-Vy  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 


24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


Iggg  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


3^r?5r 


Sr^?5F 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


jgjgi 


'*^2^ s 


^g^g 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


hrz^Trz g 


^FT?=3 


25426 


R 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G786  WESTERN  WORLD 
v.39  Adam  Smith. 


Z 


OCT  H  1932 


REFERENCE  BOOK 
LIMITED  CIRCULATION 


Archbishop  Mitty  High  School 
Media  Center 
5000  Mitty  Way 
San  Jose,  CA  95129 


RULES 


ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  LIBRARY 


1.  All  pupils 
use  the  library  a 

2.  Reserved 
one  period,  or 
should  be  returr 
following  school 

3.  All  other  b 
weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for. 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


7784 


got-.? 


,r 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


39- 

ADAM  SMITH 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


24906 


An  Inquiry 

Into  the  Nature  and  Causes 
of  the  Wealth  of  N  ations 

BY  ADAM  SMITH 


ARCHBISHIP  miTf  HIGH  SCHOOL 
Library 

5000  Mitiy  Avenue 
San  Jose,  CA  36129-1897 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  MANILA 


The  Index  in  this  edition  is  derived  from  the  Edwin  Cannan  edition 
by  arrangement  with  Methuen  &  Co.  Ltd.,  London. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 


The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10346 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


2  5  4  2  G 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Adam  Smith,  1723-1790 


Adam  Smith  was  born  on  or  shortly  before 
June  5,  1723,  in  the  small  town  of  Kirkcaldy, 
ten  miles  from  Edinburgh  on  the  Firth  of 
Forth.  His  father,  who  had  been  comptroller  of 
the  customs,  died  five  months  before  the  child’s 
birth,  and  his  mother  devoted  most  of  the  re¬ 
maining  sixty-one  years  of  her  life  to  caring 
for  her  son.  His  childhood  was  uneventful  ex¬ 
cept  for  one  incident.  In  1726,  while  visiting  his 
mother’s  family,  he  was  kidnapped  by  gypsies; 
the  prompt  action  of  his  uncle  soon  effected  his 
rescue. 

After  finishing  his  term  at  the  Kirkcaldy 
grammar  school,  Smith  at  the  age  of  fourteen 
entered  the  University  of  Glasgow.  Although 
his  favorite  studies  were  mathematics  and  nat¬ 
ural  philosophy,  he  came  strongly  under  the 
influence  of  Francis  Hutcheson,  who,  as  pro¬ 
fessor  of  moral  philosophy,  taught  a  “benevo¬ 
lent  theory”  of  morals  which  had  as  its  end 
the  “greatest  happiness  for  the  greatest  num¬ 
ber.”  It  was  probably  the  result  of  Hutcheson’s 
teaching  that  Smith,  on  going  to  Balliol  Col¬ 
lege,  Oxford,  in  1740,  devoted  much  of  his 
study  to  moral  philosophy.  He  remained  at 
Oxford  for  six  years  without  once  returning 
home,  and,  though  he  found  much  of  which  he 
did  not  approve,  he  used  the  occasion  to  read 
extensively  in  the  classics,  French  and  Italian 
literature,  as  well  as  in  morals  and  politics. 
Smith  left  Oxford  in  1746  without  completing 
the  term  of  his  fellowship,  probably  because  of 
his  unwillingness  to  take  ordination  as  was  ex¬ 
pected  of  appointees  to  the  scholarship  he  held. 

After  a  two-year  stay  with  his  mother  at 
Kirkcaldy,  where  he  continued  his  studies, 
Smith  went  to  Edinburgh.  There,  under  the 
patronage  of  Lord  Karnes  and  the  Philosophi¬ 
cal  Society,  he  gave  a  series  of  public  lectures 
on  rhetoric  and  belles-lettres.  In  1751  he  was 
called  to  the  University  of  Glasgow,  first  as 
Professor  of  Logic,  and  after  a  few  months  as 
Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy.  This  position 
he  occupied  for  twelve  years,  and  he  later  de¬ 
clared  it  was  “by  far  the  most  useful,  and  there¬ 
fore  by  far  the  happiest  and  most  honourable 
period”  of  his  life.  His  course  of  lectures  was 
divided  into  four  parts:  natural  theology,  eth¬ 
ics,  jurisprudence,  which  he  handled  historical¬ 


ly  in  the  manner  of  Montesquieu,  and  a  study 
of  “those  political  regulations  which  are  found¬ 
ed  upon  expediency,  and  which  are  calculated 
to  increase  the  riches,  the  power,  and  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  the  state.” 

Smith  was  highly  successful  as  a  lecturer, 
and  the  influence  of  even  his  first  lectures  is 
evident  upon  the  work  of  Hugh  Blair,  the 
rhetorician,  and  William  Robertson,  the  his¬ 
torian.  From  1751  he  was  an  intimate  friend 
and  something  of  an  adviser  to  Hume.  He  also 
came  to  hold  an  important  place  in  the  town 
as  well  as  the  university.  Though  Glasgow  was 
a  provincial  center,  numbering  no  more  than 
23,000  inhabitants,  the  rising  trade  of  the 
Clyde  already  gave  promise  of  the  town’s  fu¬ 
ture  industrial  and  commercial  prominence. 
Smith  numbered  many  friends  among  its  prin¬ 
cipal  merchants  and  financiers.  According  to 
Sir  James  Steuart,  the  “last  of  the  mercantil¬ 
ists,”  and  Smith’s  rival  for  favor,  it  was  Smith 
who  converted  Glasgow’s  business  leaders  to 
a  policy  of  free  trade.  Speaking  to  the  Glasgow 
Economic  Society,  founded  by  his  friend,  the 
eminent  merchant,  Andrew  Cochrane,  Smith 
in  1755  claimed  credit  for  the  novel  system  of 
economic  liberty  then  beginning  to  attract  sup¬ 
porters. 

Smith  first  appeared  as  an  author  in  1755 
with  two  articles  in  the  Edinburgh  Review, 
which  gave  his  views  on  the  Encyclopedie, 
Rousseau’s  picture  of  savage  life,  and  John¬ 
son’s  Dictionary.  In  1759  he  published  his 
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  embodying  the 
second  portion  of  his  university  course.  Two 
years  later  a  second  edition  was  called  for,  and 
he  added  an  appendix,  entitled  “Considera¬ 
tions  concerning  the  first  Formation  of  Lan¬ 
guages.”  The  following  year  he  was  awarded 
the  honorary  degree  of  doctor  of  laws  by  the 
Academic  Senate  of  Glasgow. 

In  1763  Smith  gave  up  his  university  post 
to  accept  the  offer  of  a  life-time  pension  by 
Charles  Townshend  in  return  for  acting  as  tu¬ 
tor  to  his  young  step-sons  on  a  tour  of  France. 
They  spent  some  eighteen  months  at  Toulouse, 
at  that  time  the  seat  of  a  parliament,  made  a 
visit  of  two  months  to  Geneva,  where  Smith 
met  Voltaire,  and  then  settled  for  almost  a 


v 


VI 


Biographical  Note 


year  in  Paris.  Smith,  who  was  a  minor  celeb¬ 
rity  in  his  own  right,  frequented  the  most  fash¬ 
ionable  salons  and  associated  with  Turgot, 
D’Alembert,  Helvetius,  Marmontel,  and  Roche¬ 
foucauld.  He  also  enjoyed  close  relations  with 
the  proponents  of  laissez-faire  among  the  Phys¬ 
iocrats,  notably  Quesnay  and  Dupont  de  Ne¬ 
mours.  In  1766  the  assassination  on  the  streets 
of  Paris  of  the  Duke’s  younger  brother,  also  in 
Smith’s  charge,  brought  to  a  close  his  conti¬ 
nental  sojourn. 

For  the  next  seven  years  Smith  lived  with 
his  mother  at  Kirkcaldy,  engaged  in  close 
study  most  of  the  time,  interrupted  only  by 
occasional  visits  to  Edinburgh  and  London.  He 
wTas  occupied  with  his  Inquiry  into  the  Nature 
and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations ,  which 
there  is  some  reason  for  believing  he  had  be¬ 
gun  at  Toulouse.  In  1773  he  took  his  manu¬ 
script  to  London.  In  ill-health  and  unsure  of 
his  future,  he  named  Hume  his  executor  with 
instructions  to  publish  in  event  of  his  death 
his  “juvenile”  essay,  A  History  of  Astronomi¬ 
cal  Systems ,  That  Were  In  Fashion  Down  to 
the  Time  of  Descartes;  this  was  apparently 
part  of  his  earlier  project  of  a  “connected  his¬ 
tory  of  liberal  sciences  and  elegant  arts.”  For 
the  next  five  years  he  spent  almost  all  his  time 
in  London  and  lived  on  terms  of  intimacy  with 
many  of  the  leading  figures  of  the  day,  includ¬ 
ing  Gibbon,  Burke,  and  Reynolds.  His  close 
knowledge  of  colonial  affairs  is  said  to  reflect 
his  frequent  conversations  with  Benjamin 
Franklin,  and  Smith  himself  proposed  a  plan 
of  imperial  federation  designed  to  satisfy  the 
grievances  of  the  colonies.  In  1776  the  Wealth 
of  Nations  was  published.  Hume,  in  a  congrat¬ 
ulatory  letter,  declared,  <(Euge!  belle !  dear  Mr. 
Smith,  I  am  much  pleased  with  your  perform¬ 


ance.”  Within  six  months  the  first  edition  was 
exhausted,  and  during  Smith’s  life-time  the 
book  went  through  five  editions.  Pitt  is  re¬ 
ported  as  saying,  “We  are  all  your  scholars,” 
when  the  author  entered  a  room  in  which  Pitt 
was  seated  with  his  fellow  cabinet  members, 
and  the  work  seems  to  have  had  considerable 
influence  on  the  budget  drawn  up  by  Lord 
North  in  1777  and  1778. 

The  only  other  work  published  by  Smith, 
except  for  revisions  of  his  two  earlier  books, 
was  his  letter  on  the  death  of  Hume  in  1776. 
Because  of  its  unqualified  praise  of  Hume’s 
moral  qualities,  the  letter  aroused  a  storm  of 
controversy  throughout  the  British  Isles,  and 
Boswell  among  others  denounced  it  as  a  piece 
of  “daring  effrontery.”  In  1778  Smith  was 
named  a  commissioner  of  the  customs  of  Scot¬ 
land,  and  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  he  dwelt 
with  his  mother  and  a  cousin  in  Edinburgh.  He 
enjoyed  an  eminent  place  in  society,  his  “Sun¬ 
day  suppers”  were  long  celebrated,  and  with 
Joseph  Black,  James  Hutton,  Adam  Ferguson, 
and  Dugald  Stewart  he  formed  one  of  the 
leading  clubs  of  the  city. 

After  the  death  of  his  mother  in  1784,  Smith’s 
health  began  to  decline.  In  preparation  for  his 
death  he  ordered  the  destruction  of  his  manu¬ 
scripts,  except  for  a  few  selected  essays.  Among 
the  papers  so  destroyed  were  probably  the  lec¬ 
tures  on  natural  religion  and  jurisprudence 
which  formed  part  of  his  course  at  Glasgow, 
and  also  his  lectures  on  rhetoric;  a  copy  of  stu¬ 
dent  notes  has  since  been  discovered  on  the 
course  on  jurisprudence,  Lectures  on  Justice , 
Police  Revenue  and  Arms ,  which  he  gave 
sometime  between  1762  and  1764.  After  a  pain¬ 
ful  illness  Smith  died,  July  17,  1790,  and  was 
buried  at  Canongate. 


Contents 


Biographical  Note,  v 


Introduction  and  Plan  of  the  Work  1. 

BOOK  ONE 

Of  the  Causes  of  Improvement  in  the 
Productive  Powers  of  Labour,  and  of 
the  Order  according  to  which  its  Prod¬ 
uce  is  naturally  distributed  among  the 

DIFFERENT  RANKS  OF  THE  PEOPLE 

1.  Of  the  Division  of  Labour  3. 

2.  Of  the  Principle  which  gives  occasion  to 

the  Division  of  Labour  6. 

3.  That  the  Division  of  Labour  is  limited 

by  the  Extent  of  the  Market  8. 

4.  Of  the  Origin  and  Use  of  Money  10. 

5.  Of  the  Real  and  Nominal  Price  of  Com¬ 

modities,  or  their  Price  in  Labour,  and 
their  Price  in  Money  13. 

6.  Of  the  Component  Parts  of  the  Price  of 

Commodities  20. 

7.  Of  the  Natural  and  Market  Price  of 

Commodities  23. 

8.  Of  the  Wages  of  Labour  27. 

9.  Of  the  Profits  of  Stock  37. 

10.  Of  Wages  and  Profit  in  the  different  Em¬ 
ployments  of  Labour  and  Stock  42. 

11.  Of  the  Rent  of  Land  62. 

BOOK  TWO 

Of  the  Nature,  Accumulation,  and  Em¬ 
ployment  of  Stock 

Introduction  117. 

1.  Of  the  Division  of  Stock  118. 

2.  Of  Money  considered  as  a  particular 
Branch  of  the  general  Stock  of  the  So¬ 


ciety  or  of  the  Expense  of  maintaining 
the  National  Capital  121. 

3.  Of  the  Accumulation  of  Capital,  or  of 
Productive  and  Unproductive  Labour  142. 

4.  Of  Stock  lent  at  Interest  151. 

5.  Of  the  different  Employment  of 

Capitals  155. 

BOOK  THREE 

Of  the  different  Progress  of  Opulence  in 

DIFFERENT  NATIONS 

1.  Of  the  Natural  Progress  of  Opulence  163. 

2.  Of  the  Discouragement  of  Agriculture  in 

the  ancient  State  of  Europe  after  the 
Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  165. 

3.  Of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Cities  and 

Towns  after  the  Fall  of  the  Roman 
Empire  170. 

4.  How  the  Commerce  of  the  Towns  con¬ 

tributed  to  the  Improvement  of  the 
Country  175. 

BOOK  FOUR 

Of  Systems  of  Political  Economy 

Introduction  182. 

1.  Of  the  Principle  of  the  Commercial,  or 

Mercantile  System  182. 

2.  Of  Restraints  upon  the  Importation  from 

Foreign  Countries  of  such  Goods  as  can 
be  produced  at  Home  192. 

3.  Of  the  extraordinary  Restraints  upon  the 

Importation  of  Goods  of  almost  all  kinds 
from  those  Countries  with  which  the 
Balance  is  suppposed  to  be  disadvan¬ 
tageous  201. 

4.  Of  Drawbacks  213. 

5.  Of  Bounties  216. 


Vll 


BOOK  FIVE 


BOOK  FOUR 

6.  Of  Treaties  of  Commerce  233. 

7.  Of  Colonies  239. 

8.  Conclusion  of  the  Mercantile  System  279. 

9.  Of  the  Agricultural  Systems,  or  of  those 
Systems  of  Political  Economy  which  rep¬ 
resent  the  Produce  of  Land  as  either  the 
sole  or  the  principal  Source  of  the  Reve¬ 
nue  and  Wealth  of  every  Country  288. 


Of  the  Revenue  of  the  Sovereign  or  Common¬ 
wealth 

1.  Of  the  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  or 


Commonwealth  301 . 

2.  Of  the  Sources  of  the  General  or  Public 

Revenue  of  the  Society  357. 

3.  Of  Public  Debts  401 . 

Appendix  423. 

Index  425. 


An  Inquiry 

Into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the 
Wealth  of  Nations 


INTRODUCTION  AND  PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


THE  annual  labour  of  every  nation  is  the 
fund  which  originally  supplies  it  with  all 
the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life  which 
it  annually  consumes,  and  which  consist  al¬ 
ways  either  in  the  immediate  produce  of  that 
labour,  or  in  what  is  purchased  with  that  pro¬ 
duce  from  other  nations. 

According  therefore  as  this  produce,  or  what 
is  purchased  with  it,  bears  a  greater  or  smaller 
proportion  to  the  number  of  those  who  are  to 
consume  it,  the  nation  will  be  better  or  worse 
supplied  with  all  the  necessaries  and  conven¬ 
iences  for  which  it  has  occasion. 

But  this  proportion  must  in  every  nation  be 
regulated  by  two  different  circumstances;  first, 
by  the  skill,  dexterity,  and  judgment  with  which 
its  labour  is  generally  applied;  and,  secondly, 
by  the  proportion  between  the  number  of  those 
who  are  employed  in  useful  labour,  and  that  of 
those  who  are  not  so  employed.  Whatever  be 
the  soil,  climate,  or  extent  of  territory  of  any 
particular  nation,  the  abundance  or  scantiness 
of  its  annual  supply  must,  in  that  particular 
situation,  depend  upon  those  two  circumstances. 

The  abundance  or  scantiness  of  this  supply, 
too,  seems  to  depend  more  upon  the  former  of 
those  two  circumstances  than  upon  the  latter. 
Among  the  savage  nations  of  hunters  and  fish¬ 
ers,  every  individual  who  is  able  to  work,  is 
more  or  less  employed  in  useful  labour,  and  en¬ 
deavours  to  provide,  as  well  as  he  can,  the  nec¬ 
essaries  and  conveniences  of  life,  for  himself,  or 
such  of  his  family  or  tribe  as  are  either  too  old, 
or  too  young,  or  too  infirm  to  go  a  hunting  and 
fishing. Such  nations,  however, are  so  miserably 
poor  that,  from  mere  want,  they  are  frequently 
reduced,  or,  at  least,  think  themselves  reduced, 
to  the  necessity  sometimes  of  directly  destroy¬ 
ing, and  sometimes  of  abandoning  their  infants, 
their  old  people,  and  those  afflicted  with  linger¬ 
ing  diseases,  to  perish  with  hunger,  or  to  be  de¬ 
voured  by  wild  beasts.  Among  civilised  and 


thriving  nations,  on  the  contrary,  though  a 
great  number  of  people  do  not  labour  at  all, 
many  of  whom  consume  the  produce  of  ten 
times,  frequently  of  a  hundred  times  more 
labour  than  the  greater  part  of  those  who 
work;  yet  the  produce  of  the  whole  labour 
of  the  society  is  so  great  that  all  are  often  abun¬ 
dantly  supplied,  and  a  workman,  even  of  the 
lowest  and  poorest  order,  if  he  is  frugal  and  in¬ 
dustrious,  may  enjoy  a  greater  share  of  the 
necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life  than  it  is 
possible  for  any  savage  to  acquire. 

The  causes  of  this  improvement,  in  the  pro¬ 
ductive  powers  of  labour,  and  the  order,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  its  produce  is  naturally  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  different  ranks  and  condi¬ 
tions  of  men  in  the  society,  make  the  subject 
of  the  first  book  of  this  Inquiry. 

Whatever  be  the  actual  state  of  the  skill, 
dexterity,  and  judgment  with  which  labour  is 
applied  in  any  nation,  the  abundance  or  scanti¬ 
ness  of  its  annual  supply  must  depend,  during 
the  continuance  of  that  state,  upon  the  propor¬ 
tion  between  the  number  of  those  who  are  an¬ 
nually  employed  in  useful  labour,  and  that  of 
those  who  are  not  so  employed.  The  number  of 
useful  and  productive  labourers,  it  will  here¬ 
after  appear,  is  everywhere  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  capital  stock  which  is  employed  in 
setting  them  to  work,  and  to  the  particular  way 
in  which  it  is  so  employed.  The  second  book, 
therefore,  treats  of  the  nature  of  capital  stock, 
of  the  manner  in  which  it  is  gradually  accumu¬ 
lated,  and  of  the  different  quantities  of  labour 
which  it  puts  into  motion,  according  to  the  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  in  which  it  is  employed. 

Nations  tolerably  well  advanced  as  to  skill, 
dexterity,  and  judgment,  in  the  application  of 
labour,  have  followed  very  different  plans  in 
the  general  conduct  or  direction  of  it;  and  those 
plans  have  not  all  been  equally  favourable  to 
the  greatness  of  its  produce.  The  policy  of  some 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


2 

nations  has  given  extraordinary  encourage¬ 
ment  to  the  industry  of  the  country;  that  of 
others  to  the  industry  of  towns.  Scarce  any  na¬ 
tion  has  dealt  equally  and  impartially  with 
every  sort  of  industry.  Since  the  downfall  of 
the  Roman  empire,  the  policy  of  Europe  has 
been  more  favourable  to  arts,  manufactures, 
and  commerce,  the  industry  of  towns,  than  to 
agriculture,  the  industry  of  the  country.  The 
circumstances  which  seem  to  have  introduced 
and  established  this  policy  are  explained  in  the 
third  book. 

Though  those  different  plans  were,  perhaps, 
first  introduced  by  the  private  interests  and 
prejudices  of  particular  orders  of  men,  without 
any  regard  to,  or  foresight  of,  their  consequences 
upon  the  general  welfare  of  the  society;  yet 
they  have  given  occasion  to  very  different  the¬ 
ories  of  political  economy;  of  which  some  mag¬ 
nify  the  importance  of  that  industry  which  is 
carried  on  in  towns,  others  of  that  which  is 
carried  on  in  the  country.  Those  theories  have 
had  a  considerable  influence,  not  only  upon  the 
opinions  of  men  of  learning,  but  upon  the  pub¬ 
lic  conduct  of  princes  and  sovereign  states.  I 
have  endeavoured,  in  the  fourth  book,  to  ex¬ 
plain,  as  fully  and  distinctly  as  I  can,  those  dif¬ 
ferent  theories,  and  the  principal  effects  which 


they  have  produced  in  different  ages  and  na¬ 
tions. 

To  explain  in  what  has  consisted  the  revenue 
of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  or  what  has 
been  the  nature  of  those  funds  which,  in  dif¬ 
ferent  ages  and  nations,  have  supplied  their  an¬ 
nual  consumption,  is  the  object  of  these  four 
first  books.  The  fifth  and  last  book  treats  of  the 
revenue  of  the  sovereign,  or  commonwealth.  In 
this  book  I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  first, 
what  are  the  necessary  expenses  of  the  sover¬ 
eign,  or  commonwealth;  which  of  those  ex¬ 
penses  ought  to  be  defrayed  by  the  general 
contribution  of  the  whole  society;  and  which  of 
them  by  that  of  some  particular  part  only,  or 
of  some  particular  members  of  it:  secondly, 
what  are  the  different  methods  in  which  the 
whole  society  may  be  made  to  contribute  to¬ 
wards  defraying  the  expenses  incumbent  on 
the  whole  society,  and  what  are  the  principal 
advantages  and  inconveniences  of  each  of  those 
methods:  and,  thirdly  and  lastly,  what  are  the 
reasons  and  causes  which  have  induced  almost 
all  modern  governments  to  mortgage  some  part 
of  this  revenue,  or  to  contract  debts,  and  what 
have  been  the  effects  of  those  debts  upon  the 
real  wealth,  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and 
labour  of  the  society. 


Book  One 


OF  THE  CAUSES  OF  IMPROVEMENT  IN  THE  PRODUCTIVE  POWERS 
OF  LABOUR,  AND  OF  THE  ORDER  ACCORDING  TO  WHICH  ITS 
PRODUCE  IS  NATURALLY  DISTRIBUTED  AMONG  THE  DIFFERENT 

RANKS  OF  THE  PEOPLE 


CHAPTER  I 
Of  the  Division  of  Labour 

The  greatest  improvement  in  the  productive 
powers  of  labour,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
skill,  dexterity,  and  judgment  with  which  it  is 
anywhere  directed,  or  applied,  seem  to  have 
been  the  effects  of  the  division  of  labour. 

The  effects  of  the  division  of  labour,  in  the 
general  business  of  society,  will  be  more  easily 
understood  by  considering  in  what  manner  it 
operates  in  some  particular  manufactures.  It  is 
commonly  supposed  to  be  carried  furthest  in 
some  very  trifling  ones;  not  perhaps  that  it 
really  is  carried  further  in  them  than  in  others 
of  more  importance:  but  in  those  trifling  manu¬ 
factures  which  are  destined  to  supply  the  small 
wants  of  but  a  small  number  of  people,  the 
whole  number  of  workmen  must  necessarily  be 
small;  and  those  employed  in  every  different 
branch  of  the  work  can  often  be  collected  into 
the  same  workhouse,  and  placed  at  once  under 
the  view  of  the  spectator.  In  those  great  manu¬ 
factures,  on  the  contrary,  which  are  destined  to 
supply  the  great  wants  of  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  every  different  branch  of  the  work  em¬ 
ploys  so  great  a  number  of  workmen  that  it  is 
impossible  to  collect  them  all  into  the  same 
workhouse.  We  can  seldom  see  more,  at  one 
time,  than  those  employed  in  one  single  branch. 
Though  in  such  manufactures,  therefore,  the 
work  may  really  be  divided  into  a  much  greater 
number  of  parts  than  in  those  of  a  more  trifling 
nature,  the  division  is  not  near  so  obvious,  and 
has  accordingly  been  much  less  observed. 

To  take  an  example,  therefore,  from  a  very 
trifling  manufacture;  but  one  in  which  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  has  been  very  often  taken  no¬ 
tice  of,  the  trade  of  the  pin-maker;  a  workman 
not  educated  to  this  business  (which  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  has  rendered  a  distinct  trade) , 
nor  acquainted  with  the  use  of  the  machinery 
employed  in  it  (to  the  invention  of  which  the 
same  division  of  labour  has  probably  given  oc¬ 
casion)  ,  could  scarce,  perhaps,  with  his  utmost 
industry,  make  one  pin  in  a  day,  and  certainly 


could  not  make  twenty.  But  in  the  way  in 
which  this  business  is  now  carried  on,  not  only 
the  whole  work  is  a  peculiar  trade,  but  it  is  di¬ 
vided  into  a  number  of  branches,  of  which  the 
greater  part  are  likewise  peculiar  trades.  One 
man  draws  out  the  wire,  another  straights  it, 
a  third  cuts  it,  a  fourth  points  it,  a  fifth  grinds 
it  at  the  top  for  receiving  the  head;  to  make 
the  head  requires  two  or  three  distinct  opera¬ 
tions;  to  put  it  on  is  a  peculiar  business,  to 
whiten  the  pins  is  another;  it  is  even  a  trade  by 
itself  to  put  them  into  the  paper;  and  the  im¬ 
portant  business  of  making  a  pin  is,  in  this 
manner,  divided  into  about  eighteen  distinct 
operations,  which,  in  some  manufactories,  are 
all  performed  by  distinct  hands,  though  in 
others  the  same  man  will  sometimes  perform 
two  or  three  of  them.  I  have  seen  a  small  manu¬ 
factory  of  this  kind  where  ten  men  only  were 
employed,  and  where  some  of  them  consequent¬ 
ly  performed  two  or  three  distinct  operations. 
But  though  they  were  very  poor,  and  therefore 
but  indifferently  accommodated  with  the  nec¬ 
essary  machinery,  they  could,  when  they  ex¬ 
erted  themselves,  make  among  them  about 
twelve  pounds  of  pins  in  a  day.  There  are  in  a 
pound  upwards  of  four  thousand  pins  of  a  mid¬ 
dling  size.  Those  ten  persons,  therefore,  could 
make  among  them  upwards  of  forty-eight  thou¬ 
sand  pins  in  a  day.  Each  person,  therefore, 
making  a  tenth  part  of  forty-eight  thousand 
pins,  might  be  considered  as  making  four  thou¬ 
sand  eight  hundred  pins  in  a  day.  But  if  they 
had  all  wrought  separately  and  independently, 
and  without  any  of  them  having  been  educated 
to  this  peculiar  business,  they  certainly  could 
not  each  of  them  have  made  twenty,  perhaps 
not  one  pin  in  a  day;  that  is,  certainly,  not  the 
two  hundred  and  fortieth,  perhaps  not  the  four 
thousand  eight  hundredth  part  of  what  they 
are  at  present  capable  of  performing,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  proper  division  and  combination  of 
their  different  operations. 

In  every  other  art  and  manufacture,  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  the  division  of  labour  are  similar  to 
what  they  are  in  this  very  trifling  one;  though, 


3 


The  W ealth  of  Nations 


4 

in  many  of  them,  the  labour  can  neither  be  so 
much  subdivided, nor  reduced  to  so  great  a  sim¬ 
plicity  of  operation.  The  division  of  labour, 
however,  so  far  as  it  can  be  introduced,  oc¬ 
casions,  in  every  art,  a  proportionable  increase 
of  the  productive  powers  of  labour.  The  separa¬ 
tion  of  different  trades  and  employments  from 
one  another  seems  to  have  taken  place  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  this  advantage.  This  separation, 
too,  is  generally  carried  furthest  in  those  coun¬ 
tries  which  enjoy  the  highest  degree  of  industry 
and  improvement;  what  is  the  work  of  one  man 
in  a  rude  state  of  society  being  generally  that 
of  several  in  an  improved  one.  In  every  im¬ 
proved  society,  the  farmer  is  generally  nothing 
but  a  farmer;  the  manufacturer,  nothing  but  a 
manufacturer.  The  labour,  too,  which  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  produce  any  one  complete  manufacture 
is  almost  always  divided  among  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  hands.  How  many  different  trades  are 
employed  in  each  branch  of  the  linen  and  wool¬ 
len  manufactures  from  the  growers  of  the  flax 
and  the  wool,  to  the  bleachers  and  smoothers  of 
the  linen,  or  to  the  dyers  and  dressers  of  the 
cloth!  The  nature  of  agriculture,  indeed,  does 
not  admit  of  so  many  subdivisions  of  labour, 
nor  of  so  complete  a  separation  of  one  business 
from  another,  as  manufactures.  It  is  impossible 
to  separate  so  entirely  the  business  of  the  gra¬ 
zier  from  that  of  the  corn-farmer  as  the  trade 
of  the  carpenter  is  commonly  separated  from 
that  of  the  smith.  The  spinner  is  almost  always 
a  distinct  person  from  the  weaver;  but  the 
ploughman,  the  harrower,  the  sower  of  the 
seed,  and  the  reaper  of  the  corn,  are  often  the 
same.  The  occasions  for  those  different  sorts  of 
labour  returning  with  the  different  seasons  of 
the  year,  it  is  impossible  that  one  man  should 
be  constantly  employed  in  any  one  of  them. 
This  impossibility  of  making  so  complete  and 
entire  a  separation  of  all  the  different  branches 
of  labour  employed  in  agriculture  is  perhaps 
the  reason  why  the  improvement  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  powers  of  labour  in  this  art  does  not  al¬ 
ways  keep  pace  with  their  improvement  in 
manufactures.  The  most  opulent  nations,  in¬ 
deed,  generally  excel  all  their  neighbours  in 
agriculture  as  well  as  in  manufactures; but  they 
are  commonly  more  distinguished  by  their  su¬ 
periority  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former.  Their 
lands  are  in  general  better  cultivated,  and  hav¬ 
ing  more  labour  and  expense  bestowed  upon 
them,  produce  more  in  proportion  to  the  extent 
and  natural  fertility  of  the  ground.  But  this 
superiority  of  produce  is  seldom  much  more 
than  in  proportion  to  the  superiority  of  labour 
and  expense.  In  agriculture,  the  labour  of  the 
rich  country  is  not  always  much  more  produc¬ 
tive  than  that  of  the  poor;  or,  at  least,  it  is 
never  so  much  more  productive  as  it  commonly 
is  in  manufactures.  The  corn  of  the  rich  coun¬ 
try,  therefore,  will  not  always,  in  the  same  de¬ 


gree  of  goodness,  come  cheaper  to  market  than 
that  of  the  poor.  The  corn  of  Poland,  in  the 
same  degree  of  goodness,  is  as  cheap  as  that  of 
France,  notwithstanding  the  superior  opulence 
and  improvement  of  the  latter  country.  The 
corn  of  France  is,  in  the  corn  provinces,  fully  as 
good,  and  in  most  years  nearly  about  the  same 
price  with  the  corn  of  England,  though,  in  opu¬ 
lence  and  improvement,  France  is  perhaps  in¬ 
ferior  to  England.  The  corn-lands  of  England, 
however,  are  better  cultivated  than  those  of 
France,  and  the  corn-lands  of  France  are  said 
to  be  much  better  cultivated  than  those  of 
Poland.  But  though  the  poor  country,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  inferiority  of  its  cultivation,  can, 
in  some  measure,  rival  the  rich  in  the  cheapness 
and  goodness  of  its  corn,  it  can  pretend  to  no 
such  competition  in  its  manufactures;  at  least 
if  those  manufactures  suit  the  soil,  climate,  and 
situation  of  the  rich  country.  The  silks  of 
France  are  better  and  cheaper  than  those  of 
England,  because  the  silk  manufacture,  at  least 
under  the  present  high  duties  upon  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  raw  silk,  does  not  so  well  suit  the  cli¬ 
mate  of  England  as  that  of  France.  But  the 
hardware  and  the  coarse  woollens  of  England 
are  beyond  all  comparison  superior  to  those  of 
France,  and  much  cheaper  too  in  the  same  de¬ 
gree  of  goodness.  In  Poland  there  are  said  to  be 
scarce  any  manufactures  of  any  kind,  a  few  of 
those  coarser  household  manufactures  excepted, 
without  which  no  country  can  well  subsist. 

This  great  increase  of  the  quantity  of  work 
which,  in  consequence  of  the  division  of  labour, 
the  same  number  of  people  are  capable  of  per¬ 
forming,  is  owing  to  three  different  circum¬ 
stances;  first,  to  the  increase  of  dexterity  in 
every  particular  workman;  secondly,  to  the 
saving  of  the  time  which  is  commonly  lost  in 
passing  from  one  species  of  work  to  another; 
and  lastly,  to  the  invention  of  a  great  number 
of  machines  which  facilitate  and  abridge  la¬ 
bour,  and  enable  one  man  to  do  the  work  of 
many. 

First,  the  improvement  of  the  dexterity  of 
the  workman  necessarily  increases  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  work  he  can  perform;  and  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour,  by  reducing  every  man’s  business 
to  some  one  simple  operation,  and  by  making 
this  operation  the  sole  employment  of  his  life, 
necessarily  increases  very  much  the  dexterity  of 
the  workman.  A  common  smith,  who,  though  ac¬ 
customed  to  handle  the  hammer,  has  never 
been  used  to  make  nails,  if  upon  some  particu¬ 
lar  occasion  he  is  obliged  to  attempt  it,  will 
scarce,  I  am  assured,  be  able  to  make  above  two 
or  three  hundred  nails  in  a  day,  and  those  too 
very  bad  ones.  A  smith  who  has  been  accus¬ 
tomed  to  make  nails,  but  whose  sole  or  princi¬ 
pal  business  has  not  been  that  of  a  nailer,  can 
seldom  with  his  utmost  diligence  make  more 
than  eight  hundred  or  a  thousandnails  in  a  day. 


The  Division  of  Labour 


I  have  seen  several  boys  under  twenty  years  of 
age  who  had  never  exercised  any  other  trade 
but  that  of  making  nails,  and  who,  when  they 
exerted  themselves,  could  make,  each  of  them, 
upwards  of  two  thousand  three  hundred  nails 
in  a  day.  The  making  of  a  nail,  however,  is  by 
no  means  one  of  the  simplest  operations.  The 
same  person  blows  the  bellows,  stirs  or  mends 
the  fire  as  there  is  occasion,  heats  the  iron,  and 
forges  every  part  of  the  nail:  in  forging  the 
head  too  he  is  obliged  to  change  his  tools.  The 
different  operations  into  which  the  making  of 
a  pin,  or  of  a  metal  button,  is  subdivided,  are 
all  of  them  much  more  simple,  and  the  dexter¬ 
ity  of  the  person,  of  whose  life  it  has  been  the 
sole  business  to  perform  them,  is  usually  much 
greater.  The  rapidity  with  which  some  of  the 
operations  of  those  manufacturers  are  per¬ 
formed,  exceeds  what  the  human  hand  could, 
by  those  who  had  never  seen  them,  be  supposed 
capable  of  acquiring. 

Secondly,  the  advantage  which  is  gained  by 
saving  the  time  commonly  lost  in  passing  from 
one  sort  of  work  to  another  is  much  greater 
than  we  should  at  first  view  be  apt  to  imagine 
it.  It  is  impossible  to  pass  very  quickly  from 
one  kind  of  work  to  another  that  is  carried  on  in 
a  different  place  and  with  quite  different  tools. 
A  country  weaver,  who  cultivates  a  small  farm, 
must  lose  a  good  deal  of  time  in  passing  from 
his  loom  to  the  field,  and  from  the  field  to  his 
loom.  When  the  two  trades  can  be  carried  on 
in  the  same  workhouse,  the  loss  of  time  is  no 
doubt  much  less.  It  is  even  in  this  case,  how¬ 
ever,  very  considerable.  A  man  commonly 
saunters  a  little  in  turning  his  hand  from  one 
sort  of  employment  to  another.  When  he  first 
begins  the  new  work  he  is  seldom  very  keen 
and  hearty;  his  mind,  as  they  say,  does  not  go 
to  it,  and  for  some  time  he  rather  trifles  than 
applies  to  good  purpose.  The  habit  of  saunter¬ 
ing  and  of  indolent  careless  application,  which 
is  naturally,  or  rather  necessarily  acquired  by 
every  country  workman  who  is  obliged  to 
change  his  work  and  his  tools  every  half  hour, 
and  to  apply  his  hand  in  twenty  different  ways 
almost  every  day  of  his  life,  renders  him  al¬ 
most  always  slothful  and  lazy,  and  incapable 
of  any  vigorous  application  even  on  the  most 
pressing  occasions.  Independent,  therefore,  of 
his  deficiency  in  point  of  dexterity,  this  cause 
alone  must  always  reduce  considerably  the 
quantity  of  work  which  he  is  capable  of  per¬ 
forming. 

Thirdly, and  lastly, everybody  must  be  sensi¬ 
ble  how  much  labour  is  facilitated  and  abridged 
by  the  application  of  proper  machinery.  It  is 
unnecessary  to  give  any  example.  I  shall  only 
observe,  therefore,  that  the  invention  of  all 
those  machines  by  which  labour  is  so  much 
facilitated  and  abridged  seems  to  have  been 
originally  owing  to  the  division  of  labour.  Men 


5 

are  much  more  likely  to  discover  easier  and 
readier  methods  of  attaining  any  object  when 
the  whole  attention  of  their  minds  is  directed 
towards  that  single  object  than  when  it  is  dis¬ 
sipated  among  a  great  variety  of  things.  But 
in  consequence  of  the  division  of  labour,  the 
whole  of  every  man’s  attention  comes  naturally 
to  be  directed  towards  some  one  very  simple 
object.  It  is  naturally  to  be  expected,  therefore, 
that  some  one  or  other  of  those  who  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  each  particular  branch  of  labour 
should  soon  find  out  easier  and  readier  methods 
of  performing  their  own  particular  work,  where- 
ever  the  nature  of  it  admits  of  such  improve¬ 
ment.  A  great  part  of  the  machines  made  use 
of  in  those  manufactures  in  which  labour  is 
most  subdivided,  were  originally  the  inven¬ 
tions  of  common  workmen,  who,  being  each  of 
them  employed  in  some  very  simple  operation, 
naturally  turned  their  thoughts  towards  find¬ 
ing  out  easier  and  readier  methods  of  perform¬ 
ing  it.  Whoever  has  been  much  accustomed  to 
visit  such  manufactures  must  frequently  have 
been  shown  very  pretty  machines,  which  were 
the  inventions  of  such  workmen  in  order  to 
facilitate  and  quicken  their  own  particular  part 
of  the  work.  In  the  first  fire-engines,  a  boy  was 
constantly  employed  to  open  and  shut  alter¬ 
nately  the  communication  between  the  boiler 
and  the  cylinder,  according  as  the  piston  either 
ascended  or  descended.  One  of  those  boys,  who 
loved  to  play  with  his  companions,  observed 
that,  by  tying  a  string  from  the  handle  of  the 
valve  which  opened  this  communication  to  an¬ 
other  part  of  the  machine,  the  valve  would 
open  and  shut  without  his  assistance,  and  leave 
him  at  liberty  to  divert  himself  with  his  play¬ 
fellows.  One  of  the  greatest  improvements  that 
has  been  made  upon  this  machine,  since  it  was 
first  invented,  was  in  this  manner  the  discovery 
of  a  boy  who  wanted  to  save  his  own  labour. 

All  the  improvements  in  machinery,  however, 
have  by  no  means  been  the  inventions  of  those 
who  had  occasion  to  use  the  machines.  Many 
inprovementshave  been  made  by  the  ingenuity 
of  the  makers  of  the  machines,  when  to  make 
them  became  the  business  of  a  peculiar  trade; 
and  some  by  that  of  those  who  are  called  phi¬ 
losophers  or  men  of  speculation,  whose  trade  it 
is  not  to  do  anything,  but  to  observe  every¬ 
thing;  and  who,  upon  that  account,  are  often 
capable  of  combining  together  the  powers  of 
the  most  distant  and  dissimilar  objects.  In  the 
progress  of  society,  philosophy  or  speculation 
becomes,  like  every  other  employment,  the 
principal  or  sole  trade  and  occupation  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  class  of  citizens.  Like  every  other  em¬ 
ployment  too,  it  is  subdivided  into  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  different  branches,  each  of  which  affords 
occupation  to  a  peculiar  tribe  or  class  of  phi¬ 
losophers;  and  this  subdivision  of  employment 
in  philosophy,  as  well  as  in  every  other  busi- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


6 

ness,  improves  dexterity,  and  saves  time.  Each 
individual  becomes  more  expert  in  his  own  pe¬ 
culiar  branch,  more  work  is  done  upon  the 
whole,  and  the  quantity  of  science  is  consider¬ 
ably  increased  by  it. 

It  is  the  great  multiplication  of  the  produc¬ 
tions  of  all  the  different  arts,  in  consequence  of 
the  division  of  labour,  which  occasions,  in  a 
well -governed  society,  that  universal  opulence 
which  extends  itself  to  the  lowest  ranks  of  the 
people.  Every  workman  has  a  great  quantity  of 
his  own  work  to  dispose  of  beyond  what  he  him¬ 
self  has  occasion  for;  and  every  other  workman 
being  exactly  in  the  same  situation,  he  is  en¬ 
abled  to  exchange  a  great  quantity  of  his  own 
goods  for  a  great  quantity,  or,  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing,  for  the  price  of  a  great  quantity 
of  theirs.  He  supplies  them  abundantly  with 
what  they  have  occasion  for,  and  they  accom¬ 
modate  him  as  amply  with  what  he  has  occa¬ 
sion  for,  and  a  general  plenty  diffuses  itself 
through  all  the  different  ranks  of  the  society. 

Observe  the  accommodation  of  the  most 
common  artificer  or  day-labourer  in  a  civilised 
and  thriving  country,  and  you  will  perceive 
that  the  number  of  people  of  whose  industry  a 
part,  though  but  a  small  part,  has  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  procuring  him  this  accommodation, 
exceeds  all  computation.  The  woollen  coat,  for 
example,  which  covers  the  day-labourer,  as 
coarse  and  rough  as  it  may  appear,  is  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  joint  labour  of  a  great  multitude  of 
workmen.  The  shepherd,  the  sorter  of  the  wool, 
the  wool -comber  or  carder,  the  dyer,  the  scrib¬ 
bler,  the  spinner,  the  weaver,  the  fuller,  the 
dresser,  with  many  others,  must  all  join  their 
different  arts  in  order  to  complete  even  this 
homely  production.  How  many  merchants  and 
carriers,  besides,  must  have  been  employed  in 
transporting  the  materials  from  some  of  those 
workmen  to  others  who  often  live  in  a  very 
distant  part  of  the  country!  How  much  com¬ 
merce  and  navigation  in  particular,  how  many 
ship-builders,  sailors,  sail-makers,  rope-makers, 
must  have  been  employed  in  order  to  bring  to¬ 
gether  the  different  drugs  made  use  of  by  the 
dyer,  which  often  come  from  the  remotest  cor¬ 
ners  of  the  world!  What  a  variety  of  labour,  too, 
is  necessary  in  order  to  produce  the  tools  of  the 
meanest  of  those  workmen!  To  say  nothing  of 
such  complicated  machines  as  the  ship  of  the 
sailor,  the  mill  of  the  fuller,  or  even  the  loom  of 
the  weaver,  let  us  consider  only  what  a  variety 
of  labour  is  requisite  in  order  to  form  that  very 
simple  machine,  the  shears  with  which  the 
shepherd  clips  the  wool.  The  miner,  the  builder 
of  the  furnace  for  smelting  the  ore,  the  seller 
of  the  timber,  the  burner  of  the  charcoal  to  be 
made  use  of  in  the  smelting-house,  the  brick- 
maker,  the  brick-layer,  the  workmen  who  at¬ 
tend  the  furnace,  the  mill-wright,  the  forger, 
the  smith,  must  all  of  them  join  their  different 


arts  in  order  to  produce  them.  Were  we  to  ex¬ 
amine,  in  the  same  manner,  all  the  different 
parts  of  his  dress  and  household  furniture,  the 
coarse  linen  shirt  which  he  wears  next  his  skin, 
the  shoes  which  cover  his  feet,  the  bed  which 
he  lies  on,  and  all  the  different  parts  which  com¬ 
pose  it,  the  kitchen-grate  at  which  he  prepares 
his  victuals,  the  coals  which  he  makes  use  of 
for  that  purpose,  dug  from  the  bowels  of  the 
earth,  and  brought  to  him  perhaps  by  a  long 
sea  and  a  long  land  carriage,  all  the  other  uten¬ 
sils  of  his  kitchen,  all  the  furniture  of  his  table, 
the  knives  and  forks,  the  earthen  or  pewter 
plates  upon  which  he  serves  up  and  divides  his 
victuals,  the  different  hands  employed  in  pre¬ 
paring  his  bread  and  his  beer,  the  glass  win¬ 
dow  which  lets  in  the  heat  and  the  light,  and 
keeps  out  the  wind  and  the  rain,  with  all  the 
knowledge  and  art  requisite  for  preparing  that 
beautiful  and  happy  invention,  without  which 
these  northern  parts  of  the  world  could  scarce 
have  afforded  a  very  comfortable  habitation, 
together  with  the  tools  of  all  the  different  work¬ 
men  employed  in  producing  those  different  con¬ 
veniences;  if  we  examine,  I  say,  all  these  things, 
and  consider  what  a  variety  of  labour  is  em¬ 
ployed  about  each  of  them,  we  shall  be  sensible 
that,  without  the  assistance  and  co-operation 
of  many  thousands,  the  very  meanest  person  in 
a  civilised  country  could  not  be  provided,  even 
according  to  what  we  very  falsely  imagine  the 
easy  and  simple  manner  in  which  he  is  com¬ 
monly  accommodated.  Compared, indeed,  with 
the  more  extravagant  luxury  of  the  great,  his 
accommodation  must  no  doubt  appear  ex¬ 
tremely  simple  and  easy;  and  yet  it  may  be 
true,  perhaps,  that  the  accommodation  of  a 
European  prince  does  not  always  so  much  ex¬ 
ceed  that  of  an  industrious  and  frugal  peasant 
as  the  accommodation  of  the  latter  exceeds  that 
of  many  an  African  king,  the  absolute  master 
of  the  lives  and  liberties  of  ten  thousand  naked 
savages. 

CHAPTER  II 

Of  the  Principle  which  gives  occasion 
to  the  Division  of  Labour 

This  division  of  labour,  from  which  so  many 
advantages  are  derived,  is  not  originally  the 
effect  of  any  human  wisdom,  which  foresees 
and  intends  that  general  opulence  to  which  it 
gives  occasion.  It  is  the  necessary,  though  very 
slow  and  gradual  consequence  of  a  certain  pro¬ 
pensity  in  human  nature  which  has  in  view  no 
such  extensive  utility;  the  propensity  to  truck, 
barter,  and  exchange  one  thing  for  another. 

Whether  this  propensity  be  one  of  those 
original  principles  in  human  nature  of  which  no 
further  account  can  be  given;  or  whether,  as 
seems  more  probable,  it  be  the  necessary  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  faculties  of  reason  and  speech, 


Principle  of  Division  of  Labour  7 


it  belongs  not  to  our  present  subject  to  inquire. 
It  is  common  to  all  men,  and  to  be  found  in  no 
other  race  of  animals,  which  seem  to  know 
neither  this  nor  any  other  species  of  contracts. 
Two  greyhounds,  in  running  down  the  same 
hare,  have  sometimes  the  appearance  of  acting 
in  some  sort  of  concert.  Each  turns  her  towards 
his  companion,  or  endeavours  to  intercept  her 
when  his  companion  turns  her  towards  himself. 
This,  however,  is  not  the  effect  of  any  contract, 
but  of  the  accidental  concurrence  of  their  pas¬ 
sions  in  the  same  object  at  that  particular  time. 
Nobody  ever  saw  a  dog  make  a  fair  and  delib¬ 
erate  exchange  of  one  bone  for  another  with 
another  dog.  Nobody  ever  saw  one  animal  by 
its  gestures  and  natural  cries  signify  to  another, 
this  is  mine,  that  yours;  T  am  willing  to  give 
this  for  that.  When  an  animal  wants  to  obtain 
somethingeither  of  a  man  or  of  another  animal, 
it  has  no  other  means  of  persuasion  but  to  gain 
the  favour  of  those  whose  service  it  requires. 
A  puppy  fawns  upon  its  dam,  and  a  spaniel  en¬ 
deavours  by  a  thousand  attractions  to  engage 
the  attention  of  its  master  who  is  at  dinner, 
when  it  wants  to  be  fed  by  him.  Man  some¬ 
times  uses  the  same  arts  with  his  brethren,  and 
when  he  has  no  other  means  of  engaging  them 
to  act  according  to  his  inclinations,  endeavours 
by  every  servile  and  fawning  attention  to  ob¬ 
tain  their  good  will.  He  has  not  time,  however, 
to  do  this  upon  every  occasion.  In  civilised 
society  he  stands  at  all  times  in  need  of  the  co¬ 
operation  and  assistance  of  great  multitudes, 
while  his  whole  life  is  scarce  sufficient  to  gain 
the  friendship  of  a  few  persons.  In  almost  every 
other  race  of  animals  each  individual,  when  it 
is  grown  up  to  maturity,  is  entirely  independ¬ 
ent,  and  in  its  natural  state  has  occasion  for  the 
assistance  of  no  other  living  creature.  But  man 
has  almost  constant  occasion  for  the  help  of 
his  brethren,  and  it  is  in  vain  for  him  to  expect 
it  from  their  benevolence  only.  He  will  be  more 
likely  to  prevail  if  he  can  interest  their  self-love 
in  his  favour,  and  show  them  that  it  is  for  their 
own  advantage  to  do  for  him  what  he  requires 
of  them.  Whoever  offers  to  another  a  bargain 
of  any  kind,  proposes  to  do  this.  Give  me  that 
which  I  want,  and  you  shall  have  this  which 
you  want,  is  the  meaning  of  every  such  offer; 
and  it  is  in  this  manner  that  we  obtain  from 
one  another  the  far  greater  part  of  those  good 
offices  which  we  stand  in  need  of.  It  is  not  from 
the  benevolence  of  the  butcher,  the  brewer,  or 
the  baker  that  we  expect  our  dinner,  but  from 
their  regard  to  their  own  interest.  We  address 
ourselves,  not  to  their  humanity  but  to  their 
self-love,  and  never  talk  to  them  of  our  own 
necessities  but  of  their  advantages.  Nobody 
but  a  beggar  chooses  to  depend  chiefly  upon  the 
benevolence  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Even  a  beg¬ 
gar  does  not  depend  upon  it  entirely.  The  char¬ 
ity  of  well-disposed  people,  indeed,  supplies 


him  with  the  whole  fund  of  his  subsistence.  But 
though  this  principle  ultimately  provides  him 
with  all  the  necessaries  of  life  which  he  has  oc¬ 
casion  for,  it  neither  does  nor  can  provide  him 
with  them  as  he  has  occasion  for  them.  The 
greater  part  of  his  occasional  wants  are  sup¬ 
plied  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  other  peo¬ 
ple, by  treaty, by  barter, and  by  purchase.  With 
the  money  which  one  man  gives  him  he  pur¬ 
chases  food.  The  old  clothes  which  another 
bestows  upon  him  he  exchanges  for  other  old 
clothes  which  suit  him  better,  or  for  lodging, 
or  for  food,  or  for  money,  with  which  he  can 
buy  either  food,  clothes,  or  lodging,  as  he  has 
occasion. 

As  it  is  by  treaty,  by  barter,  and  by  purchase 
that  we  obtain  from  one  another  the  greater 
part  of  those  mutual  good  offices  which  we 
stand  in  need  of,  so  it  is  this  same  trucking  dis¬ 
position  which  originally  gives  occasion  to  the 
division  of  labour.  In  a  tribe  of  hunters  or  shep¬ 
herds  a  particular  person  makes  bows  and  ar¬ 
rows,  for  example,  with  more  readiness  and  dex¬ 
terity  than  any  other.  He  frequently  exchanges 
them  for  cattle  or  for  venison  with  his  com¬ 
panions;  and  he  finds  at  last  that  he  can  in  this 
manner  get  more  cattle  and  venison  than  if 
he  himself  went  to  the  Held  to  catch  them. 
From  a  regard  to  his  own  interest,  therefore, 
the  making  of  bows  and  arrows  grows  to  be  his 
chief  business,  and  he  becomes  a  sort  of  ar¬ 
mourer.  Another  excels  in  making  the  frames 
and  covers  of  their  little  huts  or  movable  houses. 
He  is  accustomed  to  be  of  use  in  this  way  to 
his  neighbours,  who  reward  him  in  the  same 
manner  with  cattle  and  with  venison,  till  at  last 
he  finds  it  his  interest  to  dedicate  himself  en¬ 
tirely  to  this  employment,  and  to  become  a  sort 
of  house-carpenter.  In  the  same  manner  a  third 
becomes  a  smith  or  a  brazier,  a  fourth  a  tanner 
or  dresser  of  hides  or  skins,  the  principal  part 
of  the  clothing  of  savages.  And  thus  the  cer¬ 
tainty  of  being  able  to  exchange  all  that  sur¬ 
plus  part  of  the  produce  of  his  own  labour, 
which  is  over  and  above  his  own  consumption, 
for  such  parts  of  the  produce  of  other  men’s 
labour  as  he  may  have  occasion  for,  encourages 
every  man  to  apply  himself  to  a  particular  oc¬ 
cupation,  and  to  cultivate  and  bring  to  perfec¬ 
tion  whatever  talent  or  genius  he  may  possess 
for  that  particular  species  of  business. 

The  difference  of  natural  talents  in  different 
men  is,  in  reality,  much  less  than  we  are  aware 
of;  and  the  very  different  genius  which  appears 
to  distinguish  men  of  different  professions, 
when  grown  up  to  maturity,  is  not  upon  many 
occasions  so  much  the  cause  as  the  effect  of  the 
division  of  labour.  The  difference  between  the 
most  dissimilar  characters,  between  a  philoso¬ 
pher  and  a  common  street  porter,  for  example, 
seems  to  arise  not  so  much  from  nature  as  from 
habit,  custom,  and  education.  When  they  came 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


8 

into  the  world,  and  for  the  first  six  or  eight 
years  of  their  existence,  they  were  perhaps  very 
much  alike,  and  neither  their  parents  nor  play¬ 
fellows  could  perceive  any  remarkable  differ¬ 
ence.  About  that  age,  or  soon  after,  they  come 
to  be  employed  in  very  different  occupations. 
The  difference  of  talents  comes  then  to  be 
taken  notice  of,  and  widens  by  degrees,  till  at 
last  the  vanity  of  the  philosopher  is  willing  to 
acknowledge  scarce  any  resemblance.  But  with¬ 
out  the  disposition  to  truck,  barter,  and  ex¬ 
change,  every  man  must  have  procured  to 
himself  every  necessary  and  conveniency  of 
life  which  he  wanted.  All  must  have  had  the 
same  duties  to  perform,  and  the  same  work  to 
do,  and  there  could  have  been  no  such  differ¬ 
ence  of  employment  as  could  alone  give  occa¬ 
sion  to  any  great  difference  of  talents. 

As  it  is  this  disposition  which  forms  that  dif¬ 
ference  of  talents,  so  remarkable  among  men  of 
different  professions,  so  it  is  this  same  disposi¬ 
tion  which  renders  that  difference  useful.  Many 
tribes  of  animals  acknowledged  to  be  all  of  the 
same  species  derive  from  nature  a  much  more 
remarkable  distinction  of  genius,  than  what, 
antecedent  to  custom  and  education,  appears 
to  take  place  among  men.  By  nature  a  philoso¬ 
pher  is  not  in  genius  and  disposition  half  so 
different  from  a  street  porter,  as  a  mastiff  is 
from  a  greyhound,  or  a  greyhound  from  a  span¬ 
iel,  or  this  last  from  a  shepherd’s  dog.  Those 
different  tribes  of  animals,  however,  though 
all  of  the  same  species,  are  of  scarce  any  use  to 
one  another.  The  strength  of  the  mastiff  is  not, 
in  the  least,  supported  either  by  the  swiftness 
of  the  greyhound,  or  by  the  sagacity  of  the 
spaniel,  or  by  the  docility  of  the  shepherd’s  dog. 
The  effects  of  those  different  geniuses  and  tal¬ 
ents,  for  want  of  the  power  or  disposition  to 
barter  and  exchange,  cannot  be  brought  into  a 
common  stock,  and  do  not  in  the  least  con¬ 
tribute  to  the  better  accommodation  and  con¬ 
veniency  of  the  species.  Each  animal  is  still 
obliged  to  support  and  defend  itself,  separately 
and  independently,  and  derives  no  sort  of  ad¬ 
vantage  from  that  variety  of  talents  with  which 
nature  has  distinguished  its  fellows.  Among 
men,  on  the  contrary,  the  most  dissimilar  gen¬ 
iuses  are  of  use  to  one  another;  the  different 
produces  of  their  respective  talents,  by  the  gen¬ 
eral  disposition  to  truck,  barter,  and  exchange, 
being  brought,  as  it  were,  into  a  common  stock, 
where  every  man  may  purchase  whatever  part 
of  the  produce  of  other  men’s  talents  he  has 
occasion  for. 

CHAPTER  III 

That  the  Division  of  Labour  is  limited 
by  the  Extent  of  the  M arket 

As  it  is  the  power  of  exchanging  that  gives 
occasion  to  the  division  of  labour,  so  the  extent 


of  this  division  must  always  be  limited  by  the 
extent  of  that  power,  or,  in  other  words,  by  the 
extent  of  the  market.  When  the  market  is  very 
small,  no  person  can  have  any  encouragement 
to  dedicate  himself  entirely  to  one  employment, 
for  want  of  the  power  to  exchange  all  that  sur¬ 
plus  part  of  the  produce  of  his  own  labour, 
which  is  over  and  above  his  own  consumption, 
for  such  parts  of  the  produce  of  other  men’s 
labour  as  he  has  occasion  for. 

There  are  some  sorts  of  industry,  even  of  the 
lowest  kind,  which  can  be  carried  on  nowhere 
but  in  a  great  town.  A  porter,  for  example,  can 
find  employment  and  subsistence  in  no  other 
place.  A  village  is  by  much  too  narrow  a  sphere 
for  him;  even  an  ordinary  market  town  is  scarce 
large  enough  to  afford  him  constant  occupation. 
In  the  lone  houses  and  very  small  villages 
which  are  scattered  about  in  so  desert  a  coun¬ 
try  as  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  every  farmer 
must  be  butcher,  baker  and  brewer  for  his  own 
family.  In  such  situations  we  can  scarce  expect 
to  find  even  a  smith,  a  carpenter,  or  a  mason, 
within  less  than  twenty  miles  of  another  of  the 
same  trade.  The  scattered  families  that  live  at 
eight  or  ten  miles  distance  from  the  nearest  of 
them  must  learn  to  perform  themselves  a  great 
number  of  little  pieces  of  work,  for  which,  in 
more  populous  countries,  they  would  call  in  the 
assistance  of  those  workmen.  Country  work¬ 
men  are  almost  everywhere  obliged  to  apply 
themselves  to  all  the  different  branches  of  in¬ 
dustry  that  have  so  much  affinity  to  one  an¬ 
other  as  to  be  employed  about  the  same  sort  of 
materials.  A  country  carpenter  deals  in  every 
sort  of  work  that  is  made  of  wood:  a  country 
smith  in  every  sort  of  work  that  is  made  of 
iron.  The  former  is  not  only  a  carpenter,  but  a 
joiner,  a  cabinet-maker,  and  even  a  carver  in 
wood,  as  well  as  a  wheel-wright,  a  plough- 
wright,  a  cart  and  waggon  maker.  The  employ¬ 
ments  of  the  latter  are  still  more  various.  It  is 
impossible  there  should  be  such  a  trade  as  even 
that  of  a  nailer  in  the  remote  and  inland  parts 
of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.  Such  a  workman 
at  the  rate  of  a  thousand  nails  a  day,  and  three 
hundred  working  days  in  the  year,  will  make 
three  hundred  thousand  nails  in  the  year.  But 
in  such  a  situation  it  would  be  impossible  to 
dispose  of  one  thousand,  that  is,  of  one  day’s 
work  in  the  year. 

As  by  means  of  water-carriage  a  more  exten¬ 
sive  market  is  opened  to  every  sort  of  indus¬ 
try  than  what  land-carriage  alone  can  afford  it, 
so  it  is  upon  the  sea-coast,  and  along  the  banks 
of  navigable  rivers,  that  industry  of  every  kind 
naturally  begins  to  subdivide  and  improve  it¬ 
self,  and  it  is  frequently  not  till  a  long  time 
after  that  those  improvements  extend  them¬ 
selves  to  the  inland  parts  of  the  country.  A 
broad-wheeled  waggon,  attended  by  two  men, 
and  drawn  by  eight  horses,  in  about  six  weeks’ 


Limitation  of  Division  of  Labour 


time  carries  and  brings  back  between  London 
and  Edinburgh  near  four  ton  weight  of  goods. 
In  about  the  same  time  a  ship  navigated  by 
six  or  eight  men,  and  sailing  between  the  ports 
of  London  and  Leith,  frequently  carries  and 
brings  back  two  hundred  ton  weight  of  goods. 
Six  or  eight  men,  therefore,  by  the  help  of 
water-carriage,  can  carry  and  bring  back  in  the 
same  time  the  same  quantity  of  goods  between 
London  and  Edinburgh,  as  fifty  broad-wheeled 
waggons,  attended  by  a  hundred  men,  and 
drawn  by  four  hundred  horses.  Upon  two  hun¬ 
dred  tons  of  goods,  therefore,  carried  by  the 
cheapest  land-carriage  from  London  to  Edin¬ 
burgh,  there  must  be  charged  the  maintenance 
of  a  hundred  men  for  three  weeks,  and  both  the 
maintenance,  and,  what  is  nearly  equal  to  the 
maintenance,  the  wear  and  tear  of  four  hun¬ 
dred  horses  as  well  as  of  fifty  great  waggons. 
Whereas,  upon  the  same  quantity  of  goods 
carried  by  water,  there  is  to  be  charged  only 
the  maintenance  of  six  or  eight  men,  and  the 
wear  and  tear  of  a  ship  of  two  hundred  tons 
burden,  together  with  the  value  of  the  superior 
risk,  or  the  difference  of  the  insurance  between 
land  and  water-carriage.  Were  there  no  other 
communication  between  those  two  places, 
therefore,  but  by  land-carriage,  as  no  goods 
could  be  transported  from  the  one  to  the  other, 
except  such  whose  price  was  very  considerable 
in  proportion  to  their  weight,  they  could  carry 
on  but  a  small  part  of  that  commerce  which  at 
present  subsists  between  them,  and  conse¬ 
quently  could  give  but  a  small  part  of  that 
encouragement  which  they  at  present  mutu¬ 
ally  afford  to  each  other’s  industry.  There  could 
be  little  or  no  commerce  of  any  kind  between 
the  distant  parts  of  the  world.  What  goods 
could  bear  the  expense  of  land-carriage  be¬ 
tween  London  and  Calcutta?  Or  if  there  were 
any  so  precious  as  to  be  able  to  support  this 
expense,  with  what  safety  could  they  be  trans¬ 
ported  through  the  territories  of  so  many  bar¬ 
barous  nations?  Those  two  cities,  however,  at 
present  carry  on  a  very  considerable  commerce 
with  each  other,  and  by  mutually  affording  a 
market,  give  a  good  deal  of  encouragement  to 
each  other’s  industry. 

Since  such,  therefore,  are  the  advantages  of 
water-carriage,  it  is  natural  that  the  first  im¬ 
provements  of  art  and  industry  should  be  made 
where  this  conveniency  opens  the  whole  world 
for  a  market  to  the  produce  of  every  sort  of  la¬ 
bour,  and  that  they  should  always  be  much 
later  in  extending  themselves  into  the  inland 
parts  of  the  country.  The  inland  parts  of  the 
country  can  for  a  long  time  have  no  other  mar¬ 
ket  for  the  greater  part  of  their  goods,  but  the 
country  which  lies  roundabout  them, and  sepa¬ 
rates  them  from  the  sea-coast,  and  the  great 
navigable  rivers.  The  extent  of  their  market, 
therefore,  must  for  a  long  time  be  in  proportion 


9 

to  the  riches  and  populousness  of  that  country, 
and  consequently  their  improvement  must 
always  be  posterior  to  the  improvement  of  that 
country.  In  our  North  American  colonies  the 
plantations  have  constantly  followed  either  the 
sea-coast  or  the  banks  of  the  navigable  rivers, 
and  have  scarce  anywhere  extended  themselves 
to  any  considerable  distance  from  both. 

The  nations  that,  according  to  the  best  au¬ 
thenticated  history,  appear  to  have  been  first 
civilised,  were  those  that  dwelt  round  the  coast 
of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  That  sea,  by  far  the 
greatest  inlet  that  is  known  in  the  world,  hav¬ 
ing  no  tides,  nor  consequently  any  waves  ex¬ 
cept  such  as  are  caused  by  the  wind  only,  was, 
by  the  smoothness  of  its  surface,  as  well  as  by 
the  multitude  of  its  islands,  and  the  proximity 
of  its  neighbouring  shores,  extremely  favour¬ 
able  to  the  infant  navigation  of  the  world; 
when,  from  their  ignorance  of  the  compass, 
men  were  afraid  to  quit  the  view  of  the  coast, 
and  from  the  imperfection  of  the  art  of  ship¬ 
building,  to  abandon  themselves  to  the  boister¬ 
ous  waves  of  the  ocean.  To  pass  beyond  the 
pillars  of  Hercules,  that  is,  to  sail  out  of  the 
Straits  of  Gibraltar,  was,  in  the  ancient  world, 
long  considered  as  a  most  wonderful  and  dan¬ 
gerous  exploit  of  navigation.  It  was  late  before 
even  the  Phoenicians  and  Carthaginians,  the 
most  skilful  navigators  and  ship-builders  of 
those  old  times,  attempted  it,  and  they  were 
for  a  long  time  the  only  nations  that  did  at¬ 
tempt  it. 

Of  all  the  countries  on  the  coast  of  the  Medi¬ 
terranean  Sea,  Egypt  seems  to  have  been  the 
first  in  which  either  agriculture  or  manufac¬ 
tures  were  cultivated  and  improved  to  any  con¬ 
siderable  degree.  Upper  Egypt  extends  itself 
nowhere  above  a  few  miles  from  the  Nile,  and 
in  Lower  Egypt  that  great  river  breaks  itself 
into  many  different  canals,  which,  with  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  a  little  art,  seem  to  have  afforded  a 
communication  by  water-carriage,  not  only  be¬ 
tween  all  the  great  towns,  but  between  all  the 
considerable  villages,  and  even  to  many  farm¬ 
houses  in  the  country;  nearly  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  the  Rhine  and  the  Maas  do  in  Holland 
at  present.  The  extent  and  easiness  of  this 
inland  navigation  was  probably  one  of  the 
principal  causes  of  the  early  improvement  of 

Egypt-. 

The  improvements  in  agriculture  and  manu¬ 
factures  seem  likewise  to  have  been  of  very 
great  antiquity  in  the  provinces  of  Bengal,  in 
the  East  Indies,  and  in  some  of  the  eastern 
provinces  of  China;  though  the  great  extent  of 
this  antiquity  is  not  authenticated  by  any  his¬ 
tories  of  whose  authority  we,  in  this  part  of 
the  world,  are  well  assured.  In  Bengal  the 
Ganges  and  several  other  great  rivers  form  a 
great  number  of  navigable  canals  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  Nile  does  in  Egypt.  In  the  East- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


10 

ern  provinces  of  China  too,  several  great  rivers 
form,  by  their  different  branches,  a  multitude 
of  canals,  and  by  communicating  with  one  an¬ 
other  afford  an  inland  navigation  much  more 
extensive  than  that  either  of  the  Nile  or  the 
Ganges,  or  perhaps  than  both  of  them  put  to¬ 
gether.  It  is  remarkable  that  neither  the  an¬ 
cient  Egyptians,  nor  the  Indians,  nor  the  Chi¬ 
nese,  encouraged  foreign  commerce,  but  seem 
all  to  have  derived  their  great  opulence  from 
this  inland  navigation. 

All  the  inland  parts  of  Africa,  and  all  that 
part  of  Asia  which  lies  any  considerable  way 
north  of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  seas,  the  an¬ 
cient  Scythia,  the  modern  Tartary  and  Siberia, 
seem  in  all  ages  of  the  world  to  have  been  in  the 
same  barbarous  and  uncivilised  state  in  which 
we  find  them  at  present.  The  Sea  of  Tartary  is 
the  frozen  ocean  which  admits  of  no  naviga¬ 
tion,  and  though  some  of  the  greatest  rivers 
in  the  world  run  through  that  country,  they  are 
at  too  great  a  distance  from  one  another  to  carry 
commerce  and  communication  through  the 
greater  part  of  it.  There  are  in  Africa  none  of 
those  great  inlets,  such  as  the  Baltic  and  Adri¬ 
atic  seas  in  Europe,  the  Mediterranean  and 
Euxine  seas  in  both  Europe  and  Asia,  and  the 
gulfs  of  Arabia, Persia, India, Bengal,  and  Siam, 
in  Asia,  to  carry  maritime  commerce  into  the 
interior  parts  of  that  great  continent:  and  the 
great  rivers  of  Africa  are  at  too  great  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  one  another  to  give  occasion  to  any 
considerable  inland  navigation.  The  commerce 
besides  which  any  nation  can  carry  onby  means 
of  a  river  which  does  not  break  itself  into  any 
great  number  of  branches  or  canals,  and  which 
runs  into  another  territory  before  it  reaches  the 
sea,  can  never  be  very  considerable;  because  it 
is  always  in  the  power  of  the  nations  who  pos¬ 
sess  that  other  territory  to  obstruct  the  com¬ 
munication  between  the  upper  country  and  the 
sea.  The  navigation  of  the  Danube  is  of  very 
little  use  to  the  different  states  of  Bavaria, 
Austria  and  Hungary,  in  comparison  of  what 
it  would  be  if  any  of  them  possessed  the  whole 
of  its  course  till  it  falls  into  the  Black  Sea. 

CHAPTER  IV 

Of  the  Origin  and  Use  of  Money 

When  the  division  of  labour  has  been  once 
thoroughly  established,  it  is  but  a  very  small 
part  of  a  man’s  wants  which  the  produce  of  his 
own  labour  can  supply.  He  supplies  the  far 
greater  part  of  them  by  exchanging  that  sur¬ 
plus  part  of  the  produce  of  his  own  labour, 
which  is  over  and  above  his  own  consumption, 
for  such  parts  of  the  produce  of  other  men’s 
labour  as  he  has  occasion  for.  Every  man  thus 
lives  by  exchanging,  or  becomes  in  some  meas¬ 
ure  a  merchant,  and  the  society  itself  grows  to 
be  what  is  properly  a  commercial  society. 


But  when  the  division  of  labour  first  began 
to  take  place,  this  power  of  exchanging  must 
frequently  have  been  very  much  clogged  and 
embarrassed  in  its  operations.  One  man,  we  shall 
suppose,  has  more  of  a  certain  commodity  than 
he  himself  has  occasion  for,  while  another  has 
less.  The  former  consequently  would  be  glad 
to  dispose  of,  and  the  latter  to  purchase,  a  part 
of  this  superfluity.  But  if  this  latter  should 
chance  to  have  nothing  that  the  former  stands 
in  need  of,  no  exchange  can  be  made  between 
them.  The  butcher  has  more  meat  in  his  shop 
than  he  himself  can  consume,  and  the  brewer 
and  the  baker  would  each  of  them  be  willing 
to  purchase  a  part  of  it.  But  they  have  nothing 
to  offer  in  exchange,  except  the  different  pro¬ 
ductions  of  their  respective  trades,  and  the 
butcher  is  already  provided  with  all  the  bread 
and  beer  which  he  has  immediate  occasion  for. 
No  exchange  can,  in  this  case,  be  made  between 
them.  He  cannot  be  their  merchant,  nor  they 
his  customers;  and  they  are  all  of  them  thus 
mutually  less  serviceable  to  one  another.  In 
order  to  avoid  the  inconveniency  of  such  situa¬ 
tions,  every  prudent  man  in  every  period  of 
society,  after  the  first  establishment  of  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour,  must  naturally  have  endeav¬ 
oured  to  manage  his  affairs  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  have  at  all  times  by  him,  besides  the  pecul¬ 
iar  produce  of  his  own  industry,  a  certain 
quantity  of  some  one  commodity  or  other,  such 
as  he  imagined  few  people  would  be  likely  to 
refuse  in  exchange  for  the  produce  of  their  in¬ 
dustry. 

Many  different  commodities,  it  is  probable, 
were  successively  both  thought  of  and  employed 
for  this  purpose.  In  the  rude  ages  of  society, 
cattle  are  said  to  have  been  the  common  instru¬ 
ment  of  commerce;  and,  though  they  must  have 
been  a  most  inconvenient  one,  yet  in  old  times 
we  find  things  were  frequently  valued  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  number  of  cattle  which  had  been 
given  in  exchange  for  them.  The  armour  of 
Diomede,  says  Homer,  cost  only  nine  oxen; 
but  that  of  Glaucus  cost  an  hundred  oxen.  Salt 
is  said  to  be  the  common  instrument  of  com¬ 
merce  and  exchanges  in  Abyssinia;  a  species  of 
shells  in  some  parts  of  the  coast  of  India;  dried 
cod  at  Newfoundland;  tobacco  in  Virginia; 
sugar  in  some  of  our  West  India  colonies;  hides 
or  dressed  leather  in  some  other  countries;  and 
there  is  at  this  day  a  village  in  Scotland  where 
it  is  not  uncommon,  I  am  told,  for  a  workman 
to  carry  nails  instead  of  money  to  the  baker’s 
shop  or  the  alehouse. 

In  all  countries,  however,  men  seem  at  last 
to  have  been  determined  by  irresistible  reasons 
to  give  the  preference,  for  this  employment,  to 
metals  above  every  other  commodity.  Metals 
can  not  only  be  kept  with  as  little  loss  as  any 
other  commodity,  scarce  anything  being  less 
perishable  than  they  are,  but  they  can  like- 


The  Origin  and  Use  of  Money  11 


wise,  without  any  loss,  be  divided  into  any 
number  of  parts,  as  by  fusion  those  parts  can 
easily  be  reunited  again;  a  quality  which  no 
other  equally  durable  commodities  possess,  and 
which  more  than  any  other  quality  renders 
them  fit  to  be  the  instruments  of  commerce  and 
circulation.  The  man  who  wanted  to  buy  salt, 
for  example,  and  had  nothing  but  cattle  to  give 
in  exchange  for  it,  must  have  been  obliged  to 
buy  salt  to  the  value  of  a  whole  ox,  or  a  whole 
sheep  at  a  time.  He  could  seldom  buy  less  than 
this,  because  what  he  was  to  give  for  it  could 
seldom  be  divided  without  loss;  and  if  he  had 
a  mind  to  buy  more,  he  must,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
sons,  have  been  obliged  to  buy  double  or  triple 
the  quantity,  the  value,  to  wit,  of  two  or  three 
oxen,  or  of  two  or  three  sheep.  If,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  instead  of  sheep  or  oxen,  he  had  metals 
to  give  in  exchange  for  it,  he  could  easily  pro¬ 
portion  the  quantity  of  the  metal  to  the  precise 
quantity  of  the  commodity  which  he  had  im¬ 
mediate  occasion  for. 

Different  metals  have  been  made  use  of  by 
different  nations  for  this  purpose.  Iron  was  the 
common  instrument  of  commerce  among  the 
ancient  Spartans;  copper  among  the  ancient 
Romans;  and  gold  and  silver  among  all  rich  and 
commercial  nations. 

Those  metals  seem  originally  to  have  been 
made  use  of  for  this  purpose  in  rude  bars,  with¬ 
out  any  stamp  or  coinage.  Thus  we  are  told  by 
Pliny,1  upon  the  authority  of  Timaeus,  an  an¬ 
cient  historian,  that,  till  the  time  of  Servius 
Tullius,  the  Romans  had  no  coined  money,  but 
made  use  of  unstamped  bars  of  copper,  to  pur¬ 
chase  whatever  they  had  occasion  for.  These 
rude  bars,  therefore,  performed  at  this  time  the 
function  of  money. 

The  use  of  metals  in  this  rude  state  was  at¬ 
tended  with  two  very  considerable  inconven- 
iencies;  first,  with  the  trouble  of  weighing;  and, 
secondly,  with  that  of  assaying  them.  In  the 
precious  metals,  where  a  small  difference  in  the 
quantity  makes  a  great  difference  in  the  value, 
even  the  business  of  weighing,  with  proper  ex¬ 
actness,  requires  at  least  very  accurate  weights 
and  scales.  The  weighing  of  gold  in  particular 
is  an  operation  of  some  nicety.  In  the  coarser 
metals,  indeed,  where  a  small  error  would  be 
of  little  consequence,  less  accuracy  would,  no 
doubt,  be  necessary.  Yet  we  should  find  it  ex¬ 
cessively  troublesome,  if  every  time  a  poor 
man  had  occasion  either  to  buy  or  sell  a  far¬ 
thing’s  worth  of  goods,  he  was  obliged  to  weigh 
the  farthing.  The  operation  of  assaying  is  still 
more  difficult,  still  more  tedious,  and,  unless  a 
part  of  the  metal  is  fairly  melted  in  the  cruci¬ 
ble,  with  proper  dissolvents,  any  conclusion 
that  can  be  drawn  from  it,  is  extremely  un¬ 
certain.  Before  the  institution  of  coined  money, 
however,  unless  they  went  through  this  tedious 

1  Pliny,  Ilistoria  naturalis,  xxxiii,  3. 


and  difficult  operation,  people  must  always 
have  been  liable  to  the  grossest  frauds  and  im¬ 
positions,  and  instead  of  a  pound  weight  of 
pure  silver,  or  pure  copper,  might  receive  in 
exchange  for  their  goods  an  adulterated  com¬ 
position  of  the  coarsest  and  cheapest  materials, 
which  had,  however,  in  their  outward  appear¬ 
ance,  been  made  to  resemble  those  metals.  To 
prevent  such  abuses,  to  facilitate  exchanges, 
and  thereby  to  encourage  all  sorts  of  industry 
and  commerce,  it  has  been  found  necessary,  in 
all  countries  that  have  made  any  considerable 
advances  towards  improvement,  to  affix  a  pub¬ 
lic  stamp  upon  certain  quantities  of  such  par¬ 
ticular  metals  as  were  in  those  countries  com¬ 
monly  made  use  of  to  purchase  goods.  Hence 
the  origin  of  coined  money,  and  of  those  public 
offices  called  mints;  institutions  exactly  of  the 
same  nature  with  those  of  the  aulnagers  and 
stamp-masters  of  woolen  and  linen  cloth.  All  of 
them  are  equally  meant  to  ascertain,  by  means 
of  a  public  stamp,  the  quantity  and  uniform 
goodness  of  those  different  commodities  when 
brought  to  market. 

The  first  public  stamps  of  this  kind  that  were 
affixed  to  the  current  metals,  seem  in  many 
cases  to  have  been  intended  to  ascertain,  what 
it  was  both  most  difficult  and  most  important 
to  ascertain,  the  goodness  or  fineness  of  the 
metal,  and  to  have  resembled  the  sterling  mark 
which  is  at  present  affixed  to  plate  and  bars  of 
silver,  or  the  Spanish  mark  which  is  sometimes 
affixed  to  ingots  of  gold,  and  which  being  struck 
only  upon  one  side  of  the  piece,  and  not  cover¬ 
ing  the  whole  surface,  ascertains  the  fineness, 
but  not  the  weight  of  the  metal.  Abraham 
weighs  to  Ephron  the  four  hundred  shekels  of 
silver  which  he  had  agreed  to  pay  for  the  field 
of  Machpelah.  They  are  said,  however,  to  be 
the  current  money  of  the  merchant,  and  yet 
are  received  by  weight  and  not  by  tale,  in  the 
same  manner  as  ingots  of  gold  and  bars  of 
silver  are  at  present.  The  revenues  of  the  an¬ 
cient  Saxon  kings  of  England  are  said  to  have 
been  paid,  not  in  money  but  in  kind,  that  is,  in 
victuals  and  provisions  of  all  sorts.  William  the 
Conqueror  introduced  the  custom  of  paying 
them  in  money.  This  money,  however,  was,  for 
a  long  time,  received  at  the  exchequer,  by 
weight  and  not  by  tale. 

The  inconveniencyand  difficulty  of  weighing 
those  metals  with  exactness  gave  occasion  to 
the  institution  of  coins,  of  which  the  stamp, 
covering  entirely  both  sides  of  the  piece  and 
sometimes  the  edges  too,  was  supposed  to  as¬ 
certain  not  only  the  fineness,  but  the  weight 
of  the  metal.  Such  coins,  therefore,  were  re¬ 
ceived  by  tale  as  at  present,  without  the  trouble 
of  weighing. 

The  denominations  of  those  coins  seem  origi¬ 
nally  to  have  expressed  the  weight  or  quantity 
of  metal  contained  in  them.  In  the  time  of 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


12 

Servius  Tullius,  who  first  coined  money  at 
Rome,  the  Roman  as  or  pondo  contained  a 
Roman  pound  of  good  copper.lt  was  divided  in 
the  same  manner  as  our  Troyes  pound,  into 
twelve  ounces,  each  of  which  contained  a  real 
ounce  of  good  copper.  The  English  pound  ster¬ 
ling,  in  the  time  of  Edward  I,  contained  a 
pound,  Tower  weight,  of  silver,  of  a  known 
fineness.  The  Tower  pound  seems  to  have  been 
something  more  than  the  Roman  pound,  and 
something  less  than  the  Troyes  pound.  This  last 
was  not  introduced  into  the  mint  of  England 
till  the  18th  of  Henry  VIII.  The  French  livre 
contained  in  the  time  of  Charlemagne  a  pound, 
Troyes  weight,  of  silver  of  a  known  fineness. 
The  fair  of  Troyes  in  Champaign  was  at  that 
time  frequented  by  all  the  nations  of  Europe, 
and  the  weights  and  measures  of  so  famous  a 
market  were  generally  known  and  esteemed. 
The  Scots  money  pound  contained,  from  the 
time  of  Alexander  the  First  to  that  of  Robert 
Bruce,  a  pound  of  silver  of  the  same  weight  and 
fineness  with  the  English  pound  sterling.  Eng¬ 
lish,  French,  and  Scots  pennies,  too,  contained 
all  of  them  originally  a  real  pennyweight  of 
silver,  the  twentieth  part  of  an  ounce,  and  the 
two-hundred-and-fortieth  part  of  a  pound.  The 
shilling  too  seems  originally  to  have  been  the 
denomination  of  a  weight.  When  wheat  is  at 
twelve  shillings  the  quarter ,  says  an  ancient 
statute  of  Henry  III,  then  wastel  bread  of  a 
farthing  shall  weigh  eleven  shillings  and  four 
pence.  The  proportion,  however,  between  the 
shilling  and  either  the  penny  on  the  one  hand, 
or  the  pound  on  the  other,  seems  not  to  have 
been  so  constant  and  uniform  as  that  between 
the  penny  and  the  pound.  During  the  first  race 
of  the  kings  of  France,  the  French  sou  or  shil¬ 
ling  appears  upon  different  occasions  to  have 
contained  five,  twelve,  twenty,  and  forty  pen¬ 
nies.  Among  the  ancient  Saxons  a  shilling  ap¬ 
pears  at  one  time  to  have  contained  only  five 
pennies,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  may 
have  been  as  variable  among  them  as  among 
their  neighbours,  the  ancient  Franks.  From  the 
time  of  Charlemagne  among  the  French,  and 
from  that  of  William  the  Conqueror  among  the 
English,  the  proportion  between  the  pound,  the 
shilling,  and  the  penny,  seems  to  have  been  uni¬ 
formly  the  same  as  at  present,  though  the  value 
of  each  has  been  very  different.  For  in  every 
country  of  the  world,  I  believe,  the  avarice  and 
injustice  of  princes  and  sovereign  states,  abus¬ 
ing  the  confidence  of  their  subjects,  have  by 
degrees  diminished  the  real  quantity  of  metal, 
which  had  been  originally  contained  in  their 
coins.  The  Roman  as,  in  the  latter  ages  of  the 
Republic,  was  reduced  to  the  twenty-fourth 
part  of  its  original  value,  and,  instead  of  weigh¬ 
ing  a  pound,  came  to  weigh  only  half  an  ounce. 
The  English  pound  and  penny  contain  at  pres¬ 
ent  about  a  third  only;  the  Scots  pound  and 


penny  about  a  thirty-sixth;  and  the  French 
pound  and  penny  about  a  sixty-sixth  part  of 
their  original  value.  By  means  of  those  opera¬ 
tions  the  princes  and  sovereign  states  which 
performed  them  were  enabled,  in  appearance,  to 
pay  their  debts  and  to  fulfil  their  engagements 
with  a  smaller  quantity  of  silver  than  would 
otherwise  have  been  requisite.  It  was  indeed  in 
appearance  only;  for  their  creditors  were  really 
defrauded  of  a  part  of  what  was  due  to  them. 
All  other  debtors  in  the  state  were  allowed  the 
same  privilege,  and  might  pay  with  the  same 
nominal  sum  of  the  new  and  debased  coin  what¬ 
ever  they  had  borrowed  in  the  old.  Such  opera¬ 
tions,  therefore,  have  always  proved  favour¬ 
able  to  the  debtor,  and  ruinous  to  the  creditor, 
and  have  sometimes  produced  a  greater  and 
more  universal  revolution  in  the  fortunes  of 
private  persons,  than  could  have  been  occa¬ 
sioned  by  a  very  great  public  calamity. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  money  has  become 
in  all  civilised  nations  the  universal  instrument 
of  commerce,  by  the  intervention  of  which 
goods  of  all  kinds  are  bought  and  sold,  or  ex¬ 
changed  for  one  another. 

What  are  the  rules  which  men  naturally  ob¬ 
serve  in  exchanging  them  either  for  money  or 
for  one  another,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  ex¬ 
amine.  These  rules  determine  what  may  be 
called  the  relative  or  exchangeable  value  of 
goods. 

The  word  value,  it  is  to  be  observed,  has  two 
different  meanings,  and  sometimes  expresses 
the  utility  of  some  particular  object,  and  some¬ 
times  the  power  of  purchasing  other  goods 
which  the  possession  of  that  object  conveys. 
The  one  may  be  called  “value  in  use”;  the 
other,  “value  in  exchange.”  The  things  which 
have  the  greatest  value  in  use  have  frequently 
little  or  no  value  in  exchange;  and,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  those  which  have  the  greatest  value  in 
exchange  have  frequently  little  or  no  value  in 
use.  Nothing  is  more  useful  than  water:  but  it 
will  purchase  scarce  anything;  scarce  anything 
can  be  had  in  exchange  for  it.  A  diamond,  on 
the  contrary,  has  scarce  any  value  in  use;  but 
a  very  great  quantity  of  other  goods  may  fre¬ 
quently  be  had  in  exchange  for  it. 

In  order  to  investigate  the  principles  which 
regulate  the  exchangeable  value  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show: 

First,  what  is  the  real  measure  of  this  ex¬ 
changeable  value;  or,  wherein  consists  the  real 
price  of  all  commodities. 

Secondly,  what  are  the  different  parts  of 
which  this  real  price  is  composed  or  made  up. 

And,  lastly,  what  are  the  different  circum¬ 
stances  which  sometimes  raise  some  or  all  of 
these  different  parts  of  price  above,  and  some¬ 
times  sink  them  below  their  natural  or  ordinary 
rate;  or,  what  are  the  causes  which  sometimes 
hinder  the  market  price,  that  is,  the  actual 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


price  of  commodities,  from  coinciding  exactly 
with  what  may  be  called  their  natural  price. 

I  shall  endeavour  to  explain,  as  fully  and  dis¬ 
tinctly  as  I  can,  those  three  subjects  in  the 
three  following  chapters,  for  which  I  must  very 
earnestly  entreat  both  the  patience  and  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  reader:  his  patience  in  order  to  ex¬ 
amine  a  detail  which  may  perhaps  in  some 
places  appear  unnecessarily  tedious;  and  his 
attention  in  order  to  understand  what  may, 
perhaps,  after  the  fullest  explication  which  I 
am  capable  of  giving  of  it,  appear  still  in  some 
degree  obscure. I  am  always  willing  to  run  some 
hazard  of  being  tedious  in  order  to  be  sure  that 
I  am  perspicuous;  and  after  taking  the  utmost 
pains  that  I  can  to  be  perspicuous,  some  ob¬ 
scurity  may  still  appear  to  remain  upon  a  sub¬ 
ject  in  its  own  nature  extremely  abstracted. 

CHAPTER  V 

Of  the  Real  and  Nominal  Price  of 
Commodities ,  or  their  Price  in  Labour , 
and  their  Price  in  Money 

Every  man  is  rich  or  poor  according  to  the 
degree  in  which  he  can  afford  to  enjoy  the  nec¬ 
essaries,  conveniences,  and  amusements  of  hu¬ 
man  life.  But  after  the  division  of  labour  has 
once  thoroughly  taken  place,  it  is  but  a  very 
small  part  of  these  with  which  a  man’s  own  la¬ 
bour  can  supply  him.  The  far  greater  part  of 
them  he  must  derive  from  the  labour  of  other 
people,  and  he  must  be  rich  or  poor  according 
to  the  quantity  of  that  labour  which  he  can 
command,  or  which  he  can  afford  to  purchase. 
The  value  of  any  commodity,  therefore,  to  the 
person  who  possesses  it,  and  who  means  not 
to  use  or  consume  it  himself,  but  to  exchange  it 
for  other  commodities,  is  equal  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  which  it  enables  him  to  purchase  or 
command.  Labour,  therefore,  is  the  real  meas¬ 
ure  of  the  exchangeable  value  of  all  commodi¬ 
ties. 

The  real  price  of  everything,  what  every¬ 
thing  really  costs  to  the  man  who  wants  to  ac¬ 
quire  it,  is  the  toil  and  trouble  of  acquiring  it. 
What  everything  is  really  worth  to  the  man 
who  has  acquired  it,  and  who  wants  to  dispose 
of  it  or  exchange  it  for  something  else,  is  the 
toil  and  trouble  which  it  can  save  to  himself, 
and  which  it  can  impose  upon  other  people. 
What  is  bought  with  money  or  with  goods  is 
purchased  by  labour  as  much  as  what  we  ac¬ 
quire  by  the  toil  of  our  own  body.  That  money 
or  those  goods  indeed  save  us  this  toil.  They 
contain  the  value  of  a  certain  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  which  we  exchange  for  what  is  supposed 
at  the  time  to  contain  the  value  of  an  equal 
quantity.  Labour  was  the  first  price,  the  origi¬ 
nal  purchase-money  that  was  paid  for  all  things. 
It  was  not  by  gold  or  by  silver,  but  by  labour, 
that  all  the  wealth  of  the  world  was  originally 


13 

purchased;  and  its  value,  to  those  who  possess 
it,  and  who  want  to  exchange  it  for  some  new 
productions,  is  precisely  equal  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  which  it  can  enable  them  to  purchase 
or  command. 

Wealth,  as  Mr.  Hobbes  says,  is  power.  But 
the  person  who  either  acquires,  or  succeeds  to 
a  great  fortune,  does  not  necessarily  acquire  or 
succeed  to  any  political  power,  either  civil  or 
military.  His  fortune  may,  perhaps,  afford  him 
the  means  of  acquiring  both,  but  the  mere  pos¬ 
session  of  that  fortune  does  not  necessarily 
convey  to  him  either.  The  power  which  that 
possession  immediately  and  directly  conveys  to 
him,  is  the  power  of  purchasing;  a  certain  com¬ 
mand  over  all  the  labour,  or  over  all  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  labour,  which  is  then  in  the  market.  His 
fortune  is  greater  or  less,  precisely  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  extent  of  this  power;  or  to  the  quan¬ 
tity  either  of  other  men’s  labour,  or,  what  is  the 
same  thing,  of  the  produce  of  other  men’s  la¬ 
bour,  which  it  enables  him  to  purchase  or  com¬ 
mand.  The  exchangeable  value  of  everything 
must  always  be  precisely  equal  to  the  extent  of 
this  power  which  it  conveys  to  its  owner. 

But  though  labour  be  the  real  measure  of  the 
exchangeable  value  of  all  commodities,  it  is  not 
that  by  which  their  value  is  commonly  esti¬ 
mated.  It  is  often  difficult  to  ascertain  the  pro¬ 
portion  between  two  different  quantities  of  la¬ 
bour.  The  time  spent  in  two  different  sorts  of 
work  will  not  always  alone  determine  this  pro¬ 
portion.  The  different  degrees  of  hardship  en¬ 
dured,  and  of  ingenuity  exercised,  must  like¬ 
wise  be  taken  into  account.  There  may  be  more 
labour  in  an  hour’s  hard  work  than  in  two 
hours’  easy  business;  or  in  an  hour’s  applica¬ 
tion  to  a  trade  which  it  cost  ten  years’  labour 
to  learn,  than  in  a  month’s  industry  at  an  ordi¬ 
nary  and  obvious  employment.  But  it  is  not 
easy  to  find  any  accurate  measure  either  of 
hardship  or  ingenuity.  In  exchanging,  indeed, 
the  different  productions  of  different  sorts  of 
labour  for  one  another,  some  allowance  is  com¬ 
monly  made  for  both.  It  is  adjusted,  however, 
not  by  any  accurate  measure,  but  by  the  hig¬ 
gling  and  bargaining  of  the  market,  according 
to  that  sort  of  rough  equality  which,  though 
not  exact,  is  sufficient  for  carrying  on  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  common  life. 

Every  commodity,  besides,  is  more  frequent¬ 
ly  exchanged  for,  and  thereby  compared  with, 
other  commodities  than  with  labour.  It  is  more 
natural,  therefore,  to  estimate  its  exchangeable 
value  by  the  quantity  of  some  other  commod¬ 
ity  than  by  that  of  the  labour  which  it  can 
purchase.  The  greater  part  of  people,  too,  un¬ 
derstand  better  what  is  meant  by  a  quantity  of 
a  particular  commodity  than  by  a  quantity 
of  labour.  The  one  is  a  plain  palpable  object; 
the  other  an  abstract  notion,  which,  though 
it  can  be  made  sufficiently  intelligible,  is  not 


14 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


altogether  so  natural  and  obvious. 

But  when  barter  ceases,  and  money  has  be¬ 
come  the  common  instrument  of  commerce, 
every  particular  commodity  is  more  frequently 
exchanged  for  money  than  for  any  other  com¬ 
modity.  The  butcher  seldom  carries  his  beef  or 
his  mutton  to  the  baker,  or  the  brewer,  in  order 
to  exchange  them  for  bread  or  for  beer;  but  he 
carries  them  to  the  market,  where  he  exchanges 
them  for  money,  and  afterwards  exchanges  that 
money  for  bread  and  for  beer.  The  quantity  of 
money  which  he  gets  for  them  regulates,  too, 
the  quantity  of  bread  and  beer  which  he  can 
afterwards  purchase.  It  is  more  natural  and  ob¬ 
vious  to  him,  therefore,  to  estimate  their  value 
by  the  quantity  of  money,  the  commodity  for 
which  he  immediately  exchanges  them,  than 
by  that  of  bread  and  beer,  the  commodities  for 
which  he  can  exchange  them  only  by  the  inter¬ 
vention  of  another  commodity;  and  rather  to 
say  that  his  butcher’s  meat  is  worth  threepence 
or  fourpence  a  pound,  than  that  it  is  worth 
three  or  four  pounds  of  bread,  or  three  or  four 
quarts  of  small  beer.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass 
that  the  exchangeable  value  of  every  commod¬ 
ity  is  more  frequently  estimated  by  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money,  than  by  the  quantity  either  of 
labour  or  of  any  other  commodity  which  can 
be  had  in  exchange  for  it. 

Gold  and  silver,  however,  like  every  other 
commodity,  vary  in  their  value,  are  sometimes 
cheaper  and  sometimes  dearer,  sometimes  of 
easier  and  sometimes  of  more  difficult  purchase. 
The  quantity  of  labour  which  any  particular 
quantity  of  them  can  purchase  or  command,  or 
the  quantity  of  other  goods  which  it  will  ex¬ 
change  for,  depends  always  upon  the  fertility 
or  barrenness  of  the  mines  which  happen  to  be 
known  about  the  time  when  such  exchanges  are 
made.  The  discovery  of  the  abundant  mines  of 
America  reduced,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the 
value  of  gold  and  silver  in  Europe  to  about  a 
third  of  what  it  had  been  before.  As  it  costs 
less  labour  to  bring  those  metals  from  the  mine 
to  the  market,  so  when  they  were  brought  thith¬ 
er  they  could  purchase  or  command  less  la¬ 
bour;  and  this  revolution  in  their  value,  though 
perhaps  the  greatest,  is  by  no  means  the  only 
one  of  which  history  gives  some  account.  But 
as  a  measure  of  quantity,  such  as  the  natural 
foot,  fathom,  or  handful,  which  is  continually 
varying  in  its  own  quantity,  can  never  be  an 
accurate  measure  of  the  quantity  of  other 
things;  so  a  commodity  which  is  itself  continu¬ 
ally  varying  in  its  own  value,  can  never  be  an 
accurate  measure  of  the  value  of  other  com¬ 
modities.  Equal  quantities  of  labour,  at  all  times 
and  places,  may  be  said  to  be  of  equal  value  to 
the  labourer.  In  his  ordinary  state  of  health, 
strength  and  spirits;  in  the  ordinary  degree  of 
his  skill  and  dexterity, he  must  always  laydown 
the  same  portion  of  his  ease,  his  liberty,  and  his 


happiness.  The  price  which  he  pays  must  al¬ 
ways  be  the  same,  whatever  may  be  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  goods  which  he  receives  in  return  for  it. 
Of  these,  indeed,  it  may  sometimes  purchase  a 
greater  and  sometimes  a  smaller  quantity;  but 
it  is  their  value  which  varies,  not  that  of  the 
labour  which  purchases  them.  At  all  times  and 
places  that  is  dear  which  it  is  difficult  to  come 
at,  or  which  it  costs  much  labour  to  acquire; 
and  that  cheap  which  is  to  be  had  easily,  or 
with  very  little  labour.  Labour  alone,  therefore, 
never  varying  in  its  own  value,  is  alone  the  ulti¬ 
mate  and  real  standard  by  which  the  value  of 
all  commodities  can  at  all  times  and  places  be 
estimated  and  compared.  It  is  their  real  price; 
money  is  their  nominal  price  only. 

But  though  equal  quantities  of  labour  are  al¬ 
ways  of  equal  value  to  the  labourer,  yet  to  the 
person  who  employs  him  they  appear  some¬ 
times  to  be  of  greater  and  sometimes  of  smaller 
value.  He  purchases  them  sometimes  with  a 
greater  and  sometimes  with  a  smaller  quantity 
of  goods,  and  to  him  the  price  of  labour  seems 
to  vary  like  that  of  all  other  things.  It  appears 
to  him  dear  in  the  one  case,  and  cheap  in  the 
other.  In  reality,  however,  it  is  the  goods  which 
are  cheap  in  the  one  case,  and  dear  in  the  other. 

In  this  popular  sense,  therefore,  labour,  like 
commodities,  may  be  said  to  have  a  real  and  a 
nominal  price.  Its  real  price  may  be  said  to  con¬ 
sist  in  the  quantity  of  the  necessaries  and 
conveniences  of  life  which  are  given  for  it;  its 
nominal  price,  in  the  quantity  of  money.  The 
labourer  is  rich  or  poor,  is  well  or  ill  rewarded, 
in  proportion  to  the  real,  not  to  the  nominal 
price  of  his  labour. 

The  distinction  between  the  real  and  the 
nominal  price  of  commodities  and  labour  is  not 
a  matter  of  mere  speculation,  but  may  some¬ 
times  be  of  considerable  use  in  practice.  The 
same  real  price  is  always  of  the  same  value;  but 
on  account  of  the  variations  in  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver,  the  same  nominal  price  is  sometimes 
of  very  different  values.  When  a  landed  estate, 
therefore,  is  sold  with  a  reservation  of  a  per¬ 
petual  rent,  if  it  is  intended  that  this  rent 
should  always  be  of  the  same  value,  it  is  of  im¬ 
portance  to  the  family  in  whose  favour  it  is  re¬ 
served  that  it  should  not  consist  in  a  particular 
sum  of  money.  Its  value  would  in  this  case  be 
liable  to  variations  of  two  different  kinds;  first, 
to  those  which  arise  from  the  different  quanti¬ 
ties  of  gold  and  silver  which  are  contained  at 
different  times  in  coin  of  the  same  denomina¬ 
tion;  and,  secondly,  to  those  which  arise  from 
the  different  values  of  equal  quantities  of  gold 
and  silver  at  different  times. 

Princes  and  sovereign  states  have  frequently 
fancied  that  they  had  a  temporary  interest  to 
diminish  the  quantity  of  pure  metal  contained 
in  their  coins;  but  they  seldom  have  fancied 
that  they  had  any  to  augment  it.  The  quantity 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


of  metal  contained  in  the  coins,  I  believe  of  all 
nations,  has,  accordingly,  been  almost  contin¬ 
ually  diminishing,  and  hardly  ever  augmenting. 
Such  variations,  therefore,  tend  almost  always 
to  diminish  the  value  of  a  money  rent. 

The  discovery  of  the  mines  of  America  di¬ 
minished  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  in  Europe. 
This  diminution,  it  is  commonly  supposed, 
though  I  apprehend  without  any  certain  proof, 
is  still  going  on  gradually,  and  is  likely  to  con¬ 
tinue  to  do  so  for  a  long  time.  Upon  this  sup¬ 
position,  therefore,  such  variations  are  more 
likely  to  diminish  than  to  augment  the  value 
of  a  money  rent,  even  though  it  should  be  stip¬ 
ulated  to  be  paid,  not  in  such  a  quantity  of 
coined  money  of  such  a  denomination  (in  so 
many  pounds  sterling,  for  example) ,  but  in  so 
many  ounces  either  of  pure  silver,  or  of  silver 
of  a  certain  standard. 

The  rents  which  have  been  reserved  in  corn 
have  preserved  their  value  much  better  than 
those  which  have  been  reserved  in  money,  even 
where  the  denomination  of  the  coin  has  not 
been  altered.  By  the  18th  of  Elizabeth  it  was 
enacted  that  a  third  of  the  rent  of  all  college 
leases  should  be  reserved  in  corn,  to  be  paid, 
either  in  kind,  or  according  to  the  current  prices 
at  the  nearest  public  market.  The  money  aris¬ 
ing  from  this  corn  rent,  though  originally  but  a 
third  of  the  whole,  is  in  the  present  times,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Dr.  Blackstone, commonly  near  dou¬ 
ble  of  what  arises  from  the  other  two-thirds. 
The  old  money  rents  of  colleges  must,  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  account,  have  sunk  almost  to  a 
fourth  part  of  their  ancient  value;  or  are  worth 
little  more  than  a  fourth  part  of  the  corn  which 
they  were  formerly  worth.  But  since  the  reign 
of  Philip  and  Mary  the  denomination  of  the 
English  coin  has  undergone  little  or  no  altera¬ 
tion,  and  the  same  number  of  pounds,  shillings 
and  pence  have  contained  very  nearly  the  same 
quantity  of  pure  silver.  This  degradation,  there¬ 
fore,  in  the  value  of  the  money  rents  of  col¬ 
leges,  has  arisen  altogether  from  the  degrada¬ 
tion  in  the  value  of  silver. 

When  the  degradation  in  the  value  of  silver 
is  combined  with  the  diminution  of  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  it  contained  in  the  coin  of  the  same  de¬ 
nomination,  the  loss  is  frequently  still  greater. 
In  Scotland,  where  the  denomination  of  the 
coin  has  undergone  much  greater  alterations 
than  it  ever  did  in  England,  and  in  France, 
where  it  has  undergone  still  greater  than  it  ever 
did  in  Scotland,  some  ancient  rents,  originally 
of  considerable  value,  have  in  this  manner  been 
reduced  almost  to  nothing. 

Equal  quantities  of  labour  will  at  distant 
times  be  purchased  more  nearly  with  equal 
quantities  of  corn,  the  subsistence  of  the  la¬ 
bourer,  than  with  equal  quantities  of  gold  and 
silver,  or  perhaps  of  any  other  commodity. 
Equal  quantities  of  corn,  therefore,  will,  at  dis¬ 


15 

tant  times,  be  more  nearly  of  the  same  real 
value,  or  enable  the  possessor  to  purchase  or 
command  more  nearly  the  same  quantity  of 
the  labour  of  other  people.  They  will  do  this,  I 
say,  more  nearly  than  equal  quantities  of  al¬ 
most  any  other  commodity;  for  even  equal 
quantities  of  corn  will  not  do  it  exactly.  The 
subsistence  of  the  labourer,  or  the  real  price  of 
labour,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  hereafter, 
is  very  different  upon  different  occasions;  more 
liberal  in  a  society  advancing  to  opulence  than 
in  one  that  is  standing  still;  and  in  one  that  is 
standing  still  than  in  one  that  is  going  back¬ 
wards.  Every  other  commodity,  however,  will 
at  any  particular  time  purchase  a  greater  or 
smaller  quantity  of  labour  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  subsistence  which  it  can  purchase 
at  that  time.  A  rent  therefore  reserved  in  corn 
is  liable  only  to  the  variations  in  the  quantity 
of  labour  which  a  certain  quantity  of  corn  can 
purchase.  But  a  rent  reserved  in  any  other  com¬ 
modity  is  liable  not  only  to  the  variations  in 
the  quantity  of  labour  which  any  particular 
quantity  of  corn  can  purchase,  but  to  the  varia¬ 
tions  in  the  quantity  of  corn  which  can  be  pur¬ 
chased  by  any  particular  quantity  of  that  com¬ 
modity. 

Though  the  real  value  of  a  corn  rent,  it  is  to 
be  observed,  however,  varies  much  less  from 
century  to  century  than  that  of  a  money  rent, 
it  varies  much  more  from  year  to  year.  The 
money  price  of  labour,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to 
show  hereafter,  does  not  fluctuate  from  year  to 
year  with  the  money  price  of  corn,  but  seems  to 
be  everywhere  accommodated,  not  to  the  tem¬ 
porary  or  occasional,  but  to  the  average  or 
ordinary  price  of  that  necessary  of  life.  The 
average  or  ordinary  price  of  corn  again  is  regu¬ 
lated,  as  I  shall  likewise  endeavour  to  show 
hereafter,  by  the  value  of  silver,  by  the  richness 
or  barrenness  of  the  mines  which  supply  the 
market  with  that  metal,  or  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  which  must  be  employed,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  corn  which  must  be  consumed,  in 
order  to  bring  any  particular  quantity  of  silver 
from  the  mine  to  the  market.  But  the  value  of 
silver,  though  it  sometimes  varies  greatly  from 
century  to  century,  seldom  varies  much  from 
year  to  year,  but  frequently  continues  the 
same,  or  very  nearly  the  same,  for  half  a  cen¬ 
tury  or  a  century  together.  The  ordinary  or 
average  money  price  of  corn,  therefore,  may, 
during  so  long  a  period,  continue  the  same  or 
very  nearly  the  same  too,  and  along  with  it  the 
money  price  of  labour,  provided,  at  least,  the 
society  continues,  in  other  respects,  in  the  same 
or  nearly  in  the  same  condition.  In  the  mean¬ 
time  the  temporary  and  occasional  price  of 
corn  may  frequently  be  double,  one  year,  of 
what  it  had  been  the  year  before,  or  fluctuate, 
for  example,  from  five  and  twenty  to  fifty  shil¬ 
lings  the  quarter.  But  when  corn  is  at  the  latter 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


16 

price,  not  only  the  nominal,  but  the  real  value 
of  a  corn  rent  will  be  double  of  what  it  is  when 
at  the  former,  or  will  command  double  the 
quantity  either  of  labour  or  of  the  greater  part 
of  other  commodities;  the  money  price  of  la¬ 
bour,  and  along  with  it  that  of  most  other 
things,  continuing  the  same  during  all  these 
fluctuations. 

Labour,  therefore,  it  appears  evidently,  is  the 
only  universal,  as  well  as  the  only  accurate 
measure  of  value,  or  the  only  standard  by  which 
we  can  compare  the  values  of  different  com¬ 
modities  at  all  times,  and  at  all  places.  We  can¬ 
not  estimate,  it  is  allowed,  the  real  value  of  dif¬ 
ferent  commodities  from  century  to  century  by 
the  quantities  of  silver  which  were  given  for 
them.  We  cannot  estimate  it  from  year  to  year 
by  the  quantities  of  corn.  By  the  quantities  of 
labour  we  can,  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  esti¬ 
mate  it  both  from  century  to  century  and  from 
year  to  year.  From  century  to  century,  corn  is 
a  better  measure  than  silver,  because,  from  cen¬ 
tury  to  century,  equal  quantities  of  corn  will 
command  the  same  quantity  of  labour  more 
nearly  than  equal  quantities  of  silver.  From 
year  to  year,  on  the  contrary,  silver  is  a  better 
measure  than  corn,  because  equal  quantities 
of  it  will  more  nearly  command  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour. 

But  though  in  establishing  perpetual  rents, 
or  even  in  letting  very  long  leases,  it  may  be  of 
use  to  distinguish  between  real  and  nominal 
price;  it  is  of  none  in  buying  and  selling,  the 
more  common  and  ordinary  transactions  of 
human  life. 

At  the  same  time  and  place  the  real  and  the 
nominal  price  of  all  commodities  are  exactly  in 
proportion  to  one  another.  The  more  or  less 
money  you  get  for  any  commodity,  in  the  Lon¬ 
don  market  for  example,  the  more  or  less  la¬ 
bour  it  will  at  that  time  and  place  enable  you 
to  purchase  or  command.  At  the  same  time  and 
place,  therefore,  money  is  the  exact  measure  of 
the  real  exchangeable  value  of  all  commodities. 
It  is  so,  however,  at  the  same  time  and  place 
only. 

Though  at  distant  places,  there  is  no  regular 
proportion  between  the  real  and  the  money 
price  of  commodities,  yet  the  merchant  who 
carries  goods  from  the  one  to  the  other  has 
nothing  to  consider  but  their  money  price,  or 
the  difference  between  the  quantity  of  silver 
for  which  he  buys  them,  and  that  for  which  he 
is  likely  to  sell  them.  Half  an  ounce  of  silver  at 
Canton  in  China  may  command  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  both  of  labour  and  of  the  necessaries  and 
conveniences  of  life  than  an  ounce  at  London. 
A  commodity,  therefore,  which  sells  for  half 
an  ounce  of  silver  at  Canton  may  there  be 
really  dearer,  of  more  real  importance  to  the 
man  who  possesses  it  there,  than  a  commodity 
which  sells  for  an  ounce  at  London  is  to  the 


man  who  possesses  it  at  London.  If  a  London 
merchant,  however,  can  buy  at  Canton  for  half 
an  ounce  of  silver,  a  commodity  which  he  can 
afterwards  sell  at  London  for  an  ounce,  he 
gains  a  hundred  per  cent  by  the  bargain,  just 
as  much  as  if  an  ounce  of  silver  was  at  London 
exactly  of  the  same  value  as  at  Canton.  It  is  of 
no  importance  to  him  that  half  an  ounce  of  sil¬ 
ver  at  Canton  would  have  given  him  the  com¬ 
mand  of  more  labour  and  of  a  greater  quantity 
of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life  than 
an  ounce  can  do  at  London.  An  ounce  at  Lon¬ 
don  will  always  give  him  the  command  of  dou¬ 
ble  the  quantity  of  all  these  which  half  an  ounce 
could  have  done  there,  and  this  is  precisely 
what  he  wants. 

As  it  is  the  nominal  or  money  price  of  goods, 
therefore,  which  finally  determines  the  pru¬ 
dence  or  imprudence  of  all  purchases  and  sales, 
and  thereby  regulates  almost  the  whole  busi¬ 
ness  of  common  life  in  which  price  is  concerned, 
we  cannot  wonder  that  it  should  have  been  so 
much  more  attended  to  than  the  real  price. 

In  such  a  work  as  this,  however,  it  may  some¬ 
times  be  of  use  to  compare  the  different  real 
values  of  a  particular  commodity  at  different 
times  and  places,  or  the  different  degrees  of 
power  over  the  labour  of  other  people  which  it 
may,  upon  different  occasions,  have  given  to 
those  who  possessed  it.  We  must  in  this  case 
compare,  not  so  much  the  different  quantities 
of  silver  for  which  it  was  commonly  sold,  as  the 
different  quantities  of  labour  which  those  dif¬ 
ferent  quantities  of  silver  could  have  purchased. 
But  the  current  prices  of  labour  at  distant  times 
and  places  can  scarce  ever  be  known  with  any 
degree  of  exactness.  Those  of  corn,  though  they 
have  in  few  places  been  regularly  recorded,  are 
in  general  better  known  and  have  been  more 
frequently  taken  notice  of  by  historians  and 
other  writers.  We  must  generally,  therefore, 
content  ourselves  with  them,  not  as  being  al¬ 
ways  exactly  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  cur¬ 
rent  prices  of  labour,  but  as  being  the  nearest 
approximation  which  can  commonly  be  had  to 
that  proportion.  I  shall  hereafter  have  occasion 
to  make  several  comparisons  of  this  kind. 

In  the  progress  of  industry,  commercial  na¬ 
tions  have  found  it  convenient  to  coin  several 
different  metals  into  money;  gold  for  larger 
payments,  silver  for  purchases  of  moderate 
value,  and  copper,  or  some  other  coarse  metal, 
for  those  of  still  smaller  consideration.  They 
have  always,  however,  considered  one  of  those 
metals  as  more  peculiarly  the  measure  of  value 
than  any  of  the  other  two;  and  this  preference 
seems  generally  to  have  been  given  to  the  metal 
which  they  happened  first  to  make  use  of  as  the 
instrument  of  commerce.  Having  once  begun 
to  use  it  as  their  standard,  which  they  must 
have  done  when  they  had  no  other  money,  they 
have  generally  continued  to  do  so  even  when 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


the  necessity  was  not  the  same. 

The  Romans  are  said  to  have  had  nothing 
but  copper  money  till  within  five  years  before 
the  first  Punic  war,1  when  they  first  began  to 
coin  silver.  Copper,  therefore,  appears  to  have 
continued  always  the  measure  of  value  in  that 
republic.  At  Rome  all  accounts  appear  to  have 
been  kept,  and  the  value  of  all  estates  to  have 
been  computed  either  in  asses  or  in  sestertii. 
The  as  was  always  the  denomination  of  a  cop¬ 
per  coin.  The  word  sestertius  signifies  two  asses 
and  a  half.  Though  the  sestertius,  therefore, 
was  originally  a  silver  coin,  its  value  was  esti¬ 
mated  in  copper.  At  Rome,  one  who  owed  a 
great  deal  of  money  was  said  to  have  a  great 
deal  of  other  people’s  copper. 

The  northern  nations  who  established  them¬ 
selves  upon  the  ruins  of  the  Roman  empire, 
seem  to  have  had  silver  money  from  the  first 
beginning  of  their  settlements,  and  not  to  have 
known  either  gold  or  copper  coins  for  several 
ages  thereafter.  There  were  silver  coins  in  Eng¬ 
land  in  the  time  of  the  Saxons;  but  there  was 
little  gold  coined  till  the  time  of  Edward  III 
nor  any  copper  till  that  of  James  I  of  Great 
Britain.  In  England,  therefore,  and  for  the 
same  reason,  I  believe,  in  all  other  modern  na¬ 
tions  of  Europe,  all  accounts  are  kept,  and  the 
value  of  all  goods  and  of  all  estates  is  generally 
computed  in  silver:  and  when  we  mean  to  ex¬ 
press  the  amount  of  a  person’s  fortune,  we  sel¬ 
dom  mention  the  number  of  guineas,  but  the 
number  of  pounds  sterling  which  we  suppose 
would  be  given  for  it. 

Originally,  in  all  countries,  I  believe,  a  legal 
tender  of  payment  could  be  made  only  in  the 
coin  of  that  metal,  which  was  peculiarly  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  standard  or  measure  of  value.  In 
England,  gold  was  not  considered  as  a  legal 
tender  for  a  long  time  after  it  was  coined  into 
money.  The  proportion  between  the  values  of 
gold  and  silver  money  was  not  fixed  by  any 
public  law  or  proclamation;  but  was  left  to  be 
settled  by  the  market.  If  a  debtor  offered 
payment  in  gold,  the  creditor  might  either  re¬ 
ject  such  payment  altogether,  or  accept  of  it 
at  such  a  valuation  of  the  gold  as  he  and  his 
debtor  could  agree  upon.  Copper  is  not  at  pres¬ 
ent  a  legal  tender  except  in  the  change  of  the 
smaller  silver  coins.  In  this  state  of  things  the 
distinction  between  the  metal  which  was  the 
standard,  and  that  which  was  not  the  stand¬ 
ard,  was  something  more  than  a  nominal  dis¬ 
tinction. 

In  process  of  time,  and  as  people  became 
gradually  more  familiar  with  the  use  of  the  dif¬ 
ferent  metals  in  coin,  and  consequently  better 
acquainted  with  the  proportion  between  their 
respective  values,  it  has  in  most  countries,  I 
believe, been  found  convenient  to  ascertain  this 
proportion,  and  to  declare  by  a  public  law  that 

1  Pliny,  xxxiii,  3. 


17 

a  guinea,  for  example,  of  such  a  weight  and 
fineness,  should  exchange  for  one-and-twenty 
shillings,  or  be  a  legal  tender  for  a  debt  of  that 
amount.  In  this  state  of  things,  and  during  the 
continuance  of  any  one  regulated  proportion  of 
this  kind,  the  distinction  between  the  metal 
which  is  the  standard,  and  that  which  is  not 
the  standard,  becomes  little  more  than  a  nomi¬ 
nal  distinction. 

In  consequence  of  any  change,  however,  in 
this  regulated  proportion,  this  distinction  be¬ 
comes,  or  at  least  seems  to  become,  something 
more  than  nominal  again.  If  the  regulated  val¬ 
ue  of  a  guinea,  for  example,  was  either  reduced 
to  twenty,  or  raised  to  two-and-twenty  shil¬ 
lings,  all  accounts  being  kept  and  almost  all 
obligations  for  debt  being  expressed  in  silver 
money,  the  greater  part  of  payments  could  in 
either  case  be  made  with  the  same  quantity  of 
silver  money  as  before;  but  would  require  very 
different  quantities  of  gold  money;  a  greater  in 
the  one  case,  and  a  smaller  in  the  other.  Silver 
would  appear  to  be  more  invariable  in  its  value 
than  gold.  Silver  would  appear  to  measure  the 
value  of  gold,  and  gold  would  not  appear  to 
measure  the  value  of  silver.  The  value  of  gold 
would  seem  to  depend  upon  the  quantity  of  sil¬ 
ver  which  it  would  exchange  for;  and  the  value 
of  silver  would  not  seem  to  depend  upon  the 
quantity  of  gold  which  it  would  exchange  for. 
This  difference,  however,  would  be  altogether 
owing  to  the  custom  of  keeping  accounts,  and 
of  expressing  the  amount  of  all  great  and  small 
sums  rather  in  silver  than  in  gold  money.  One 
of  Mr.  Drummond’s  notes  for  five-and-twenty 
or  fifty  guineas  would,  after  an  alteration  of 
this  kind,  be  still  payable  with  five-and-twenty 
or  fifty  guineas  in  the  same  manner  as  before. 
It  would,  after  such  an  alteration,  be  payable 
with  the  same  quantity  of  gold  as  before,  but 
with  very  different  quantities  of  silver.  In  the 
payment  of  such  a  note,  gold  would  appear  to 
be  more  invariable  in  its  value  than  silver. Gold 
would  appear  to  measure  the  value  of  silver, 
and  silver  would  not  appear  to  measure  the 
value  of  gold.  If  the  custom  of  keeping  ac¬ 
counts,  and  of  expressing  promissory  notes  and 
other  obligations  for  money  in  this  manner, 
should  ever  become  general,  gold,  and  not  sil¬ 
ver,  would  be  considered  as  the  metal  which 
was  peculiarly  the  standard  or  measure  of 
value. 

In  reality,  during  the  continuance  of  any  one 
regulated  proportion  between  the  respective 
values  of  the  different  metals  in  coin,  the  value 
of  the  most  precious  metal  regulates  the  value 
of  the  whole  coin.  Twelve  copper  pence  con¬ 
tain  half  a  pound,  avoirdupois,  of  copper,  of  not 
the  best  quality,  which,  before  it  is  coined,  is 
seldom  worth  sevenpence  in  silver.  But  as  by 
the  regulation  twelve  such  pence  are  ordered 
to  exchange  for  a  shilling,  they  are  in  the  mar- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


18 

ket  considered  as  worth  a  shilling,  and  a  shil¬ 
ling  can  at  any  time  be  had  for  them.  Even  be¬ 
fore  the  late  reformation  of  the  gold  coin  of 
Great  Britain,  the  gold,  that  part  of  it  at  least 
which  circulated  in  London  and  its  neighbour¬ 
hood,  was  in  general  less  degraded  below  its 
standard  weight  than  the  greater  part  of  the 
silver.  One-and-twenty  worn  and  defaced  shill¬ 
ings,  however,  were  considered  as  equivalent  to 
a  guinea,  which  perhaps,  indeed,  was  worn  and 
defaced  too,  but  seldom  so  much  so.  The  late 
regulations  have  brought  the  gold  coin  as  near 
perhaps  to  its  standard  weight  as  it  is  possible 
to  bring  the  current  coin  of  any  nation;  and 
the  order,  to  receive  no  gold  at  the  public  of¬ 
fices  but  by  weight,  is  likely  to  preserve  it  so, 
as  long  as  that  order  is  enforced.  The  silver 
coin  still  continues  in  the  same  worn  and  de¬ 
graded  state  as  before  the  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin.  In  the  market,  however,  one-and- 
twenty  shillings  of  this  degraded  silver  coin 
are  still  considered  as  worth  a  guinea  of  this  ex¬ 
cellent  gold  coin. 

The  reformation  of  the  gold  coin  has  evi¬ 
dently  raised  the  value  of  the  silver  coin  which 
can  be  exchanged  for  it. 

In  the  English  mint  a  pound  weight  of  gold 
is  coined  into  forty-four  guineas  and  a  half, 
which,  at  one-and-twenty  shillings  the  guinea, 
is  equal  to  forty-six  pounds  fourteen  shillings 
and  sixpence.  An  ounce  of  such  gold  coin,  there¬ 
fore,  is  worth  £3  17s.  10%d.  in  silver.  In  Eng¬ 
land  no  duty  or  seignorage  is  paid  upon  the 
coinage,  and  he  who  carries  a  pound  weight  or 
an  ounce  weight  of  standard  gold  bullion  to 
the  mint,  gets  back  a  pound  weight  or  an  ounce 
weight  of  gold  in  coin,  without  any  deduction. 
Three  pounds  seventeen  shillings  and  tenpence 
halfpenny  an  ounce,  therefore,  is  said  to  be  the 
mint  price  of  gold  in  England,  or  the  quantity 
of  gold  coin  which  the  mint  gives  in  return  for 
standard  gold  bullion. 

Before  the  reformation  of  the  gold  coin,  the 
price  of  standard  gold  bullion  in  the  market 
had  for  many  years  been  upwards  of  £3  18s. 
sometimes  £3  19s.  and  very  frequently  £4  an 
ounce;  that  sum,  it  is  probable,  in  the  worn  and 
degraded  gold  coin,  seldom  containing  more 
than  an  ounce  of  standard  gold. Since  the  refor¬ 
mation  of  the  gold  coin,  the  market  price  of 
standard  gold  bullion  seldom  exceeds  £3  17s. 
7d.  an  ounce.  Before  the  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin,  the  market  price  was  always  more 
or  less  above  the  mint  price.  Since  that  refor¬ 
mation,  the  market  price  has  been  constantly 
below  the  mint  price.  But  that  market  price  is 
the  same  whether  it  is  paid  in  gold  or  in  silver 
coin.  The  late  reformation  of  the  gold  coin, 
therefore,  has  raised  not  only  the  value  of  the 
gold  coin,  but  likewise  that  of  the  silver  coin 
in  proportion  to  gold  bullion,  and  probably, 
too,  in  proportion  to  all  other  commodities; 


through  the  price  of  the  greater  part  of  other 
commodities  being  influenced  by  so  many  other 
causes,  the  rise  in  the  value  either  of  gold  or 
silver  coin  in  proportion  to  them  may  not  be  so 
distinct  and  sensible. 

In  the  English  mint  a  pound  weight  of  stand¬ 
ard  silver  bullion  is  coined  into  sixty-two  shil¬ 
lings,  containing,  in  the  same  manner,  a  pound 
weight  of  standard  silver.  Five  shillings  and 
twopence  an  ounce,  therefore,  is  said  to  be  the 
mint  price  of  silver  in  England,  or  the  quantity 
of  silver  coin  which  the  mint  gives  in  return  for 
standard  silver  bullion.  Before  the  reformation 
of  the  gold  coin,  the  market  price  of  standard 
silver  bullion  was,  upon  different  occasions,  five 
shillings  and  fourpence,  five  shillings  and  five- 
pence,  five  shillings  and  sixpence,  five  shillings 
and  sevenpence,  and  very  often  five  shillings 
and  eightpence  an  ounce.  Five  shillings  and 
sevenpence,  however,  seems  to  have  been  the 
most  common  price.  Since  the  reformation  of 
the  gold  coin,  the  market  price  of  standard  sil¬ 
ver  bullion  has  fallen  occasionally  to  five  shil¬ 
lings  and  threepence,  five  shillings  and  four- 
pence,  and  five  shillings  and  fivepence  an  ounce, 
which  last  price  it  has  scarce  ever  exceeded. 
Though  the  market  price  of  silver  bullion  has 
fallen  considerably  since  the  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin,  it  has  not  fallen  so  low  as  the  mint 
price. 

In  the  proportion  between  the  different  met¬ 
als  in  the  English  coin,  as  copper  is  rated  very 
much  above  its  real  value,  so  silver  is  rated 
somewhat  below  it.  In  the  market  of  Europe,  in 
the  French  coin  and  in  the  Dutch  coin,  an 
ounce  of  fine  gold  exchanges  for  about  fourteen 
ounces  of  fine  silver.  In  the  English  coin,  it 
exchanges  for  about  fifteen  ounces,  that  is, 
for  more  silver  than  it  is  worth  according  to 
the  common  estimation  of  Europe.  But  as  the 
price  of  copper  in  bars  is  not,  even  in  England, 
raised  by  the  high  price  of  copper  in  English 
coin,  so  the  price  of  silver  in  bullion  is  not  sunk 
by  the  low  rate  of  silver  in  English  coin.  Sil¬ 
ver  in  bullion  still  preserves  its  proper  propor¬ 
tion  to  gold;  for  the  same  reason  that  copper 
in  bars  preserves  its  proper  proportion  to 
silver. 

Upon  the  reformation  of  the  silver  coin  in 
the  reign  of  William  III  the  price  of  silver  bul¬ 
lion  still  continued  to  be  somewhat  above  the 
mint  price.  Mr.  Locke  imputed  this  high  price 
to  the  permission  of  exporting  silver  bullion, 
and  to  the  prohibition  of  exporting  silver  coin. 
This  permission  of  exporting,  he  said,  rendered 
the  demand  for  silver  bullion  greater  than  the 
demand  for  silver  coin.  But  the  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  who  want  silver  coin  for  the  common  uses 
of  buying  and  selling  at  home,  is  surely  much 
greater  than  that  of  those  who  want  silver 
bullion  either  for  the  use  of  exportation  or  for 
any  other  use.  There  subsists  at  present  a  like 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


permission  of  exporting  gold  bullion,  and  a  like 
prohibition  of  exporting  gold  coin:  and  yet  the 
price  of  gold  bullion  has  fallen  below  the  mint 
price.  But  in  the  English  coin  silver  was  then, 
in  the  same  manner  as  now,  underrated  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  gold,  and  the  gold  coin  (which  at 
that  time  too  was  not  supposed  to  require  any 
reformation)  regulated  then,  as  well  as  now, 
the  real  value  of  the  whole  coin.  As  the  refor¬ 
mation  of  the  silver  coin  did  not  then  reduce 
the  price  of  silver  bullion  to  the  mint  price,  it  is 
not  very  probable  that  a  like  reformation  will 
do  so  now. 

Were  the  silver  coin  brought  back  as  near  to 
its  standard  weight  as  the  gold,  a  guinea,  it  is 
probable,  would,  according  to  the  present  pro¬ 
portion,  exchange  for  more  silver  in  coin  than 
it  would  purchase  in  bullion.  The  silver  coin 
containing  its  full  standard  weight,  there  would 
in  this  case  be  a  profit  in  melting  it  down,  in 
order,  first,  to  sell  the  bullion  for  gold  coin,  and 
afterwards  to  exchange  this  gold  coin  for  silver 
coin  to  be  melted  down  in  the  same  manner. 
Some  alteration  in  the  present  proportion  seems 
to  be  the  only  method  of  preventing  this  incon- 
veniency. 

The  inconveniency  perhaps  would  be  less  if 
silver  was  rated  in  the  coin  as  much  above  its 
proper  proportion  to  gold  as  it  is  at  present 
rated  below  it;  provided  it  was  at  the  same 
time  enacted  that  silver  should  not  be  a  legal 
tender  for  more  than  the  change  of  a  guinea,  in 
the  same  manner  as  copper  is  not  a  legal  tender 
for  more  than  the  change  of  a  shilling.  No  credi¬ 
tor  could  in  this  case  be  cheated  in  consequence 
of  the  high  valuation  of  silver  in  coin;  as  no 
creditor  can  at  present  be  cheated  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  high  valuation  of  copper.  The 
bankers  only  would  suffer  by  this  regulation. 
When  a  run  comes  upon  them  they  sometimes 
endeavour  to  gain  time  by  paying  in  sixpences, 
and  they  would  be  precluded  by  this  regulation 
from  this  discreditable  method  of  evading  im¬ 
mediate  payment.  They  would  be  obliged  in 
consequence  to  keep  at  all  times  in  their  coffers 
a  greater  quantity  of  cash  than  at  present;  and 
though  this  might  no  doubt  be  a  considerable 
inconveniency  to  them,  it  would  at  the  same 
time  be  a  considerable  security  to  their  credi¬ 
tors. 

Three  pounds  seventeen  shillings  and  ten- 
pence  halfpenny  (the  mint  price  of  gold)  cer¬ 
tainly  does  not  contain,  even  in  our  present  ex¬ 
cellent  gold  coin,  more  than  an  ounce  of  stand¬ 
ard  gold,  and  it  may  be  thought,  therefore, 
should  not  purchase  more  standard  bullion. 
But  gold  in  coin  is  more  convenient  than  gold 
in  bullion,  and  though,  in  England,  the  coinage 
is  free,  yet  the  gold  which  is  carried  in  bullion 
to  the  mint  can  seldom  be  returned  in  coin  to 
the  owner  till  after  a  delay  of  several  weeks.  In 
the  present  hurry  of  the  mint,  it  could  not  be 


19 

returned  till  after  a  delay  of  several  months. 
This  delay  is  equivalent  to  a  small  duty,  and 
renders  gold  in  coin  somewhat  more  valuable 
than  an  equal  quantity  of  gold  in  bullion.  If  in 
the  English  coin  silver  was  rated  according  to 
it  proper  proportion  to  gold,  the  price  of  silver 
bullion  would  probably  fall  below  the  mint 
price  even  without  any  reformation  of  the  sil¬ 
ver  coin;  the  value  even  of  the  present  worn 
and  defaced  silver  coin  being  regulated  by  the 
value  of  the  excellent  gold  coin  for  which  it 
can  be  changed. 

A  small  seignorage  or  duty  upon  the  coinage 
of  both  gold  and  silver  would  probably  increase 
still  more  the  superiority  of  those  metals  in 
coin  above  an  equal  quantity  of  either  of  them 
in  bullion.  The  coinage  would  in  this  case  in¬ 
crease  the  value  of  the  metal  coined  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  extent  of  this  small  duty;  for  the 
same  reason  that  the  fashion  increases  the  val¬ 
ue  of  plate  in  proportion  to  the  price  of  that 
fashion.  The  superiority  of  coin  above  bullion 
would  prevent  the  melting  down  of  the  coin, 
and  would  discourage  its  exportation.  If  upon 
any  public  exigency  it  should  become  necessary 
to  export  the  coin,  the  greater  part  of  it  would 
soon  return  again  of  its  own  accord.  Abroad  it 
could  sell  only  for  its  weight  in  bullion.  At  home 
it  would  buy  more  than  that  weight.  There 
would  be  a  profit,  therefore,  in  bringing  it  home 
again.  In  France  a  seignorage  of  about  eight 
per  cent  is  imposed  upon  the  coinage,  and  the 
French  coin,  when  exported,  is  said  to  return 
home  again  of  its  own  accord. 

The  occasional  fluctuations  in  the  market 
price  of  gold  and  silver  bullion  arise  from  the 
same  causes  as  the  like  fluctuations  in  that  of 
all  other  commodities.  The  frequent  loss  of 
those  metals  from  various  accidents  by  sea  and 
by  land,  the  continual  waste  of  them  in  gilding 
and  plating,  in  lace  and  embroidery,  in  the 
wear  and  tear  of  coin,  and  in  that  of  plate;  re¬ 
quire,  in  all  countries  which  possess  no  mines 
of  their  own,  a  continual  importation,  in  order 
to  repair  this  loss  and  this  waste.  The  merchant 
importers,  like  all  other  merchants,  we  may  be¬ 
lieve,  endeavour,  as  well  as  they  can,  to  suit 
their  occasional  importations  to  what,  they 
judge,  is  likely  to  be  the  immediate  demand. 
With  all  their  attention,  however,  they  some¬ 
times  overdo  the  business,  and  sometimes 
underdo  it.  When  they  import  more  bullion 
than  is  wanted,  rather  than  incur  the  risk  and 
trouble  of  exporting  it  again,  they  are  some¬ 
times  willing  to  sell  a  part  of  it  for  something 
less  than  the  ordinary  or  average  price.  When, 
on  the  other  hand,  they  import  less  than  is 
wanted,  they  get  something  more  than  this 
price.  But  when,  under  all  those  occasional 
fluctuations,  the  market  price  either  of  gold  or 
silver  bullion  continues  for  several  years  to¬ 
gether  steadily  and  constantly,  either  more  or 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


c20 

less  above,  or  more  or  less  below  the  mint  price, 
we  may  be  assured  that  this  steady  and  con¬ 
stant,  either  superiority  or  inferiority  of  price, 
is  the  effect  of  something  in  the  state  of  the 
coin,  which,  at  that  time,  renders  a  certain 
quantity  of  coin  either  of  more  value  or  of  less 
value  than  the  precise  quantity  of  bullion  which 
it  ought  to  contain.  The  constancy  and  steadi¬ 
ness  of  the  effect  supposes  a  proportionable  con¬ 
stancy  and  steadiness  in  the  cause. 

The  money  of  any  particular  country  is,  at 
any  particular  time  and  place,  more  or  less  an 
accurate  measure  of  value  according  as  the  cur¬ 
rent  coin  is  more  or  less  exactly  agreeable  to  its 
standard,  or  contains  more  or  less  exactly  the 
precise  quantity  of  pure  gold  or  pure  silver 
which  it  ought  to  contain.  If  in  England,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  forty-four  guineas  and  a  half  contained 
exactly  a  pound  weight  of  standard  gold,  or 
eleven  ounces  of  fine  gold  and  one  ounce  of 
alloy,  the  gold  coin  of  England  would  be  as  ac¬ 
curate  a  measure  of  the  actual  value  of  goods 
at  any  particular  time  and  place  as  the  nature 
of  the  thing  would  admit.  But  if,  by  rubbing 
and  wearing,  forty-four  guineas  and  a  half  gen¬ 
erally  contain  less  than  a  pound  weight  of 
standard  gold;  the  diminution,  however,  being 
greater  in  some  pieces  than  in  others;  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  value  comes  to  be  liable  to  the  same  sort 
of  uncertainty  to  which  all  other  weights  and 
measures  are  commonly  exposed.  As  it  rarely 
happens  that  these  are  exactly  agreeable  to 
their  standard,  the  merchant  adjusts  the  price 
of  his  goods,  as  well  as  he  can,  not  to  what 
those  weights  and  measures  ought  to  be,  but 
to  what,  upon  an  average,  he  finds  by  experi¬ 
ence  they  actually  are.  In  consequence  of  a 
like  disorder  in  the  coin,  the  price  of  goods 
comes,  in  the  same  manner,  to  be  adjusted,  not 
to  the  quantity  of  pure  gold  or  silver  which  the 
coin  ought  to  contain,  but  to  that  which,  upon 
an  average,  it  is  found  by  experience,  it  actually 
does  contain. 

By  the  money-price  of  goods,  it  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served,  I  understand  always  the  quantity  of 
pure  gold  or  silver  for  which  they  are  sold, 
without  any  regard  to  the  denomination  of  the 
coin.  Six  shillings  and  eightpence,  for  example, 
in  the  time  of  Edward  I,  I  consider  as  the  same 
money-price  with  a  pound  sterling  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  times;  because  it  contained,  as  nearly  as 
we  can  judge,  the  same  quantity  of  pure  silver. 

CHAPTER  VI 

Of  the  Component  Parts  of  the  Price 
of  Commodities 

In  that  early  and  rude  state  of  society  which 
precedes  both  the  accumulation  of  stock  and 
the  appropriation  of  land,  the  proportion  be¬ 
tween  the  quantities  of  labour  necessary  for  ac¬ 
quiring  different  objects  seems  to  be  the  only 


circumstance  which  can  afford  any  rule  for  ex¬ 
changing  them  for  one  another.  If  among  a  na¬ 
tion  of  hunters,  for  example,  it  usually  costs 
twice  the  labour  to  kill  a  beaver  which  it  does 
to  kill  a  deer,  one  beaver  should  naturally  ex¬ 
change  for  or  be  worth  two  deer.  It  is  natural 
that  what  is  usually  the  produce  of  two  days* 
or  two  hours’  labour,  should  be  worth  double  of 
what  is  usually  the  produce  of  one  day’s  or  one 
hour’s  labour. 

If  the  one  species  of  labour  should  be  more 
severe  than  the  other,  some  allowance  will  natu¬ 
rally  be  made  for  this  superior  hardship;  and 
the  produce  of  one  hour’s  labour  in  the  one  way 
may  frequently  exchange  for  that  of  two  hours’ 
labour  in  the  other. 

Or  if  the  one  species  of  labour  requires  an  un¬ 
common  degree  of  dexterity  and  ingenuity,  the 
esteem  which  men  have  for  such  talents  will 
naturally  give  a  value  to  their  produce,  supe¬ 
rior  to  what  would  be  due  to  the  time  employed 
about  it.  Such  talents  can  seldom  be  acquired 
but  in  consequence  of  long  application,  and  the 
superior  value  of  their  produce  may  frequently 
be  no  more  than  a  reasonable  compensation  for 
the  time  and  labour  which  must  be  spent  in  ac¬ 
quiring  them.  In  the  advanced  state  of  society, 
allowances  of  this  kind,  for  superior  hardship 
and  superior  skill,  are  commonly  made  in  the 
wages  of  labour;  and  something  of  the  same 
kind  must  probably  have  taken  place  in  its 
earliest  and  rudest  period. 

In  this  state  of  things,  the  whole  produce  of 
labour  belongs  to  the  labourer;  and  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  commonly  employed  in  acquiring 
or  producing  any  commodity  is  the  only  cir¬ 
cumstance  which  can  regulate  the  quantity  of 
labour  which  it  ought  commonly  to  purchase, 
command,  or  exchange  for. 

As  soon  as  stock  has  accumulated  in  the 
hands  of  particular  persons,  some  of  them  will 
naturally  employ  it  in  setting  to  work  indus¬ 
trious  people,  whom  they  will  supply  with  mate¬ 
rials  and  subsistence,  in  order  to  make  a  profit 
by  the  sale  of  their  work,  or  by  what  their  la¬ 
bour  adds  to  the  value  of  the  materials.  In  ex¬ 
changing  the  complete  manufacture  either  for 
money,  for  labour,  or  for  other  goods,  over  and 
above  what  may  be  sufficient  to  pay  the  price 
of  the  materials,  and  the  wages  of  the  workmen, 
something  must  be  given  for  the  profits  of  the 
undertaker  of  the  work  who  hazards  his  stock 
in  this  adventure.  The  value  which  the  work¬ 
men  add  to  the  materials,  therefore,  resolves 
itself  in  this  case  into  two  parts,  of  which  the 
one  pays  their  wages,  the  other  the  profits  of 
their  employer  upon  the  whole  stock  of  mate¬ 
rials  and  wages  which  he  advanced.  He  could 
have  no  interest  to  employ  them,  unless  he  ex¬ 
pected  from  the  sale  of  their  work  something 
more  than  what  was  sufficient  to  replace  his 
stock  to  him;  and  he  could  have  no  interest  to 


The  Price  of 

employ  a  great  stock  rather  than  a  small  one, 
unless  his  profits  were  to  bear  some  proportion 
to  the  extent  of  his  stock. 

The  profits  of  stock,  it  may  perhaps  be 
thought,  are  only  a  different  name  for  the  wages 
of  a  particular  sort  of  labour,  the  labour  of  in¬ 
spection  and  direction.  They  are,  however,  al¬ 
together  different,  are  regulated  by  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  principles,  and  bear  no  proportion  to  the 
quantity,  the  hardship,  or  the  ingenuity  of  this 
supposed  labour  of  inspection  and  direction. 
They  are  regulated  altogether  by  the  value  of 
the  stock  employed,  and  are  greater  or  smaller 
in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  this  stock.  Let 
us  suppose,  for  example,  that  in  some  particu¬ 
lar  place,  where  the  common  annual  profits  of 
manufacturing  stock  are  ten  per  cent,  there  are 
two  different  manufactures,  in  each  of  which 
twenty  workmen  are  employed  at  the  rate  of 
fifteen  pounds  a  year  each,  or  at  the  expense  of 
three  hundred  a  year  in  each  manufactory.  Let 
us  suppose,  too,  that  the  coarse  materials  an¬ 
nually  wrought  up  in  the  one  cost  only  seven 
hundred  pounds,  while  the  finer  materials  in 
the  other  cost  seven  thousand.  The  capital  an¬ 
nually  employed  in  the  one  will  in  this  case 
amount  only  to  one  thousand  pounds;  whereas 
that  employed  in  the  other  will  amount  to  seven 
thousand  three  hundred  pounds.  At  the  rate  of 
ten  per  cent,  therefore,  the  undertaker  of  the 
one  will  expect  a  yearly  profit  of  about  one 
hundred  pounds  only;  while  that  of  the  other 
will  expect  about  seven  hundred  and  thirty 
pounds.  But  though  their  profits  are  so  very 
different,  their  labour  of  inspection  and  direc¬ 
tion  may  be  either  altogether  or  very  nearly 
the  same.  In  many  great  works  almost  the 
whole  labour  of  this  kind  is  committed  to  some 
principal  clerk.  His  wages  properly  express  the 
value  of  this  labour  of  inspection  and  direction. 
Though  in  settling  them  some  regard  is  had 
commonly,  not  only  to  his  labour  and  skill,  but 
to  the  trust  which  is  reposed  in  him,  yet  they 
never  bear  any  regular  proportion  to  the  capi¬ 
tal  of  which  he  oversees  the  management;  and 
the  owner  of  this  capital,  though  he  is  thus  dis¬ 
charged  of  almost  all  labour,  still  expects  that 
his  profits  should  bear  a  regular  proportion  to 
his  capital.  In  the  price  of  commodities,  there¬ 
fore,  the  profits  of  stock  constitute  a  compo¬ 
nent  part  altogether  different  from  the  wages  of 
labour,  and  regulated  by  quite  different  prin¬ 
ciples. 

In  this  state  of  things,  the  whole  produce  of 
labour  does  not  always  belong  to  the  labourer. 
He  must  in  most  cases  share  it  with  the  owner 
of  the  stock  which  employs  him.  Neither  is  the 
quantity  of  labour  commonly  employed  in  ac¬ 
quiring  or  producing  any  commodity,  the  only 
circumstance  which  can  regulate  the  quantity 
which  it  ought  commonly  to  purchase,  com¬ 
mand,  or  exchange  for.  An  additional  quantity, 


Commodities  21 

it  is  evident,  must  be  due  for  the  profits  of  the 
stock  which  advanced  the  wages  and  furnished 
the  materials  of  that  labour. 

As  soon  as  the  land  of  any  country  has  all 
become  private  property,  the  landlords,  like  all 
other  men,  love  to  reap  where  they  never  sowed, 
and  demand  a  rent  even  for  its  natural  prod¬ 
uce.  The  wood  of  the  forest,  the  grass  of  the 
field,  and  all  the  natural  fruits  of  the  earth, 
which,  when  land  was  in  common,  cost  the  la¬ 
bourer  only  the  trouble  of  gathering  them,  come, 
even  to  him,  to  have  an  additional  price  fixed 
upon  them.  He  must  then  pay  fur  the  licence  to 
gather  them;  and  must  give  up  to  the  landlord 
a  portion  of  what  his  labour  either  collects  or 
produces.  This  portion,  or,  what  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  the  price  of  this  portion,  consti¬ 
tutes  the  rent  of  land,  and  in  the  price  of  the 
greater  part  of  commodities  makes  a  third 
component  part. 

The  real  value  of  all  the  different  compo¬ 
nent  parts  of  price,  it  must  be  observed,  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  quantity  of  labour  which  they  can, 
each  of  them,  purchase  or  command.  Labour 
measures  the  value  not  only  of  that  part  of 
price  which  resolves  itself  into  labour,  but  of 
that  which  resolves  itself  into  rent,  and  of  that 
which  resolves  itself  into  profit. 

In  every  society  the  price  of  every  commod¬ 
ity  finally  resolves  itself  into  some  one  or  other, 
or  all  of  those  three  parts;  and  in  every  im¬ 
proved  society,  all  the  three  enter  more  or  less, 
as  component  parts,  into  the  price  of  the  far 
greater  part  of  commodities. 

In  the  price  of  corn,  for  example,  one  part 
pays  the  rent  of  the  landlord,  another  pays  the 
wages  or  maintenance  of  the  labourers  and  la¬ 
bouring  cattle  employed  in  producing  it,  and 
the  third  pays  the  profit  of  the  farmer.  These 
three  parts  seem  either  immediately  or  ulti¬ 
mately  to  make  up  the  whole  price  of  corn.  A 
fourth  part,  it  may  perhaps  be  thought,  is  nec¬ 
essary  for  replacing  the  stock  of  the  farmer,  or 
for  compensating  the  wear  and  tear  of  his  la¬ 
bouring  cattle,  and  other  instruments  of  hus¬ 
bandry.  But  it  must  be  considered  that  the 
price  of  any  instrument  of  husbandry,  such  as 
a  labouring  horse,  is  itself  made  up  of  the  same 
three  parts;  the  rent  of  the  land  upon  which  he 
is  reared,  the  labour  of  tending  and  rearing 
him,  and  the  profits  of  the  farmer  who  ad¬ 
vances  both  the  rent  of  this  land,  and  the  wages 
of  this  labour.  Though  the  price  of  the  corn, 
therefore,  may  pay  the  price  as  well  as  the 
maintenance  of  the  horse,  the  whole  price  still 
resolves  itself  either  immediately  or  ultimately 
into  the  same  three  parts  of  rent,  labour,  and 
profit. 

In  the  price  of  flour  or  meal,  we  must  add  to 
the  price  of  the  corn,  the  profits  of  the  miller, 
and  the  wages  of  his  servants;  in  the  price  of 
bread,  the  profits  of  the  baker,  and  the  wages 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


22 

of  his  servants;  and  in  the  price  of  both,  the 
labour  of  transporting  the  corn  from  the  house 
of  the  farmer  to  that  of  the  miller,  and  from 
that  of  the  miller  to  that  of  the  baker,  together 
with  the  profits  of  those  who  advance  the  wages 
of  that  labour. 

The  price  of  flax  resolves  itself  into  the  same 
three  parts  as  that  of  corn.  In  the  price  of  linen 
we  must  add  to  this  price  the  wages  of  the  flax- 
dresser,  of  the  spinner,  of  the  weaver,  of  the 
bleacher,  etc.,  together  with  the  profits  of  their 
respective  employers. 

As  any  particular  commodity  comes  to  be 
more  manufactured,  that  part  of  the  price 
which  resolves  itself  into  wages  and  profit 
comes  to  be  greater  in  proportion  to  that  which 
resolves  itself  into  rent.  In  the  progress  of  the 
manufacture,  not  only  the  number  of  profits 
increase,  but  every  subsequent  profit  is  greater 
than  the  foregoing;  because  the  capital  from 
which  it  is  derived  must  always  be  greater.  The 
capital  which  employs  the  weavers,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  must  be  greater  than  that  which  employs 
the  spinners;  because  it  not  only  replaces  that 
capital  with  its  profits,  but  pays,  besides,  the 
wages  of  the  weavers;  and  the  profits  must  al¬ 
ways  bear  some  proportion  to  the  capital. 

In  the  most  improved  societies,  however, 
there  are  always  a  few  commodities  of  which 
the  price  resolves  itself  into  two  parts  only,  the 
wages  of  labour,  and  the  profits  of  stock;  and 
a  still  smaller  number,  in  which  it  consists  al¬ 
together  in  the  wages  of  labour.  In  the  price  of 
sea-fish,  for  example,  one  part  pays  the  labour 
of  the  fishermen,  and  the  other  the  profits  of  the 
capital  employed  in  the  fishery.  Rent  very  sel¬ 
dom  makes  any  part  of  it,  though  it  does  some¬ 
times,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter.  It  is  otherwise, 
at  least  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  in 
river  fisheries.  A  salmon  fishery  pays  a  rent, 
and  rent,  though  it  cannot  well  be  called  the 
rent  of  land,  makes  a  part  of  the  price  of  a 
salmon  as  well  as  wages  and  profit.  In  some 
parts  of  Scotland  a  few  poor  people  make  a 
trade  of  gathering,  along  the  sea-shore,  those 
little  variegated  stones  commonly  known  by 
the  name  of  Scotch  Pebbles.  The  price  which  is 
paid  to  them  by  the  stone-cutter  is  altogether 
the  wages  of  their  labour;  neither  rent  nor 
profit  make  any  part  of  it. 

But  the  whole  price  of  any  commodity  must 
still  finally  resolve  itself  into  some  one  or  other, 
or  all  of  those  three  parts;  as  whatever  part  of 
it  remains  after  paying  the  rent  of  the  land, 
and  the  price  of  the  whole  labour  employed  in 
raising,  manufacturing,  and  bringing  it  to  mar¬ 
ket,  must  necessarily  be  profit  to  somebody. 

As  the  price  or  exchangeable  value  of  every 
particular  commodity,  taken  separately,  re¬ 
solves  itself  into  some  one  or  other  or  all  of 
those  three  parts;  so  that  of  all  the  commodi¬ 
ties  which  compose  the  whole  annual  produce 


of  the  labour  of  every  country,  taken  complex¬ 
ly,  must  resolve  itself  into  the  same  three  parts, 
and  be  parcelled  out  among  different  inhabit¬ 
ants  of  the  country,  either  as  the  wages  of  their 
labour,  the  profits  of  their  stock,  or  the  rent  of 
their  land.  The  whole  of  what  is  annually  either 
collected  or  produced  by  the  labour  of  every 
society,  or  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the 
whole  price  of  it,  is  in  this  manner  originally 
distributed  among  some  of  its  different  mem¬ 
bers.  Wages,  profit,  and  rent,  are  the  three 
original  sources  of  all  revenue  as  well  as  of  all 
exchangeable  value.  All  other  revenue  is  ulti¬ 
mately  derived  from  some  one  or  other  of  these. 

Whoever  derives  his  revenue  from  a  fund 
which  is  his  own,  must  draw  it  either  from  his 
labour,  from  his  stock,  or  from  his  land.  The 
revenue  derived  from  labour  is  called  wages. 
That  derived  from  stock,  by  the  person  who 
manages  or  employes  it,  is  called  profit.  That 
derived  from  it  by  the  person  who  does  not 
employ  it  himself,  but  lends  it  to  another,  is 
called  the  interest  or  the  use  of  money.  It  is  the 
compensation  which  the  borrower  pays  to  the 
lender,  for  the  profit  which  he  has  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  makingby  the  use  of  the  money.  Part  of 
that  profit  naturally  belongs  to  the  borrower, 
who  runs  the  risk  and  takes  the  trouble  of  em¬ 
ploying  it;  and  part  to  the  lender,  who  affords 
him  the  opportunity  of  making  this  profit.  The 
interest  of  money  is  always  a  derivative  reve¬ 
nue,  which,  if  it  is  not  paid  from  the  profit  which 
is  made  by  the  use  of  the  money,  must  be  paid 
from  some  other  source  of  revenue,  unless  per¬ 
haps  the  borrower  is  a  spendthrift,  who  con¬ 
tracts  a  second  debt  in  order  to  pay  the  interest 
of  the  first.  The  revenue  which  proceeds  alto¬ 
gether  from  land,  is  called  rent,  and  belongs  to 
the  landlord.  The  revenue  of  the  farmer  is  de¬ 
rived  partly  from  his  labour,  and  partly  from 
his  stock.  To  him,  land  is  only  the  instrument 
which  enables  him  to  earn  the  wages  of  this 
labour,  and  to  make  the  profits  of  this  stock. 
All  taxes,  and  all  the  revenue  which  is  founded 
upon  them,  all  salaries,  pensions,  and  annuities 
of  every  kind,  are  ultimately  derived  from  some 
one  or  other  of  those  three  original  sources  of 
revenue,  and  are  paid  either  immediately  or 
mediately  from  the  wages  of  labour,  the  profits 
of  stock,  or  the  rent  of  land. 

When  those  three  different  sorts  of  revenue 
belong  to  different  persons,  they  are  readily 
distinguished;  but  when  they  belong  to  the 
same  they  are  sometimes  confounded  with  one 
another,  at  least  in  common  language. 

A  gentleman  who  farms  a  part  of  his  own 
estate,  after  paying  the  expense  of  cultivation, 
should  gain  both  the  rent  of  the  landlord  and 
the  profit  of  the  farmer.  He  is  apt  to  denomi¬ 
nate,  however,  his  whole  gain,  profit,  and  thus 
confounds  rent  with  profit,  at  least  in  com¬ 
mon  language.  The  greater  part  of  our  North 


23 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


American  and  West  Indian  planters  are  in  this 
situation.  They  farm,  the  greater  part  of  them, 
their  own  estates,  and  accordingly  we  seldom 
hear  of  the  rent  of  a  plantation,  but  frequently 
of  its  profit. 

Common  farmers  seldom  employ  any  over¬ 
seer  to  direct  the  general  operations  of  the 
farm.  They  generally,  too,  work  a  good  deal 
with  their  own  hands,  as  ploughmen,  harrow- 
ers,  etc.  What  remains  of  the  crop  after  paying 
the  rent,  therefore,  should  not  only  replace  to 
them  their  stock  employed  in  cultivation,  to¬ 
gether  with  its  ordinary  profits,  but  pay  them 
the  wages  which  are  due  to  them,  both  as  la¬ 
bourers  and  overseers.  Whatever  remains,  how¬ 
ever,  after  paying  the  rent  and  keeping  up  the 
stock,  is  called  profit.  But  wages  evidently 
make  a  part  of  it.  The  farmer,  by  saving  these 
wages,  must  necessarily  gain  them.  Wages, 
therefore,  are  in  this  case  confounded  with 
profit. 

An  independent  manufacturer,  who  has  stock 
enough  both  to  purchase  materials,  and  to 
maintain  himself  till  he  can  carry  his  work  to 
market,  should  gain  both  the  wages  of  a  jour¬ 
neyman  who  works  under  a  master,  and  the 
profit  which  that  master  makes  by  the  sale  of 
the  journeyman’s  work.  His  whole  gains,  how¬ 
ever,  are  commonly  called  profit,  and  wages 
are,  in  this  case  too,  confounded  with  profit. 

A  gardener  who  cultivates  his  own  garden 
with  his  own  hands,  unites  in  his  own  person 
the  three  different  characters  of  landlord,  farm¬ 
er,  and  labourer.  His  produce,  therefore,  should 
pay  him  the  rent  of  the  first,  the  profit  of  the 
second,  and  the  wages  of  the  third.  The  whole, 
however,  is  commonly  considered  as  the  earn¬ 
ings  of  his  labour.  Both  rent  and  profit  are,  in 
this  case,  confounded  with  wages. 

As  in  a  civilised  country  there  are  but  few 
commodities  of  which  the  exchangeable  value 
arises  from  labour  only,  rent  and  profit  contrib¬ 
uting  largely  to  that  of  the  far  greater  part  of 
them,  so  the  annual  produce  of  its  labour  will 
always  be  sufficient  to  purchase  or  command  a 
much  greater  quantity  of  labour  than  whatwas 
employed  in  raising,  preparing,  and  bringing 
that  produce  to  market.  If  the  society  were  an¬ 
nually  to  employ  all  the  labour  which  it  can 
annually  purchase,  as  the  quantity  of  labour 
would  increase  greatly  every  year,  so  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  every  succeeding  year  would  be  of  vast¬ 
ly  greater  value  than  that  of  the  foregoing.  But 
there  is  no  country  in  which  the  whole  annual 
produce  is  employed  in  maintaining  the  indus¬ 
trious.  The  idle  everywhere  consume  a  great 
part  of  it;  and  according  to  the  different  pro¬ 
portions  in  which  it  is  annually  divided  between 
those  two  different  orders  of  people,  its  ordi¬ 
nary  or  average  value  must  either  annually  in¬ 
crease,  or  diminish,  or  continue  the  same  from 
one  year  to  another. 


CHAPTER  VII 

Of  the  Natural  and  Market  Price 
of  Commodities 

There  is  in  every  society  or  neighbourhood 
an  ordinary  or  average  rate  both  of  wages  and 
profit  in  every  different  employment  of  labour 
and  stock.  This  rate  is  naturally  regulated,  as 
I  shall  show  hereafter,  partly  by  the  general 
circumstances  of  the  society,  their  riches  or 
poverty,  their  advancing,  stationary,  or  declin¬ 
ing  condition;  and  partly  by  the  particular  na¬ 
ture  of  each  employment. 

There  is  likewise  in  every  society  or  neigh¬ 
bourhood  an  ordinary  or  average  rate  of  rent, 
which  is  regulated  too,  as  I  shall  show  here¬ 
after,  partly  by  the  general  circumstances  of 
the  society  or  neighbourhood  in  which  the  land 
is  situated,  and  partly  by  the  natural  or  im¬ 
proved  fertility  of  the  land. 

These  ordinary  or  average  rates  may  be 
called  the  natural  rates  of  wages,  profit,  and 
rent,  at  the  time  and  place  in  which  they  com¬ 
monly  prevail. 

When  the  price  of  any  commodity  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  what  is  sufficient  to  pay  the 
rent  of  the  land,  the  wages  of  the  labour,  and 
the  profits  of  the  stock  employed  in  raising, 
preparing,  and  bringing  it  to  market,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  natural  rates,  the  commodity  is 
then  sold  for  what  may  be  called  its  natural 
price. 

The  commodity  is  then  sold  precisely  for 
what  it  is  worth,  or  for  what  it  really  costs  the 
person  who  brings  it  to  market;  for  though  in 
common  language  what  is  called  the  prime  cost 
of  any  commodity  does  not  comprehend  the 
profit  of  the  person  who  is  to  sell  it  again,  yet 
if  he  sell  it  at  a  price  which  does  not  allow  him 
the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  in  his  neighbour¬ 
hood,  he  is  evidently  a  loser  by  the  trade;  since 
by  employing  his  stock  in  some  other  way  he 
might  have  made  that  profit.  His  profit,  be¬ 
sides,  is  his  revenue,  the  proper  fund  of  his 
subsistence.  As,  while  he  is  preparing  and  bring¬ 
ing  the  goods  to  market,  he  advances  to  his 
workmen  their  wages,  or  their  subsistence;  so 
he  advances  to  himself,  in  the  same  manner,  his 
own  subsistence,  which  is  generally  suitable  to 
the  profit  which  he  may  reasonably  expect  from 
the  sale  of  his  goods.  Unless  they  yield  him  this 
profit,  therefore,  they  do  not  repay  him  what 
they  may  very  properly  be  said  to  have  really 
cost  him. 

Though  the  price,  therefore,  which  leaves 
him  this  profit  is  not  always  the  lowest  at  which 
a  dealer  may  sometimes  sell  his  goods,  it  is  the 
lowest  at  which  he  is  likely  to  sell  them  for  any 
considerable  time;  at  least  where  there  is  per¬ 
fect  liberty,  or  where  he  may  change  his  trade 
as  often  as  he  pleases. 

The  actual  price  at  which  any  commodity 


24 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


is  commonly  sold  is  called  its  market  price.  It 
may  either  be  above,  or  below,  or  exactly  the 
same  with  its  natural  price. 

The  market  price  of  every  particular  com¬ 
modity  is  regulated  by  the  proportion  between 
the  quantity  which  is  actually  brought  to  mar¬ 
ket,  and  the  demand  of  those  who  are  willing 
to  pay  the  natural  price  of  the  commodity,  or 
the  whole  value  of  the  rent,  labour,  and  profit, 
which  must  be  paid  in  order  to  bring  it  thither. 
Such  people  may  be  called  the  effectual  de- 
manders,  and  their  demand  the  effectual  de¬ 
mand;  since  it  may  be  sufficient  to  effectuate 
the  bringing  of  the  commodity  to  market.  It  is 
different  from  the  absolute  demand.  A  very 
poor  man  may  be  said  in  some  sense  to  have  a 
demand  for  a  coach  and  six;  he  might  like  to 
have  it;  but  his  demand  is  not  an  effectual  de¬ 
mand,  as  the  commodity  can  never  be  brought 
to  market  in  order  to  satisfy  it. 

When  the  quantity  of  any  commodity  which 
is  brought  to  market  falls  short  of  the  effectual 
demand,  all  those  who  are  willing  to  pay  the 
whole  value  of  the  rent,  wages,  and  profit, 
which  must  be  paid  in  order  to  bring  it  thither, 
cannot  be  supplied  with  the  quantity  which 
they  want.  Rather  than  want  it  altogether, 
some  of  them  will  be  willing  to  give  more.  A 
competition  will  immediately  begin  among 
them,  and  the  market  price  will  rise  more  or 
less  above  the  natural  price,  according  as  either 
the  greatness  of  the  deficiency,  or  the  wealth 
and  wanton  luxury  of  the  competitors,  hap¬ 
pen  to  animate  more  or  less  the  eagerness  of 
the  competition.  Among  competitors  of  equal 
wealth  and  luxury  the  same  deficiency  will  gen¬ 
erally  occasion  a  more  or  less  eager  competi¬ 
tion,  according  as  the  acquisition  of  the  com¬ 
modity  happens  to  be  of  more  or  less  impor¬ 
tance  to  them.  Hence  the  exorbitant  price  of 
the  necessaries  of  life  during  the  blockade  of  a 
town  or  in  a  famine. 

When  the  quantity  brought  to  market  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  effectual  demand,  it  cannot  be  all 
sold  to  those  who  are  willing  to  pay  the  whole 
value  of  the  rent,  wages,  and  profit,  which 
must  be  paid  in  order  to  bring  it  thither.  Some 
part  must  be  sold  to  those  who  are  willing  to 
pay  less,  and  the  low  price  which  they  give  for 
it  must  reduce  the  price  of  the  whole.  The  mar¬ 
ket  price  will  sink  more  or  less  below  the  nat¬ 
ural  price,  according  as  the  greatness  of  the  ex¬ 
cess  increases  more  or  less  the  competition  of 
the  sellers,  or  according  as  it  happens  to  be 
more  or  less  important  to  them  to  get  immedi¬ 
ately  rid  of  the  commodity.  The  same  excess  in 
the  importation  of  perishable,  will  occasion  a 
much  greater  competition  than  in  that  of  du¬ 
rable  commodities;  in  the  importation  of  or¬ 
anges,  for  example,  than  in  that  of  old  iron. 

When  the  quantity  brought  to  market  is  just 
sufficient  to  supply  the  effectual  demand,  and 


no  more,  the  market  price  naturally  comes  to 
be  either  exactly,  or  as  nearly  as  can  be  judged 
of,  the  same  with  the  natural  price.  The  whole 
quantity  upon  hand  can  be  disposed  of  for  this 
price,  and  cannot  be  disposed  of  for  more.  The 
competition  of  the  different  dealers  obliges 
them  all  to  accept  of  this  price,  but  does  not 
oblige  them  to  accept  of  less. 

The  quantity  of  every  commodity  brought 
to  market  naturally  suits  itself  to  the  effectual 
demand.  It  is  the  interest  of  all  those  who  em¬ 
ploy  their  land,  labour,  or  stock,  in  bringing 
any  commodity  to  market,  that  the  quantity 
never  should  exceed  the  effectual  demand;  and 
it  is  the  interest  of  all  other  people  that  it  never 
should  fall  short  of  that  demand. 

If  at  any  time  it  exceeds  the  effectual  de¬ 
mand,  some  of  the  component  parts  of  its  price 
must  be  paid  below  their  natural  rate.  If  it  is 
rent,  the  interest  of  the  landlords  will  immedi¬ 
ately  prompt  them  to  withdraw  a  part  of  their 
land;  and  if  it  is  wages  or  profit,  the  interest  of 
the  labourers  in  the  one  case,  and  of  their  em¬ 
ployers  in  the  other,  will  prompt  them  to  with¬ 
draw  a  part  of  their  labour  or  stock  from  this 
employment.  The  quantity  brought  to  market 
will  soon  be  no  more  than  sufficient  to  supply 
the  effectual  demand.  All  the  different  parts  of 
its  price  will  rise  to  their  natural  rate,  and  the 
whole  price  to  its  natural  price. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  quantity  brought  to 
market  should  at  any  time  fall  short  of  the  ef¬ 
fectual  demand,  some  of  the  component  parts 
of  its  price  must  rise  above  their  natural  rate. 
If  it  is  rent,  the  interest  of  all  other  landlords 
will  naturally  prompt  them  to  prepare  more 
land  for  the  raising  of  this  commodity;  if  it  is 
wages  or  profit,  the  interest  of  all  other  labour¬ 
ers  and  dealers  will  soon  prompt  them  to  em¬ 
ploy  more  labour  and  stock  in  preparing  and 
bringing  it  to  market.  The  quantity  brought 
thither  will  soon  be  sufficient  to  supply  the  ef¬ 
fectual  demand.  All  the  different  parts  of  its 
price  will  soon  sink  to  their  natural  rate,  and 
the  whole  price  to  its  natural  price. 

The  natural  price,  therefore,  is,  as  it  were, 
the  central  price,  to  which  the  prices  of  all  com¬ 
modities  are  continually  gravitating.  Different 
accidents  may  sometimes  keep  them  suspended 
a  good  deal  above  it,  and  sometimes  force  them 
down  even  somewhat  below  it.  But  whatever 
may  be  the  obstacles  which  hinder  them  from 
settling  in  this  centre  of  repose  and  continu¬ 
ance,  they  are  constantly  tending  towards  it. 

The  whole  quantity  of  industry  annually  em¬ 
ployed  in  order  to  bring  any  commodity  to 
market  naturally  suits  itself  in  this  manner  to 
the  effectual  demand.  It  naturally  aims  at 
bringing  always  that  precise  quantity  thither 
which  may  be  sufficient  to  supply,  and  no  more 
than  supply,  that  demand. 

But  in  some  employments  the  same  quan- 


The  Price  of  Commodities 


tity  of  industry  will  in  different  years  produce 
very  different  quantities  of  commodities;  while 
in  others  it  will  produce  always  the  same,  or 
very  nearly  the  same.  The  same  number  of  la¬ 
bourers  in  husbandry  will,  in  different  years, 
produce  very  different  quantities  of  corn,  wine, 
oil,  hops,  etc.  But  the  same  number  of  spinners 
and  weavers  will  every  year  produce  the  same 
or  very  nearly  the  same  quantity  of  linen  and 
woollen  cloth.  It  is  only  the  average  produce  of 
the  one  species  of  industry  which  can  be  suited 
in  any  respect  to  the  effectual  demand;  and  as 
its  actual  produce  is  frequently  much  greater 
and  frequently  much  less  than  its  average  prod¬ 
uce,  the  quantity  of  the  commodities  brought 
to  market  will  sometimes  exceed  a  good  deal, 
and  sometimes  fall  short  a  good  deal,  of  the 
effectual  demand.  Even  though  that  demand 
therefore  should  continue  always  the  same, 
their  market  price  will  be  liable  to  great  fluctu¬ 
ations,  will  sometimes  fall  a  good  deal  below, 
and  sometimes  rise  a  good  deal  above  their 
natural  price.  In  the  other  species  of  industry, 
the  produce  of  equal  quantities  of  labour  be¬ 
ing  always  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same,  it 
can  be  more  exactly  suited  to  the  effectual  de¬ 
mand.  While  that  demand  continues  the  same, 
therefore,  the  market  price  of  the  commodities 
is  likely  to  do  so  too,  and  to  be  either  alto¬ 
gether,  or  as  nearly  as  can  be  judged  of,  the 
same  with  the  natural  price.  That  the  price  of 
linen  and  woollen  cloth  is  liable  neither  to 
such  frequent  nor  to  such  great  variations  as 
the  price  of  corn,  every  man’s  experience  will 
inform  him.  The  price  of  the  one  species  of 
commodities  varies  only  with  the  variations  in 
the  demand:  that  of  the  other  varies,  not  only 
with  the  variations  in  the  demand,  but  with  the 
much  greater  and  more  frequent  variations  in 
the  quantity  of  what  is  brought  to  market  in 
order  to  supply  that  demand. 

The  occasional  and  temporary  fluctuations 
in  the  market  price  of  any  commodity  fall 
chiefly  upon  those  parts  of  its  price  which  re¬ 
solve  themselves  into  wages  and  profit.  That 
part  which  resolves  itself  into  rent  is  less  af¬ 
fected  by  them.  A  rent  certain  in  money  is  not 
in  the  least  affected  by  them  either  in  its  rate 
or  in  its  value.  A  rent  which  consists  either  in  a 
certain  proportion  or  in  a  certain  quantity  of 
the  rude  produce,  is  no  doubt  affected  in  its 
yearly  value  by  all  the  occasional  and  tempo¬ 
rary  fluctuations  in  the  market  price  of  that 
rude  produce;  but  it  is  seldom  affected  by  them 
in  its  yearly  rate.  In  settling  the  terms  of  the 
lease,  the  landlord  and  farmer  endeavour,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  best  judgment,  to  adjust  that 
rate,  not  to  the  temporary  and  occasional,  but 
to  the  average  and  ordinary  price  of  the  prod¬ 
uce. 

Such  fluctuations  affect  both  the  value  and 
the  rate  either  of  wages  or  of  profit,  according 


25 

as  the  market  happens  to  be  either  overstocked 
or  understocked  with  commodities  or  with  la¬ 
bour;  with  work  done,  or  with  work  to  be  done. 
A  public  mourning  raises  the  price  of  black 
cloth  (with  which  the  market  is  almost  always 
understocked  upon  such  occasions) ,  and  aug¬ 
ments  the  profits  of  the  merchants  who  possess 
any  considerable  quantity  of  it.  It  has  no  effect 
upon  the  wages  of  the  weavers.  The  market  is 
understocked  with  commodities,  not  with  la¬ 
bour;  with  work  done,  not  with  work  to  be 
done.  It  raises  the  wages  of  journeymen  tailors. 
The  market  is  here  understocked  with  labour. 
There  is  an  effectual  demand  for  more  labour, 
for  more  work  to  be  done  than  can  be  had. 
It  sinks  the  price  of  coloured  silks  and  cloths, 
and  thereby  reduces  the  profits  of  the  mer¬ 
chants  who  have  any  considerable  quantity  of 
them  upon  hand.  It  sinks,  too,  the  wages  of  the 
workmen  employed  in  preparing  such  commod¬ 
ities,  for  which  all  demand  is  stopped  for  six 
months,  perhaps  for  a  twelvemonth.  The  mar¬ 
ket  is  here  over-stocked  both  with  commodities 
and  with  labour. 

But  though  the  market  price  of  every  par¬ 
ticular  commodity  is  in  this  manner  continually 
gravitating,  if  one  may  say  so,  towards  the 
natural  price,  yet  sometimes  particular  acci¬ 
dents,  sometimes  natural  causes,  and  some¬ 
times  particular  regulations  of  police,  may,  in 
many  commodities,  keep  up  the  market  price, 
for  a  long  time  together,  a  good  deal  above  the 
natural  price. 

When  by  an  increase  in  the  effectual  demand, 
the  market  price  of  some  particular  commodity 
happens  to  rise  a  good  deal  above  the  natural 
price,  those  who  employ  their  stocks  in  supply¬ 
ing  that  market  are  generally  careful  to  conceal 
this  change.  If  it  was  commonly  known,  their 
great  profit  would  tempt  so  many  new  rivals 
to  employ  their  stocks  in  the  same  way  that, 
the  effectual  demand  being  fully  supplied,  the 
market  price  would  soon  be  reduced  to  the 
natural  price,  and  perhaps  for  some  time  even 
below  it.  If  the  market  is  at  a  great  distance 
from  the  residence  of  those  who  supply  it,  they 
may  sometimes  be  able  to  keep  the  secret  for 
several  years  together,  and  may  so  long  enjoy 
their  extraordinary  profits  without  any  new 
rivals.  Secrets  of  this  kind,  however,  it  must  be 
acknowledged,  can  seldom  be  long  kept;  and 
the  extraordinary  profit  can  last  very  little 
longer  than  they  are  kept. 

Secrets  in  manufactures  are  capable  of  being 
longer  kept  than  secrets  in  trade.  A  dyer  who 
has  found  the  means  of  producing  a  particular 
colour  with  materials  which  cost  only  half  the 
price  of  those  commonly  made  use  of,  may, 
with  good  management,  enjoy  the  advantage 
of  his  discovery  as  long  as  he  lives,  and  even 
leave  it  as  a  legacy  to  his  posterity.  His  extraor¬ 
dinary  gains  arise  from  the  high  price  which 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


26 

is  paid  for  his  private  labour.  They  properly 
consist  in  the  high  wages  of  that  labour.  But  as 
they  are  repeated  upon  every  part  of  his  stock, 
and  as  their  whole  amount  bears,  upon  that  ac¬ 
count,  a  regular  proportion  to  it,  they  are  com¬ 
monly  considered  as  extraordinary  profits  of 
stock. 

Such  enhancements  of  the  market  price  are 
evidently  the  effects  of  particular  accidents,  of 
which,  however,  the  operation  may  sometimes 
last  for  many  years  together. 

Some  natural  productions  require  such  a  sin¬ 
gularity  of  soil  and  situation  that  all  the  land 
in  a  great  country,  which  is  fit  for  producing 
them,  may  not  be  sufficient  to  supply  the  ef¬ 
fectual  demand.  The  whole  quantity  brought 
to  market,  therefore,  may  be  disposed  of  to 
those  who  are  willing  to  give  more  than  what  is 
sufficient  to  pay  the  rent  of  the  land  which  pro¬ 
duced  them,  together  with  the  wages  of  the 
labour,  and  the  profits  of  the  stock  which  were 
employed  in  preparing  and  bringing  them  to 
market,  according  to  their  natural  rates.  Such 
commodities  may  continue  for  whole  centuries 
together  to  be  sold  at  this  high  price;  and  that 
part  of  it  which  resolves  itself  into  the  rent  of 
land  is  in  this  case  the  part  which  is  generally 
paid  above  its  natural  rate.  The  rent  of  the 
land  which  affords  such  singular  and  esteemed 
productions,  like  the  rent  of  some  vineyards  in 
France  of  a  peculiarly  happy  soil  and  situation, 
bears  no  regular  proportion  to  the  rent  of  other 
equally  fertile  and  equally  well-cultivated  land 
in  its  neighbourhood.  The  wages  of  the  labour 
and  the  profits  of  the  stock  employed  in  bring¬ 
ing  such  commodities  to  market,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  are  seldom  out  of  their  natural  propor¬ 
tion  to  those  of  the  other  employments  of  la¬ 
bour  and  stock  in  their  neighbourhood. 

Such  enhancements  of  the  market  price  are 
evidently  the  effect  of  natural  causes  which 
may  hinder  the  effectual  demand  from  ever  be¬ 
ing  fully  supplied,  and  which  may  continue, 
therefore,  to  operate  for  ever. 

A  monopoly  granted  either  to  an  individual 
or  to  a  trading  company  has  the  same  effect  as 
a  secret  in  trade  or  manufactures.  The  monopo¬ 
lists,  by  keeping  the  market  constantly  under¬ 
stocked,  by  never  fully  supplying  the  effectual 
demand,  sell  their  commodities  much  above 
the  natural  price,  and  raise  their  emoluments, 
whether  they  consist  in  wages  or  profit,  greatly 
above  their  natural  rate. 

The  price  of  monopoly  is  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion  the  highest  which  can  be  got.  The  natural 
price,  or  the  price  of  free  competition,  on  the 
contrary,  is  the  lowest  which  can  be  taken,  not 
upon  every  occasion,  indeed,  but  for  any  con¬ 
siderable  time  together.  The  one  is  upon  every 
occasion  the  highest  which  can  be  squeezed 
out  of  the  buyers,  or  which,  it  is  supposed,  they 
will  consent  to  give:  the  other  is  the  lowest 


which  the  sellers  can  commonly  afford  to  take, 
and  at  the  same  time  continue  their  business. 

The  exclusive  privileges  of  corporations,  stat¬ 
utes  of  apprenticeship,  and  all  those  laws  which 
restrain,  in  particular  employments,  the  com¬ 
petition  to  a  smaller  number  than  might  other¬ 
wise  go  into  them,  have  the  same  tendency, 
though  in  a  less  degree.  They  are  a  sort  of  en¬ 
larged  monopolies,  and  may  frequently,  for  ages 
together,  and  in  whole  classes  of  employments, 
keep  up  the  market  price  of  particular  com¬ 
modities  above  the  natural  price,  and  maintain 
both  the  wages  of  the  labour  and  the  profits 
of  the  stock  employed  about  them  somewhat 
above  their  natural  rate. 

Such  enhancements  of  the  market  price  may 
last  as  long  as  the  regulations  of  police  which 
give  occasion  to  them. 

The  market  price  of  any  particular  commod¬ 
ity,  though  it  may  continue  long  above,  can 
seldom  continue  long  below  its  natural  price. 
Whatever  part  of  it  was  paid  below  the  natural 
rate,  the  persons  whose  interest  it  affected 
would  immediately  feel  the  loss,  and  would  im¬ 
mediately  withdraw  either  so  much  land,  or  so 
much  labour,  or  so  much  stock,  from  being  em¬ 
ployed  about  it,  that  the  quantity  brought  to 
market  would  soon  be  no  more  than  sufficient 
to  supply  the  effectual  demand.  Its  market 
price,  therefore,  would  soon  rise  to  the  natural 
price.  This  at  least  would  be  the  case  where 
there  was  perfect  liberty. 

The  same  statutes  of  apprenticeship  and 
other  corporation  laws  indeed,  which,  when  a 
manufacture  is  in  prosperity,  enable  the  work¬ 
man  to  raise  his  wages  a  good  deal  above  their 
natural  rate,  sometimes  oblige  him,  when  it  de¬ 
cays,  to  let  them  down  a  good  deal  below  it. 
As  in  the  one  case  they  exclude  many  people 
from  his  employment,  so  in  the  other  they  ex¬ 
clude  him  from  many  employments.  The  effect 
of  such  regulations,  however,  is  not  near  so  dura¬ 
ble  in  sinking  the  workman’s  wages  below,  as 
in  raising  them  above  their  natural  rate.  Their 
operation  in  the  one  way  may  endure  for  many 
centuries,  but  in  the  other  it  can  last  no  longer 
than  the  lives  of  some  of  the  workmen  who 
were  bred  to  the  business  in  the  time  of  its 
prosperity.  When  they  are  gone,  the  number 
of  those  who  are  afterwards  educated  to  the 
trade  will  naturally  suit  itself  to  the  effectual 
demand.  The  police  must  be  as  violent  as  that 
of  Indostan  or  ancient  Egypt  (where  every 
man  was  bound  by  a  principle  of  religion  to  fol¬ 
low  the  occupation  of  his  father,  and  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  commit  the  most  horrid  sacrilege  if 
he  changed  it  for  another) ,  which  can  in  any 
particular  employment,  and  for  several  genera¬ 
tions  together,  sink  either  the  wages  of  labour 
or  the  profits  of  stock  below  their  natural  rate. 

This  is  all  that  I  think  necessary  to  be  ob¬ 
served  at  present  concerning  the  deviations, 


27 


The  Wages  of  Labour 


whether  occasional  or  permanent,  of  the  mar¬ 
ket  price  of  commodities  from  the  natural  price. 

The  natural  price  itself  varies  with  the  nat¬ 
ural  rate  of  each  of  its  component  parts,  of 
wages,  profit,  and  rent;  and  in  every  society 
this  rate  varies  according  to  their  circum¬ 
stances,  according  to  their  riches  or  poverty, 
their  advancing,  stationary,  or  declining  con¬ 
dition.  I  shall,  in  the  four  following  chapters, 
endeavour  to  explain,  as  fully  and  distinctly  as 
I  can,  the  causes  of  those  different  variations. 

First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  what  are 
the  circumstances  which  naturally  determine 
the  rate  of  wages,  and  in  what  manner  those 
circumstances  are  affected  by  the  riches  or 
poverty,  by  the  advancing,  stationary,  or  de¬ 
clining  state  of  the  society. 

Secondly,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  what 
are  the  circumstances  which  naturally  deter¬ 
mine  the  rate  of  profit,  and  in  what  manner, 
too,  those  circumstances  are  affected  by  the 
like  variations  in  the  state  of  the  society. 

Though  pecuniary  wages  and  profit  are  very 
different  in  the  different  employments  of  la¬ 
bour  and  stock;  yet  a  certain  proportion  seems 
commonly  to  take  place  between  both  the 
pecuniary  wages  in  all  the  different  employ¬ 
ments  of  labour,  and  the  pecuniary  profits  in 
all  the  different  employments  of  stock.  This 
proportion,  it  will  appear  hereafter,  depends 
partly  upon  the  nature  of  the  different  employ¬ 
ments,  and  partly  upon  the  different  laws  and 
policy  of  the  society  in  which  they  are  carried 
on.  But  though  in  many  respects  dependent 
upon  the  laws  and  policy,  this  proportion  seems 
to  be  little  affected  by  the  riches  or  poverty  of 
that  society;  by  its  advancing,  stationary,  or 
declining  condition;  but  to  remain  the  same  or 
very  nearly  the  same  in  all  those  different 
states.  I  shall,  in  the  third  place,  endeavour  to 
explain  all  the  different  circumstances  which 
regulate  this  proportion. 

In  the  fourth  and  last  place,  I  shall  endeav¬ 
our  to  show  what  are  the  circumstances  which 
regulate  the  rent  of  land,  and  which  either  raise 
or  lower  the  real  price  of  all  the  different  sub¬ 
stances  which  it  produces. 

CHAPTER  VIII 
Of  the  Wages  of  Labour 

The  produce  of  labour  constitutes  the  nat¬ 
ural  recompense  or  wages  of  labour. 

In  that  original  state  of  things,  which  pre¬ 
cedes  both  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the 
accumulation  of  stock,  the  whole  produce  of 
labour  belongs  to  the  labourer.  He  has  neither 
landlord  nor  master  to  share  with  him. 

Had  this  state  continued,  the  wages  of  la¬ 
bour  would  have  augmented  with  all  those  im¬ 
provements  in  its  productive  powers  to  which 
the  division  of  labour  gives  occasion.  All  things 


would  gradually  have  become  cheaper.  They 
would  have  been  produced  by  a  smaller  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour;  and  as  the  commodities  pro¬ 
duced  by  equal  quantities  of  labour  would  nat¬ 
urally  in  this  state  of  things  be  exchanged  for 
one  another,  they  would  have  been  purchased 
likewise  with  the  produce  of  a  smaller  quan¬ 
tity. 

But  though  all  things  would  have  become 
cheaper  in  reality,  in  appearance  many  things 
might  have  become  dearer  than  before,  or  have 
been  exchanged  for  a  greater  quantity  of  other 
goods.  Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  in  the 
greater  part  of  employments  the  productive 
powers  of  labour  had  been  improved  to  tenfold, 
or  that  a  day’s  labour  could  produce  ten  times 
the  quantity  of  work  which  it  had  done  origi¬ 
nally;  but  that  in  a  particular  employment  they 
had  been  improved  only  to  double,  or  that  a 
day’s  labour  could  produce  only  twice  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  work  which  it  had  done  before.  In  ex¬ 
changing  the  produce  of  a  day’s  labour  in  the 
greater  part  of  employments  for  that  of  a  day’s 
labour  in  this  particular  one,  ten  times  the 
original  quantity  of  work  in  them  would  pur¬ 
chase  only  twice  the  original  quantity  in  it. 
Any  particular  quantity  in  it,  therefore,  a 
pound  weight,  for  example,  would  appear  to  be 
five  times  dearer  than  before.  In  reality,  how¬ 
ever,  it  would  be  twice  as  cheap.  Though  it  re¬ 
quired  five  times  the  quantity  of  other  goods  to 
purchase  it,  it  would  require  only  half  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  either  to  purchase  or  to  produce 
it.  The  acquisition,  therefore,  would  be  twice 
as  easy  as  before. 

But  this  original  state  of  things,  in  which  the 
labourer  enjoyed  the  whole  produce  of  his  own 
labour,  could  not  last  beyond  the  first  intro¬ 
duction  of  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the 
accumulation  of  stock.  It  was  at  an  end,  there¬ 
fore,  long  before  the  most  considerable  im¬ 
provements  were  made  in  the  productive  pow¬ 
ers  of  labour,  and  it  would  be  to  no  purpose  to 
trace  further  what  might  have  been  its  effects 
upon  the  recompense  or  wages  of  labour. 

As  soon  as  land  becomes  private  property, 
the  landlord  demands  a  share  of  almost  all  the 
produce  which  the  labourer  can  either  raise,  or 
collect  from  it.  His  rent  makes  the  first  deduc¬ 
tion  from  the  produce  of  the  labour  which  is 
employed  upon  land. 

It  seldom  happens  that  the  person  who  tills 
the  ground  has  wherewithal  to  maintain  him¬ 
self  till  he  reaps  the  harvest.  His  maintenance 
is  generally  advanced  to  him  from  the  stock  of 
a  master,  the  farmer  who  employs  him,  and 
who  would  have  no  interest  to  employ  him,  un¬ 
less  he  was  to  share  in  the  produce  of  hislabour, 
or  unless  his  stock  was  to  be  replaced  to  him 
with  a  profit.  This  profit  makes  a  second  de¬ 
duction  from  the  produce  of  the  labour  which 
is  employed  upon  land. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


28 

The  produce  of  almost  all  other  labour  is  lia¬ 
ble  to  the  like  deduction  of  profit.  In  all  arts 
and  manufactures  the  greater  part  of  the  work¬ 
men  stand  in  need  of  a  master  to  advance  them 
the  materials  of  their  work,  and  their  wages 
and  maintenance  till  it  be  completed. He  shares 
in  the  produce  of  their  labour,  or  in  the  value 
which  it  adds  to  the  materials  upon  which  it  is 
bestowed;  and  in  this  share  consists  his  profit. 

It  sometimes  happens,  indeed,  that  a  single 
independent  workman  has  stock  sufficient  both 
to  purchase  the  materials  of  his  work,  and  to 
maintain  himself  till  it  be  completed.  He  is  both 
master  and  workman,  and  enjoys  the  whole 
produce  of  his  own  labour,  or  the  whole  value 
which  it  adds  to  the  materials  upon  which  it  is 
bestowed.  It  includes  what  are  usually  two  dis¬ 
tinct  revenues,  belonging  to  two  distinct  per¬ 
sons,  the  profits  of  stock,  and  the  wages  of  la¬ 
bour. 

Such  cases,  however,  are  not  very  frequent, 
and  in  every  part  of  Europe,  twenty  workmen 
serve  under  a  master  for  one  that  is  independ¬ 
ent;  and  the  wages  of  labour  are  everywhere 
understood  to  be,  what  they  usually  are,  when 
the  labourer  is  one  person,  and  the  owner  of  the 
stock  which  employs  him  another. 

What  are  the  common  wages  of  labour,  de¬ 
pends  everywhere  upon  the  contract  usually 
made  between  those  two  parties,  whose  inter¬ 
ests  are  by  no  means  the  same.  The  workmen 
desire  to  get  as  much,  the  masters  to  give  as 
little  as  possible.  The  former  are  disposed  to 
combine  in  order  to  raise,  the  latter  in  order  to 
lower  the  wages  of  labour. 

It  is  not,  however,  difficult  to  foresee  which 
of  the  two  parties  must,  upon  all  ordinary  oc¬ 
casions,  have  the  advantage  in  the  dispute,  and 
force  the  other  into  a  compliance  with  their 
terms.  The  masters,  being  fewer  in  number, 
can  combine  much  more  easily;  and  the  law, be¬ 
sides,  authorizes,  or  at  least  does  not  prohibit 
their  combinations,  while  it  prohibits  those  of 
the  workmen.  We  have  no  acts  of  parliament 
against  combining  to  lower  the  price  of  work; 
but  many  against  combining  to  raise  it.  In  all 
such  disputes  the  masters  can  hold  out  much 
longer.  A  landlord,  a  farmer,  a  master  manu¬ 
facturer,  a  merchant,  though  they  did  not  em¬ 
ploy  a  single  workman,  could  generally  live  a 
year  or  two  upon  the  stocks  which  they  have 
already  acquired.  Many  workmen  could  not 
subsist  a  week,  few  could  subsist  a  month,  and 
scarce  any  a  year  without  employment.  In  the 
long  run  the  workman  may  be  as  necessary  to 
his  master  as  his  master  is  to  him;  but  the  ne¬ 
cessity  is  not  so  immediate. 

We  rarely  hear,  it  has  been  said,  of  the  com¬ 
binations  of  masters,  though  frequently  of  those 
of  workmen.  But  whoever  imagines,  upon  this 
account,  that  masters  rarely  combine,  is  as  ig¬ 
norant  of  the  world  as  of  the  subject.  Masters 


are  always  and  everywhere  in  a  sort  of  tacit, 
but  constant  and  uniform  combination,  not  to 
raise  the  wages  of  labour  above  their  actual 
rate.  To  violate  this  combination  is  everywhere 
a  most  unpopular  action, and  a  sort  of  reproach 
to  a  master  among  his  neighbours  and  equals. 
We  seldom,  indeed,  hear  of  this  combination, 
because  it  is  the  usual,  and  one  may  say,  the 
natural  state  of  things,  which  nobody  ever 
hears  of.  Masters,  too,  sometimes  enter  into 
particular  combinations  to  sink  the  wages  of 
labour  even  below  this  rate.  These  are  always 
conducted  with  the  utmost  silence  and  secrecy, 
till  the  moment  of  execution,  and  when  the 
workmen  yield,  as  they  sometimes  do,  without 
resistance,  though  severely  felt  by  them,  they 
are  never  heard  of  by  other  people.  Such  com¬ 
binations,  however,  are  frequently  resisted  by 
a  contrary  defensive  combination  of  the  work¬ 
men;  who  sometimes  too,  without  any  provoca¬ 
tion  of  this  kind,  combine  of  their  own  accord 
to  raise  the  price  of  their  labour.  Their  usual 
pretences  are,  sometimes  the  high  price  of  pro¬ 
visions;  sometimes  the  great  profit  which  their 
masters  make  by  their  work.  But  whether  their 
combinations  be  offensive  or  defensive,  they 
are  always  abundantly  heard  of.  In  order  to 
bring  the  point  to  a  speedy  decision,  they  have 
always  recourse  to  the  loudest  clamour,  and 
sometimes  to  the  most  shocking  violence  and 
outrage.  They  are  desperate,  and  act  with  the 
folly  and  extravagance  of  desperate  men,  who 
must  either  starve,  or  frighten  their  masters  in¬ 
to  an  immediate  compliance  with  their  de¬ 
mands.  The  masters  upon  these  occasions  are 
just  as  clamorous  upon  the  other  side,  and  nev¬ 
er  cease  to  call  aloud  for  the  assistance  of  the 
civil  magistrate,  and  the  rigorous  execution  of 
those  laws  which  have  been  enacted  with  so 
much  severity  against  the  combinations  of  serv¬ 
ants,  labourers,  and  journeymen.  The  work¬ 
men,  accordingly,  very  seldom  derive  any  ad¬ 
vantage  from  the  violence  of  those  tumultuous 
combinations,  which,  partly  from  the  inter¬ 
position  of  the  civil  magistrate,  partly  from  the 
superior  steadiness  of  the  masters,  partly  from 
the  necessity  which  the  greater  part  of  the 
workmen  are  under  of  submitting  for  the  sake 
of  present  subsistence,  generally  end  in  noth¬ 
ing,  but  the  punishment  or  ruin  of  the  ringlead¬ 
ers. 

But  though  in  disputes  with  their  workmen, 
masters  must  generally  have  the  advantage, 
there  is,  however,  a  certain  rate  below  which  it 
seems  impossible  to  reduce,  for  any  considera¬ 
ble  time,  the  ordinary  wages  even  of  the  lowest 
species  of  labour. 

A  man  must  always  live  by  his  work,  and  his 
wages  must  at  least  be  sufficient  to  maintain 
him.  They  must  even  upon  most  occasions  be 
somewhat  more;  otherwise  it  would  be  impos¬ 
sible  for  him  to  bring  up  a  family,  and  the  race 


The  Wages  of  Labour 


of  such  workmen  could  not  last  beyond  the  first 
generation.  Mr.  Cantillon  seems,  upon  this  ac¬ 
count,  to  suppose  that  the  lowest  species  of 
common  labourers  must  everywhere  earn  at 
least  double  their  own  maintenance,  in  order 
that  one  with  another  they  may  be  enabled  to 
bring  up  two  children;  the  labour  of  the  wife, 
on  account  of  her  necessary  attendance  on  the 
children,  being  supposed  no  more  than  suffi¬ 
cient  to  provide  for  herself.  But  one  half  the 
children  born,  it  is  computed,  die  before  the 
age  of  manhood.  The  poorest  labourers,  there¬ 
fore,  according  to  this  account,  must,  one  with 
another,  attempt  to  rear  at  least  four  children, 
in  order  that  two  may  have  an  equal  chance  of 
living  to  that  age.  But  the  necessary  mainte¬ 
nance  of  four  children,  it  is  supposed,  may  be 
nearly  equal  to  that  of  one  man.  The  labour  of 
an  able-bodied  slave,  the  same  author  adds,  is 
computed  to  be  worth  double  his  maintenance; 
and  that  of  the  meanest  labourer,  he  thinks, 
cannot  be  worth  less  than  that  of  an  able- 
bodied  slave.  Thus  far  at  least  seems  certain, 
that,  in  order  to  bring  up  a  family,  the  labour 
of  the  husband  and  wife  together  must,  even 
in  the  lowest  species  of  common  labour,  be  able 
to  earn  something  more  than  what  is  precisely 
necessary  for  their  own  maintenance;  but  in 
what  proportion,  whether  in  that  above  men¬ 
tioned,  or  in  any  other,  I  shall  not  take  upon 
me  to  determine. 

There  are  certain  circumstances,  however, 
which  sometimes  give  the  labourers  an  advan¬ 
tage,  and  enable  them  to  raise  their  wages  con¬ 
siderably  above  this  rate;  evidently  the  lowest 
which  is  consistent  with  common  humanity. 

When  in  any  country  the  demand  for  those 
who  live  by  wages, labourers,  journeymen,  serv¬ 
ants  of  every  kind,  is  continually  increasing; 
when  every  year  furnishes  employment  for  a 
greater  number  than  had  been  employed  the 
year  before,  the  workmen  have  no  occasion  to 
combine  in  order  to  raise  their  wages.  The  scar¬ 
city  of  hands  occasions  a  competition  among 
masters,  who  bid  against  one  another,  in  order 
to  get  workmen,  and  thus  voluntarily  break 
through  the  natural  combination  of  masters 
not  to  raise  wages. 

The  demand  for  those  who  live  by  wages,  it 
is  evident,  cannot  increase  but  in  proportion  to 
the  increase  of  the  funds  which  are  destined  for 
the  payment  of  wages.  These  funds  are  of  two 
kinds;  first,  the  revenue  which  is  over  and  above 
what  is  necessary  for  the  maintenance;  and, 
secondly,  the  stock  which  is  over  and  above 
what  is  necessary  for  the  employment  of  their 
masters.  ' 

When  the  landlord,  annuitant,  or  monied 
man, has  a  greater  revenue  than  what  hejudges 
sufficient  to  maintain  his  own  family,  he  em¬ 
ploys  either  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  surplus 
in  maintaining  one  or  more  menial  servants. 


29 

Increase  this  surplus,  and  he  will  naturally  in¬ 
crease  the  number  of  those  servants. 

When  an  independent  workman,  such  as  a 
weaver  or  shoemaker,  has  got  more  stock  than 
what  is  sufficient  to  purchase  the  materials  of 
his  own  work,  and  to  maintain  himself  till  he 
can  dispose  of  it,  he  naturally  employs  one  or 
more  journeymen  with  the  surplus,  in  order  to 
make  a  profit  by  their  work.  Increase  this  sur¬ 
plus,  and  he  will  naturally  increase  the  number 
of  his  journeymen. 

The  demand  for  those  who  live  by  wages, 
therefore,  necessarily  increases  with  the  increase 
of  the  revenue  and  stock  of  every  country,  and 
cannot  possibly  increase  without  it.  The  in¬ 
crease  of  revenue  and  stock  is  the  increase  of 
national  wealth.  The  demand  for  those  who 
live  by  wages,  therefore,  naturally  increases 
with  the  increase  of  national  wealth,  and 
cannot  possibly  increase  without  it. 

It  is  not  the  actual  greatness  of  national 
wealth,  but  its  continual  increase,  which  oc¬ 
casions  a  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour.  It  is  not, 
accordingly,  in  the  richest  countries,  but  in  the 
most  thriving,  or  in  those  which  are  growing 
rich  the  fastest,  that  the  wages  of  labour  are 
highest.  England  is  certainly,  in  the  present 
times,  a  much  richer  country  than  any  part  of 
North  America.  The  wages  of  labour,  however, 
are  much  higher  in  North  America  than  in  any 
part  of  England.  In  the  province  of  New  York, 
common  labourers  earn 1  three  shillings  and 
sixpence  currency,  equal  to  two  shillings  ster¬ 
ling,  a  day;  ship  carpenters,  ten  shillings  and 
sixpence  currency,  with  a  pint  of  rum  worth 
sixpence  sterling,  equal  in  all  to  six  shillings 
and  sixpence  sterling;  house  carpenters  and 
bricklayers,  eight  shillings  currency,  equal  to 
four  shillings  and  sixpence  sterling;  journey¬ 
men  tailors,  five  shillings  currency,  equal  to 
about  two  shillings  and  ten  pence  sterling.  These 
prices  are  all  above  the  London  price;  and 
wages  are  said  to  be  as  high  in  the  other  col¬ 
onies  as  in  New  York.  The  price  of  provisions 
is  everywhere  in  North  America  much  lower 
than  in  England.  A  dearth  has  never  been 
known  there.  In  the  worst  seasons  they  have 
always  had  a  sufficiency  for  themselves,  though 
less  for  exportation.  If  the  money  price  of  la¬ 
bour,  therefore,  be  higher  than  it  is  anywhere 
in  the  mother  country,  its  real  price,  the  real 
command  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniencies 
of  life  which  it  conveys  to  the  labourer  must  be 
higher  in  a  still  greater  proportion. 

But  though  North  America  is  not  yet  so  rich 
as  England,  it  is  much  more  thriving,  and  ad¬ 
vancing  with  much  greater  rapidity  to  the  fur¬ 
ther  acquisition  of  riches.  The  most  decisive 
mark  of  the  prosperity  of  any  country  is  the 
increase  of  the  number  of  its  inhabitants.  In 

1  This  was  written  in  1773,  before  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  late  disturbances. 


30 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


Great  Britain,  and  most  other  European  coun¬ 
tries,  they  are  not  supposed  to  double  in  less 
than  five  hundred  years.  In  the  British  colonies 
in  North  America,  it  has  been  found  that  they 
double  in  twenty  or  five-and-twenty  years.  Nor 
in  the  present  times  is  this  increase  principally 
owing  to  the  continual  importation  of  new  in¬ 
habitants,  but  to  the  great  multiplication  of 
the  species.  Those  who  live  to  old  age,  it  is  said, 
frequently  see  there  from  fifty  to  a  hundred, 
and  sometimes  many  more,  descendants  from 
their  own  body.  Labour  is  there  so  well  reward¬ 
ed  that  a  numerous  family  of  children,  instead 
of  being  a  burthen,  is  a  source  of  opulence  and 
prosperity  to  the  parents.  The  labour  of  each 
child,  before  it  can  leave  their  house,  is  com¬ 
puted  to  be  worth  a  hundred  pounds  clear  gain 
to  them.  A  young  widow  with  four  or  five 
young  children,  who,  among  the  middling  or 
inferior  ranks  of  people  in  Europe,  would  have 
so  little  chance  for  a  second  husband,  is  there 
frequently  courted  as  a  sort  of  fortune.  The 
value  of  children  is  the  greatest  of  all  encour¬ 
agements  to  marriage.  We  cannot,  therefore, 
wonder  that  the  people  in  North  America 
should  generally  marry  very  young.  Notwith¬ 
standing  the  great  increase  occasioned  by  such 
early  marriages,  there  is  a  continual  complaint 
of  the  scarcity  of  hands  in  North  America.  The 
demand  for  labourers,  the  funds  destined  for 
maintaining  them,  increase,  it  seems,  still  fast¬ 
er  than  they  can  find  labourers  to  employ. 

Though  the  wealth  of  a  country  should  be 
very  great,  yet  if  it  has  been  long  stationary, 
we  must  not  expect  to  find  the  wages  of  labour 
very  high  in  it.  The  funds  destined  for  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  wages,  the  revenue  and  stock  of  its  in¬ 
habitants,  may  be  of  the  greatest  extent;  but  if 
they  have  continued  for  several  centuries  of 
the  same,  or  very  nearly  of  the  same  extent,  the 
number  of  labourers  employed  every  year  could 
easily  supply,  and  even  more  than  supply,  the 
number  wanted  the  following  year. There  could 
seldom  be  any  scarcity  of  hands,  nor  could  the 
masters  be  obliged  to  bid  against  one  another 
in  order  to  get  them.  The  hands,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  would,  in  this  case,  naturally  multiply 
beyond  their  employment.  There  would  be  a 
constant  scarcity  of  employment,  and  the  la¬ 
bourers  would  be  obliged  to  bid  against  one  an¬ 
other  in  order  to  get  it.  If  in  such  a  country  the 
wages  of  labour  had  ever  been  more  than  suffi¬ 
cient  to  maintain  the  labourer,  and  to  enable 
him  to  bring  up  a  family,  the  competition  of 
the  labourers  and  the  interest  of  the  masters 
would  soon  reduce  them  to  this  lowest  rate 
which  is  consistent  with  common  humanity. 
China  has  been  long  one  of  the  richest,  that  is, 
one  of  the  most  fertile,  best  cultivated,  most 
industrious,and  most  populous  countries  in  the 
world.  It  seems,  however,  to  have  been  long 
stationary.  Marco  Polo,  who  visited  it  more 


than  five  hundred  years  ago,  describes  its  cul¬ 
tivation,  industry,  and  populousness,  almost  in 
the  same  terms  in  which  they  are  described  by 
travellers  in  the  present  times.  It  had  perhaps, 
even  long  before  his  time,  acquired  that  full 
complement  of  riches  which  the  nature  of  its 
laws  and  institutions  permits  it  to  acquire.  The 
accounts  of  all  travellers,  inconsistent  in  many 
other  respects,  agree  in  the  low  wages  of  labour, 
and  in  the  difficulty  which  a  labourer  finds  in 
bringing  up  a  family  in  China.  If  by  digging 
the  ground  a  whole  day  he  can  get  what  will 
purchase  a  small  quantity  of  rice  in  the  eve¬ 
ning,  he  is  contented.  The  condition  of  artifi¬ 
cers  is,  if  possible,  still  worse.  Instead  of  wait¬ 
ing  indolently  in  their  workhouses,  for  the 
calls  of  their  customers,  as  in  Europe,  they  are 
continually  running  about  the  streets  with  the 
tools  of  their  respective  trades,  offering  their 
service,  and  as  it  were  begging  employment. 
The  poverty  of  the  lower  ranks  of  people  in 
China  far  surpasses  that  of  the  most  beggarly 
nations  in  Europe.  In  the  neighbourhood  of 
Canton  many  hundred,  it  is  commonly  said, 
many  thousand  families  have  no  habitation  on 
the  land,  but  live  constantly  in  little  fishing 
boats  upon  the  rivers  and  canals.  The  subsist¬ 
ence  which  they  find  there  is  so  scanty  that 
they  are  eager  to  fish  up  the  nastiest  garbage 
thrown  overboard  from  any  European  ship. 
Any  carrion,  the  carcase  of  a  dead  dog  or  cat, 
for  example,  though  half  putrid  and  stinking, 
is  as  welcome  to  them  as  the  most  wholesome 
food  to  the  people  of  other  countries.  Marriage 
is  encouraged  in  China,  not  by  the  profitable¬ 
ness  of  children,  but  by  the  liberty  of  destroy¬ 
ing  them.  In  all  great  towns  several  are  every 
night  exposed  in  the  street,  or  drowned  like 
puppies  in  the  water.  The  performance  of  this 
horrid  office  is  even  said  to  be  the  avowed  busi¬ 
ness  by  which  some  people  earn  their  subsist¬ 
ence. 

China,  however,  though  it  may  perhaps 
stand  still,  does  not  seem  to  go  backwards.  Its 
towns  are  nowhere  deserted  by  their  inhabit¬ 
ants.  The  lands  which  had  once  been  culti¬ 
vated  are  nowhere  neglected.  The  same  or  very 
nearly  the  same  annual  labour  must  therefore 
continue  to  be  performed,  and  the  funds  des¬ 
tined  for  maintaining  it  must  not,  consequent¬ 
ly,  be  sensibly  diminished.  The  lowest  class 
of  labourers,  therefore,  notwithstanding  their 
scanty  subsistence,  must  some  way  or  another 
make  shift  to  continue  their  race  so  far  as  to 
keep  up  their  usual  numbers. 

But  it  would  be  otherwise  in  a  country  where 
the  funds  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  la¬ 
bour  were  sensibly  decaying.  Every  year  the 
demand  for  servants  and  labourers  would,  in 
all  the  different  classes  of  employments,  be  less 
than  it  had  been  the  year  before.  Many  who 
had  been  bred  in  the  superior  classes,  not  being 


31 


The  Wages 

able  to  find  employment  in  their  own  business, 
would  be  glad  to  seek  it  in  the  lowest.  The  low¬ 
est  class  being  not  only  overstocked  with  its 
own  workmen,  but  with  the  overflowings  of  all 
the  other  classes,  the  competition  for  employ¬ 
ment  would  be  so  great  in  it,  as  to  reduce  the 
wages  of  labour  to  the  most  miserable  and 
scanty  subsistence  of  the  labourer.  Many  would 
not  be  able  to  find  employment  even  upon 
these  hard  terms,  but  would  either  starve,  or  be 
driven  to  seek  a  subsistence  either  by  begging, 
or  by  the  perpetration  perhaps  of  the  greatest 
enormities.  Want,  famine, and  mortality  would 
immediately  prevail  in  that  class,  and  from 
thence  extend  themselves  to  all  the  superior 
classes,  till  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  the 
country  was  reduced  to  what  could  easily  be 
maintained  by  the  revenue  and  stock  which  re¬ 
mained  in  it,  and  which  had  escaped  either  the 
tyranny  or  calamity  which  had  destroyed  the 
rest.  This  perhaps  is  nearly  the  present  state 
of  Bengal,  and  of  some  other  of  the  English 
settlements  in  the  East  Indies.  In  a  fertile 
country  which  had  before  been  much  depopu¬ 
lated,  where  subsistence,  consequently,  should 
not  be  very  difficult,  and  where,  notwithstand¬ 
ing,  three  or  four  hundred  thousand  people  die 
of  hunger  in  one  year,  we  may  be  assured  that 
the  funds  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
labouring  poor  are  fast  decaying.  The  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  genius  of  the  British  consti¬ 
tution  which  protects  and  governs  North  Amer¬ 
ica,  and  that  of  the  mercantile  company  which 
oppresses  and  domineers  in  the  East  Indies, 
cannot  perhaps  be  better  illustrated  than  by 
the  different  state  of  those  countries. 

The  liberal  reward  of  labour,  therefore,  as  it 
is  the  necessary  effect,  so  it  is  the  natural  symp¬ 
tom  of  increasing  national  wealth.  The  scanty 
maintenance  of  the  labouring  poor,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  the  natural  symptom  that  things  are 
at  a  stand,  and  their  starving  condition  that 
they  are  going  fast  backwards. 

In  Great  Britain  the  wages  of  labour  seem, 
in  the  present  times,  to  be  evidently  more  than 
what  is  precisely  necessary  to  enable  the  la¬ 
bourer  to  bring  up  a  family.  In  order  to  satisfy 
ourselves  upon  this  point  it  will  not  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  enter  into  any  tedious  or  doubtful  cal¬ 
culation  of  what  may  be  the  lowest  sum  upon 
which  it  is  possible  to  do  this.  There  are  many 
plain  symptoms  that  the  wages  of  labour  are 
nowhere  in  this  country  regulated  by  this  low¬ 
est  rate  which  is  consistent  with  common  hu¬ 
manity. 

First,  in  almost  every  part  of  Great  Britain 
there  is  a  distinction,  even  in  the  lowest  species 
of  labour,  between  summer  and  winter  wages. 
Summer  wages  are  always  highest.  But  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  extraordinary  expense  of  fuel,  the 
maintenance  of  a  family  is  most  expensive  in 
winter.  Wages,  therefore,  being  highest  when 


of  Labour 

this  expense  is  lowest,  it  seems  evident  that 
they  are  not  regulated  by  what  is  necessary  for 
this  expense;  but  by  the  quantity  and  supposed 
value  of  the  work.  A  labourer,  it  may  be  said 
indeed,  ought  to  save  part  of  his  summer  wages 
in  order  to  defray  his  winter  expense;  and  that 
through  the  whole  year  they  do  not  exceed 
what  is  necessary  to  maintain  his  family 
through  the  whole  year.  A  slave,  however,  or 
one  absolutely  dependent  on  us  for  immediate 
subsistence,  would  not  be  treated  in  this  man¬ 
ner.  His  daily  subsistence  would  be  propor¬ 
tioned  to  his  daily  necessities. 

Secondly,  the  wages  of  labour  do  not  in  Great 
Britain  fluctuate  with  the  price  of  provisions. 
These  vary  everywhere  from  year  to  year,  fre¬ 
quently  from  month  to  month.  But  in  many 
places  the  money  price  of  labour  remains  uni¬ 
formly  the  same  sometimes  for  half  a  century 
together.  If  in  these  places,  therefore,  the  la¬ 
bouring  poor  can  maintain  their  families  in 
dear  years,  they  must  be  at  their  ease  in  times 
of  moderate  plenty,  and  in  affluence  in  those  of 
extraordinary  cheapness. The  high  price  of  pro¬ 
visions  during  these  ten  years  past  has  not  in 
many  parts  of  the  kingdom  been  accompanied 
with  any  sensible  rise  in  the  money  price  of 
labour.  It  has,  indeed,  in  some,  owing  probably 
more  to  the  increase  of  the  demand  for  labour 
than  to  that  of  the  price  of  provisions. 

Thirdly,  as  the  price  of  provisions  varies 
more  from  year  to  year  than  the  wages  of  la¬ 
bour,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wages  of  labour 
vary  more  from  place  to  place  than  the  price  of 
provisions.  The  prices  of  bread  and  butcher’s 
meat  are  generally  the  same  or  very  nearly  the 
same  through  the  greater  part  of  the  United 
Kingdom.  These  and  most  other  things  which 
are  sold  by  retail,  the  way  in  which  the  labour¬ 
ing  poor  buy  all  things,  are  generally  fully  as 
cheap  or  cheaper  in  great  towns  than  in  the 
remoter  parts  of  the  country,  for  reasons  which 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  explain  hereafter.  But 
the  wages  of  labour  in  a  great  town  and  its 
neighbourhood  are  frequently  a  fourth  or  a 
fifth  part,  twenty  or  five-and-twenty  per  cent 
higher  than  at  a  few  miles  distance.  Eighteen- 
pence  a  day  may  be  reckoned  the  common  price 
of  labour  in  London  and  its  neighbourhood.  At 
a  few  miles  distance  it  falls  to  fourteen  and 
fifteenpence  Tenpence  may  be  reckoned  its 
price  in  Edinburgh  and  its  neighbourhood.  At 
a  few  miles  distance  it  falls  to  eightpence,  the 
usual  price  of  common  labour  through  the 
greater  part  of  the  low  country  of  Scotland, 
where  it  varies  a  good  deal  less  than  in  Eng¬ 
land.  Such  a  difference  of  prices,  which  it  seems 
is  not  always  sufficient  to  transport  a  man  from 
one  parish  to  another,  would  necessarily  oc¬ 
casion  so  great  a  transportation  of  the  most 
bulky  commodities,  not  only  from  one  parish 
to  another,  but  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom, 


32 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


almost  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the  other, 
as  would  soon  reduce  them  more  nearly  to  a 
level.  After  all  that  has  been  said  of  the  levity 
and  inconstancy  of  human  nature,  it  appears 
evidently  from  experience  that  a  man  is  of  all 
sorts  of  luggage  the  most  difficult  to  be  trans¬ 
ported.  If  the  labouring  poor,  therefore,  can 
maintain  their  familes  in  those  parts  of  the 
kingdom  where  the  price  of  labour  is  lowest, 
they  must  be  in  affluence  where  it  is  highest. 

Fourthly,  the  variations  in  the  price  of  la¬ 
bour  not  only  do  not  correspond  either  in  place 
or  time  with  those  in  the  price  of  provisions, 
but  they  are  frequently  quite  opposite. 

Grain,  the  food  of  the  common  people,  is 
dearer  in  Scotland  than  in  England,  whence 
Scotland  receives  almost  every  year  very  large 
supplies.  But  English  corn  must  be  sold  dearer 
in  Scotland,  the  country  to  which  it  is  brought, 
than  in  England,  the  country  from  which  it 
comes;  and  in  proportion  to  its  quality  it  can¬ 
not  be  sold  dearer  in  Scotland  than  the  Scotch 
corn  that  comes  to  the  same  market  in  compe¬ 
tition  with  it.  The  quality  of  grain  depends 
chiefly  upon  the  quantity  of  flour  or  meal 
which  it  yields  at  the  mill,  and  in  this  respect 
English  grain  is  so  much  superior  to  the  Scotch 
that,  though  often  dearer  in  appearance,  or  in 
proportion  to  the  measure  of  its  bulk,  it  is  gen¬ 
erally  cheaper  in  reality,  or  in  proportion  to  its 
quality,  or  even  to  the  measure  of  its  weight. 
The  price  of  labour,  on  the  contrary,  is  dearer 
in  England  than  in  Scotland.  If  the  labouring 
poor,  therefore,  can  maintain  their  families  in 
the  one  part  of  the  United  Kingdom,  they  must 
be  in  affluence  in  the  other.  Oatmeal  indeed 
supplies  the  common  people  in  Scotland  with 
the  greatest  and  the  best  part  of  their  food, 
which  is  in  general  much  inferior  to  that  of 
their  neighbours  of  the  same  rank  in  England. 
This  difference,  however,  in  the  mode  of  their 
subsistence  is  not  the  cause,  but  the  effect  of 
the  difference  in  their  wages;  though,  by  a 
strange  misapprehension,  I  have  frequently 
heard  it  represented  as  the  cause.  It  is  not  be¬ 
cause  one  man  keeps  a  coach  while  his  neigh¬ 
bour  walks  afoot  that  the  one  is  rich  and  the 
other  poor;  but  because  the  one  is  rich  he  keeps 
a  coach,  and  because  the  other  is  poor  he  walks 
afoot. 

During  the  course  of  the  last  century,  taking 
one  year  with  another,  grain  was  dearer  in  both 
parts  of  the  United  Kingdom  than  during  that 
of  the  present.  This  is  a  matter  of  fact  which 
cannot  now  admit  of  any  reasonable  doubt; 
and  the  proof  of  it  is,  if  possible,  still  more  de¬ 
cisive  with  regard  to  Scotland  than  with  regard 
to  England.  It  is  in  Scotland  supported  by  the 
evidence  of  the  public  fiars,  annual  valuations 
made  upon  oath,  according  to  the  actual  state 
of  the  markets,  of  all  the  different  sorts  of 
grain  in  every  different  county  of  Scotland.  If 


such  direct  proof  could  require  any  collateral 
evidence  to  confirm  it,  I  would  observe  that 
this  has  likewise  been  the  case  in  France,  and 
probably  in  most  other  parts  of  Europe.  With 
regard  to  France  there  is  the  clearest  proof.  But 
though  it  is  certain  that  in  both  parts  of  the 
United  Kingdom  grain  was  somewhat  dearer 
in  the  last  century  than  in  the  present,  it  is 
equally  certain  that  labour  was  much  cheaper. 
If  the  labouring  poor,  therefore,  could  bring  up 
their  families  then,  they  must  be  much  more 
at  their  ease  now.  In  the  last  century,  the  most 
usual  day-wages  of  common  labour  through  the 
greater  part  of  Scotland  were  sixpence  in  sum¬ 
mer  and  fivepence  in  winter.  Three  shillings  a 
week,  the  same  price  very  nearly,  still  continues 
to  be  paid  in  some  parts  of  the  Highlands  and 
Western  Islands.  Through  the  greater  part  of 
the  low  country  the  most  usual  wages  of  com¬ 
mon  labour  are  now  eightpence  a  day;  ten- 
pence,  sometimes  a  shilling  about  Edinburgh, 
in  the  counties  which  border  upon  England, 
probably  on  account  of  that  neighbourhood, 
and  in  a  few  other  places  where  there  has  lately 
been  a  considerable  rise  in  the  demand  for  la¬ 
bour,  about  Glasgow,  Carron,  Ayrshire,  etc.  In 
England  the  improvements  of  agriculture,  man¬ 
ufactures,  and  commerce  began  much  earlier 
than  in  Scotland.  The  demand  for  labour,  and 
consequently  its  price,  must  necessarily  have 
increased  with  those  improvements.  In  the  last 
century,  accordingly,  as  well  as  in  the  present, 
the  wages  of  labour  were  higher  in  England 
than  in  Scotland.  They  have  risen,  too,  consid¬ 
erably  since  that  time,  though,  on  account  of 
the  greater  variety  of  wages  paid  there  in  dif¬ 
ferent  places,  it  is  more  difficult  to  ascertain 
how  much.  In  1614,  the  pay  of  a  foot  soldier 
was  the  same  as  in  the  present  times,  eight- 
pence  a  day.  When  it  was  first  established  it 
would  naturally  be  regulated  by  the  usual 
wages  of  common  labourers,  the  rank  of  peo¬ 
ple  from  which  foot  soldiers  are  commonly 
drawn.  Lord  Chief  Justice  Hales,  who  wrote  in 
the  time  of  Charles  II,  computes  the  necessary 
expense  of  a  labourer’s  family,  consisting  of 
six  persons,  the  father  and  mother,  two  chil¬ 
dren  able  to  do  something,  and  two  not  able,  at 
ten  shillings  a  week,  or  twenty-six  pounds  a 
year.  If  they  cannot  earn  this  by  their  labour, 
they  must  make  it  up,  he  supposes,  either  by 
begging  or  stealing.  He  appears  to  have  in¬ 
quired  very  carefully  into  this  subject.1  In  1 688, 
Mr. Gregory  King,  whose  skill  in  political  arith¬ 
metic  is  so  much  extolled  by  Doctor  Davenant, 
computed  the  ordinary  income  of  labourers  and 
out-servants  to  be  fifteen  pounds  a  year  to  a 
family,  which  he  supposed  to  consist,  one  with 
another,  of  three  and  a  half  persons.  His  calcu¬ 
lation,  therefore,  though  different  in  appear- 

1  See  his  scheme  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor, 
in  Burns’  History  of  the  Poor  Laws. 


33 


The  Wages  of  Labour 


ance,  corresponds  very  nearly  at  bottom  with 
that  of  Judge  Hales.  Both  suppose  the  weekly 
expense  of  such  families  to  be  about  twenty 
pence  a  head.  Both  the  pecuniary  income  and 
expense  of  such  families  have  increased  con¬ 
siderably  since  that  time  through  the  greater 
part  of  the  kingdom;  in  some  places  more,  and 
in  some  less;  though  perhaps  scarce  anywhere 
so  much  as  some  exaggerated  accounts  of  the 
present  wages  of  labour  have  lately  represented 
them  to  the  public.  The  price  of  labour,  it  must 
be  observed,  cannot  be  ascertained  very  accu¬ 
rately  anywhere,  different  prices  being  often 
paid  at  the  same  place  and  for  the  same  sort  of 
labour,  not  only  according  to  the  different  abil¬ 
ities  of  the  workmen,  but  according  to  the 
easiness  or  hardness  of  the  masters.  Where 
wages  are  not  regulated  by  law,  all  that  we  can 
pretend  to  determine  is  what  are  the  most 
usual;  and  experience  seems  to  show  that  law 
can  never  regulate  them  properly,  though  it 
has  often  pretended  to  do  so. 

The  real  recompense  of  labour,  the  real  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life 
which  it  can  procure  to  the  labourer,  has,  dur¬ 
ing  the  course  of  the  present  century,  increased 
perhaps  in  a  still  greater  proportion  than  its 
money  price.  Not  only  grain  has  become  some¬ 
what  cheaper,  but  many  other  things  from 
which  the  industrious  poor  derive  an  agreeable 
and  wholesome  variety  of  food  have  become  a 
great  deal  cheaper.  Potatoes,  for  example,  do 
not  at  present,  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
kingdom,  cost  half  the  price  which  they  used 
to  do  thirty  or  forty  years  ago.  The  same  thing 
may  be  said  of  turnips,  carrots,  cabbages;  things 
which  were  formerly  never  raised  but  by  the 
spade,  but  which  are  now  commonly  raised  by 
the  plough.  All  sort  of  garden  stuff,  too,  has  be¬ 
come  cheaper.  The  greater  part  of  the  apples 
and  even  of  the  onions  consumed  in  Great 
Britain  were  in  the  last  century  imported  from 
Flanders.  The  great  improvements  in  the 
coarser  manufactures  of  both  linen  and  wool¬ 
len  cloth  furnish  the  labourers  with  cheaper 
and  better  clothing;  and  those  in  the  manu¬ 
factures  of  the  coarser  metals,  with  cheaper 
and  better  instruments  of  trade,  as  well  as  with 
many  agreeable  and  convenient  pieces  of  house¬ 
hold  furniture.  Soap,  salt,  candles,  leather,  and 
fermented  liquors  have,  indeed,  become  a  good 
deal  dearer;  chiefly  from  the  taxes  which  have 
been  laid  upon  them.  The  quantity  of  these, 
however,  which  the  labouring  poor  are  under 
any  necessity  of  consuming,  is  so  very  small, 
that  the  increase  in  their  price  does  not  com¬ 
pensate  the  diminution  in  that  of  so  many  other 
things.  The  common  complaint  that  luxury  ex¬ 
tends  itself  even  to  the  lowest  ranks  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  that  the  labouring  poor  will  not  now 
be  contented  with  the  same  food,  clothing,  and 
lodging  which  satisfied  them  in  former  times, 


may  convince  us  that  it  is  not  the  money  price 
of  labour  only,  but  its  real  recompense,  which 
has  augmented. 

Is  this  improvement  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  lower  ranks  of  the  people  to  be  regarded  as 
an  advantage  or  as  an  inconveniency  to  the 
society?  The  answer  seems  at  first  sight  abun¬ 
dantly  plain. Servants, labourers,  and  workmen 
of  different  kinds,  make  up  the  far  greater  part 
of  every  great  political  society.  But  what  im¬ 
proves  the  circumstances  of  the  greater  part 
can  never  be  regarded  as  an  inconveniency  to 
the  whole.  No  society  can  surely  be  flourishing 
and  happy,  of  which  the  far  greater  part  of  the 
members  are  poor  and  miserable.  It  is  but 
equity,  besides,  that  they  who  feed,  clothe,  and 
lodge  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  should  have 
such  a  share  of  the  produce  of  their  own  labour 
as  to  be  themselves  tolerably  well  fed,  clothed, 
and  lodged. 

Poverty,  though  it  no  doubt  discourages, 
does  not  always  prevent  marriage.  It  seems 
even  to  be  favourable  to  generation.  A  half- 
starved  Highland  woman  frequently  bears  more 
than  twenty  children,  while  a  pampered  fine 
lady  is  often  incapable  of  bearing  any,  and  is 
generally  exhausted  by  two  or  three.  Barren¬ 
ness,  so  frequent  among  women  of  fashion,  is 
very  rare  among  those  of  inferior  station.  Lux¬ 
ury  in  the  fair  sex,  while  it  inflames  perhaps 
the  passion  for  enjoyment,  seems  always  to 
weaken,  and  frequently  to  destroy  altogether, 
the  powers  of  generation. 

But  poverty,  though  it  does  not  prevent  the 
generation,  is  extremely  unfavourable  to  the 
rearing  of  children.  The  tender  plant  is  pro¬ 
duced,  but  in  so  cold  a  soil  and  so  severe  a  cli¬ 
mate,  soon  withers  and  dies.  It  is  not  uncom¬ 
mon,  I  have  been  frequently  told,  in  the  High¬ 
lands  of  Scotland  for  a  mother  who  has  borne 
twenty  children  not  to  have  two  alive.  Several 
officers  of  great  experience  have  assured  me, 
that  so  far  from  recruiting  their  regiment,  they 
have  never  been  able  to  supply  it  with  drums 
and  fifes  from  all  the  soldiers'  children  that 
were  born  in  it.  A  greater  number  of  fine  chil¬ 
dren,  however,  is  seldom  seen  anywhere  than 
about  a  barrack  of  soldiers.  Very  few  of  them, 
it  seems,  arrive  at  the  age  of  thirteen  or  four¬ 
teen.  In  some  places  one  half  the  children  born 
die  before  they  are  four  years  of  age;  in  many 
places  before  they  are  seven;  and  in  almost  all 
places  before  they  are  nine  or  ten.  This  great 
mortality,  however,  will  everywhere  be  found 
chiefly  among  the  children  of  the  common  peo¬ 
ple,  who  cannot  afford  to  tend  them  with  the 
same  care  as  those  of  better  station.  Though 
their  marriages  are  generally  more  fruitful  than 
those  of  people  of  fashion,  a  smaller  proportion 
of  their  children  arrive  at  maturity.  In  found¬ 
ling  hospitals,  and  among  the  children  brought 
up  by  parish  charities,  the  mortality  is  still 


34 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


greater  than  among  those  of  the  common  peo¬ 
ple. 

Every  species  of  animals  naturally  multiplies 
in  proportion  to  the  means  of  their  subsistence, 
and  no  species  can  ever  multiply  beyond  it. But 
in  civilised  society  it  is  only  among  the  inferior 
ranks  of  people  that  the  scantiness  of  subsist¬ 
ence  can  set  limits  to  the  further  multiplication 
of  the  human  species;  and  it  can  do  so  in  no 
other  way  than  by  destroying  a  great  part  of 
the  children  which  their  fruitful  marriages  pro¬ 
duce. 

The  liberal  reward  of  labour,  by  enabling 
them  to  provide  better  for  their  children,  and 
consequently  to  bring  up  a  greater  number, 
naturally  tends  to  widen  and  extend  those  lim¬ 
its.  It  deserves  to  be  remarked,  too,  that  it 
necessarily  does  this  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the 
proportion  which  the  demand  for  labour  re¬ 
quires.  If  this  demand  is  continually  increas¬ 
ing,  the  reward  of  labour  must  necessarily  en¬ 
courage  in  such  a  manner  the  marriage  and 
multiplication  of  labourers,  as  may  enable  them 
to  supply  that  continually  increasing  demand 
by  a  continually  increasing  population.  If  the 
reward  should  at  any  time  be  less  than  what 
was  requisite  for  this  purpose,  the  deficiency  of 
hands  would  soon  raise  it;  and  if  it  should  at 
any  time  be  more,  their  excessive  multiplica¬ 
tion  would  soon  lower  it  to  this  necessary  rate. 
The  market  would  be  so  much  understocked 
with  labour  in  the  one  case,  and  so  much  over¬ 
stocked  in  the  other,  as  would  soon  force  back 
its  price  to  that  proper  rate  which  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  society  required.  It  is  in  this 
manner  that  the  demand  for  men,  like  that  for 
any  other  commodity,  necessarily  regulates  the 
production  of  men;  quickens  it  when  it  goes  on 
too  slowly,  and  stops  it  when  it  advances  too 
fast.  It  is  this  demand  which  regulates  and  de¬ 
termines  the  state  of  propagation  in  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  countries  of  the  world,  in  North  Amer¬ 
ica,  in  Europe,  and  in  China;  which  renders  it 
rapidly  progressive  in  the  first,  slow  and  grad¬ 
ual  in  the  second,  and  altogether  stationary  in 
the  last. 

The  wear  and  tear  of  a  slave,  it  has  been  said, 
is  at  the  expense  of  his  master;  but  that  of  a 
free  servant  is  at  his  own  expense.  The  wear 
and  tear  of  the  latter,  however,  is,  in  reality,  as 
much  at  the  expense  of  his  master  as  that  of 
the  former.  The  wages  paid  to  journeymen  and 
servants  of  every  kind  must  be  such  as  may  en¬ 
able  them,  one  with  another,  to  continue  the 
race  of  journeymen  and  servants,  according  as 
the  increasing,  diminishing,  or  stationary  de¬ 
mand  of  the  society  may  happen  to  require. 
But  though  the  wear  and  tear  of  a  free  servant 
be  equally  at  the  expense  of  his  master,  it  gen¬ 
erally  costs  him  much  less  than  that  of  a  slave. 
The  fund  destined  for  replacing  or  repairing,  if 
I  may  say  so,  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  slave,  is 


commonly  managed  by  a  negligent  master  or 
careless  overseer.  That  destined  for  performing 
the  same  office  with  regard  to  the  free  man,  is 
managed  by  the  free  man  himself.  The  dis¬ 
orders  which  generally  prevail  in  the  economy 
of  the  rich,  naturally  introduce  themselves  into 
the  management  of  the  former:  the  strict  fru¬ 
gality  and  parsimonious  attention  of  the  poor 
as  naturally  establish  themselves  in  that  of  the 
latter.  Under  such  different  management,  the 
same  purpose  must  require  very  different  de¬ 
grees  of  expense  to  execute  it.  It  appears,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  from  the  experience  of  all  ages  and 
nations,  I  believe,  that  the  work  done  by  free¬ 
men  comes  cheaper  in  the  end  than  that  per¬ 
formed  by  slaves.  It  is  found  to  do  so  even  at 
Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia,  where 
the  wages  of  common  labour  are  so  very  high. 

The  liberal  reward  of  labour,  therefore,  as  it 
is  the  effect  of  increasing  wealth,  so  it  is  the 
cause  of  increasing  population.  To  complain  of 
it  is  to  lament  over  the  necessary  effect  and 
cause  of  the  greatest  public  prosperity. 

It  deserves  to  be  remarked,  perhaps,  that  it 
is  in  the  progressive  state,  while  the  society  is 
advancing  to  the  further  acquisition,  rather 
than  when  it  has  acquired  its  full  complement 
of  riches,  that  the  condition  of  the  labouring 
poor,  of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  seems  to 
be  the  happiest  and  the  most  comfortable.  It 
is  hard  in  the  stationary,  and  miserable  in  the 
declining  state.  The  progressive  state  is  in  real¬ 
ity  the  cheerful  and  the  hearty  state  to  all  the 
different  orders  of  the  society.  The  stationary 
is  dull;  the  declining,  melancholy. 

The  liberal  reward  of  labour,  as  it  encourages 
the  propagation,  so  it  increases  the  industry  of 
the  common  people.  The  wages  of  labour  are 
the  encouragement  of  industry,  which,  like 
every  other  human  quality,  improves  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  encouragement  it  receives.  A  plenti¬ 
ful  subsistence  increases  the  bodily  strength  of 
the  labourer,  and  the  comfortable  hope  of  bet¬ 
tering  his  condition,  and  of  ending  his  days  per¬ 
haps  in  ease  and  plenty,  animates  him  to  exert 
that  strength  to  the  utmost.  Where  wages  are 
high,  accordingly,  we  shall  always  find  the 
workmen  more  active,  diligent,  and  expeditious 
than  where  they  are  low:  in  England,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  than  in  Scotland;  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  great  towns  than  in  remote  country  places. 
Some  workmen,  indeed,  when  they  can  earn  in 
four  days  what  will  maintain  them  through  the 
week,  will  be  idle  the  other  three.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  is  by  no  means  the  case  with  the  greater 
part.  Workmen,  on  the  contrary ,  when  they  are 
liberally  paid  by  the  piece,  are  very  apt  to 
overwork  themselves,  and  to  ruin  their  health 
and  constitution  in  a  few  years.  A  carpenter  in 
London,  and  in  some  other  places,  is  not  sup¬ 
posed  to  last  in  his  utmost  vigour  above  eight 
years.  Something  of  the  same  kind  happens  in 


The  Wages  of  Labour 


many  other  trades,  in  which  the  workmen  are 
paid  by  the  piece,  as  they  generally  are  in 
manufactures,  and  even  in  country  labour, 
wherever  wages  are  higher  than  ordinary.  Al¬ 
most  every  class  of  artificers  is  subject  to  some 
peculiar  infirmity  occasioned  by  excessive  ap¬ 
plication  to  their  peculiar  species  of  work. 
Ramuzzini,  an  eminent  Italian  physician,  has 
written  a  particular  book  concerning  such  dis¬ 
eases.  We  do  not  reckon  our  soldiers  the  most 
industrious  set  of  people  among  us.  Yet  when 
soldiers  have  been  employed  in  some  particular 
sorts  of  work,  and  liberally  paid  by  the  piece, 
their  officers  have  frequently  been  obliged  to 
stipulate  with  the  undertaker,  that  they  should 
not  be  allowed  to  earn  above  a  certain  sum 
every  day,  according  to  the  rate  at  which  they 
were  paid.  Till  this  stipulation  was  made,  mu¬ 
tual  emulation  and  the  desire  of  greater  gain 
frequently  prompted  them  to  overwork  them¬ 
selves,  and  to  hurt  their  health  by  excessive 
labour.  Excessive  application  during  four  days 
of  the  week  is  frequently  the  real  cause  of  the 
idleness  of  the  other  three,  so  much  and  so 
loudly  complained  of.  Great  labour,  either  of 
mind  or  body,  continued  for  several  days  to¬ 
gether,  is  in  most  men  naturally  followed  by  a 
great  desire  of  relaxation,  which,  if  not  re¬ 
strained  by  force  or  by  some  strong  necessity, 
is  almost  irresistible.  It  is  the  call  of  nature, 
which  requires  to  be  relieved  by  some  indul¬ 
gence,  sometimes  of  ease  only,  but  sometimes, 
too,  of  dissipation  and  diversion.  If  it  is  not 
complied  with,  the  consequences  are  often  dan¬ 
gerous,  and  sometimes  fatal,  and  such  as 
almost  always,  sooner  or  later,  brings  on  the  pe¬ 
culiar  infirmity  of  the  trade.  If  masters  would 
always  listen  to  the  dictates  of  reason  and  hu¬ 
manity,  they  have  frequently  occasion  rather 
to  moderate  than  to  animate  the  application  of 
many  of  their  workmen.  It  will  be  found,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  in  every  sort  of  trade,  that  the  man  who 
works  so  moderately  as  to  be  able  to  work 
constantly  not  only  preserves  his  health  the 
longest,  but,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  executes 
the  greatest  quantity  of  work. 

In  cheap  years,  it  is  pretended,  workmen  are 
generally  more  idle,  and  in  dear  ones  more  in¬ 
dustrious  than  ordinary.  A  plentiful  subsist¬ 
ence,  therefore,  it  has  been  concluded,  relaxes, 
and  a  scanty  one  quickens  their  industry.  That 
a  little  more  plenty  than  ordinary  may  render 
some  workmen  idle,  cannot  well  be  doubted; 
but  that  it  should  have  this  effect  upon  the 
greater  part,  or  that  men  in  general  should 
work  better  when  they  are  ill  fed  than  when 
they  are  well  fed,  when  they  are  disheartened 
than  when  they  are  in  good  spirits,  when  they 
are  frequently  sick  than  when  they  are  gener¬ 
ally  in  good  health,  seems  not  very  probable. 
Years  of  dearth,  it  is  to  be  observed,  are  gen¬ 
erally  among  the  common  people  years  of  sick¬ 


35 

ness  and  mortality,  which  cannot  fail  to  dimin¬ 
ish  the  produce  of  their  industry. 

In  years  of  plenty,  servants  frequently  leave 
their  masters,  and  trust  their  subsistence  to 
what  they  can  make  by  their  own  industry. 
But  the  same  cheapness  of  provisions,  by  in¬ 
creasing  the  fund  which  is  destined  for  the 
maintenance  of  servants,  encourages  masters, 
farmers  especially,  to  employ  a  greater  num¬ 
ber.  Farmers  upon  such  occasions  expect  more 
profit  from  their  corn  by  maintaining  a  few 
more  labouring  servants  than  by  selling  it  at  a 
low  price  in  the  market.  The  demand  for  serv¬ 
ants  increases,  while  the  number  of  those  who 
offer  to  supply  that  demand  diminishes.  The 
price  of  labour,  therefore,  frequently  rises  in 
cheap  years. 

In  years  of  scarcity,  the  difficulty  and  un¬ 
certainty  of  subsistence  make  all  such  people 
eager  to  return  to  service.  But  the  high  price 
of  provisions,  by  diminishing  the  funds  des¬ 
tined  for  the  maintenance  of  servants,  disposes 
masters  rather  to  diminish  than  to  increase  the 
number  of  those  they  have.  In  dear  years,  too, 
poor  independent  workmen  frequently  con¬ 
sume  the  little  stocks  with  which  they  had  used 
to  supply  themselves  with  the  materials  of 
their  work,  and  are  obliged  to  become  journey¬ 
men  for  subsistence.  More  people  want  em¬ 
ployment  than  can  easily  get  it;  many  are  will¬ 
ing  to  take  it  upon  lower  terms  than  ordinary, 
and  the  wages  of  both  servants  and  journey¬ 
men  frequently  sink  in  dear  years. 

Masters  of  all  sorts,  therefore,  frequently 
make  better  bargains  with  their  servants  in 
dear  than  in  cheap  years,  and  find  them  more 
humble  and  dependent  in  the  former  than  in 
the  latter.  They  naturally,  therefore,  commend 
the  former  as  more  favourable  to  industry. 
Landlords  and  farmers,  besides,  two  of  the 
largest  classes  of  masters,  have  another  reason 
for  being  pleased  with  dear  years.  The  rents  of 
the  one  and  the  profits  of  the  other  depend 
very  much  upon  the  price  of  provisions.  Noth¬ 
ing  can  be  more  absurd,  however,  than  to  imag¬ 
ine  that  men  in  general  should  work  less  when 
they  work  for  themselves,  than  when  they  work 
for  other  people.  A  poor  independent  workman 
will  generally  be  more  industrious  than  even 
a  journeyman  who  works  by  the  piece.  The  one 
enjoys  the  whole  produce  of  his  own  industry; 
the  other  shares  it  with  his  master.  The  one, 
in  his  separate  independent  state,  is  less  liable 
to  the  temptations  of  bad  company,  which  in 
large  manufactories  so  frequently  ruin  the 
morals  of  the  other.  The  superiority  of  the  in¬ 
dependent  workman  over  those  servants  who 
are  hired  by  the  month  or  by  the  year,  and 
whose  wages  and  maintenance  are  the  same 
whether  they  do  much  or  do  little,  is  likely  to 
be  still  greater.  Cheap  years  tend  to  increase 
the  proportion  of  independent  workmen  to 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


36 

journeymen  and  servants  of  all  kinds,  and  dear 
years  to  diminish  it. 

A  French  author  of  great  knowledge  and  in¬ 
genuity,  Mr.  Messance,  receiver  of  the  taillies 
in  the  election  of  St.  Etienne,  endeavours  to 
show  that  the  poor  do  more  work  in  cheap  than 
in  dear  years,  by  comparing  the  quantity  and 
value  of  the  goods  made  upon  those  different 
occasions  in  three  different  manufactures;  one 
of  coarse  woollens  carried  on  at  Elbeuf;  one  of 
linen,  and  another  of  silk,  both  which  extend 
through  the  whole  generality  of  Rouen.  It  ap¬ 
pears  from  his  account,  which  is  copied  from 
the  registers  of  the  public  offices,  that  the  quan¬ 
tity  and  value  of  the  goods  made  in  all  those 
three  manufactures  has  generally  been  greater 
in  cheap  than  in  dear  years;  and  that  it  has  al¬ 
ways  been  greatest  in  the  cheapest,  and  least  in 
the  dearest  years.  All  the  three  seem  to  be 
stationary  manufactures,  or  which,  though 
their  produce  may  vary  somewhat  from  year 
to  year,  are  upon  the  whole  neither  going  back¬ 
wards  nor  forwards. 

The  manufacture  of  linen  in  Scotland,  and 
that  of  coarse  woollens  in  the  West  Riding  of 
Yorkshire,  are  growing  manufactures,  of  which 
the  produce  is  generally,  though  with  some  vari¬ 
ations,  increasing  both  in  quantity  and  value. 
Upon  examining,  however,  the  accounts  which 
have  been  published  of  their  annual  produce,  I 
have  not  been  able  to  observe  that  its  varia¬ 
tions  have  had  any  sensible  connection  with 
the  dearness  or  cheapness  of  the  seasons.  In 
1740,  a  year  of  great  scarcity,  both  manufac¬ 
tures,  indeed,  appear  to  have  declined  very  con¬ 
siderably.  But  in  1756,  another  year  of  great 
scarcity,  the  Scotch  manufacture  made  more 
than  ordinary  advances.  The  Yorkshire  manu¬ 
facture,  indeed,  declined,  and  its  produce  did 
not  rise  to  what  it  had  been  in  1755  till  1766, 
after  the  repeal  of  the  American  Stamp  Act. 
In  that  and  the  following  year  it  greatly  ex¬ 
ceeded  what  it  had  ever  been  before,  and  it  has 
continued  to  advance  ever  since. 

The  produce  of  all  great  manufactures  for 
distant  sale  must  necessarily  depend,  not  so 
much  upon  the  dearness  or  cheapness  of  the 
seasons  in  the  countries  where  they  are  carried 
on  as  upon  the  circumstances  which  affect  the 
demand  in  the  countries  where  they  are  con¬ 
sumed;  upon  peace  or  war,  upon  the  prosperity 
or  declension  of  other  rival  manufactures,  and 
upon  the  good  or  bad  humour  of  their  princi¬ 
pal  customers.  A  great  part  of  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  work,  besides,  which  is  probably  done  in 
cheap  years,  never  enters  the  public  registers 
of  manufactures.  The  men  servants  who  leave 
their  masters  become  independent  labourers. 
The  women  return  to  their  parents,  and  com¬ 
monly  spin  in  order  to  make  clothes  for  them¬ 
selves  and  their  families.  Even  the  independent 
workmen  do  not  always  work  for  public  sale, 


but  are  employed  by  some  of  their  neighbours 
in  manufactures  for  family  use.  The  produce  of 
their  labour,  therefore,  frequently  makes  no 
figure  in  those  public  registers  of  which  the 
records  are  sometimes  published  with  so  much 
parade,  and  from  which  our  merchants  and 
manufacturers  would  often  vainly  pretend  to 
announce  the  prosperity  or  declension  of  the 
greatest  empires. 

Though  the  variations  in  the  price  of  labour 
not  only  do  not  always  correspond  with  those 
in  the  price  of  provisions,  but  are  frequently 
quite  opposite,  we  must  not,  upon  this  account, 
imagine  that  the  price  of  provisions  has  no 
influence  upon  that  of  labour.  The  money  price 
of  labour  is  necessarily  regulated  by  two  cir¬ 
cumstances;  the  demand  for  labour,  and  the 
price  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of 
life.  The  demand  for  labour,  according  as  it 
happens  to  be  increasing,  stationary,  or  declin¬ 
ing,  or  to  require- an  increasing,  stationary,  or 
declining  population,  determines  the  quantity 
of  the  necessaries  and  conveniencies  of  life 
which  must  be  given  to  the  labourer;  and  the 
money  price  of  labour  is  determined  by  what 
is  requisite  for  purchasing  this  quantity. 
Though  the  money  price  of  labour,  therefore, 
is  sometimes  high  where  the  price  of  provisions 
is  low,  it  would  be  still  higher,  the  demand  con¬ 
tinuing  the  same,  if  the  price  of  provisions  was 
high. 

It  is  because  the  demand  for  labour  increases 
in  years  of  sudden  and  extraordinary  plenty, 
and  diminishes  in  those  of  sudden  and  ex¬ 
traordinary  scarcity,  that  the  money  price  of 
labour  sometimes  rises  in  the  one  and  sinks  in 
the  other. 

In  a  year  of  sudden  and  extraordinary  plenty, 
there  are  funds  in  the  hands  of  many  of  the 
employers  of  industry  sufficient  to  maintain 
and  employ  a  greater  number  of  industrious 
people  than  had  been  employed  the  year  be¬ 
fore;  and  this  extraordinary  number  cannot  al¬ 
ways  be  had.  Those  masters,  therefore,  who 
want  more  workmen  bid  against  one  another, 
in  order  to  get  them,  which  sometimes  raises 
both  the  real  and  the  money  price  of  their  la¬ 
bour. 

The  contrary  of  this  happens  in  a  year  of 
sudden  and  extraordinary  scarcity.  The  funds 
destined  for  employing  industry  are  less  than 
they  had  been  the  year  before.  A  considerable 
number  of  people  are  thrown  out  of  employ¬ 
ment,  who  bid  against  one  another,  in  order  to 
get  it,  which  sometimes  lowers  both  the  real 
and  the  money  price  of  labour.  In  1740,  a  year 
of  extraordinary  scarcity,  many  people  were 
willing  to  work  for  bare  subsistence.  In  the 
succeeding  years  of  plenty,  it  was  more  difficult 
to  get  labourers  and  servants. 

The  scarcity  of  a  dear  year,  by  diminishing 
the  demand  for  labour,  tends  to  lower  its  price, 


37 


The  Profits  of  Stock 


as  the  high  price  of  provisions  tends  to  raise 
it.  The  plenty  of  a  cheap  year,  on  the  contrary, 
by  increasing  the  demand,  tends  to  raise  the 
price  of  labour,  as  the  cheapness  of  provisions 
tends  to  lower  it.  In  the  ordinary  variations  of 
the  price  of  provisions  those  two  opposite 
causes  seem  to  counterbalance  one  another, 
which  is  probably  in  part  the  reason  why  the 
wages  of  labour  are  everywhere  so  much  more 
steady  and  permanent  than  the  price  of  pro¬ 
visions. 

The  increase  in  the  wages  of  labour  neces¬ 
sarily  increases  the  price  of  many  commodities, 
by  increasing  that  part  of  it  which  resolves  it¬ 
self  into  wages,  and  so  far  tends  to  diminish 
their  consumption  both  at  home  and  abroad. 
The  same  cause,  however,  which  raises  the 
wages  of  labour,  the  increase  of  stock,  tends  to 
increase  its  productive  powers,  and  to  make  a 
smaller  quantity  of  labour  produce  a  greater 
quantity  of  work.  Theownerof  the  stock  which 
employs  a  great  number  of  labourers,  neces¬ 
sarily  endeavours,  for  his  own  advantage,  to 
make  such  a  proper  division  and  distribution 
of  employment  that  they  may  be  enabled  to 
produce  the  greatest  quantity  of  work  possible. 
For  the  same  reason,  he  endeavours  to  supply 
them  with  the  best  machinery  which  either  he 
or  they  can  think  of.  What  takes  place  among 
the  labourers  in  a  particular  workhouse  takes 
place,  for  the  same  reason,  among  those  of  a 
great  society.  The  greater  their  number,  the 
more  they  naturally  divide  themselves  into 
different  classes  and  subdivisions  of  employ¬ 
ment.  More  heads  are  occupied  in  inventing 
the  most  proper  machinery  for  executing  the 
work  of  each,  and  it  is,  therefore,  more  likely  to 
be  invented.  There  are  many  commodities, 
therefore,  which,  in  consequence  of  these  im¬ 
provements,  come  to  be  produced  by  so  much 
less  labour  than  before  that  the  increase  of 
its  price  is  more  than  compensated  by  the  dim¬ 
inution  of  its  quantity. 

CHAPTER  IX 
Of  the  Profits  of  Stock 

The  rise  and  fall  in  the  profits  of  stock  de¬ 
pend  upon  the  same  causes  with  the  rise  and 
fall  in  the  wages  of  labour,  the  increasing  or 
declining  state  of  the  wealth  of  the  society; 
but  those  causes  affect  the  one  and  the  other 
very  differently. 

The  increase  of  stock,  which  raises  wages, 
tends  to  lower  profit.  When  the  stocks  of  many 
rich  merchants  are  turned  into  the  same  trade, 
their  mutual  competition  naturally  tends  to 
lower  its  profit;  and  when  there  is  a  like  in¬ 
crease  of  stock  in  all  the  different  trades  carried 
on  in  the  same  society,  the  same  competition 
must  produce  the  same  effect  in  them  all. 

It  is  not  easy,  it  has  already  been  observed, 


to  ascertain  what  are  the  average  wages  of 
labour  even  in  a  particular  place,  and  at  a  par¬ 
ticular  time.  We  can,  even  in  this  case,  seldom 
determine  more  than  what  are  the  most  usual 
wages.  But  even  this  can  seldom  be  done  with 
regard  to  the  profits  of  stock.  Profit  is  so  very 
fluctuating  that  the  person  who  carries  on  a 
particular  trade  cannot  always  tell  you  him¬ 
self  what  is  the  average  of  his  annual  profit. 
It  is  affected  not  only  by  every  variation  of 
price  in  the  commodities  which  he  deals  in,  but 
by  the  good  or  bad  fortune  both  of  his  rivals 
and  of  his  customers,  and  by  a  thousand  other 
accidents  to  which  goods  when  carried  either 
by  sea  or  by  land,  or  even  when  stored  in  a 
warehouse,  are  liable.  It  varies,  therefore,  not 
only  from  year  to  year,  but  from  day  to  day, 
and  almost  from  hour  to  hour.  To  ascertain 
what  is  the  average  profit  of  all  the  different 
trades  carried  on  in  a  great  kingdom  must  be 
much  more  difficult;  and  to  judge  of  what  it 
may  have  been  formerly,  or  in  remote  periods 
of  time,  with  any  degree  of  precision,  must  be 
altogether  impossible. 

But  though  it  may  be  impossible  to  deter¬ 
mine,  with  any  degree  of  precision,  what  are 
or  were  the  average  profits  of  stock,  either  in 
the  present  or  in  ancient  times,  some  notion 
may  be  formed  of  them  from  the  interest  of 
money.  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  maxim, 
that  wherever  a  great  deal  can  be  made  by 
the  use  of  money,  a  great  deal  will  commonly 
be  given  for  the  use  of  it;  and  that  wherever 
little  can  be  made  by  it,  less  will  commonly  be 
given  for  it.  According,  therefore,  as  the  usual 
market  rate  of  interest  varies  in  any  country, 
we  may  be  assured  that  the  ordinary  profits  of 
stock  must  vary  with  it,  must  sink  as  it  sinks, 
and  rise  as  it  rises.  The  progress  of  interest, 
therefore,  may  lead  us  to  form  some  notion  of 
the  progress  of  profit. 

By  the  37th  of  Henry  VIII  all  interest  above 
ten  per  cent  was  declared  unlawful.  More,  it 
seems,  had  sometimes  been  taken  before  that. 
In  the  reign  of  Edward  VI  religious  zeal  pro¬ 
hibited  all  interest.  This  prohibition,  however, 
like  all  others  of  the  same  kind,  is  said  to  have 
produced  no  effect,  and  probably  rather  in¬ 
creased  than  diminished  the  evil  of  usury.  The 
statute  of  Henry  VIII  was  revived  by  the  13th 
of  Elizabeth,  c.  8,  and  ten  per  cent  continued 
to  be  the  legal  rate  of  interest  till  the  21st  of 
James  I,  when  it  was  restricted  to  eight  per 
cent.  It  was  reduced  to  six  per  cent  soon  after 
the  Restoration,  and  by  the  12th  of  Queen 
Anne  to  five  per  cent.  All  these  different  statu¬ 
tory  regulations  seem  to  have  been  made  with 
great  propriety.  They  seem  to  have  followed 
and  not  to  have  gone  before  the  market  rate  of 
interest,  or  the  rate  at  which  people  of  good 
credit  usually  borrowed.  Since  the  time  of 
Queen  Anne,  five  per  cent  seems  to  have  been 


38 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


rather  above  than  below  the  market  rate.  Be¬ 
fore  the  late  war,  the  government  borrowed  at 
three  per  cent;  and  people  of  good  credit  in  the 
capital,  and  in  many  other  parts  of  the  king¬ 
dom,  at  three  and  a  half,  four,  and  four  and  a 
half  per  cent. 

Since  the  time  of  Henry  VIII  the  wealth  and 
revenue  of  the  country  have  been  continually 
advancing,  and,  in  the  course  of  their  progress, 
their  pace  seems  rather  to  have  been  gradually 
accelerated  than  retarded.  They  seem  not  only 
to  have  been  going  on,  but  to  have  been  going 
on  faster  and  faster.  The  wages  of  labour  have 
been  continually  increasing  during  the  same 
period,  and  in  the  greater  part  of  the  different 
branches  of  trade  and  manufactures  the  profits 
of  stock  have  been  diminishing. 

It  generally  requires  a  greater  stock  to  carry 
on  any  sort  of  trade  in  a  great  town  than  in  a 
country  village.  The  great  stocks  employed  in 
every  branch  of  trade,  and  the  number  of  rich 
competitors,  generally  reduce  the  rate  of  profit 
in  the  former  below  what  it  is  in  the  latter 
But  the  wages  of  labour  are  generally  higher 
in  a  great  town  than  in  a  country  village.  In 
a  thriving  town  the  people  who  have  great 
stocks  to  employ  frequently  cannot  get  the 
number  of  workmen  they  want,  and  therefore 
bid  against  one  another  in  order  to  get  as  many 
as  they  can,  which  raises  the  wages  of  labour, 
and  lowers  the  profits  of  stock.  In  the  remote 
parts  of  the  country  there  is  frequently  not 
stock  sufficient  to  employ  all  the  people,  who 
therefore  bid  against  one  another  in  order  to 
get  employment,  which  lowers  the  wages  of 
labour  and  raises  the  profits  of  stock. 

In  Scotland,  though  the  legal  rate  of  interest 
is  the  same  as  in  England,  the  market  rate  is 
rather  higher.  People  of  the  best  credit  there 
seldom  borrow  under  five  per  cent.  Even  pri¬ 
vate  bankers  in  Edinburgh  give  four  per  cent 
upon  their  promissory  notes,  of  which  payment 
either  in  whole  or  in  part  may  be  demanded  at 
pleasure.  Private  bankers  in  London  give  no 
interest  for  the  money  which  is  deposited  with 
them.  There  are  few  trades  which  cannot  be 
carried  on  with  a  smaller  stock  in  Scotland 
than  in  England.  The  common  rate  of  profit, 
therefore,  must  be  somewhat  greater.  The 
wages  of  labour,  it  has  already  been  observed, 
are  lower  in  Scotland  than  in  England.  The 
country,  too,  is  not  only  much  poorer,  but  the 
steps  by  which  it  advances  to  a  better  con¬ 
dition,  for  it  is  evidently  advancing,  seem  to 
be  much  slower  and  more  tardy. 

The  legal  rate  of  interest  in  France  has  not, 
during  the  course  of  the  present  century,  been 
always  regulated  by  the  market  rate.1  In  1720 
interest  was  reduced  from  the  twentieth  to  the 
fiftieth  penny,  or  from  five  to  two  per  cent.  In 

1  See  Denifart.  Article  Tauz  des  Intirets,  vol.  iii. 

p.  18. 


1724  it  was  raised  to  the  thirtieth  penny,  or  to 
3%  per  cent.  In  1725  it  was  again  raised  to  the 
twentieth  penny,  or  to  five  per  cent.  In  1766, 
during  the  administration  of  Mr.  Laverdy,  it 
was  reduced  to  the  twenty-fifth  penny,  or  to 
four  per  cent.  The  Abbe  Terray  raised  it  after¬ 
wards  to  the  old  rate  of  five  per  cent.  The 
supposed  purpose  of  many  of  those  violent  re¬ 
ductions  of  interest  was  to  prepare  the  way  for 
reducing  that  of  the  public  debts;  a  purpose 
which  has  sometimes  been  executed.  France  is 
perhaps  in  the  present  times  not  so  rich  a  coun¬ 
try  as  England;  and  though  the  legal  rate  of  in¬ 
terest  has  in  France  frequently  been  lower  than 
in  England,  the  market  rate  has  generally  been 
higher;  for  there,  as  in  other  countries,  they 
have  several  very  safe  and  easy  methods  of 
evading  the  law.  The  profits  of  trade,  I  have 
been  assured  by  British  merchants  who  had 
traded  in  both  countries,  are  higher  in  France 
than  in  England;  and  it  is  no  doubt  upon  this 
account  that  many  British  subjects  choose 
rather  to  employ  their  capitals  in  a  country 
where  trade  is  in  disgrace,  than  in  one  where  it 
is  highly  respected.  The  wages  of  labour  are 
lower  in  France  than  in  England.  When  you  go 
from  Scotland  to  England,  the  difference  which 
you  may  remark  between  the  dress  and  counte¬ 
nance  of  the  common  people  in  the  one  coun¬ 
try  and  in  the  other  sufficiently  indicates  the 
difference  in  their  condition.  The  contrast  is 
still  greater  when  you  return  from  France. 
France,  though  no  doubt  a  richer  country  than 
Scotland, seems  not  to  be  going  forward  so  fast. 
It  is  a  common  and  even  a  popular  opinion  in 
the  country  that  it  is  going  backwards;  an  opin¬ 
ion  which,  I  apprehend,  is  ill  founded  even  with 
regard  to  France,  but  which  nobody  can  pos¬ 
sibly  entertain  with  regard  to  Scotland,  who 
sees  the  country  now,  and  who  saw  it  twenty 
or  thirty  years  ago. 

The  province  of  Holland,  on  the  other  hand, 
in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  its  territory  and 
the  number  of  its  people,  is  a  richer  country 
than  England.  The  government  there  borrows 
at  two  per  cent,  and  private  people  of  good 
credit  at  three.  The  wages  of  labour  are  said 
to  be  higher  in  Holland  than  in  England,  and 
the  Dutch,  it  is  well  known,  trade  upon  lower 
profits  than  any  people  in  Europe.  The  trade 
of  Holland,  it  has  been  pretended  by  some  peo¬ 
ple,  is  decaying,  and  it  may  perhaps  be  true 
that  some  particular  branches  of  it  are  so.  But 
these  symptoms  seem  to  indicate  sufficiently 
that  there  is  no  general  decay.  When  profit 
diminishes,  merchants  are  very  apt  to  complain 
that  trade  decays;  though  the  diminution  of 
profit  is  the  natural  effect  of  its  prosperity,  or 
of  a  greater  stock  being  employed  in  it  than  be¬ 
fore.  During  the  late  war2  the  Dutch  gained  the 

2  The  Seven  Years’  War,  1756-1763. — Ed. 


39 


The  Profits  of  Stock 


whole  carrying  trade  of  France,  of  which  they 
still  retain  a  very  large  share.  The  great 
property  which  they  possess  both  in  the  French 
and  English  funds,  about  forty  millions,  it  is 
said,  in  the  latter  (in  which  I  suspect,  however, 
there  is  a  considerable  exaggeration) ;  the  great 
sums  which  they  lend  to  private  people  in 
countries  where  the  rate  of  interest  is  higher 
than  in  their  own,  are  circumstances  which  no 
doubt  demonstrate  the  redundancy  of  their 
stock,  or  that  it  has  increased  beyond  what 
they  can  employ  with  tolerable  profit  in  the 
proper  business  of  their  own  country:  but  they 
do  not  demonstrate  that  that  business  has  de¬ 
creased.  As  the  capital  of  a  private  man,  though 
acquired  by  a  particular  trade,  may  increase 
beyond  what  he  can  employ  in  it,  and  yet  that 
trade  continue  to  increase  too;  so  may  like¬ 
wise  the  capital  of  a  great  nation. 

In  our  North  American  and  West  Indian 
colonies,  not  only  the  wages  of  labour,  but  the 
interest  of  money,  and  consequently  the  profits 
of  stock,  are  higher  than  in  England.  In  the 
different  colonies  both  the  legal  and  the  market 
rate  of  interest  run  from  six  to  eight  per  cent. 
High  wages  of  labour  and  high  profits  of  stock, 
however,  are  things,  perhaps,  which  scarce  ever 
go  together,  except  in  the  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  of  new  colonies.  A  new  colony  must  al¬ 
ways  for  some  time  be  more  understocked  in 
proportion  to  the  extent  of  its  territory,  and 
more  underpeopled  in  proportion  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  its  stock,  than  the  greater  part  of 
other  countries.  They  have  more  land  than 
they  have  stock  to  cultivate.  What  they  have, 
therefore,  is  applied  to  the  cultivation  only 
of  what  is  most  fertile  and  most  favourably 
situated,  the  land  near  the  sea  shore,  and 
along  the  banks  of  navigable  rivers.  Such 
land,  too,  is  frequently  purchased  at  a  price 
below  the  value  even  of  its  natural  produce. 
Stock  employed  in  the  purchase  and  improve¬ 
ment  of  such  lands  must  yield  a  very  large 
profit,  and  consequently  afford  to  pay  a  very 
large  interest.  Its  rapid  accumulation  in  so 
profitable  an  employment  enables  the  planter 
to  increase  the  number  of  his  hands  faster  than 
he  can  find  them  in  a  new  settlement.  Those 
whom  he  can  find,  therefore,  are  very  liberally 
rewarded.  As  the  colony  increases,  the  profits 
of  stock  gradually  diminish.  When  the  most 
fertile  and  best  situated  lands  have  been  all 
occupied,  less  profit  can  be  made  by  the  culti¬ 
vation  of  what  is  inferior  both  in  soil  and  situa¬ 
tion,  and  less  interest  can  be  afforded  for  the 
stock  which  is  so  employed.  In  the  greater  part 
of  our  colonies,  accordingly,  both  the  legal  and 
the  market  rate  of  interest  have  been  consider¬ 
ably  reduced  during  the  course  of  the  present 
century.  As  riches,  improvement,  and  popula¬ 
tion  have  increased,  interest  has  declined.  The 
wages  of  labour  do  not  sink  with  the  profits  of 


stock.  The  demand  for  labour  increases  with 
the  increase  of  stock  whatever  be  its  profits; 
and  after  these  are  diminished,  stock  may  not 
only  continue  to  increase,  but  to  increase  much 
faster  than  before.  It  is  with  industrious  na¬ 
tions  who  are  advancing  in  the  acquisition  of 
riches  as  with  industrious  individuals.  A  great 
stock,  though  with  small  profits,  generally  in¬ 
creases  faster  than  a  small  stock  with  great 
profits.  Money,  says  the  proverb,  makes  money. 
When  you  have  got  a  little,  it  is  often  easy  to 
get  more.  The  great  difficulty  is  to  get  that 
little.  The  connection  between  the  increase  of 
stock  and  that  of  industry,  or  of  the  demand 
for  useful  labour,  has  partly  been  explained  al¬ 
ready,  but  will  be  explained  more  fully  here¬ 
after  in  treating  of  the  accumulation  of  stock. 

The  acquisition  of  new  territory,  or  of  new 
branches  of  trade,  may  sometimes  raise  the 
profits  of  stock,  and  with  them  the  interest  of 
money,  even  in  a  country  which  is  fast  ad¬ 
vancing  in  the  acquisition  of  riches.  The  stock 
of  the  country  not  being  sufficient  for  the 
whole  accession  of  business,  which  such  ac¬ 
quisitions  present  to  the  different  people  among 
whom  it  is  divided,  is  applied  to  those  particu¬ 
lar  branches  only  which  afford  the  greatest 
profit.  Part  of  what  had  before  been  employed 
in  other  trades  is  necessarily  withdrawn  from 
them,  and  turned  into  some  of  the  new  and 
more  profitable  ones.  In  all  those  old  trades, 
therefore,  the  competition  comes  to  be  less 
than  before.  The  market  comes  to  be  less  fully 
supplied  with  many  different  sorts  of  goods. 
Their  price  necessarily  rises  more  or  less,  and 
yields  a  greater  profit  to  those  who  deal  in 
them,  who  can,  therefore,  afford  to  borrow  at 
a  higher  interest.  For  some  time  after  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  late  war,  not  only  private  people 
of  the  best  credit,  but  some  of  the  greatest  com¬ 
panies  in  London,  commonly  borrowed  at  five 
per  cent,  who  before  that  had  not  been  used  to 
pay  more  than  four,  and  four  and  a  half  per 
cent.  The  great  accession  both  of  territory  and 
trade,  by  our  acquisitions  in  North  America 
and  the  West  Indies,  will  sufficiently  account 
for  this,  without  supposing  any  diminution  in 
the  capital  stock  of  the  society.  So  great  an 
accession  of  new  business  to  be  carried  on  by 
the  old  stock  must  necessarily  have  diminished 
the  quantity  employed  in  a  great  number  of 
particular  branches,  in  which  the  competition 
being  less,  the  profits  must  have  been  greater. 
1  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  mention  the 
reasons  which  dispose  me  to  believe  that  the 
capital  stock  of  Great  Britain  was  not  dimin¬ 
ished  even  by  the  enormous  expense  of  the  late 
war. 

The  diminution  of  the  capital  stock  of  the 
society,  or  of  the  funds  destined  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  industry,  however,  as  it  lowers  the 
wages  of  labour,  so  it  raises  the  profits  of  stock, 


40 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


and  consequently  the  interestof  money.  By  the 
wages  of  labour  being  lowered,  the  owners  of 
what  stock  remains  in  the  society  can  bring 
their  goods  at  less  expense  to  market  than  be¬ 
fore,  and  less  stock  being  employed  in  supply¬ 
ing  the  market  than  before,  they  can  sell  them 
dearer.  Their  goods  cost  them  less,  and  they 
get  more  for  them.  Their  profits,  therefore,  be¬ 
ing  augmented  at  both  ends,  can  well  afford  a 
large  interest.  The  great  fortunes  so  suddenly 
and  so  easily  acquired  in  Bengal  and  the  other 
British  settlements  in  the  East  Indies  may 
satisfy  us  that,  as  the  wages  of  labour  are  very 
low,  so  the  profits  of  stock  are  very  high  in 
those  ruined  countries.  The  interest  of  money 
is  proportionably  so.  In  Bengal,  money  is  fre¬ 
quently  lent  to  the  farmers  at  forty,  fifty,  and 
sixty  per  cent  and  the  succeeding  crop  is  mort¬ 
gaged  for  the  payment.  As  the  profits  which 
can  afford  such  an  interest  must  eat  up  almost 
the  whole  rent  of  the  landlord,  so  such  enor¬ 
mous  usury  must  in  its  turn  eat  up  the  greater 
part  of  those  profits.  Before  the  fall  of  the 
Roman  republic,  a  usury  of  the  same  kind 
seems  to  have  been  common  in  the  provinces, 
under  the  ruinous  administration  of  their  pro- 
consuls.  The  virtuous  Brutus  lent  money  in 
Cyprus  at  eight-and-forty  per  cent  as  we  learn 
from  the  letters  of  Cicero. 

In  a  country  which  had  acquired  that  full 
complement  of  riches  which  the  nature  of  its 
soil  and  climate,  and  its  situation  with  respect 
to  other  countries,  allowed  it  to  acquire;  which 
could,  therefore,  advance  no  further,  and  which 
was  not  going  backwards,  both  the  wages  of 
labour  and  the  profits  of  stock  would  probably 
be  very  low.  In  a  country  fully  peopled  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  what  either  its  territory  could  main¬ 
tain  or  its  stock  employ,  the  competition  for 
employment  would  necessarily  be  so  great  as 
to  reduce  the  wages  of  labour  to  what  was 
barely  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  number  of  la¬ 
bourers,  and,  the  country  being  already  fully 
peopled,  that  number  could  never  be  aug¬ 
mented.  In  a  country  fully  stocked  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  all  the  business  it  had  to  transact,  as 
great  a  quantity  of  stock  would  be  employed 
in  every  particular  branch  as  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  trade  would  admit.  The  competi¬ 
tion,  therefore,  would  everywhere  be  as  great, 
and  consequently  the  ordinary  profit  as  low  as 
possible. 

But  perhaps  no  country  has  ever  yet  arrived 
at  this  degree  of  opulence.  China  seems  to  have 
been  long  stationary,  and  had  probably  long 
ago  acquired  that  full  complement  of  riches 
which  is  consistent  with  the  nature  of  its  laws 
and  institutions.  But  this  complement  may  be 
much  inferior  to  what,  with  other  laws  and  in¬ 
stitutions,  the  nature  of  its  soil,  climate,  and 
situation  might  admit  of.  A  country  which  neg¬ 
lects  or  despises  foreign  commerce,  and  which 


admits  the  vessels  of  foreign  nations  into  one 
or  two  of  its  ports  only,  cannot  transact  the 
same  quantity  of  business  which  it  might  do 
with  different  laws  and  institutions.  In  a  coun¬ 
try  too,  where,  though  the  rich  or  the  owners 
of  large  capitals  enjoy  a  good  deal  of  security, 
the  poor  or  the  owners  of  small  capitals  enjoy 
scarce  any,  but  are  liable,  under  the  pretence  of 
justice,  to  be  pillaged  and  plundered  at  any 
time  by  the  inferior  mandarins,  the  quantity  of 
stock  employed  in  all  the  different  branches  of 
business  transacted  within  it  can  never  be 
equal  to  what  the  nature  and  extent  of  that 
business  might  admit.  In  every  different 
branch,  the  oppression  of  the  poor  must  estab¬ 
lish  the  monopoly  of  the  rich,  who,  by  engross¬ 
ing  the  whole  trade  to  themselves,  will  be  able 
to  make  very  large  profits.  Twelve  per  cent 
accordingly  is  said  to  be  the  common  interest 
of  money  in  China,  and  the  ordinary  profits  of 
stock  must  be  sufficient  to  afford  this  large 
interest. 

A  defect  in  the  law  may  sometimes  raise  the 
rate  of  interest  considerably  above  what  the 
condition  of  the  country,  as  to  wealth  or  pov¬ 
erty,  would  require.  When  the  law  does  not 
enforce  the  performance  of  contracts,  it  puts 
all  borrowers  nearly  upon  the  same  footing 
with  bankrupts  or  people  of  doubtful  credit  in 
better  regulated  countries.  The  uncertainty  of 
recovering  his  money  makes  the  lender  exact 
the  same  usurious  interest  which  is  usually  re¬ 
quired  from  bankrupts.  Among  the  barbarous 
nations  who  overran  the  western  provinces  of 
the  Roman  empire,  the  performance  of  con¬ 
tracts  was  left  for  many  ages  to  the  faith  of 
the  contracting  parties.  The  courts  of  justice 
of  their  kings  seldom  intermeddled  in  it.  The 
high  rate  of  interest  which  took  place  in  those 
ancient  times  may  perhaps  be  partly  accounted 
for  from  this  cause. 

When  the  law  prohibits  interest  altogether, 
it  does  not  prevent  it.  Many  people  must  bor¬ 
row,  and  nobody  will  lend  without  such  a  con¬ 
sideration  for  the  use  of  their  money  as  is  suit¬ 
able  not  only  to  what  can  be  made  by  the  use 
of  it,  but  to  the  difficulty  and  danger  of  evading 
the  law.  The  high  rate  of  interest  among  all 
Mahometan  nations  is  accounted  for  by  Mr. 
Montesquieu,  not  from  their  poverty, but  part¬ 
ly  from  this,  and  partly  from  the  difficulty  of 
recovering  the  money. 

The  lowest  ordinary  rate  of  profit  must  al¬ 
ways  be  something  more  than  what  is  sufficient 
to  compensate  the  occasional  losses  to  which 
every  employment  of  stock  is  exposed.  It  is  this 
surplus  only  which  is  neat  or  clear  profit.  What 
is  called  gross  profit  comprehends  frequently, 
not  only  this  surplus,  but  what  is  retained 
for  compensating  such  extraordinary  losses. 
The  interest  which  the  borrower  can  afford  to 
pay  is  in  proportion  to  the  clear  profit  only. 


41 


The  Profits  of  Stock 


The  lowest  ordinary  rate  of  interest  must,  in 
the  same  manner,  be  something  more  than 
sufficient  to  compensate  the  occasional  losses 
to  which  lending,  even  with  tolerable  pru¬ 
dence,  is  exposed.  Were  it  not  more,  charity 
or  friendship  could  be  the  only  motive  for 
lending. 

In  a  country  which  had  acquired  its  full 
complement  of  riches,  where  in  every  particu¬ 
lar  branch  of  business  there  was  the  greatest 
quantity  of  stock  that  could  be  employed  in  it, 
as  the  ordinary  rate  of  clear  profit  would  be 
very  small,  so  the  usual  market  rate  of  interest 
which  could  be  afforded  out  of  it  would  be  so 
low  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  any  but  the 
very  wealthiest  people  to  live  upon  the  inter¬ 
est  of  their  money.  All  people  of  small  or 
middling  fortunes  would  be  obliged  to  super¬ 
intend  themselves  the  employment  of  their  own 
stocks.  It  would  be  necessary  that  almost  every 
man  should  be  a  man  of  business,  or  engage  in 
some  sort  of  trade.  The  province  of  Holland 
seems  to  be  approaching  near  to  this  state.  It 
is  there  unfashionable  not  to  be  a  man  of  busi¬ 
ness.  Necessity  makes  it  usual  for  almost  every 
man  to  be  so,  and  custom  everywhere  regulates 
fashion.  As  it  is  ridiculous  not  to  dress,  so  is  it, 
in  some  measure,  not  to  be  employed,  like  other 
people.  As  a  man  of  a  civil  profession  seems 
awkward  in  a  camp  or  a  garrison,  and  is  even 
in  some  danger  of  being  despised  there,  so  does 
an  idle  man  among  men  of  business. 

The  highest  ordinary  rate  of  profit  may  be 
such  as,  in  the  price  of  the  greater  part  of  com¬ 
modities,  eats  up  the  whole  of  what  should  go 
to  the  rent  of  the  land,  and  leaves  only  what  is 
sufficient  to  pay  the  labour  of  preparing  and 
bringing  them  to  market,  according  to  the  low¬ 
est  rate  at  which  labour  can  anywhere  be  paid, 
the  bare  subsistence  of  the  labourer.  The  work¬ 
man  must  always  have  been  fed  in  some  way 
or  other  while  he  was  about  the  work;  but  the 
landlord  may  not  always  have  been  paid.  The 
profits  of  the  trade  which  the  servants  of  the 
East  India  Company  carry  on  in  Bengal  may 
not  perhaps  be  very  far  from  this  rate. 

The  proportion  which  the  usual  market  rate 
of  interest  ought  to  bear  to  the  ordinary  rate 
of  clear  profit,  necessarily  varies  as  profit  rises 
or  falls.  Double  interest  is  in  Great  Britain 
reckoned  what  the  merchants  call  a  good,  mod¬ 
erate,  reasonable  profit;  terms  which  I  appre¬ 
hend  mean  no  more  than  a  common  and  usual 
profit.  In  a  country  where  the  ordinary  rate 
of  clear  profit  is  eight  or  ten  per  cent,  it  may 
be  reasonable  that  one  half  of  it  should  go  to 
interest,  wherever  business  is  carried  on  with 
borrowed  money.  The  stock  is  at  the  risk  of 
the  borrower,  who,  as  it  were,  insures  it  U)  the 
lender;  and  four  or  five  per  cent  may,  in  the 
greater  part  of  trades,  be  both  a  sufficient  profit 


upon  the  risk  of  this  insurance,  and  a  sufficient 
recompense  for  the  trouble  of  employing  the 
stock.  But  the  proportion  between  interest 
and  clear  profit  might  not  be  the  same  in  coun¬ 
tries  where  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  was 
either  a  good  deal  lower,  or  a  good  deal  higher. 
If  it  were  a  good  deal  lower,  one  half  of  it  per¬ 
haps  could  not  be  afforded  for  interest;  and 
more  might  be  afforded  if  it  were  a  good  deal 
higher. 

In  countries  which  are  fast  advancing  to 
riches,  the  low  rate  of  profit  may,  in  the  price 
of  many  commodities,  compensate  the  high 
wages  of  labour,  and  enable  those  countries 
to  sell  as  cheap  as  their  less  thriving  neigh¬ 
bours,  among  whom  the  wages  of  labour  may 
be  lower. 

In  reality  high  profits  tend  much  more  to 
raise  the  price  of  work  than  high  wages.  If  in 
the  linen  manufacture,  for  example,  the  wages 
of  the  different  working  people,  the  flax-dress¬ 
ers,  the  spinners,  the  weavers,  etc.,  should,  all 
of  them,  be  advanced  twopence  a  day;  it  would 
be  necessary  to  heighten  the  price  of  a  piece 
of  linen  only  by  a  number  of  twopences  equal 
to  the  number  of  people  that  had  been  em¬ 
ployed  about  it,  multiplied  by  the  number  of 
days  during  which  they  had  been  so  employed. 
That  part  of  the  price  of  the  commodity  which 
resolved  itself  into  wages  would,  through  all 
the  different  stages  of  the  manufacture,  rise 
only  in  arithmetical  proportion  to  this  rise  of 
wages.  But  if  the  profits  of  all  the  different  em¬ 
ployers  of  those  working  people  should  be 
raised  five  per  cent,  that  part  of  the  price  of 
the  commodity  which  resolved  itself  into  profit 
would,  through  all  the  different  stages  of  the 
manufacture,  rise  in  geometrical  proportion  to 
this  rise  of  profit.  The  employer  of  the  flax- 
dressers  would  in  selling  his  flax  require  an 
additional  five  per  cent  upon  the  whole  value 
of  the  materials  and  wages  which  he  advanced 
to  his  workmen.  The  employer  of  the  spinners 
would  require  an  additional  five  per  cent  both 
upon  the  advanced  price  of  the  flax  and  upon 
the  wages  of  the  spinners.  And  the  employer  of 
the  weavers  would  require  a  like  five  per  cent 
both  upon  the  advanced  price  of  the  linen  yarn 
and  upon  the  wages  of  the  weavers.  In  raising 
the  price  of  commodities  the  rise  of  wages 
operates  in  the  same  manner  as  simple  interest 
does  in  the  accumulation  of  debt.  The  rise  of 
profit  operates  like  compound  interest.  Our 
merchants  and  master-manufacturers  complain 
much  of  the  bad  effects  of  high  wages  in  raising 
the  price,  and  thereby  lessening  the  sale  of 
their  goods  both  at  home  and  abroad.  !  hey  say 
nothing  concerning  the  bad  effects  of  high 
profits.  They  are  silent  with  regard  to  the  per¬ 
nicious  effects  of  their  own  gains.  They  com¬ 
plain  only  of  those  of  other  people. 


42  The  Wealth  of  Nations 


CHAPTER  X 

Of  Wages  and  Profit  in  the  different 
Employments  of  Labour  and  Stock 

The  whole  of  the  advantages  and  disadvan¬ 
tages  of  the  different  employments  of  labour 
and  stock  must,  in  the  same  neighbourhood, 
be  either  perfectly  equal  or  continually  tend¬ 
ing  to  equality.  If  in  the  same  neighbourhood, 
there  was  any  employment  evidently  either 
more  or  less  advantageous  than  the  rest,  so 
many  people  would  crowd  into  it  in  the  one 
case,  and  so  many  would  desert  it  in  the  other, 
that  its  advantages  would  soon  return  to  the 
level  of  other  employments.  This  at  least  would 
be  the  case  in  a  society  where  things  were  left 
to  follow  their  natural  course,  where  there  was 
perfect  liberty,  and  where  every  man  was  per¬ 


fectly  free  both  to  choose  what  occupation  he 
thought  proper,  and  to  change  it  as  often  as  he 
thought  proper.  Every  man’s  interest  would 
prompt  him  to  seek  the  advantageous,  and  to 
shun  the  disadvantageous  employment. 

Pecuniary  wages  and  profit,  indeed,  are 
everywhere  in  Europe  extremely  different  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  different  employments  of  labour 
and  stock.  But  this  difference  arises  partly 
from  certain  circumstances  in  the  employments 
themselves,  which,  either  really,  or  at  least  in 
the  imaginations  of  men,  make  up  for  a  small 
pecuniary  gain  in  some,  and  counterbalance 
a  great  one  in  others;  and  partly  from  the 
policy  of  Europe,  which  nowhere  leaves  things 
at  perfect  liberty. 

The  particular  consideration  of  those  cir¬ 
cumstances  and  of  that  policy  will  divide  this 
chapter  into  two  parts. 


Part  1 

Inequalities  arising  from  the  Nature  of  the  Employments  themselves 


The  five  following  are  the  principal  circum¬ 
stances  which,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ob¬ 
serve,  make  up  for  a  small  pecuniary  gain  in 
some  employments,  and  counterbalance  a  great 
one  in  others:  first,  the  agreeableness  or  dis¬ 
agreeableness  of  the  employments  themselves; 
secondly,  the  easiness  and  cheapness,  or  the 
difficulty  and  expense  of  learning  them;  third¬ 
ly,  the  constancy  or  inconstancy  of  employ¬ 
ment  in  them;  fourthly,  the  small  or  great  trust 
which  must  be  reposed  in  those  who  exercise 
them;  and,  fifthly,  the  probability  or  improba¬ 
bility  of  success  in  them. 

First,  the  wages  of  labour  vary  with  the  ease 
or  hardship,  the  cleanliness  or  dirtiness,  the 
honourableness  or  dishonourableness  of  the 
employment.  Thus  in  most  places,  take  the 
year  round,  a  journeyman  tailor  earns  less 
than  a  journeyman  weaver.  His  work  is  much 
easier.  A  journeyman  weaver  earns  less  than  a 
journeyman  smith.  His  work  is  not  always 
easier,  but  it  is  much  cleanlier.  A  journeyman 
blacksmith,  though  an  artificer,  seldom  earns 
so  much  in  twelve  hours  as  a  collier,  who  is 
only  a  labourer,  does  in  eight.  His  work  is  not 
quite  so  dirty,  is  less  dangerous,  and  is  carried 
on  in  daylight,  and  above  ground.  Honour 
makes  a  great  part  of  the  reward  of  all  honour¬ 
able  professions.  In  point  of  pecuniary  gain, 
all  things  considered,  they  are  generally  under¬ 
recompensed,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  by 
and  by.  Disgrace  has  the  contrary  effect.  The 
trade  of  a  butcher  is  a  brutal  and  an  odious 
business;  but  it  is  in  most  places  more  profit¬ 
able  than  the  greater  part  of  common  trades. 
The  most  detestable  of  all  employments,  that 
of  public  executioner,  is,  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  work  done,  better  paid  than  any 
common  trade  whatever. 


Hunting  and  fishing,  the  most  important  em¬ 
ployments  of  mankind  in  the  rude  state  of  so¬ 
ciety,  become  in  its  advanced  state  their  most 
agreeable  amusements,  and  they  pursue  for 
pleasure  what  they  once  followed  from  neces¬ 
sity.  In  the  advanced  state  of  society,  there¬ 
fore,  they  are  all  very  poor  people  who  follow 
as  a  trade  what  other  people  pursue  as  a 
pastime.  Fishermen  have  been  so  since  the 
time  of  Theocritus.1  A  poacher  is  everywhere 
a  very  poor  man  in  Great  Britain.  In  coun¬ 
tries  where  the  rigour  of  the  law  suffers  no 
poachers,  the  licensed  hunter  is  not  in  a  much 
better  condition.  The  natural  taste  for  those 
employments  makes  more  people  follow  them 
than  can  live  comfortably  by  them,  and  the 
produce  of  their  labour,  in  proportion  to  its 
quantity,  comes  always  too  cheap  to  market 
to  afford  anything  but  the  most  scanty  sub¬ 
sistence  to  the  labourers. 

Disagreeableness  and  disgrace  affect  the 
profits  of  stock  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
wages  of  labour.  The  keeper  of  an  inn  or  tav¬ 
ern,  who  is  never  master  of  his  own  house, 
and  who  is  exposed  to  the  brutality  of  every 
drunkard,  exercises  neither  a  very  agreeable 
nor  a  very  creditable  business.  But  there  is 
scarce  any  common  trade  in  which  a  small 
stock  yields  so  great  a  profit. 

Secondly,  the  wages  of  labour  vary  with 
the  easiness  and  cheapness,  or  the  difficulty 
and  expense  of  learning  the  business. 

When  any  expensive  machine  is  erected, 
the  extraordinary  work  to  be  performed  by  it 
before  it  is  worn  out,  it  must  be  expected, 
will  replace  the  capital  laid  out  upon  it,  with 
at  least  the  ordinary  profits.  A  man  educated 
at  the  expense  of  much  labour  and  time  to 

’See  Idyllium  XXI. 


43 


Wages  and  Profit 


any  of  those  employments  which  require  ex¬ 
traordinary  dexterity  and  skill,  may  be  com¬ 
pared  to  one  of  those  expensive  machines.  The 
work  which  he  learns  to  perform,  it  must  be 
expected,  over  and  above  the  usual  wages  of 
common  labour,  will  replace  to  him  the  whole 
expense  of  his  education,  with  at  least  the 
ordinary  profits  of  an  equally  valuable  capital. 
It  must  do  this,  too,  in  a  reasonable  time,  re¬ 
gard  being  had  to  the  very  uncertain  dura¬ 
tion  of  human  life,  in  the  same  manner  as  to 
the  more  certain  duration  of  the  machine. 

The  difference  between  the  wages  of  skilled 
labour  and  those  of  common  labour  is  founded 
upon  this  principle. 

The  policy  of  Europe  considers  the  labour 
of  all  mechanics,  artificers,  and  manufacturers, 
as  skilled  labour;  and  that  of  all  country 
labourers  as  common  labour.  It  seems  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  of  the  former  to  be  of  a  more  nice 
and  delicate  nature  than  that  of  the  latter. 
It  is  so  perhaps  in  some  cases;  but  in  the 
greater  part  is  it  quite  otherwise,  as  I  shall 
endeavour  to  show  by  and  by.  The  laws  and 
customs  of  Europe,  therefore,  in  order  to 
qualify  any  person  for  exercising  the  one  spe¬ 
cies  of  labour,  impose  the  necessity  of  an  ap¬ 
prenticeship,  though  with  different  degrees  of 
rigour  in  different  places.  They  leave  the  other 
free  and  open  to  everybody.  During  the  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  apprenticeship,  the  whole  la¬ 
bour  of  the  apprentice  belongs  to  his  master. 
In  the  meantime  he  must,  in  many  cases,  be 
maintained  by  his  parents  or  relations,  and 
in  almost  all  cases  must  be  clothed  by  them. 
Some  money,  too,  is  commonly  given  to  the 
master  for  teaching  him  his  trade.  They  who 
cannot  give  money  give  time,  or  become 
bound  for  more  than  the  usual  number  of 
years;  a  consideration  which,  though  it  is  not 
always  advantageous  to  the  master,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  usual  idleness  of  apprentices,  is 
always  disadvantageous  to  the  apprentice.  In 
country  labour,  on  the  contrary,  the  labourer, 
while  he  is  employed  about  the  easier,  learns 
the  more  difficult  parts  of  his  business,  and 
his  own  labour  maintains  him  through  all 
the  different  stages  of  his  employment.  It  is 
reasonable,  therefore,  that  in  Europe  the 
wages  of  mechanics,  artificers,  and  manufac¬ 
turers,  should  be  somewhat  higher  than  those 
of  common  labourers.  They  are  so  according¬ 
ly,  and  their  superior  gains  make  them  in 
most  places  be  considered  as  a  superior  rank 
of  people.  This  superiority,  however,  is  gen¬ 
erally  very  small;  the  daily  or  weekly  earn¬ 
ings  of  journeymen  in  the  more  common  sorts 
of  manufactures,  such  as  those  of  plain  linen 
and  woollen  cloth,  computed  at  an  average, 
are,  in  most  places,  very  little  more  than  the 
day  wages  of  common  labourers.  Their  em¬ 
ployment,  indeed,  is  more  steady  and  uni¬ 


form,  and  the  superiority  of  their  earnings, 
taking  the  whole  year  together,  may  be  some¬ 
what  greater.  It  seems  evidently,  however, 
to  be  no  greater  than  what  is  sufficient  to 
compensate  the  superior  expense  of  their 
education. 

Education  in  the  ingenious  arts  and  in  the 
liberal  professions  is  still  more  tedious  and 
expensive.  The  pecuniary  recompense,  there¬ 
fore,  of  painters  and  sculptors,  of  lawyers 
and  physicians,  ought  to  be  much  more  lib¬ 
eral;  and  it  is  so  accordingly. 

The  profits  of  stock  seem  to  be  very  little 
affected  by  the  easiness  or  difficulty  of  learn¬ 
ing  the  trade  in  which  it  is  employed.  All  the 
different  ways  in  which  stock  is  commonly 
employed  in  great  towns  seem,  in  reality,  to 
be  almost  equally  easy  and  equally  difficult 
to  learn.  One  branch  either  of  foreign  or  do¬ 
mestic  trade  cannot  well  be  a  much  more  in¬ 
tricate  business  than  another. 

Thirdly,  the  wages  of  labour  in  different 
occupations  vary  with  the  constancy  or  in¬ 
constancy  of  employment. 

Employment  is  much  more  constant  in 
some  trades  than  in  others.  In  the  greater 
part  of  manufacturers,  a  journeyman  may 
be  pretty  sure  of  employment  almost  every 
day  in  the  year  that  he  is  able  to  work.  A 
mason  or  bricklayer,  on  the  contrary,  can 
work  neither  in  hard  frost  nor  in  foul  weath¬ 
er,  and  his  employment  at  all  other  times 
depends  upon  the  occasional  calls  of  his  cus¬ 
tomers.  He  is  liable,  in  consequence,  to  be 
frequently  without  any.  What  he  earns,  there¬ 
fore,  while  he  is  employed,  must  not  only 
maintain  him  while  he  is  idle,  but  make  him 
some  compensation  for  those  anxious  and  de¬ 
sponding  moments  which  the  thought  of  so 
precarious  a  situation  must  sometimes  occa¬ 
sion.  Where  the  computed  earnings  of  the 
greater  part  of  manufacturers,  accordingly, 
are  nearly  upon  a  level  with  the  day  wages 
of  common  labourers,  those  of  masons  and 
bricklayers  are  generally  from  one  half  more 
to  double  those  wages.  Where  common  la¬ 
bourers  earn  four  and  five  shillings  a  week, 
masons  and  bricklayers  frequently  earn  sev¬ 
en  and  eight;  where  the  former  earn  six,  the 
latter  often  earn  nine  and  ten;  and  where 
the  former  earn  nine  and  ten,  as  in  London, 
the  latter  commonly  earn  fifteen  and  eight¬ 
een.  No  species  of  skilled  labour,  however, 
seems  more  easy  to  learn  than  that  of  masons 
and  bricklayers.  Chairmen  in  London,  during 
the  summer  season,  are  said  sometimes  to  be 
employed  as  bricklayers.  The  high  wages  of 
those  workmen,  therefore,  are  not  so  much 
the  recompense  of  their  skill,  as  the  compen¬ 
sation  for  the  inconstancy  of  their  employ¬ 
ment. 

A  house  carpenter  seems  to  exercise  rather 


44 


The  Wealth 

a  nicer  and  more  ingenious  trade  than  a  ma¬ 
son.  In  most  places,  however,  for  it  is  not 
universally  so,  his  day- wages  are  somewhat 
lower.  His  employment,  though  it  depends 
much,  does  not  depend  so  entirely  upon  the 
occasional  calls  of  his  customers;  and  it  is  not 
liable  to  be  interrupted  by  the  weather. 

When  the  trades  which  generally  afford 
constant  employment  happen  in  a  particular 
place  not  to  do  so,  the  wages  of  the  work¬ 
men  always  rise  a  good  deal  above  their  or¬ 
dinary  proportion  to  those  of  common  la¬ 
bour.  In  London  almost  all  journeymen  ar¬ 
tificers  are  liable  to  be  called  upon  and  dis¬ 
missed  by  their  masters  from  day  to  day,  and 
from  week  to  week,  in  the  same  manner  as 
day-labourers  in  other  places.  The  lowest  or¬ 
der  of  artificers,  journeymen  tailors,  accord¬ 
ingly,  earn  there  half  a  crown  a-day,  though 
eighteenpence  may  be  reckoned  the  wages 
of  common  labour.  In  small  towns  and  coun¬ 
try  villages,  the  wages  of  journeymen  tailors 
frequently  scarce  equal  those  of  common  la¬ 
bour;  but  in  London  they  are  often  many 
weeks  without  employment,  particularly  dur¬ 
ing  the  summer. 

When  the  inconstancy  of  employment  is 
combined  with  the  hardship,  disagreeableness 
and  dirtiness  of  the  work,  it  sometimes  raises 
the  wages  of  the  most  common  labour  above 
those  of  the  most  skilful  artificers.  A  collier 
working  by  the  piece  is  supposed,  at  New¬ 
castle,  to  earn  commonly  about  double,  and 
in  many  parts  of  Scotland  about  three  times 
the  wages  of  common  labour.  His  high  wages 
arise  altogether  from  the  hardship,  disagree¬ 
ableness,  and  dirtiness  of  his  work.  His  em¬ 
ployment  may,  upon  most  occasions,  be  as 
constant  as  he  pleases.  The  coal-heavers  in 
London  exercise  a  trade  which  in  hardship, 
dirtiness,  and  disagreeableness,  almost  equals 
that  of  colliers;  and  from  the  unavoidable 
irregularity  in  the  arrivals  of  coal -ships,  the 
employment  of  the  greater  part  of  them  is 
necessarily  very  inconstant.  If  colliers,  there¬ 
fore,  commonly  earn  double  and  triple  the 
wages  of  common  labour,  it  ought  not  to 
seem  unreasonable  that  coal-heavers  should 
sometimes  earn  four  and  five  times  those 
wages.  In  the  inquiry  made  into  their  con¬ 
dition  a  few  years  ago,  it  was  found  that  at 
the  rate  at  which  they  were  then  paid,  they 
could  earn  from  six  to  ten  shillings  a  day. 
Six  shillings  are  about  four  times  the  wages 
of  common  labour  in  London,  and  in  every 
particular  trade  the  lowest  common  earnings 
may  always  be  considered  as  those  of  the 
far  greater  number.  How  extravagant  soever 
those  earnings  may  appear,  if  they  were  more 
than  sufficient  to  compensate  all  the  disagree¬ 
able  circumstances  of  the  business,  there 
would  soon  be  so  great  a  number  of  com¬ 


of  Nations 

petitors  as,  in  a  trade  which  has  no  exclusive 
privilege,  would  quickly  reduce  them  to  a 
lower  rate. 

The  constancy  or  inconstancy  of  employ¬ 
ment  cannot  affect  the  ordinary  profits  of 
stock  in  any  particular  trade.  Whether  the 
stock  is  or  is  not  constantly  employed  de¬ 
pends,  not  upon  the  trade,  but  the  trader. 

Fourthly,  the  wages  of  labour  vary  accord¬ 
ingly  to  the  small  or  great  trust  which  must 
be  reposed  in  the  workmen. 

The  wages  of  goldsmiths  and  jewellers  are 
everywhere  superior  to  those  of  many  other 
workmen,  not  only  of  equal,  but  of  much  su¬ 
perior  ingenuity,  on  account  of  the  precious 
materials  with  which  they  are  intrusted. 

We  trust  our  health  to  the  physician:  our 
fortune  and  sometimes  our  life  and  reputation 
to  the  lawyer  and  attorney.  Such  confidence 
could  not  safely  be  reposed  in  people  of  a 
very  mean  or  low  condition.  Their  reward 
must  be  such,  therefore,  as  may  give  them 
that  rank  in  the  society  which  so  important 
a  trust  requires.  The  long  time  and  the  great 
expense  which  must  be  laid  out  in  their  educa¬ 
tion,  when  combined  with  this  circumstance, 
necessarily  enhance  still  further  the  price  of 
their  labour. 

When  a  person  employs  only  his  own  stock 
in  trade,  there  is  no  trust;  and  the  credit 
which  he  may  get  from  other  people  depends, 
not  upon  the  nature  of  his  trade,  but  upon 
their  opinion  of  his  fortune,  probity,  and  pru¬ 
dence.  The  different  rates  of  profit,  there¬ 
fore,  in  the  different  branches  of  trade,  can¬ 
not  arise  from  the  different  degrees  of  trust 
reposed  in  the  traders. 

Fifthly,  the  wages  of  labour  in  different 
employments  vary  according  to  the  proba¬ 
bility  or  improbability  of  success  in  them. 

The  probability  that  any  particular  person 
shall  ever  be  qualified  for  the  employment  to 
which  he  is  educated  is  very  different  in  dif¬ 
ferent  occupations.  In  the  greater  part  of 
mechanic  trades,  success  is  almost  certain; 
but  very  uncertain  in  the  liberal  professions. 
Put  your  son  apprentice  to  a  shoemaker,  there 
is  little  doubt  of  his  learning  to  make  a  pair 
of  shoes;  but  send  him  to  study  the  law,  it  is 
at  least  twenty  to  one  if  ever  he  makes  such 
proficiency  as  will  enable  him  to  live  by  the 
business.  In  a  perfectly  fair  lottery,  those  who 
draw  the  prizes  ought  to  gain  all  that  is  lost 
by  those  who  draw  the  blanks.  In  a  profession 
where  twenty  fail  for  one  that  succeeds,  that 
one  ought  to  gain  all  that  should  have  been 
gained  by  the  unsuccessful  twenty.  The  coun- 
sellor-at-law  who,  perhaps,  at  near  forty  years 
of  age,  begins  to  make  something  by  his  pro¬ 
fession,  ought  to  receive  the  retribution,  not 
only  of  his  own  so  tedious  and  expensive 
education,  but  that  of  more  than  twenty 


45 


Wages  and  Pro  jit 


others  who  are  never  likely  to  make  anything 
by  it.  How  extravagant  soever  the  fees  of 
counsellors-at-law  may  sometimes  appear, 
their  real  retribution  is  never  equal  to  this. 
Compute  in  any  particular  place  what  is  like¬ 
ly  to  be  annually  gained,  and  what  is  likely  to 
be  annually  spent,  by  all  the  different  work¬ 
men  in  any  common  trade,  such  as  that  of 
shoemakers  or  weavers,  and  you  will  find  that 
the  former  sum  will  generally  exceed  the  lat¬ 
ter.  But  make  the  same  computation  with  re¬ 
gard  to  all  the  counsellors  and  students  of  law, 
in  all  the  different  inns  of  court,  and  you  will 
find  that  their  annual  gains  bear  but  a  very 
small  proportion  to  their  annual  expense,  even 
though  you  rate  the  former  as  high,  and 
the  latter  as  low,  as  can  well  be  done.  The 
lottery  of  the  law,  therefore,  is  very  far  from 
being  a  perfectly  fair  lottery;  and  that,  as 
well  as  many  other  liberal  and  honourable 
professions,  are,  in  point  of  pecuniary  gain, 
evidently  under-recompensed. 

Those  professions  keep  their  level,  however, 
with  other  occupations,  and,  notwithstanding 
these  discouragements,  all  the  most  generous 
and  liberal  spirits  are  eager  to  crowd  into 
them.  Two  different  causes  contribute  to  rec¬ 
ommend  them.  First,  the  desire  of  the  reputa¬ 
tion  which  attends  upon  superior  excellence 
in  any  of  them;  and,  secondly,  the  natural 
confidence  which  every  man  has  more  or  less, 
not  only  in  his  own  abilities,  but  in  his  own 
good  fortune. 

To  excel  in  any  profession,  in  which  but 
few  arrive  at  mediocrity,  is  the  most  decisive 
mark  of  what  is  called  genius  or  superior 
talents.  The  public  admiration  which  attends 
upon  such  distinguished  abilities  makes  al¬ 
ways  a  part  of  their  reward;  a  greater  or 
smaller  in  proportion  as  it  is  higher  or  lower 
in  degree.  It  makes  a  considerable  part  of  that 
reward  in  the  profession  of  physic;  a  still 
greater  perhaps  in  that  of  law;  in  poetry  and 
philosophy  it  makes  almost  the  whole. 

There  are  some  very  agreeable  and  beau¬ 
tiful  talents  of  which  the  possession  com¬ 
mands  a  certain  sort  of  admiration;  but  of 
which  the  exercise  for  the  sake  of  gain  is  con¬ 
sidered,  whether  from  reason  or  prejudice,  as 
a  sort  of  public  prostitution.  The  pecuniary 
recompense,  therefore,  of  those  who  exercise 
them  in  this  manner  must  be  sufficient,  not 
only  to  pay  for  the  time,  labour,  and  expense 
of  acquiring  the  talents,  but  for  the  discredit 
which  attends  the  employment  of  them  as 
the  means  of  subsistence.  The  exorbitant  re¬ 
wards  of  players,  opera-singers,  opera-dancers, 
etc.,  are  founded  upon  those  two  principles; 
the  rarity  and  beauty  of  the  talents,  and  the 
discredit  of  employing  them  in  this  manner. 
It  seems  absurd  at  first  sight  that  we  should 
despise  their  persons  and  yet  reward  their  tal¬ 


ents  with  the  most  profuse  liberality.  While 
we  do  the  one,  however,  we  must  of  necessity 
do  the  other.  Should  the  public  opinion  or 
prejudice  ever  alter  with  regard  to  such  occu¬ 
pations,  their  pecuniary  recompense  would 
quickly  diminish.  More  people  would  apply 
to  them,  and  the  competition  would  quickly 
reduce  the  price  of  their  labour.  Such  talents, 
though  far  from  being  common,  are  by  no 
means  so  rare  as  is  imagined.  Many  people 
possess  them  in  great  perfection,  who  disdain 
to  make  this  use  of  them;  and  many  more  are 
capable  of  acquiring  them,  if  anything  could 
be  made  honourably  by  them. 

The  overweening  conceit  which  the  greater 
part  of  men  have  of  their  own  abilities  is  an 
ancient  evil  remarked  by  the  philosophers 
and  moralists  of  all  ages.  Their  absurd  pre¬ 
sumption  in  their  own  good  fortune  has  been 
less  taken  notice  of.  It  is,  however,  if  possible, 
still  more  universal.  There  is  no  man  living 
who,  when  in  tolerable  health  and  spirits,  has 
not  some  share  of  it.  The  chance  of  gain  is 
by  every  man  more  or  less  overvalued,  and 
the  chance  of  loss  is  by  most  men  under¬ 
valued,  and  by  scarce  any  man,  who  is  in 
tolerable  health  and  spirits,  valued  more 
than  it  is  worth. 

That  the  chance  of  gain  is  naturally  over¬ 
valued,  we  may  learn  from  the  universal 
success  of  lotteries.  The  world  neither  ever 
saw,  nor  ever  will  see,  a  perfectly  fair  lot¬ 
tery;  or  one  in  which  the  whole  gain  compen¬ 
sated  the  whole  loss;  because  the  undertaker 
could  make  nothing  by  it.  In  the  state  lot¬ 
teries  the  tickets  are  really  not  worth  the 
price  which  is  paid  by  the  original  subscribers, 
and  yet  commonly  sell  in  the  market  for 
twenty,  thirty,  and  sometimes  forty  per  cent 
advance.  The  vain  hope  of  gaining  some  of 
the  great  prizes  is  the  sole  cause  of  this  de¬ 
mand.  The  soberest  people  scarce  look  upon 
it  as  a  folly  to  pay  a  small  sum  for  the  chance 
of  gaining  ten  or  twenty  thousand  pounds; 
though  they  know  that  even  that  small  sum 
is  perhaps  twenty  or  thirty  per  cent  more 
than  the  chance  is  worth.  In  a  lottery  in 
which  no  prize  exceeded  twenty  pounds, 
though  in  other  respects  it  approached  much 
nearer  to  a  perfectly  fair  one  than  the  com¬ 
mon  state  lotteries,  there  would  not  be  the 
same  demand  for  tickets.  In  order  to  have  a 
better  chance  for  some  of  the  great  prizes, 
some  people  purchase  several  tickets,  and 
others,  small  share  in  a  still  greater  number. 
There  is  not,  however,  a  more  certain  prop¬ 
osition  in  mathematics  than  that  the  more 
tickets  you  adventure  upon,  the  more  likely 
you  are  to  be  a  loser.  Adventure  upon  all  the 
tickets  in  the  lottery,  and  you  lose  for  cer¬ 
tain;  and  the  greater  the  number  of  your  tick¬ 
ets  the  nearer  you  approach  to  this  certainty. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


46 

That  the  chance  of  loss  is  frequently  under¬ 
valued,  and  scarce  ever  valued  more  than  it 
is  worth,  we  may  learn  from  a  very  moderate 
profit  of  insurers.  In  order  to  make  insurance, 
either  from  fire  or  sea-risk,  a  trade  at  all,  the 
common  premium  must  be  sufficient  to  com¬ 
pensate  the  common  losses,  to  pay  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  management,  and  to  afford  such  a 
profit  as  might  have  been  drawn  from  an 
equal  capital  employed  in  any  common  trade. 
The  person  who  pays  no  more  than  this  evi¬ 
dently  pays  no  more  than  the  real  value  of 
the  risk,  or  the  lowest  price  at  which  he  can 
reasonably  expect  to  insure  it.  But  though 
many  people  have  made  a  little  money  by 
insurance,  very  few  have  made  a  great  for¬ 
tune;  and  from  this  consideration  alone,  it 
seems  evident  enough  that  the  ordinary  bal¬ 
ance  of  profit  and  loss  is  not  more  advanta¬ 
geous  in  this  than  in  other  common  trades  by 
which  so  many  people  make  fortunes.  Mod¬ 
erate,  however,  as  the  premium  of  insurance 
commonly  is,  many  people  despise  the  risk 
too  much  to  care  to  pay  it.  Taking  the  whole 
kingdom  at  an  average,  nineteen  houses  in 
twenty,  or  rather  perhaps  ninety-nine  in  a 
hundred,  are  not  insured  from  fire.  Sea  risk 
is  more  alarming  to  the  greater  part  of  peo¬ 
ple,  and  the  proportion  of  ships  insured  to 
those  not  insured  is  much  greater.  Many  fail, 
however,  at  all  seasons,  and  even  in  time  of 
war,  without  any  insurance.  This  may  some¬ 
times  perhaps  be  done  without  any  impru¬ 
dence.  When  a  great  company,  or  even  a 
great  merchant,  has  twenty  or  thirty  ships 
at  sea,  they  may,  as  it  were,  insure  one  an¬ 
other.  The  premium  saved  upon  them  all  may 
more  than  compensate  such  losses  as  they  are 
likely  to  meet  with  in  the  common  course  of 
chances.  The  neglect  of  insurance  upon  ship¬ 
ping,  however,  in  the  same  manner  as  upon 
houses,  is,  in  most  cases,  the  effect  of  no  such 
nice  calculation,  but  of  mere  thoughtless  rash¬ 
ness  and  presumptuous  contempt  of  the  risk. 

The  contempt  of  risk  and  the  presumptuous 
hope  of  success  are  in  no  period  of  life  more 
active  than  at  the  age  at  which  young  peo¬ 
ple  choose  their  professions.  How  little  the 
fear  of  misfortune  is  then  capable  of  balanc¬ 
ing  the  hope  of  good  luck  appears  still  more 
evidently  in  the  readiness  of  the  common  peo¬ 
ple  to  enlist  as  soldiers,  or  to  go  to  sea,  than 
in  the  eagerness  of  those  of  better  fashion  to 
enter  into  what  are  called  the  liberal  pro¬ 
fessions. 

What  a  common  soldier  may  lose  is  obvious 
enough.  Without  regarding  the  danger,  how¬ 
ever,  young  volunteers  never  enlist  so  readily 
as  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  war;  and  though 
they  have  scarce  any  chance  of  preferment, 
they  figure  to  themselves,  in  their  youthful 
fancies,  a  thousand  occasions  of  acquiring  hon¬ 


our  and  distinction  which  never  occur.  These 
romantic  hopes  make  the  whole  price  of  their 
blood.  Their  pay  is  less  than  that  of  common 
labourers,  and  in  actual  service  their  fatigues 
are  much  greater. 

The  lottery  of  the  sea  is  not  altogether  so 
disadvantageous  as  that  of  the  army.  The  son 
of  a  creditable  labourer  or  artificer  may  fre¬ 
quently  go  to  sea  with  his  father’s  consent; 
but  if  he  enlists  as  a  soldier,  it  is  always  with¬ 
out  it.  Other  people  see  some  chance  of  his 
making  something  by  the  one  trade:  nobody 
but  himself  sees  any  of  his  making  anything 
by  the  other.  The  great  admiral  is  less  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  public  admiration  than  the  great  gen¬ 
eral,  and  the  highest  success  in  the  sea  service 
promises  a  less  brilliant  fortune  and  reputa¬ 
tion  than  equal  success  in  the  land.  The  same 
difference  runs  through  all  the  inferior  degrees 
of  preferment  in  both.  By  the  rules  of  preced¬ 
ency  a  captain  in  the  navy  ranks  with  a  colo¬ 
nel  in  the  army;  but  he  does  not  rank  with 
him  in  the  common  estimation.  As  the  great 
prizes  in  the  lottery  are  less,  the  smaller  ones 
must  be  more  numerous.  Common  sailors, 
therefore,  more  frequently  get  some  fortune 
and  preferment  than  common  soldiers;  and  the 
hope  of  those  prizes  is  what  principally  rec¬ 
ommends  the  trade.  Though  their  skill  and 
dexterity  are  much  superior  to  that  of  almost 
any  artificers,  and  though  their  whole  life  is 
one  continual  scene  of  hardship  and  danger, 
yet  for  all  this  dexterity  and  skill,  for  all  those 
hardships  and  dangers,  while  they  remain  in 
the  condition  of  common  sailors,  they  receive 
scarce  any  other  recompense  but  the  pleasure 
of  exercising  the  one  and  of  surmounting  the 
other.  Their  wages  are  not  greater  than  those 
of  common  labourers  at  the  port  which  reg¬ 
ulates  the  rate  of  seamen’s  wages.  As  they  are 
continually  going  from  port  to  port,  the 
monthly  pay  of  those  who  sail  from  all  the 
different  ports  of  Great  Britain  is  more  nearly 
upon  a  level  than  that  of  any  other  workmen 
in  those  different  places;  and  the  rate  of  the 
port  to  and  from  which  the  greatest  number 
sail,  that  is  the  port  of  London,  regulates  that 
of  all  the  rest.  At  London  the  wages  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  different  classes  of  work¬ 
men  are  about  double  those  of  the  same  classes 
at  Edinburgh.  But  the  sailors  who  sail  from 
the  port  of  London  seldom  earn  above  three 
or  four  shillings  a  month  more  than  those  who 
sail  from  the  port  of  Leith,  and  the  differ¬ 
ence  is  frequently  not  so  great.  In  time  of 
peace,  and  in  the  merchant  service,  the  Lon¬ 
don  price  is  from  a  guinea  to  about  seven - 
and-twenty  shillings  the  calendar  month.  A 
common  labourer  in  London,  at  the  rate  of 
nine  or  ten  shillings  a  week,  may  earn  in  the 
calendar  month  from  forty  to  five-and-forty 
shillings.  The  sailor,  indeed,  over  and  above 


Wages  and  Profit 


his  pay,  is  supplied  with  provisions.  Their 
value,  however,  may  not  perhaps  always  ex¬ 
ceed  the  difference  between  his  pay  and  that 
of  the  common  labourer;  and  though  it  some¬ 
times  should,  the  excess  will  not  be  clear 
gain  to  the  sailor,  because  he  cannot  share  it 
with  his  wife  and  family,  whom  he  must 
maintain  out  of  his  wages  at  home. 

The  dangers  and  hairbreadth  escapes  of  a 
life  of  adventures,  instead  of  disheartening 
young  people,  seem  frequently  to  recommend 
a  trade  to  them.  A  tender  mother,  among  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people,  is  often  afraid  to  send 
her  son  to  school  at  a  seaport  town,  lest  the 
sight  of  the  ships  and  the  conversation  and 
adventures  of  the  sailors  should  entice  him  to 
go  to  sea.  The  distant  prospect  of  hazards, 
from  which  we  can  hope  to  extricate  our¬ 
selves  by  courage  and  address,  is  not  disagree¬ 
able  to  us,  and  does  not  raise  the  wages  of 
labour  in  any  employment.  It  is  otherwise 
with  those  in  which  courage  and  address  can 
be  of  no  avail.  In  trades  which  are  known  to 
be  very  unwholesome,  the  wages  of  labour  are 
always  remarkably  high.  Unwholesomeness  is 
a  species  of  disagreeableness,  and  its  effects 
upon  the  wages  of  labour  are  to  be  ranked 
under  that  general  head. 

In  all  the  different  employments  of  stock, 
the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  varies  more  or  less 
with  the  certainty  or  uncertainty  of  the  re¬ 
turns.  These  are  in  general  less  uncertain  in 
the  inland  than  in  the  foreign  trade,  and  in 
some  branches  of  foreign  trade  than  in  others; 
in  the  trade  to  North  America,  for  example, 
than  in  that  to  Jamaica.  The  ordinary  rate  of 
profit  always  rises  more  or  less  with  the  risk. 
It  does  not,  however,  seem  to  rise  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  it,  or  so  as  to  compensate  it  complete¬ 
ly.  Bankruptcies  are  most  frequent  in  the 
most  hazardous  trades.  The  most  hazardous 
of  all  trades,  that  of  a  smuggler,  though  when 
the  adventure  succeeds  it  is  likewise  the  most 
profitable,  is  the  infallible  road  to  bankruptcy. 
The  presumptuous  hope  of  success  seems  to 
act  here  as  upon  all  other  occasions,  and  to 
entice  so  many  adventurers  into  those  hazard¬ 
ous  trades,  that  their  competition  reduces 
their  profit  below  what  is  sufficient  to  com¬ 
pensate  the  risk.  To  compensate  it  completely, 
the  common  returns  ought,  over  and  above 
the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  not  only  to 
make  up  for  all  occasional  losses,  but  to  af¬ 
ford  a  surplus  profit  to  the  adventurers  of 
the  same  nature  with  the  profit  of  insurers. 
But  if  the  common  returns  were  sufficient  for 
all  this,  bankruptcies  would  not  be  more  fre¬ 
quent  in  these  than  in  other  trades. 

Of  the  five  circumstances,  therefore,  which 
vary  the  wages  of  labour,  two  only  affect  the 
profits  of  stock;  the  agreeableness  or  disagree¬ 
ableness  of  the  business,  and  the  risk  or  secur¬ 


47 

ity  with  which  it  is  attended.  In  point  of 
agreeableness,  there  is  little  or  no  difference  in 
the  far  greater  part  of  the  different  employ¬ 
ments  of  stock;  but  a  great  deal  in  those  of 
labour;  and  the  ordinary  profit  of  stock, 
though  it  rises  with  the  risk,  does  not  always 
seem  to  rise  in  proportion  to  it.  It  should  fol¬ 
low  from  all  this,  that,  in  the  same  society  or 
neighbourhood,  the  average  and  ordinary 
rates  of  profit  in  the  different  employments  of 
stock  should  be  more  nearly  upon  a  level 
than  the  pecuniary  wages  of  the  different 
sorts  of  labour.  They  are  so  accordingly.  The 
difference  between  the  earnings  of  a  common 
labourer  and  those  of  a  well  employed  lawyer 
or  physician,  is  evidently  much  greater  than 
that  between  the  ordinary  profits  in  any  two 
different  branches  of  trade.  The  apparent  dif¬ 
ference,  besides,  in  the  profits  of  different 
trades,  is  generally  a  deception  arising  from 
our  not  always  distinguishing  what  ought  to 
be  considered  as  wages,  from  what  ought  to 
be  considered  as  profit. 

Apothecaries’  profit  is  become  a  bye-word, 
denoting  something  uncommonly  extravagant. 
This  great  apparent  profit,  however,  is  fre¬ 
quently  no  more  than  the  reasonable  wages 
of  labour.  The  skill  of  an  apothecary  is  a  much 
nicer  and  more  delicate  matter  than  that  of 
any  artificer  whatever;  and  the  trust  which  is 
reposed  in  him  is  of  much  greater  importance. 
He  is  the  physician  of  the  poor  in  all  cases, 
and  of  the  rich  when  the  distress  or  danger 
is  not  very  great.  His  reward,  therefore,  ought 
to  be  suitable  to  his  skill  and  his  trust,  and  it 
arises  generally  from  the  price  at  which  he 
sells  his  drugs.  But  the  whole  drugs  which  the 
best  employed  apothecary,  in  a  large  market 
town,  will  sell  in  a  year,  may  not  perhaps 
cost  him  above  thirty  or  forty  pounds.  Though 
he  should  sell  them,  therefore,  for  three  or 
four  hundred,  or  at  a  thousand  per  cent  profit, 
this  may  frequently  be  no  more  than  the  rea¬ 
sonable  wages  of  his  labour  charged,  in  the 
only  way  in  which  he  can  charge  them,  upon 
the  price  of  his  drugs.  The  greater  part  of 
the  apparent  profit  is  real  wages  disguised  in 
the  garb  of  profit. 

In  a  small  seaport  town,  a  little  grocer  will 
make  forty  or  fifty  per  cent  upon  a  stock  of 
a  single  hundred  pounds,  while  a  considerable 
wholesale  merchant  in  the  same  place  will 
scarce  make  eight  or  ten  per  cent  upon  a  stock 
of  ten  thousand.  The  trade  of  the  grocer  may 
be  necessary  for  the  conveniency  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  and  the  narrowness  of  the  market 
may  not  admit  the  employment  of  a  larger 
capital  in  the  business.  The  man,  however, 
must  not  only  live  by  his  trade,  but  live  by 
it  suitably  to  the  qualifications  which  it  re¬ 
quires.  Besides  possessing  a  little  capital,  he 
must  be  able  to  read,  write,  and  account,  and 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


48 

must  be  a  tolerable  judge  too  of,  perhaps, 
fifty  or  sixty  different  sorts  of  goods,  their 
prices,  qualities,  and  the  markets  where  they 
are  to  be  had  cheapest.  He  must  have  all  the 
knowledge,  in  short,  that  is  necessary  for  a 
great  merchant,  which  nothing  hinders  him 
from  becoming  but  the  want  of  a  sufficient 
capital.  Thirty  or  forty  pounds  a  year  can¬ 
not  be  considered  as  too  great  a  recompense 
for  the  labour  of  a  person  so  accomplished. 
Deduct  this  from  the  seemingly  great  profits 
of  his  capital,  and  little  more  will  remain, 
perhaps,  than  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock. 
The  greater  part  of  the  apparent  profit  is,  in 
this  case  too,  real  wages. 

The  difference  between  the  apparent  profit 
of  the  retail  and  that  of  the  wholesale  trade, 
is  much  less  in  the  capital  than  in  small  towns 
and  country  villages.  Where  ten  thousand 
pounds  can  be  employed  in  the  grocery  trade, 
the  wages  of  the  grocer’s  labour  make  but  a 
very  trifling  addition  to  the  real  profits  of 
so  great  a  stock.  The  apparent  profits  of  the 
wealthy  retailer,  therefore,  are  there  more 
nearly  upon  a  level  with  those  of  the  whole¬ 
sale  merchant.  It  is  upon  this  account  that 
goods  sold  by  retail  are  generally  as  cheap 
and  frequently  much  cheaper  in  the  capital 
than  in  small  towns  and  country  villages. 
Grocery  goods,  for  example,  are  generally 
much  cheaper;  bread  and  butcher’s  meat  fre¬ 
quently  as  cheap.  It  costs  no  more  to  bring 
grocery  goods  to  the  great  town  than  to  the 
country  village;  but  it  costs  a  great  deal  more 
to  bring  corn  and  cattle,  as  the  greater  part 
of  them  must  be  brought  from  a  much  greater 
distance.  The  prime  cost  of  grocery  goods, 
therefore,  being  the  same  in  both  places,  they 
are  cheapest  where  the  least  profit  is  charged 
upon  them.  The  prime  cost  of  bread  and 
butcher’s  meat  is  greater  in  the  great  town 
than  in  the  country  village;  and  though  the 
profit  is  less,  therefore,  they  are  not  always 
cheaper  there,  but  often  equally  cheap.  In 
such  articles  as  bread  and  butcher’s  meat,  the 
same  cause,  which  diminishes  apparent  profit, 
increases  prime  cost.  The  extent  of  the  mar¬ 
ket,  by  giving  employment  to  greater  stocks, 
diminishes  apparent  profit;  but  by  requiring 
supplies  from  a  greater  distance,  it  increases 
prime  cost.  This  diminution  of  the  one  and 
increase  of  the  other  seem,  in  most  cases, 
nearly  to  counterbalance  one  another,  which 
is  probably  the  reason  that,  though  the  prices 
of  corn  and  cattle  are  commonly  very  different 
in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  those  of 
bread  and  butcher’s  meat  are  generally  very 
nearly  the  same  through  the  greater  part  of  it. 

Though  the  profits  of  stock  both  in  the 
wholesale  and  retail  trade  are  generally  less  in 
the  capital  than  in  small  towns  and  country 
villages,  yet  great  fortunes  are  frequently  ac¬ 


quired  from  small  beginnings  in  the  former, 
and  scarce  ever  in  the  latter.  In  small  towns 
and  country  villages,  on  account  of  the  nar¬ 
rowness  of  the  market,  trade  cannot  always 
be  extended  as  stock  extends.  In  such  places, 
therefore,  though  the  rate  of  a  particular  per¬ 
son’s  profits  may  be  very  high,  the  sum  or 
amount  of  them  can  never  be  very  great, 
nor  consequently  that  of  his  annual  accumu¬ 
lation.  In  great  towns,  on  the  contrary,  trade 
can  be  extended  as  stock  increases,  and  the 
credit  of  a  frugal  and  thriving  man  increases 
much  faster  than  his  stock.  His  trade  is  ex¬ 
tended  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  both, 
and  the  sum  or  amount  of  his  profits  is  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  extent  of  his  trade,  and  his  an¬ 
nual  accumulation  in  proportion  to  the  amount 
of  his  profits.  It  seldom  happens,  however, 
that  great  fortunes  are  made  even  in  great 
towns  by  any  one  regular,  established,  and 
well-known  branch  of  business,  but  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  long  life  of  industry,  frugality,  and 
attention.  Sudden  fortunes,  indeed,  are  some¬ 
times  made  in  such  places  by  what  is  called 
the  trade  of  speculation.  The  speculative  mer¬ 
chant  exercises  no  one  regular,  established,  or 
well-known  branch  of  business.  He  is  a  corn 
merchant  this  year,  and  a  wine  merchant  the 
next,  and  a  sugar,  tobacco,  or  tea  merchant 
the  year  after.  He  enters  into  every  trade 
when  he  foresees  that  it  is  likely  to  be  more 
than  commonly  profitable,  and  he  quits  it 
when  he  foresees  that  its  profits  are  likely  to 
return  to  the  level  of  other  trades.  His  profits 
and  losses,  therefore,  can  bear  no  regular  pro¬ 
portion  to  those  of  any  one  established  and 
well-known  branch  of  business.  A  bold  ad¬ 
venturer  may  sometimes  acquire  a  consider¬ 
able  fortune  by  two  or  three  successful  spec¬ 
ulations;  but  is  just  as  likely  to  lose  one  by  two 
or  three  unsuccessful  ones.  This  trade  can  be 
carried  on  nowhere  but  in  great  towns.  It  is 
only  in  places  of  the  most  extensive  commerce 
and  correspondence  that  the  intelligence  req¬ 
uisite  for  it  can  be  had. 

The  five  circumstances  above  mentioned, 
though  they  occasion  considerable  inequal¬ 
ities  in  the  wages  of  labour  and  profits  of 
stock,  occasion  none  in  the  whole  of  the  ad¬ 
vantages  and  disadvantages,  real  or  imagi¬ 
nary,  of  the  different  employments  of  either. 
The  nature  of  those  circumstances  is  such 
that  they  make  up  for  a  small  pecuniary  gain 
in  some,  and  counterbalance  a  great  one  in 
others. 

In  order,  however,  that  this  equality  may 
take  place  in  the  whole  of  their  advantages 
or  disadvantages,  three  things  are  requisite 
even  where  there  is  the  most  perfect  free¬ 
dom.  First,  the  employments  must  be  well 
known  and  long  established  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood;  secondly,  they  must  be  in  their  ordi- 


49 


Wages  and  Profit 


nary,  or  what  may  be  called  their  natural 
state;  and,  thirdly,  they  must  be  the  sole  or 
principal  employments  of  those  who  occupy 
them. 

First,  this  equality  can  take  place  only  in 
those  employments  which  are  well  known, 
and  have  been  long  established  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood. 

Where  all  other  circumstances  are  equal, 
wages  are  generally  higher  in  new  than  in  old 
trades.  When  a  projector  attempts  to  establish 
a  new  manufacture,  he  must  at  first  entice  his 
workmen  from  other  employments  by  higher 
wages  than  they  can  either  earn  in  their 
own  trades,  or  than  the  nature  of  his  work 
would  otherwise  require,  and  a  considerable 
time  must  pass  away  before  he  can  venture 
to  reduce  them  to  the  common  level.  Manu¬ 
factures  for  which  the  demand  arises  alto¬ 
gether  from  fashion  and  fancy  are  continual¬ 
ly  changing,  and  seldom  last  long  enough  to 
be  considered  as  old  established  manufactures. 
Those,  on  the  contrary,  for  which  the  de¬ 
mand  arises  chiefly  from  use  or  necessity,  are 
less  liable  to  change,  and  the  same  form  or 
fabric  may  continue  in  demand  for  whole 
centuries  together.  The  wages  of  labour,  there¬ 
fore,  are  likely  to  be  higher  in  manufactures 
of  the  former  than  in  those  of  the  latter  kind. 
Birmingham  deals  chiefly  in  manufactures  of 
the  former  kind;  Sheffield  in  those  of  the  lat¬ 
ter;  and  the  wages  of  labour  in  those  two  dif¬ 
ferent  places  are  said  to  be  suitable  to  this 
difference  in  the  nature  of  their  manufactures. 

The  establishment  of  any  new  manufacture, 
of  any  new  branch  of  commerce,  or  of  any 
new  practice  in  agriculture,  is  always  a  specu¬ 
lation,  from  which  the  projector  promises  him¬ 
self  extraordinary  profits.  These  profits  some¬ 
times  are  very  great,  and  sometimes,  more 
frequently,  perhaps,  they  are  quite  otherwise; 
but  in  general  they  bear  no  regular  propor¬ 
tion  to  those  of  other  old  trades  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  If  the  project  succeeds,  they  are 
commonly  at  first  very  high.  When  the  trade 
or  practice  becomes  thoroughly  established 
and  well  known,  the  competition  reduces  them 
to  the  level  of  other  trades. 

Secondly,  this  equality  in  the  whole  of  the 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  differ¬ 
ent  employments  of  labour  and  stock,  can  take 
place  only  in  the  ordinary,  or  what  may  be 
called  the  natural  state  of  those  employments. 

The  demand  for  almost  every  different  spe¬ 
cies  of  labour  is  sometimes  greater  and  some¬ 
times  less  than  usual.  In  the  one  case  the 
advantages  of  the  employment  rise  above,  in 
the  other  they  fall  below  the  common  level. 
The  demand  for  country  labour  is  greater  at 
hay-time  and  harvest  than  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  year;  and  wages  rise  with  the  de¬ 
mand.  In  time  of  war,  when  forty  or  fifty 


thousand  sailors  are  forced  from  the  merchant 
service  into  that  of  the  king,  the  demand  for 
sailors  to  merchant  ships  necessarily  rises 
with  their  scarcity,  and  their  wages  upon  such 
occasions  commonly  rise  from  a  guinea  and 
seven-and-twenty  shillings,  to  forty  shillings 
and  three  pounds  a  month.  In  a  decaying 
manufacture,  on  the  contrary,  many  work¬ 
men,  rather  than  quit  their  old  trade,  are 
contented  with  smaller  wages  than  would 
otherwise  be  suitable  to  the  nature  of  their 
employment. 

The  profits  of  stock  vary  with  the  price  of 
the  commodities  in  which  it  is  employed.  As 
the  price  of  any  commodity  rises  above  the 
ordinary  or  average  rate,  the  profits  of  at  least 
some  part  of  the  stock  that  is  employed  in 
bringing  it  to  market,  rise  above  their  proper 
level,  and  as  it  falls  they  sink  below  it.  All 
commodities  are  more  or  less  liable  to  varia¬ 
tions  of  price,  but  some  are  much  more  so 
than  others.  In  all  commodities  which  are  pro¬ 
duced  by  human  industry,  the  quantity  of 
industry  annually  employed  is  necessarily  reg¬ 
ulated  by  the  annual  demand,  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  that  the  average  annual  produce  may,  as 
nearly  as  possible,  be  equal  to  the  average  an¬ 
nual  consumption.  In  some  employments,  it 
has  already  been  observed,  the  same  quantity 
of  industry  will  always  produce  the  same,  or 
very  nearly  the  same  quantity  of  commod¬ 
ities.  In  the  linen  or  woollen  manufactures, 
for  example,  the  same  number  of  hands  will 
annually  work  up  very  nearly  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  linen  and  woollen  cloth.  The  variations 
in  the  market  price  of  such  commodities, 
therefore,  can  arise  only  from  some  accidental 
variation  in  the  demand.  A  public  mourning 
raises  the  price  of  black  cloth.  But  as  the 
demand  for  most  sorts  of  plain  linen  and  wool¬ 
len  cloth  is  pretty  uniform,  so  is  likewise  the 
price.  But  there  are  other  employments  in 
which  the  same  quantity  of  industry  will  not 
always  produce  the  same  quantity  of  com¬ 
modities.  The  same  quantity  of  industry,  for 
example,  will,  in  different  years,  produce  very 
different  quantities  of  corn,  wine,  hops,  sugar, 
tobacco,  etc.  The  price  of  such  commodities, 
therefore,  varies  not  only  with  the  variations 
of  demand,  but  with  the  much  greater  and 
more  frequent  variations  of  quantity,  and  is 
consequently  extremely  fluctuating.  But  the 
profit  of  some  of  the  dealers  must  necessarily 
fluctuate  with  the  price  of  the  commodities. 
The  operations  of  the  speculative  merchant 
are  principally  employed  about  such  com¬ 
modities.  He  endeavours  to  buy  them  up 
when  he  foresees  that  their  price  is  likely  to 
rise,  and  to  sell  them  when  it  is  likely  to  fall. 

Thirdly,  this  equality  in  the  whole  of  the 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  different 
employments  of  labour  and  stock  can  take 


ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL  LIBRARY 
San  Jose,  California 


50 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


place  only  in  such  as  are  the  sole  or  principal 
employments  of  those  who  occupy  them. 

When  a  person  derives  his  subsistence  from 
one  employment,  which  does  not  occupy  the 
greater  part  of  his  time,  in  the  intervals  of 
his  leisure  he  is  often  willing  to  work  as  an¬ 
other  for  less  wages  than  would  otherwise  suit 
the  nature  of  the  employment. 

There  still  subsists  in  many  parts  of  Scot¬ 
land  a  set  of  people  called  Cotters  or  Cot¬ 
tagers,  though  they  were  more  frequent  some 
years  ago  than  they  are  now.  They  are  a 
sort  of  outservants  of  the  landlords  and  farm¬ 
ers.  The  usual  reward  which  they  receive  from 
their  masters  is  a  house,  a  small  garden  for 
pot-herbs,  as  much  grass  as  will  feed  a  cow, 
and,  perhaps,  an  acre  or  two  of  bad  arable 
land.  When  their  master  has  occasion  for  their 
labour,  he  gives  them,  besides,  two  pecks  of 
oatmeal  a  week,  worth  about  sixteenpence 
sterling.  During  a  great  part  of  the  year  he  has 
little  or  no  occasion  for  their  labour,  and  the 
cultivation  of  their  own  little  possession  is  not 
sufficient  to  occupy  the  time  which  is  left  at 
their  own  disposal.  When  such  occupiers  were 
more  numerous  than  they  are  at  present,  they 
are  said  to  have  been  willing  to  give  their 
spare  time  for  a  very  small  recompense  to  any¬ 
body,  and  to  have  wrought  for  less  wages 
than  other  labourers.  In  ancient  times  they 
seem  to  have  been  common  all  over  Europe. 
In  countries  ill  cultivated  and  worse  inhabited, 
the  greater  part  of  landlords  and  farmers 
could  not  otherwise  provide  themselves  with 
the  extraordinary  number  of  hands  which 
country  labour  requires  at  certain  seasons. 
The  daily  or  weekly  recompense  which  such 
labourers  occasionally  received  from  their 
masters  was  evidently  not  the  whole  price  of 
their  labour.  Their  small  tenement  made  a 
considerable  part  of  it.  This  daily  or  weekly 
recompense,  however,  seems  to  have  been 
considered  as  the  whole  of  it,  by  many  writers 
who  have  collected  the  prices  of  labour  and 
provisions  in  ancient  times,  and  who  have 
taken  pleasures  in  representing  both  as  won¬ 
derfully  low. 

The  produce  of  such  labour  comes  frequent¬ 
ly  cheaper  to  market  than  would  otherwise 
be  suitable  to  its  nature.  Stockings  in  many 
parts  of  Scotland  are  knit  much  cheaper  than 
they  can  anywhere  be  wrought  upon  the  loom. 
They  are  the  work  of  servants  and  labourers, 
who  derive  the  principal  part  of  their  sub¬ 
sistence  from  some  other  employment.  More 
than  a  thousand  pair  of  Shetland  stockings 
are  annually  imported  into  Leith,  of  which 
the  price  is  from  fivepence  to  sevenpence  a 
pair.  At  Lerwick,  the  small  capital  of  the 
Shetland  Islands,  tenpence  a  day,  I  have 
been  assured,  is  a  common  price  of  common 


labour.  In  the  same  islands  they  knit  worsted 
stockings  to  the  value  of  a  guinea  a  pair  and 
upwards. 

The  spinning  of  linen  yarn  is  carried  on  in 
Scotland  nearly  in  the  same  way  as  the  knit¬ 
ting  of  stockings  by  servants,  who  are  chiefly 
hired  for  other  purposes.  They  earn  but  a 
very  scanty  subsistence,  who  endeavour  to 
get  their  whole  livelihood  by  either  of  those 
trades.  In  most  parts  of  Scotland  she  is  a 
good  spinner  who  can  earn  twentypence  a 
week. 

In  opulent  countries  the  market  is  general¬ 
ly  so  extensive  that  any  one  trade  is  sufficient 
to  employ  the  whole  labour  and  stock  of  those 
who  occupy  it.  Instances  of  people’s  living  by 
one  employment,  and  at  the  same  time  deriv¬ 
ing  some  little  advantage  from  another,  occur 
chiefly  in  poor  countries.  The  following  in¬ 
stance,  however,  of  something  of  the  same 
kind  is  to  be  found  in  the  capital  of  a  very 
rich  one.  There  is  no  city  in  Europe,  I  believe, 
in  which  house-rent  is  dearer  than  in  London, 
and  yet  I  know  no  capital  in  which  a  furnished 
apartment  can  be  hired  as  cheap.  Lodging  is 
not  only  much  cheaper  in  London  than  in 
Paris;  it  is  much  cheaper  than  in  Edinburgh 
of  the  same  degree  of  goodness;  and  what 
may  seem  extraordinary,  the  dearness  of 
house-rent  is  the  cause  of  the  cheapness  of 
lodging.  The  dearness  of  house-rent  in  Lon¬ 
don  arises  not  only  from  those  causes  which 
render  it  dear  in  all  great  capitals,  the  dear¬ 
ness  of  labour,  the  dearness  of  all  the  materials 
of  building,  which  must  generally  be  brought 
from  a  great  distance,  and  above  all  the  dear¬ 
ness  of  ground-rent,  every  landlord  acting 
the  part  of  a  monopolist,  and  frequently  ex¬ 
acting  a  higher  rent  for  a  single  acre  of  bad 
land  in  a  town  than  can  be  had  for  a  hundred 
of  the  best  in  the  country;  but  it  arises  in  part 
from  the  peculiar  manners  and  customs  of 
the  people,  which  oblige  every  master  of  a 
family  to  hire  a  whole  house  from  top  to  bot¬ 
tom.  A  dwelling-house  in  England  means 
everything  that  is  contained  under  the  same 
roof.  In  France,  Scotland,  and  many  other 
parts  of  Europe,  it  frequently  means  no  more 
than  a  single  story.  A  tradesman  in  London 
is  obliged  to  hire  a  whole  house  in  that  part 
of  the  town  where  his  customers  live.  His 
shop  is  upon  the  ground-floor,  and  he  and  his 
family  sleep  in  the  garret;  and  he  endeavours 
to  pay  a  part  of  his  house-rent  by  letting  the 
two  middle  stories  to  lodgers.  He  expects  to 
maintain  his  family  by  his  trade,  and  not  by 
his  lodgers.  Whereas,  at  Paris  and  Edinburgh, 
the  people  who  let  lodgings  have  commonly 
no  other  means  of  subsistence  and  the 
price  of  the  lodging  must  pay,  not  only  the 
rent  of  the  house,  but  the  whole  expense  of 
the  family. 


Wages  and  Profit 


51 


Part  2 

Inequalities  by  the  Policy  of  Europe 


Such  are  the  inequalities  in  the  whole  of 
the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  differ¬ 
ent  employments  of  labour  and  stock,  which 
the  defect  of  any  of  the  three  requisites  above 
mentioned  must  occasion,  even  where  there  is 
the  most  perfect  liberty.  But  the  policy  of 
Europe,  by  not  leaving  things  at  perfect  liber¬ 
ty,  occasions  other  inequalities  of  much  greater 
importance. 

It  does  this  chiefly  in  the  three  following 
ways.  First,  by  restraining  the  competition 
in  some  employments  to  a  smaller  number 
than  would  otherwise  be  disposed  to  enter 
into  them;  secondly,  by  increasing  it  in  others 
beyond  what  it  naturally  would  be;  and,  third¬ 
ly,  by  obstructing  the  free  circulation  of  la¬ 
bour  and  stock,  both  from  employment  to 
employment  and  from  place  to  place. 

First,  the  policy  of  Europe  occasions  a  very 
important  inequality  in  the  whole  of  the  ad¬ 
vantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  different 
employments  of  labour  and  stock,  by  restrain¬ 
ing  the  competition  in  some  employments  to 
a  smaller  number  than  might  otherwise  be 
disposed  to  enter  into  them. 

The  exclusive  privileges  of  corporations  are 
the  principal  means  it  makes  use  of  for  this 
purpose. 

The  exclusive  privilege  of  an  incorporated 
trade  necessarily  restrains  the  competition,  in 
the  town  where  it  is  established,  to  those  who 
are  free  of  the  trade.  To  have  served  an  ap¬ 
prenticeship  in  the  town,  under  a  master  prop¬ 
erly  qualified,  is  commonly  the  necessary  req¬ 
uisite  for  obtaining  this  freedom.  The  bye¬ 
laws  of  the  corporation  regulate  sometimes 
the  number  of  apprentices  which  any  master 
is  allowed  to  have,  and  almost  always  the 
number  of  years  which  each  apprentice  is 
obliged  to  serve.  The  intention  of  both  reg¬ 
ulations  is  to  restrain  the  competition  to  a 
much  smaller  number  than  might  otherwise 
be  disposed  to  enter  into  the  trade.  The  limi¬ 
tation  of  the  number  of  apprentices  restrains 
it  directly.  A  long  term  of  apprenticeship  re¬ 
strains  it  more  indirectly,  but  as  effectually, 
by  increasing  the  expense  of  education. 

In  Sheffield  no  master  cutler  can  have  more 
than  one  apprentice  at  a  time,  by  a  bye-law 
of  the  corporation.  In  Norfolk  and  Norwich 
no  master  weaver  can  have  more  than  two 
apprentices,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  five 
pounds  a  month  to  the  king.  No  master  hatter 
can  have  more  than  two  apprentices  any¬ 
where  in  England,  or  in  the  English  planta¬ 
tions,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  five  pounds  a 
month,  half  to  the  king  and  half  to  him  who 
shall  sue  in  anv  court  of  record.  Both  these 


regulations,  though  they  have  been  confirmed 
by  a  public  law  of  the  kingdom,  are  evidently 
dictated  by  the  same  corporation  spirit  which 
enacted  the  bye-law  of  Sheffield.  The  silk 
weavers  in  London  had  scarce  been  incorpo¬ 
rated  a  year  when  they  enacted  a  bye-law 
restraining  any  master  from  having  more  than 
two  apprentices  at  a  time.  It  required  a  par¬ 
ticular  Act  of  Parliament  to  rescind  this  bye¬ 
law. 

Seven  years  seem  anciently  to  have  been, 
all  over  Europe,  the  usual  term  established 
for  the  duration  of  apprenticeships  in  the 
greater  part  of  incorporated  trades.  All  such 
incorporations  were  anciently  called  univer¬ 
sities,  which  indeed  is  the  proper  Latin  name 
for  any  incorporation  whatever.  The  univer¬ 
sity  of  smiths,  the  university  of  tailors,  etc., 
are  expressions  which  we  commonly  meet  with 
in  the  old  charters  of  ancient  towns.  When 
those  particular  incorporations  which  are 
now  peculiarly  called  universities  were  first 
established,  the  term  of  years  which  it  was 
necessary  to  study,  in  order  to  obtain  the  de¬ 
gree  of  master  of  arts,  appears  evidently  to 
have  been  copied  from  the  terms  of  appren¬ 
ticeship  in  common  trades,  of  which  the  in¬ 
corporations  were  much  more  ancient.  As  to 
have  wrought  seven  years  under  a  master 
properly  qualified  was  necessary  in  order  to 
entitle  any  person  to  become  a  master,  and 
to  have  himself  apprenticed  in  a  common 
trade;  so  to  have  studied  seven  years  under 
a  master  properly  qualified  was  necessary  to 
entitle  him  to  become  a  master,  teacher,  or 
doctor  (words  anciently  synonymous)  in  the 
liberal  arts,  and  to  have  scholars  or  appren¬ 
tices  (words  likewise  originally  synonymous) 
to  study  under  him. 

By  the  5th  of  Elizabeth,  commonly  called 
the  Statute  of  Apprenticeship,  it  was  enacted, 
that  no  person  should  for  the  future  exercise 
any  trade,  craft,  or  mystery  at  that  time  ex¬ 
ercised  in  England,  unless  he  had  previously 
served  to  it  an  apprenticeship  of  seven  years 
at  least;  and  what  before  had  been  the  bye¬ 
law  of  many  particular  corporations  became 
in  England  the  general  and  public  law  of 
all  trades  carried  on  in  market  towns.  For 
though  the  words  of  the  statute  are  very  gen¬ 
eral,  and  seem  plainly  to  include  the  whole 
kingdom,  by  interpretation  its  operation  has 
been  limited  to  market  towns,  it  having  been 
held  that  in  country  villages  a  person  may 
exercise  several  different  trades,  though  he 
has  not  served  a  seven  years’  apprenticeship 
to  each,  they  being  necessary  for  the  conven- 
iency  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the  number  of 


52  The  Wealth 

people  frequently  not  being  sufficient  to  sup¬ 
ply  each  with  a  particular  set  of  hands. 

By  a  strict  interpretation  of  the  words,  too, 
the  operation  of  this  statute  has  been  lim¬ 
ited  to  those  trades  which  were  established 
in  England  before  the  5th  of  Elizabeth,  and 
has  never  been  extended  to  such  as  have  been 
introduced  since  that  time.  This  limitation  has 
given  occasion  to  several  distinctions  which, 
considered  as  rules  of  police,  appear  as  foolish 
as  can  well  be  imagined.  It  has  been  adjudged, 
for  example,  that  a  coachmaker  can  neither 
himself  make  nor  employ  journeymen  to  make 
his  coach-wheels,  but  must  buy  them  of  a 
master  wheel-wright;  this  latter  trade  having 
been  exercised  in  England  before  the  5th  of 
Elizabeth.  But  a  wheelwright,  though  he  has 
never  served  an  apprenticeship  to  a  coach- 
maker,  may  either  himself  make  or  employ 
journeyman  to  make  coaches;  the  trade  of 
a  coachmaker  not  being  within  the  statute, 
because  not  exercised  in  England  at  the  time 
when  it  was  made.  The  manufactures  of  Man¬ 
chester,  Birmingham,  and  Wolverhampton,  are 
many  of  them,  upon  this  account,  not  within 
the  statute,  not  having  been  exercised  in  Eng¬ 
land  before  the  5th  of  Elizabeth. 

In  France,  the  duration  of  apprenticeships 
is  different  in  different  towns  and  in  different 
trades.  In  Paris,  five  years  is  the  term  required 
in  a  great  number;  but  before  any  person  can 
be  qualified  to  exercise  the  trade  as  a  master, 
he  must,  in  many  of  them,  serve  five  years 
more  as  a  journeyman.  During  this  latter  term 
he  is  called  the  companion  of  his  master,  and 
the  term  itself  is  called  his  companionship. 

In  Scotland  there  is  no  general  law  which 
regulates  universally  the  duration  of  appren¬ 
ticeships.  The  term  is  different  in  different 
corporations.  Where  it  is  long,  a  part  of  it 
may  generally  be  redeemed  by  paying  a  small 
fine.  In  most  towns,  too,  a  very  small  fine  is 
sufficient  to  purchase  the  freedom  of  any  cor¬ 
poration.  The  weavers  of  linen  and  hempen 
cloth,  the  principal  manufactures  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  as  well  as  all  other  artificers  subservient 
to  them,  wheel-makers,  reel-makers,  etc.,  may 
exercise  their  trades  in  any  town  corporate 
without  paying  any  fine.  In  all  towns  corpo¬ 
rate  all  persons  are  free  to  sell  butcher’s  meat 
upon  any  lawful  day  of  the  week.  Three  years 
in  Scotland  is  a  common  term  of  apprentice¬ 
ship,  even  in  some  very  nice  trades;  and  in 
general  I  know  of  no  country  in  Europe  in 
which  corporation  laws  are  so  little  oppressive. 

The  property  which  every  man  has  in  his 
own  labour,  as  it  is  the  original  foundation  of 
all  other  property,  so  it  is  the  most  sacred  and 
inviolable.  The  patrimony  of  a  poor  man  lies 
in  the  strength  and  dexterity  of  his  hands; 
and  to  hinder  him  from  employing  this 
strength  and  dexterity  of  his  hands;  and  to 


of  Nations 

hinder  him  from  employing  this  strength  and 
dexterity  in  what  manner  he  thinks  proper 
without  injury  to  his  neighbour  is  a  plain  vio¬ 
lation  of  this  most  sacred  property.  It  is  a 
manifest  encroachment  upon  the  just  liberty 
both  of  the  workman  and  of  those  who  might 
be  disposed  to  employ  him.  As  it  hinders  the 
one  from  working  at  what  he  thinks  proper, 
so  it  hinders  the  others  from  employing  whom 
they  think  proper.  To  judge  whether  he  is  fit 
to  be  employed  may  surely  be  trusted  to  the 
discretion  of  the  employers  whose  interest  it 
so  much  concerns.  The  affected  anxiety  of  the 
law-giver  lest  they  should  employ  an  improp¬ 
er  person  is  evidently  as  impertinent  as  it  is 
oppressive. 

The  institution  of  long  apprenticeships  can 
give  no  security  that  insufficient  workman¬ 
ship  shall  not  frequently  be  exposed  to  public 
sale.  When  this  is  done  it  is  generally  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  fraud,  and  not  of  inability;  and  the 
longest  apprenticeship  can  give  no  security 
against  fraud.  Quite  different  regulations  are 
necessary  to  prevent  this  abuse.  The  sterling 
mark  upon  plate,  and  the  stamps  upon  linen 
and  woollen  cloth,  give  the  purchaser  much 
greater  security  than  any  statute  of  appren¬ 
ticeship.  He  generally  looks  at  these,  but 
never  thinks  it  worth  while  to  inquire  whether 
the  workman  had  served  a  seven  years’  ap¬ 
prenticeship. 

The  institution  of  long  apprenticeships  has 
no  tendency  to  form  a  young  people  to  in¬ 
dustry.  A  journeyman  who  works  by  the  piece 
is  likely  to  be  industrious,  because  he  derives 
a  benefit  from  every  exertion  of  his  industry. 
An  apprentice  is  likely  to  be  idle,  and  almost 
always  is  so,  because  he  has  no  immediate 
interest  to  be  otherwise.  In  the  inferior  em¬ 
ployments,  the  sweets  of  labour  consist  alto¬ 
gether  in  the  recompense  of  labour.  They  who 
are  soonest  in  a  condition  to  enjoy  the  sweets 
of  it  are  likely  soonest  to  conceive  a  relish  for 
it,  and  to  acquire  the  early  habit  of  industry. 
A  young  man  naturally  conceives  an  aversion 
to  labour  when  for  a  long  time  he  receives 
no  benefit  from  it.  The  boys  who  are  put  out 
apprentices  from  public  charities  are  general¬ 
ly  bound  for  more  than  the  usual  number  of 
years,  and  they  generally  turn  out  very  idle 
and  worthless. 

Apprenticeships  were  altogether  unknown 
to  the  ancients.  The  reciprocal  duties  of  mas¬ 
ter  and  apprentice  make  a  considerable  article 
in  every  modern  code.  The  Roman  law  is  per¬ 
fectly  silent  with  regard  to  them.  I  know  no 
Greek  or  Latin  word  (I  might  venture,  I 
believe,  to  assert  that  there  is  none)  which 
expresses  the  idea  we  now  annex  to  the  word 
Apprentice,  a  servant  bound  to  work  at  a 
particular  trade  for  the  benefit  of  a  master, 
during  a  term  of  years,  upon  condition  that 


53 


Wages  and  Profit 


the  master  shall  teach  him  that  trade. 

Long  apprenticeships  are  altogether  unnec¬ 
essary.  The  arts,  which  are  much  superior  to 
common  trades,  such  as  those  of  making  clocks 
and  watches,  contain  no  such  mystery  as  to 
require  a  long  course  of  instruction.  The  first 
invention  of  such  beautiful  machines,  indeed, 
and  even  that  of  some  of  the  instruments  em¬ 
ployed  in  making  them,  must,  no  doubt,  have 
been  the  work  of  deep  thought  and  long  time, 
and  may  justly  be  considered  as  among  the 
happiest  efforts  of  human  ingenuity.  But  when 
both  have  been  fairly  invented  and  are  well 
understood,  to  explain  to  any  young  man,  in 
the  completest  manner,  how  to  apply  the  in¬ 
struments  and  how  to  construct  the  machines, 
cannot  well  require  more  than  the  lessons  of 
a  few  weeks:  perhaps  those  of  a  few  days 
might  be  sufficient.  In  the  common  mechanic 
trades,  those  of  a  few  days  might  certainly 
be  sufficient.  The  dexterity  of  hand,  indeed, 
even  in  common  trades,  cannot  be  acquired 
without  much  practice  and  experience.  But  a 
young  man  would  practice  with  much  more 
diligence  and  attention,  if  from  the  beginning 
he  wrought  as  a  journeyman,  being  paid  in 
proportion  to  the  little  work  which  he  could 
execute,  and  paying  in  his  turn  for  the  mate¬ 
rials  which  he  might  sometimes  spoil  through 
awkwardness  and  inexperience.  His  education 
would  generally  in  this  way  be  more  effectual, 
and  always  less  tedious  and  expensive.  The 
master,  indeed,  would  be  a  loser.  He  would 
lose  all  the  wages  of  the  apprentice,  which  he 
now  saves,  for  seven  years  together.  In  the 
end,  perhaps,  the  apprentice  himself  would  be 
a  loser.  In  a  trade  so  easily  learnt  he  would 
have  more  competitors,  and  his  wages,  when 
he  came  to  be  a  complete  workman,  would  be 
much  less  than  at  present.  The  same  increase 
of  competition  would  reduce  the  profits  of  the 
masters  as  well  as  the  wages  of  the  workmen. 
The  trades,  the  crafts,  the  mysteries,  would 
all  be  losers.  But  the  public  would  be  a 
gainer,  the  work  of  all  artificers  coming  in  this 
way  much  cheaper  to  market. 

It  is  to  prevent  this  reduction  of  price,  and 
consequently  of  wages  and  profit,  by  restrain¬ 
ing  that  free  competition  which  would  most 
certainly  occasion  it,  that  all  corporations,  and 
the  greater  part  of  corporation  laws,  have 
been  established.  In  order  to  erect  a  corpora¬ 
tion,  no  other  authority  in  ancient  times  was 
requisite  in  many  parts  of  Europe,  but  that 
of  the  town  corporate  in  which  it  was  estab¬ 
lished.  In  England,  indeed,  a  charter  from  the 
king  was  likewise  necessary.  But  this  prerog¬ 
ative  of  the  crown  seems  to  have  been  re¬ 
served  rather  for  extorting  money  from  the 
subject  than  for  the  defence  of  the  common 
liberty  against  such  oppressive  monopolies. 
Upon  paying  a  fine  to  the  king,  the  charter 


seems  generally  to  have  been  readily  granted; 
and  when  any  particular  class  of  artificers 
or  traders  thought  proper  to  act  as  a  corpora¬ 
tion  without  a  charter,  such  adulterine  guilds, 
as  they  were  called,  were  not  always  dis¬ 
franchised  upon  that  account,  but  obliged  to 
fine  annually  to  the  king  for  permission  to 
exercise  their  usurped  privileges.1  The  immedi¬ 
ate  inspection  of  all  corporations,  and  of  the 
bye-laws  which  they  might  think  proper  to 
enact  for  their  own  government,  belonged  to 
the  town  corporate  in  which  they  were  estab¬ 
lished;  and  whatever  discipline  was  exercised 
over  them  proceeded  commonly,  not  from  the 
king,  but  from  the  greater  incorporation  of 
which  those  subordinate  ones  were  only  parts 
or  members. 

The  government  of  towns  corporate  was 
altogether  in  the  hands  of  traders  and  artif¬ 
icers,  and  it  was  the  manifest  interest  of  every 
particular  class  of  them  to  prevent  the  mar¬ 
ket  from  being  overstocked,  as  they  common¬ 
ly  express  it,  with  their  own  particular  spe¬ 
cies  of  industry,  which  is  in  reality  to  keep  it 
always  understocked.  Each  class  was  eager 
to  establish  regulations  proper  for  this  pur¬ 
pose,  and,  provided  it  was  allowed  to  do  so, 
was  willing  to  consent  that  every  other  class 
should  do  the  same.  In  consequence  of  such 
regulations,  indeed,  each  class  was  obliged  to 
buy  the  goods  they  had  occasion  for  from 
every  other  within  the  town,  somewhat  dearer 
than  they  otherwise  might  have  done.  But  in 
recompense,  they  were  enabled  to  sell  their 
own  just  as  much  dearer;  so  that  so  far  it  was 
as  broad  as  long,  as  they  say;  and  in  the  deal¬ 
ings  of  the  different  classes  within  the  town 
with  one  another,  none  of  them  were  losers 
by  these  regulations.  But  in  their  dealings 
with  the  country  they  were  all  great  gainers; 
and  in  these  latter  dealings  consists  the  whole 
trade  which  supports  and  enriches  every  town. 

Every  town  draws  its  whole  subsistence, 
and  all  the  materials  of  its  industry,  from 
the  country.  It  pays  for  these  chiefly  in  two 
ways:  first,  by  sending  back  to  the  country 
a  part  of  those  materials  wrought  up  and 
manufactured;  in  which  case  their  price  is 
augmented  by  the  wages  of  the  workmen,  and 
the  profits  of  their  masters  or  immediate  em¬ 
ployers;  secondly,  by  sending  to  it  a  part  both 
of  the  rude  and  manufactured  produce,  either 
of  other  countries,  or  of  distant  parts  of  the 
same  country,  imported  into  the  town;  in 
which  case,  too,  the  original  price  of  those 
goods  is  augmented  by  the  wages  of  the  car¬ 
riers  or  sailors,  and  by  the  profits  of  the  mer¬ 
chants  who  employ  them.  In  what  is  gained 
upon  the  first  of  those  two  branches  of  com¬ 
merce  consists  the  advantage  which  the  town 
makes  by  its  manufactures;  in  what  is  gained 

*See  Madox,  Firma  Burgi,  p.  26,  etc. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


54 

upon  the  second,  the  advantage  of  its  inland 
and  foreign  trade.  The  wages  of  the  work¬ 
men,  and  the  profits  of  their  different  em¬ 
ployers,  make  up  the  whole  of  what  is  gained 
upon  both.  Whatever  regulations,  therefore, 
tend  to  increase  those  wages  and  profits  be¬ 
yond  what  they  otherwise  would  be,  tend  to 
enable  the  town  to  purchase,  with  a  smaller 
quantity  of  its  labour,  the  produce  of  a  great¬ 
er  quantity  of  the  labour  of  the  country.  They 
give  the  traders  and  artificers  in  the  town  an 
advantage  over  the  landlords,  farmers,  and 
labourers  in  the  country,  and  break  down 
that  natural  equality  which  would  otherwise 
take  place  in  the  commerce  which  is  carried 
on  between  them.  The  whole  annual  produce 
of  the  labour  of  the  society  is  annually  divided 
between  those  two  different  sets  of  people. 
By  means  of  those  regulations  a  greater  share 
of  it  is  given  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town 
than  would  otherwise  fall  to  them;  and  a  less 
to  those  of  the  country. 

The  price  which  the  town  really  pays  for 
the  provisions  and  materials  annually  im¬ 
ported  into  it  is  the  quantity  of  manufac¬ 
tures  and  other  goods  annually  exported  from 
it.  The  dearer  the  latter  are  sold,  the  cheaper 
the  former  are  bought.  The  industry  of  the 
town  becomes  more,  and  that  of  the  country 
less  advantageous. 

That  the  industry  which  is  carried  on  in 
towns  is,  everywhere  in  Europe,  more  ad¬ 
vantageous  than  that  which  is  carried  on  in 
the  country,  without  entering  into  any  very 
nice  computations,  we  may  satisfy  ourselves 
by  one  very  simple  and  obvious  observation. 
In  every  country  of  Europe  we  find,  at  least,  a 
hundred  people  who  have  acquired  great  for¬ 
tunes  from  small  beginnings  by  trade  and 
manufactures,  the  industry  which  properly 
belongs  to  towns,  for  one  who  has  done  so 
by  that  which  properly  belongs  to  the  coun¬ 
try,  the  raising  of  rude  produce  by  the  im¬ 
provement  and  cultivation  of  land.  Industry, 
therefore,  must  be  better  rewarded,  the  wages 
of  labour  and  the  profits  of  stock  must  evi¬ 
dently  be  greater  in  the  one  situation  than 
in  the  other.  But  stock  and  labour  naturally 
seek  the  most  advantageous  employment. 
They  naturally,  therefore,  resort  as  much  as 
they  can  to  the  town,  and  desert  the  country. 

The  inhabitants  of  a  town,  being  collected 
into  one  place,  can  easily  combine  together. 
The  most  insignificant  trades  carried  on  in 
towns  have  accordingly,  in  some  place  or 
other,  been  incorporated,  and  even  where 
they  have  never  been  incorporated,  yet  the 
corporation  spirit,  the  jealousy  of  strangers, 
the  aversion  to  take  apprentices,  or  to  com¬ 
municate  the  secret  of  their  trade,  generally 
prevail  in  them,  and  often  teach  them,  by 
voluntary  associations  and  agreements,  to 


prevent  that  free  competition  which  they  can¬ 
not  prohibit  by  bye-laws.  The  trades  which 
employ  but  a  small  number  of  hands  run  most 
easily  into  such  combinations.  Half  a  dozen 
wool -combers,  perhaps,  are  necessary  to  keep 
a  thousand  spinners  and  weavers  at  work.  By 
combining  not  to  take  apprentices  they  can 
not  only  engross  the  employment,  but  reduce 
the  whole  manufacture  into  a  sort  of  slavery 
to  themselves,  and  raise  the  price  of  their  la¬ 
bour  much  above  what  is  due  to  the  nature 
of  their  work. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  country,  dispersed 
in  distant  places,  cannot  easily  combine  to¬ 
gether.  They  have  not  only  never  been  in¬ 
corporated,  but  the  corporation  spirit  never 
has  prevailed  among  them.  No  apprentice¬ 
ship  has  ever  been  thought  necessary  to  qual¬ 
ify  for  husbandry,  the  great  trade  of  the  coun¬ 
try.  After  what  are  called  the  fine  arts,  and 
the  liberal  professions,  however,  there  is  per¬ 
haps  no  trade  which  requires  so  great  a  vari¬ 
ety  of  knowledge  and  experience.  The  innu¬ 
merable  volumes  which  have  been  written 
upon  it  in  all  languages  may  satisfy  us  that, 
among  the  wisest  and  most  learned  nations, 
it  has  never  been  regarded  as  a  matter  very 
easily  understood.  And  from  all  those  volumes 
we  shall  in  vain  attempt  to  collect  that  knowl¬ 
edge  of  its  various  and  complicated  opera¬ 
tions,  which  is  commonly  possessed  even  by 
the  common  farmer;  how  contemptuously  so¬ 
ever  the  very  contemptible  authors  of  some  of 
them  may  sometimes  affect  to  speak  of  him. 
There  is  scarce  any  common  mechanic  trade, 
on  the  contrary,  of  which  all  the  operations 
may  not  be  as  completely  and  distinctly  ex¬ 
plained  in  a  pamphlet  of  a  very  few  pages,  as 
it  is  possible  for  words  illustrated  by  figures 
to  explain  them.  In  the  history  of  the  arts, 
now  publishing  by  the  French  Academy  of 
Sciences,  several  of  them  are  actually  ex¬ 
plained  in  this  manner.  The  direction  of  oper¬ 
ations,  besides,  which  must  be  varied  with 
every  change  of  the  weather,  as  well  as  with 
many  other  accidents,  requires  much  more 
judgment  and  discretion  than  that  of  those 
which  are  always  the  same  or  very  nearly 
the  same. 

Not  only  the  art  of  the  farmer,  the  gen¬ 
eral  direction  of  the  operations  of  husbandry, 
but  many  inferior  branches  of  country  la¬ 
bour  require  much  more  skill  and  experience 
than  the  greater  part  of  mechanic  trades.  The 
man  who  works  upon  brass  and  iron,  works 
with  instruments  and  upon  materials  of  which 
the  temper  is  always  the  same,  or  very  nearly 
the  same.  But  the  man  who  ploughs  the 
ground  with  a  team  of  horses  or  oxen,  works 
with  instruments  of  which  the  health, 
strength,  and  temper,  are  very  different  upon 
different  occasions.  The  condition  of  the  ma- 


55 


Wages  and  Profit 


terials  which  he  works  upon,  too,  is  as  vari¬ 
able  as  that  of  the  instruments  which  he  works 
with,  and  both  require  to  be  managed  with 
much  judgment  and  discretion.  The  common 
ploughman,  though  generally  regarded  as  the 
pattern  of  stupidity  and  ignorance,  is  seldom 
defective  in  this  judgment  and  discretion.  He 
is  less  accustomed,  indeed,  to  social  inter¬ 
course  than  the  mechanic  who  lives  in  a 
town.  His  voice  and  language  are  more  un¬ 
couth  and  more  difficult  to  be  understood  by 
those  who  are  not  used  to  them.  His  under¬ 
standing,  however,  being  accustomed  to  con¬ 
sider  a  greater  variety  of  objects,  is  general¬ 
ly  much  superior  to  that  of  the  other,  whose 
whole  attention  from  morning  till  night  is 
commonly  occupied  in  performing  one  or  two 
very  simple  operations.  How  much  the  lower 
ranks  of  people  in  the  country  are  really  su¬ 
perior  to  those  of  the  town  is  well  known  to 
every  man  whom  either  business  or  curiosity 
has  led  to  converse  much  with  both.  In  China 
and  Indostan  accordingly  both  the  rank  and 
the  wages  of  country  labourers  are  said  to  be 
superior  to  those  of  the  greater  part  of  artifi¬ 
cers  and  manufacturers.  They  would  probably 
be  so  everywhere,  if  corporation  laws  and  the 
corporation  spirit  did  not  prevent  it. 

The  superiority  which  the  industry  of  the 
towns  has  everywhere  in  Europe  over  that  of 
the  country  is  not  altogether  owing  to  cor¬ 
porations  and  corporation  laws.  It  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  many  other  regulations.  The  high 
duties  upon  foreign  manufactures  and  upon 
all  goods  imported  by  alien  merchants,  all 
tend  to  the  same  purpose.  Corporation  laws 
enable  the  inhabitants  of  towns  to  raise  their 
prices,  without  fearing  to  be  undersold  by  the 
free  competition  of  their  own  countrymen. 
Those  other  regulations  secure  them  equally 
against  that  of  foreigners.  The  enhancement 
of  price  occasioned  by  both  is  everywhere  fi¬ 
nally  paid  by  the  landlords,  farmers,  and  la¬ 
bourers  of  the  country,  who  have  seldom  op¬ 
posed  the  establishment  of  such  monopolies. 
They  have  commonly  neither  inclination  nor 
fitness  to  enter  into  combinations:  and  the 
clamour  and  sophistry  of  merchants  and  man¬ 
ufacturers  easily  persuade  them  that  the  pri¬ 
vate  interest  of  a  part,  and  of  a  subordinate 
part  of  the  society,  is  the  general  interest  of 
the  whole. 

In  Great  Britain  the  superiority  of  the  in¬ 
dustry  of  the  towns  over  that  of  the  country 
seems  to  have  been  greater  formerly  than  in 
the  present  times.  The  wages  of  country  la¬ 
bour  approach  nearer  to  those  of  manufactur¬ 
ing  labour,  and  the  profits  of  stock  employed 
in  agriculture  to  those  of  trading  and  manu¬ 
facturing  stock,  than  they  are  said  to  have 
done  in  the  last  century,  or  in  the  beginning 
of  the  present.  This  change  may  be  regarded 


as  the  necessary,  though  very  late  consequence 
of  the  extraordinary  encouragement  given  to 
the  industry  of  the  towns.  The  stock  accu¬ 
mulated  in  them  comes  in  time  to  be  so  great 
that  it  can  no  longer  be  employed  with  the 
ancient  profit  in  that  species  of  industry  which 
is  peculiar  to  them.  That  industry  has  its 
limits  like  every  other;  and  the  increase  of 
stock,  by  increasing  the  competition,  neces¬ 
sarily  reduces  the  profit.  The  lowering  of 
profit  in  the  town  forces  out  stock  to  the 
country,  where,  by  creating  a  new  demand 
for  country  labour,  it  necessarily  raises  its 
wages.  It  then  spreads  itself,  if  I  may  say  so, 
over  the  face  of  the  land,  and  by  being  em¬ 
ployed  in  agriculture  is  in  part  restored  to  the 
country,  at  the  expense  of  which,  in  a  great 
measure,  it  had  originally  been  accumulated 
in  the  town.  That  everywhere  in  Europe  the 
greatest  improvements  of  the  country  have 
been  owing  to  such  overflowings  of  the  stock 
originally  accumulated  in  the  towns,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  show  hereafter;  and  at  the  same 
time  to  demonstrate  that,  though  some  coun¬ 
tries  have  by  this  course  attained  to  a  con¬ 
siderable  degree  of  opulence,  it  is  in  itself  nec¬ 
essarily  slow,  uncertain,  liable  to  be  disturbed 
and  interrupted  by  innumerable  accidents, 
and  in  every  respect  contrary  to  the  order  of 
nature  and  of  reason.  The  interests,  prejudices, 
laws  and  customs,  which  have  given  occasion 
to  it,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  as  fully  and 
distinctly  as  I  can  in  the  third  and  fourth 
books  of  this  Inquiry. 

People  of  the  same  trade  seldom  meet  to¬ 
gether,  even  for  merriment  and  diversion,  but 
the  conversation  ends  in  a  conspiracy  against 
the  public,  or  in  some  contrivance  to  raise 
prices.  It  is  impossible  indeed  to  prevent  such 
meetings,  by  any  law  which  either  could  be 
executed,  or  would  be  consistent  with  liberty 
and  justice.  But  though  the  law  cannot  hin¬ 
der  people  of  the  same  trade  from  sometimes 
assembling  together,  it  ought  to  do  nothing 
to  facilitate  such  assemblies,  much  less  to 
render  them  necessary. 

A  regulation  which  obliges  all  those  of  the 
same  trade  in  a  particular  town  to  enter  their 
names  and  places  of  abode  in  a  public  register, 
facilitates  such  assemblies.  It  connects  indi¬ 
viduals  who  might  never  otherwise  be  known 
to  one  another,  and  gives  every  man  of  the 
trade  a  direction  where  to  find  every  other 
man  of  it. 

A  regulation  which  enables  those  of  the 
same  trade  to  tax  themselves  in  order  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  their  poor,  their  sick,  their  widows 
and  orphans,  by  giving  them  a  common  inter¬ 
est  to  manage,  renders  such  assemblies  nec¬ 
essary. 

An  incorporation  not  only  renders  them 
necessary,  but  makes  the  act  of  the  majority 


56 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


binding  upon  the  whole.  In  a  free  trade  an 
effectual  combination  cannot  be  established 
but  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  every  single 
trader,  and  it  cannot  last  longer  than  every 
single  trader  continues  of  the  same  mind. 
The  majority  of  a  corporation  can  enact  a 
bye-law  with  proper  penalties,  which  will  limit 
the  competition  more  effectually  and  more  du¬ 
rably  than  any  voluntary  combination  what¬ 
ever. 

The  pretence  that  corporations  are  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  better  government  of  the  trade 
is  without  any  foundation.  The  real  and  effec¬ 
tual  discipline  which  is  exercised  over  a  work¬ 
man  is  not  that  of  his  corporation,  but  that 
of  his  customers.  It  is  the  fear  of  losing  their 
employment  which  restrains  his  frauds  and 
corrects  his  negligence.  An  exclusive  corpora¬ 
tion  necessarily  weakens  the  force  of  this  dis¬ 
cipline.  A  particular  set  of  workmen  must  then 
be  employed,  let  them  behave  well  or  ill.  It 
is  upon  this  account  that  in  many  large  in¬ 
corporated  towns  no  tolerable  workmen  are 
to  be  found,  even  in  some  of  the  most  neces¬ 
sary  trades.  If  you  would  have  your  work 
tolerably  executed,  it  must  be  done  in  the 
suburbs,  where  the  workmen,  having  no  ex¬ 
clusive  privilege,  have  nothing  but  their  char¬ 
acter  to  depend  upon,  and  you  must  then 
smuggle  it  into  the  town  as  well  as  you  can. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  policy  of 
Europe,  by  restraining  the  competition  in 
some  employments  to  a  smaller  number  than 
would  otherwise  be  disposed  to  enter  into 
them,  occasions  a  very  important  inequality 
in  the  whole  of  the  advantages  and  disadvan¬ 
tages  of  the  different  employments  of  labour 
and  stock. 

Secondly,  the  policy  of  Europe,  by  increas¬ 
ing  the  competition  in  some  employments 
beyond  what  it  naturally  would  be,  occasions 
another  inequality  of  an  opposite  kind  in  the 
whole  of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages 
of  the  different  employments  of  labour  and 
stock. 

It  has  been  considered  as  of  so  much  im¬ 
portance  that  a  proper  number  of  young  peo¬ 
ple  should  be  educated  for  certain  professions, 
that  sometimes  the  public  and  sometimes 
the  piety  of  private  founders  have  establish¬ 
ed  many  pensions,  scholarships,  exhibitions, 
bursaries,  etc.,  for  this  purpose,  which  draw 
many  more  people  into  those  trades  than 
could  otherwise  pretend  to  follow  them.  In 
all  Christian  countries,  I  believe,  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  the  greater  part  of  churchmen  is  paid 
for  in  this  manner.  Very  few  of  them  are 
educated  altogether  at  their  own  expense.  The 
long,  tedious,  and  expensive  education,  there¬ 
fore,  of  those  who  are,  will  not  always  procure 
them  a  suitable  reward,  the  church  being 
crowded  with  people  who,  in  order  to  get 


employment,  are  willing  to  accept  of  a  much 
smaller  recompense  than  what  such  an  educa¬ 
tion  would  otherwise  have  entitled  them  to; 
and  in  this  manner  the  competition  of  the 
poor  takes  away  the  reward  of  the  rich.  It 
would  be  indecent,  no  doubt,  to  compare  ei¬ 
ther  a  curate  or  a  chaplain  with  a  journey¬ 
man  in  any  common  trade.  The  pay  of  a  cu¬ 
rate  or  chaplain,  however,  may  very  properly 
be  considered  as  of  the  same  nature  with  the 
wages  of  a  journeyman.  They  are,  all  three, 
paid  for  their  work  according  to  the  contract 
which  they  may  happen  to  make  with  their 
respective  superiors.  Till  after  the  middle  of 
the  fourteenth  century,  five  merks,  contain¬ 
ing  about  as  much  silver  as  ten  pounds  of  our 
present  money,  was  in  England  the  usual  pay 
of  a  curate  or  a  stipendiary  parish  priest,  as 
we  find  it  regulated  by  the  decrees  of  several 
different  national  councils.  At  the  same  pe¬ 
riod  fourpence  a  day,  containing  the  same 
quantity  of  silver  as  a  shilling  of  our  present 
money,  was  declared  to  be  the  pay  of  a  mas¬ 
ter  mason,  and  threepence  a  day,  equal  to 
ninepence  of  our  present  money,  that  of  a 
journeyman  mason.1  The  wages  of  both  these 
labourers,  therefore,  supposing  them  to  have 
been  constantly  employed,  were  much  supe¬ 
rior  to  those  of  the  curate.  The  wages  of  the 
master  mason,  supposing  him  to  have  been 
without  employment  one  third  of  the  year, 
would  have  fully  equalled  them.  By  the  12th 
of  Queen  Anne,  c.  12,  it  is  declared,  “That 
whereas  for  want  of  sufficient  maintenance 
and  encouragement  to  curates,  the  cures  have 
in  several  places  been  meanly  supplied,  the 
bishop  is,  therefore,  empowered  to  appoint 
by  writing  under  his  hand  and  seal  a  sufficient 
certain  stipend  or  allowance,  not  exceeding 
fifty  and  not  less  than  twenty  pounds  a  year/’ 
Forty  pounds  a  year  is  reckoned  at  present 
very  good  pay  for  a  curate,  and  notwithstand¬ 
ing  this  Act  of  Parliament  there  are  many 
curacies  under  twenty  pounds  a  year.  There 
are  journeymen  shoemakers  in  London  who 
earn  forty  pounds  a  year,  and  there  is  scarce 
an  industrious  workman  of  any  kind  in  that 
metropolis  who  does  not  earn  more  than 
twenty.  This  last  sum  indeed  does  not  ex¬ 
ceed  what  is  frequently  earned  by  common 
labourers  in  many  country  parishes.  When¬ 
ever  the  law  has  attempted  to  regulate  the 
wages  of  workmen,  it  has  always  been  rather 
to  lower  them  than  to  raise  them.  But  the 
law  has  upon  many  occasions  attempted  to 
raise  the  wages  of  curates,  and  for  the  dignity 
of  the  church,  to  oblige  the  rectors  of  par¬ 
ishes  to  give  them  more  than  the  wretched 
maintenance  which  they  themselves  might 
be  willing  to  accept  of.  And  in  both  cases  the 
law  seems  to  have  been  equally  ineffectual, 
^ee  the  Statute  of  Labourers,  25  Ed.  III. 


Wages  and  Profit 


and  has  never  either  been  able  to  raise  the 
wages  of  curates,  or  to  sink  those  of  labour¬ 
ers  to  the  degree  that  was  intended:  because 
it  has  never  been  able  to  hinder  either  the 
one  from  being  willing  to  accept  of  less  than 
the  legal  allowance,  on  account  of  the  indi¬ 
gence  of  their  situation  and  the  multitude 
of  their  competitors;  or  the  other  from  receiv¬ 
ing  more,  on  account  of  the  contrary  competi¬ 
tion  of  those  who  expected  to  derive  either 
profit  or  pleasure  from  employing  them. 

The  great  benefices  and  other  ecclesiastical 
dignities  support  the  honour  of  the  church, 
notwithstanding  the  mean  circumstance  of 
some  of  its  inferior  members.  The  respect 
paid  to  the  profession,  too,  makes  some  com¬ 
pensation  even  to  them  for  the  meanness  of 
their  pecuniary  recompense.  In  England,  and 
in  all  Roman  Catholic  countries,  the  lottery 
of  the  church  is  in  reality  much  more  advanta¬ 
geous  than  is  necessary.  The  example  of  the 
churches  of  Scotland,  of  Geneva,  and  of  sev¬ 
eral  other  Protestant  churches,  may  satisfy 
us  that  in  so  creditable  a  profession,  in  which 
education  is  so  easily  procured,  the  hopes 
of  much  more  moderate  benefices  will  draw 
a  sufficient  number  of  learned,  decent,  and 
respectable  men  into  holy  orders. 

In  professions  in  which  there  are  no  bene¬ 
fices,  such  as  law  and  physic,  if  an  equal  pro¬ 
portion  of  people  were  educated  at  the  public 
expense,  the  competition  would  soon  be  so 
great  as  to  sink  very  much  their  pecuniary 
reward.  It  might  then  not  be  worth  any  man’s 
while  to  educate  his  son  to  either  of  those 
professions  at  his  own  expense.  They  would 
be  entirely  abandoned  to  such  as  had  been 
educated  by  those  public  charities,  whose 
numbers  and  necessities  would  oblige  them 
in  general  to  content  themselves  wdth  a  very 
miserable  recompense,  to  the  entire  degrada¬ 
tion  of  the  now  respectable  professions  of  law 
and  physic. 

That  unprosperous  race  of  men  commonly 
called  men  of  letters  are  pretty  much  in  the 
situation  which  lawyers  and  physicians  prob¬ 
ably  would  be  in  upon  the  foregoing  supposi¬ 
tion.  In  every  part  of  Europe  the  greater  part 
of  them  have  been  educated  for  the  church, 
but  have  been  hindered  by  different  reasons 
from  entering  into  holy  orders.  They  have 
generally,  therefore,  been  educated  at  the  pub¬ 
lic  expense,  and  their  numbers  are  everywhere 
so  great  as  commonly  to  reduce  the  price  of 
their  labour  to  a  very  paltry  recompense. 

Before  the  invention  of  the  art  of  printing, 
the  only  employment  by  which  a  man  of  let¬ 
ters  could  make  anything  by  his  talents  was 
that  of  a  public  or  private  teacher,  or  by 
communicating  to  other  people  the  curious 
and  useful  knowledge  which  he  had  acquired 
himself:  and  this  is  still  surely  a  more  hon¬ 


57 

ourable,  a  more  useful,  and  in  general  even 
a  more  profitable  employment  than  that  other 
of  writing  for  a  bookseller,  to  which  the  art 
of  printing  has  given  occasion.  The  time  and 
study,  the  genius,  knowledge,  and  application 
requisite  to  qualify  an  eminent  teacher  of  the 
sciences,  are  at  least  equal  to  what  is  necessary 
for  the  greatest  practitioners  in  law  and 
physic.  But  the  usual  reward  of  the  eminent 
teacher  bears  no  proportion  to  that  of  the 
lawyer  or  physician:  because  the  trade  of  the 
one  is  crowded  with  indigent  people  who  have 
been  brought  up  to  it  at  the  public  expense; 
whereas  those  of  the  other  two  are  encum¬ 
bered  with  very  few  who  have  not  been  edu¬ 
cated  at  their  own.  The  usual  recompense, 
however,  of  public  and  private  teachers,  small 
as  it  may  appear,  would  undoubtedly  be  less 
than  it  is,  if  the  competition  of  those  yet  more 
indigent  men  of  letters  who  write  for  bread 
was  not  taken  out  of  the  market.  Before  the 
invention  of  the  art  of  printing,  a  scholar  and 
a  beggar  seem  to  have  been  terms  very  nearly 
synonymous.  The  different  governors  of  the 
universities  before  that  time  appear  to  have 
often  granted  licences  to  their  scholars  to  beg. 

In  ancient  times,  before  any  charities  of 
this  kind  had  been  established  for  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  indigent  people  to  the  learned  profes¬ 
sions,  the  rewards  of  eminent  teachers  appear 
to  have  been  much  more  considerable.  Iso¬ 
crates,  in  what  is  called  his  discourse  against 
the  sophists,  reproaches  the  teachers  of  his 
own  times  with  inconsistency.  “They  make 
the  most  magnificent  promises  to  their  schol¬ 
ars,”  says  he,  “and  undertake  to  teach  them 
to  be  wise,  to  be  happy,  and  to  be  just,  and 
in  return  for  so  important  a  service  they  stip¬ 
ulate  the  paltry  reward  of  four  or  five  minse. 
They  who  teach  wisdom,”  continues  he, 
“ought  certainly  to  be  wise  themselves;  but 
if  any  man  were  to  sell  such  a  bargain  for 
such  a  price,  he  would  be  convicted  of  the 
most  evident  folly.”  He  certainly  does  not 
mean  here  to  exaggerate  the  reward,  and  we 
may  be  assured  that  it  was  not  less  than  he 
represents  it.  Four  minse  were  equal  to  thir¬ 
teen  pounds  six  shillings  and  eightpence:  five 
minse  to  sixteen  pounds  thirteen  shillings  and 
fourpence.  Something  not  less  than  the  larg¬ 
est  of  those  two  sums,  therefore,  must  at  that 
time  have  been  usually  paid  to  the  most  emi¬ 
nent  teachers  at  Athens.  Isocrates  himself  de¬ 
manded  ten  minse,  or  thirty-three  pounds  six 
shillings  and  eightpence,  from  each  scholar. 
When  he  taught  at  Athens,  he  is  said  to  have 
had  a  hundred  scholars.  I  understand  this 
to  be  the  number  whom  he  taught  at  one  time, 
or  who  attended  what  we  could  call  one  course 
of  lectures,  a  number  which  will  not  appear 
extraordinary  from  so  great  a  city  to  so  fa¬ 
mous  a  teacher,  who  taught,  too,  what  was 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


58 

at  that  time  the  most  fashionable  of  all  sci¬ 
ences,  rhetoric.  He  must  have  made,  therefore, 
by  each  course  of  lectures,  a  thousand  minse, 
or  £3333  6s.  8d.  A  thousand  minae,  according¬ 
ly,  is  said  by  Plutarch  in  another  place,  to 
have  been  his  Didactron,  or  usual  price  of 
teaching.  Many  other  eminent  teachers  in 
those  times  appear  to  have  acquired  great 
fortunes.  Gorgias  made  a  present  to  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Delphi  of  his  own  statue  in  solid  gold. 
We  must  not,  I  presume,  suppose  that  it  was 
as  large  as  the  life.  His  way  of  living,  as  well 
as  that  of  Hippias  and  Protagoras,  two  other 
eminent  teachers  of  those  times,  is  represented 
by  Plato  as  splendid  even  to  ostentation.  Plato 
himself  is  said  to  have  lived  with  a  good  deal 
of  magnificence.  Aristotle,  after  having  been 
tutor  to  Alexander,  and  most  munificently 
rewarded,  as  it  is  universally  agreed,  both  by 
him  and  his  father  Philip,  thought  it  worth 
while,  notwithstanding,  to  return  to  Athens, 
in  order  to  resume  the  teaching  of  his  school. 
Teachers  of  the  sciences  were  probably  in 
those  times  less  common  than  they  came  to 
be  in  an  age  or  two  afterwards,  when  the  com¬ 
petition  had  probably  somewhat  reduced  both 
the  price  of  their  labour  and  the  admiration 
for  their  persons.  The  most  eminent  of  them, 
however,  appear  always  to  have  enjoyed  a 
degree  of  consideration  much  superior  to  any 
of  the  like  profession  in  the  present  times. 
The  Athenians  sent  Carneades  the  Academic, 
and  Diogenes  the  Stoic,  upon  a  solemn  em¬ 
bassy  to  Rome;  and  though  their  city  had 
then  declined  from  its  former  grandeur,  it 
was  still  an  independent  and  considerable 
republic.  Carneades,  too,  was  a  Babylonian 
by  birth,  and  as  there  never  was  a  people  more 
jealous  of  admitting  foreigners  to  public  offices 
than  the  Athenians,  their  consideration  for 
him  must  have  been  very  great. 

This  inequality  is  upon  the  whole,  perhaps, 
rather  advantageous  than  hurtful  to  the  pub¬ 
lic.  It  may  somewhat  degrade  the  profession 
of  a  public  teacher;  but  the  cheapness  of  liter¬ 
ary  education  is  surely  an  advantage  which 
greatly  overbalances  this  trifling  inconven- 
iency.  The  public,  too,  might  derive  still 
greater  benefit  from  it,  if  the  constitution  of 
those  schools  and  colleges,  in  which  education 
is  carried  on,  was  more  reasonable  than  it  is 
at  present  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe. 

Thirdly,  the  policy  of  Europe,  by  obstruct¬ 
ing  the  free  circulation  of  labour  and  stock 
both  from  employment  to  employment,  and 
from  place  to  place,  occasions  in  some  cases 
a  very  incovenient  inequality  in  the  whole  of 
the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  their 
different  employments. 

The  Statute  of  Apprenticeship  obstructs 
the  free  circulation  of  labour  from  one  em¬ 
ployment  to  another,  even  in  the  same  place. 


The  exclusive  privileges  of  corporations  ob¬ 
struct  it  from  one  place  to  another,  even  in 
the  same  employment. 

It  frequently  happens  that  while  high  wages 
are  given  to  the  workmen  in  one  manufac¬ 
ture,  those  in  another  are  obliged  to  content 
themselves  with  bare  subsistence.  The  one 
is  in  an  advancing  state,  and  has,  therefore, 
a  continual  demand  for  new  hands:  the  other 
is  in  a  declining  state,  and  the  superabun¬ 
dance  of  hands  is  continually  increasing.  Those 
two  manufactures  may  sometimes  be  in  the 
same  town,  and  sometimes  in  the  same  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  without  being  able  to  lend  the 
least  assistance  to  one  another.  The  Statute 
of  Apprenticeship  may  oppose  it  in  the  one 
case,  and  both  that  and  an  exclusive  cor¬ 
poration  in  the  other.  In  many  different  man¬ 
ufactures,  however,  the  operations  are  so 
much  alike,  that  the  workmen  could  easily 
change  trades  with  one  another,  if  those  ab¬ 
surd  laws  did  not  hinder  them.  The  arts  of 
weaving  plain  linen  and  plain  silk,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  are  almost  entirely  the  same.  That  of 
weaving  plain  woollen  is  somewhat  different; 
but  the  difference  is  so  insignificant  that  ei¬ 
ther  a  linen  or  a  silk  weaver  might  become 
a  tolerable  workman  in  a  very  few  days. 
If  any  of  those  three  capital  manufactures, 
therefore,  were  decaying,  the  workmen  might 
find  a  resource  in  one  of  the  other  two  which 
was  in  a  more  prosperous  condition;  and  their 
wages  would  neither  rise  too  high  in  the 
thriving,  nor  sink  too  low  in  the  decaying 
manufacture.  The  linen  manufacture  indeed 

is,  in  England,  by  a  particular  statute,  open 
to  everybody;  but  as  it  is  not  much  culti¬ 
vated  through  the  greater  part  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  it  can  afford  no  general  resource  to  the 
workmen  of  other  decaying  manufactures, 
who,  wherever  the  Statute  of  Apprenticeship 
takes  place,  have  no  other  choice  but  either 
to  come  upon  the  parish,  or  to  work  as  com¬ 
mon  labourers,  for  which,  by  their  habits, 
they  are  much  worse  qualified  than  for  any 
sort  of  manufacture  that  bears  any  resem¬ 
blance  to  their  own.  They  generally,  there¬ 
fore,  choose  to  come  upon  the  parish. 

Whatever  obstructs  the  free  circulation 
of  labour  from  one  employment  to  another 
obstructs  that  of  stock  likewise;  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  stock  which  can  be  employed  in  any 
branch  of  business  depending  very  much 
upon  that  of  the  labour  which  can  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  it.  Corporation  laws,  however, 
give  less  obstruction  to  the  free  circulation 
of  stock  from  one  place  to  another  than  to 
that  of  labour.  It  is  everywhere  much  easier 
for  a  wealthy  merchant  to  obtain  the  privi¬ 
lege  of  trading  in  a  town  corporate,  than  for 
a  poor  artificer  to  obtain  that  of  working'  in 

it. 


59 


W ages  and  Profit 


The  obstruction  which  corporation  laws 
give  to  the  free  circulation  of  labour  is  com¬ 
mon,  I  believe,  to  every  part  of  Europe.  That 
which  is  given  to  it  by  the  Poor  Laws  is,  so 
far  as  I  know,  peculiar  to  England.  It  con¬ 
sists  in  the  difficulty  which  a  poor  man  finds 
in  obtaining  a  settlement,  or  even  in  being 
allowed  to  exercise  his  industry  in  any  parish 
but  that  to  which  he  belongs.  It  is  the  labour 
of  artificers  and  manufacturers  only  of  which 
the  free  circulation  is  obstructed  by  corpora¬ 
tion  laws.  The  difficulty  of  obtaining  settle¬ 
ments  obstructs  even  that  of  common  labour. 
It  may  be  worth  while  to  give  some  account 
of  the  rise,  progress,  and  present  state  of 
this  disorder,  the  greatest  perhaps  of  any  in 
the  police  of  England. 

When  by  the  destruction  of  monasteries 
the  poor  had  been  deprived  of  the  charity  of 
those  religious  houses,  after  some  other  in¬ 
effectual  attempts  for  their  relief,  it  was 
enacted  by  the  43rd  of  Elizabeth,  c.  2,  that 
every  parish  should  be  bound  to  provide  for 
its  own  poor;  and  that  overseers  of  the  poor 
should  be  annually  appointed,  who,  with  the 
churchwardens,  should  raise  by  a  parish  rate 
competent  sums  for  this  purpose. 

By  this  statute  the  necessity  of  providing 
for  their  own  poor  was  indispensably  im¬ 
posed  upon  every  parish.  Who  were  to  be 
considered  as  the  poor  of  each  parish  became, 
therefore,  a  question  of  some  importance. 
This  question,  after  some  variation,  was  at 
last  determined  by  the  13th  and  14th  of 
Charles  II  when  it  was  enacted,  that  forty 
days’  undisturbed  residence  should  gain  any 
person  a  settlement  in  any  parish;  but  that 
within  that  time  it  should  be  lawful  for  two 
justices  of  the  peace,  upon  complaint  made 
by  the  churchwardens  or  overseers  of  the 
poor,  to  remove  any  new  inhabitant  to  the 
parish  where  he  was  last  legally  settled;  un¬ 
less  he  either  rented  a  tenement  of  ten  pounds 
a  year,  or  could  give  such  security  for  the 
discharge  of  the  parish  where  he  was  then 
living,  as  those  justices  should  judge  suffi¬ 
cient. 

Some  frauds,  it  is  said,  were  committed  in 
consequence  of  this  statute;  parish  officers 
sometimes  bribing  their  own  poor  to  go 
clandestinely  to  another  parish,  and  by  keep¬ 
ing  themselves  concealed  for  forty  days  to 
gain  a  settlement  there,  to  the  discharge  of 
that  to  which  they  properly  belonged.  It 
was  enacted,  therefore,  by  the  1st  of  James 
II  that  the  forty  days’  undisturbed  residence 
of  any  person  necessary  to  gain  a  settlement 
should  be  accounted  only  from  the  time  of 
his  delivering  notice  in  writing,  of  the  place 
of  his  abode  and  the  number  of  his  family, 
to  one  of  the  churchwardens  or  overseers  of 
the  parish  where  he  came  to  dwell. 


But  parish  officers,  it  seems,  were  not  al¬ 
ways  more  honest  with  regard  to  their  own, 
than  they  had  been  with  regard  to  other 
parishes,  and  sometimes  connived  at  such  in¬ 
trusions,  receiving  the  notice,  and  taking  no 
proper  steps  in  consequence  of  it.  As  every 
person  in  a  parish,  therefore,  was  supposed 
to  have  an  interest  to  prevent  as  much  as 
possible  their  being  burdened  by  such  in¬ 
truders,  it  was  further  enacted  by  the  3rd 
of  William  III  that  the  forty  days’  residence 
should  be  accounted  only  from  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  such  notice  in  writing  on  Sunday  in 
the  church,  immediately  after  divine  service. 

“After  all,”  says  Doctor  Burn,  “this  kind 
of  settlement,  by  continuing  forty  days  after 
publication  of  notice  in  writing,  is  very  sel¬ 
dom  obtained;  and  the  design  of  the  acts  is 
not  so  much  for  gaining  of  settlements,  as 
for  the  avoiding  of  them,  by  persons  coming 
into  a  parish  clandestinely:  for  the  giving  of 
notice  is  only  putting  a  force  upon  the  parish 
to  remove.  But  if  a  person’s  situation  is  such, 
that  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  is  actually  re¬ 
movable  or  not,  he  shall  by  giving  of  notice 
compel  the  parish  either  to  allow  him  a  settle¬ 
ment  uncontested,  by  suffering  him  to  con¬ 
tinue  forty  days;  or,  by  removing  him,  to  try 
the  right.” 

This  statute,  therefore,  rendered  it  almost 
impracticable  for  a  poor  man  to  gain  a  new 
settlement  in  the  old  way,  by  forty  days’  in¬ 
habitancy.  But  that  it  might  not  appear  to 
preclude  altogether  the  common  people  of 
one  parish  from  ever  establishing  themselves 
with  security  in  another,  it  appointed  four 
other  ways  by  which  a  settlement  might  be 
gained  without  any  notice  delivered  or  pub¬ 
lished.  The  first  was,  by  being  taxed  to  parish 
rates  and  paying  them;  the  second,  by  being 
elected  into  an  annual  parish  office,  and  serv¬ 
ing  in  it  a  year;  the  third,  by  serving  an  ap¬ 
prenticeship  in  the  parish;  the  fourth,  by  be¬ 
ing  hired  into  service  there  for  a  year,  and 
continuing  in  the  same  service  during  the 
whole  of  it. 

Nobody  can  gain  a  settlement  by  either  of 
the  two  first  ways,  but  by  the  public  deed 
of  the  whole  parish,  who  are  too  well  aware 
of  the  consequences  to  adopt  any  new-comer 
who  has  nothing  but  his  labour  to  support 
him,  either  by  taxing  him  to  parish  rates,  or 
by  electing  him  into  a  parish  office. 

No  married  man  can  well  gain  any  settle¬ 
ment  in  either  of  the  two  last  ways.  An  ap¬ 
prentice  is  scarce  ever  married;  and  it  is  ex¬ 
pressly  enacted  that  no  married  servant  shall 
gain  any  settlement  by  being  hired  for  a  year. 
The  principal  effect  of  introducing  settlement 
by  service  has  been  to  put  out  in  a  great  meas¬ 
ure  the  old  fashion  of  hiring  for  a  year,  which 
before  had  been  so  customary  in  England, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


GO 

that  even  at  this  day,  if  no  particular  term 
is  agreed  upon,  the  law  intends  that  every 
servant  is  hired  for  a  year.  But  masters  are 
not  always  willing  to  give  their  servants  a 
settlement  by  hiring  them  in  this  manner;  and 
servants  are  not  always  willing  to  be  so  hired, 
because,  as  every  last  settlement  discharges 
all  the  foregoing,  they  might  thereby  lose 
their  original  settlement  in  the  places  of  their 
nativity,  the  habitation  of  their  parents  and 
relations. 

No  independent  workman,  it  is  evident, 
whether  labourer  or  artificer,  is  likely  to  gain 
any  new  settlement  either  by  apprenticeship 
or  by  service.  When  such  a  person,  therefore, 
carried  his  industry  to  a  new  parish,  he  was 
liable  to  be  removed,  how  healthy  and  indus¬ 
trious  soever,  at  the  caprice  of  any  church¬ 
warden  or  overseer,  unless  he  either  rented  a 
tenement  of  ten  pounds  a  year,  a  thing  impos¬ 
sible  for  one  who  has  nothing  but  his  labour 
to  live  by;  or  could  give  such  security  for  the 
discharge  of  the  parish  as  two  justices  of  the 
peace  should  judge  sufficient.  What  security 
they  shall  require,  indeed,  is  left  altogether  to 
their  discretion;  but  they  cannot  well  require 
less  than  thirty  pounds,  it  having  been  enact¬ 
ed  that  the  purchase  even  of  a  freehold  estate 
of  less  than  thirty  pounds’  value  shall  not 
gain  any  person  a  settlement,  as  not  being 
sufficient  for  the  discharge  of  the  parish.  But 
this  is  a  security  which  scarce  any  man  who 
lives  by  labour  can  give;  and  much  greater 
security  is  frequently  demanded. 

In  order  to  restore  in  some  measure  that 
free  circulation  of  labour  which  those  differ¬ 
ent  statutes  had  almost  entirely  taken  away, 
the  invention  of  certificates  was  fallen  upon. 
By  the  8th  and  9th  of  William  III  it  was 
enacted  that  if  any  person  should  bring  a 
certificate  from  the  parish  where  he  was  last 
legally  settled,  subscribed  by  the  churchwar¬ 
dens  and  overseers  of  the  poor,  and  allowed 
by  two  justices  of  the  peace,  that  every  other 
parish  should  be  obliged  to  receive  him;  that 
he  should  not  be  removable  merely  upon  ac¬ 
count  of  his  being  likely  to  become  charge¬ 
able,  but  only  upon  his  becoming  actually 
chargeable,  and  that  then  the  parish  which 
granted  the  certificate  should  be  obliged  to 
pay  the  expense  both  of  his  maintenance  and 
of  his  removal.  And  in  order  to  give  the  most 
perfect  security  to  the  parish  where  such  cer¬ 
tificated  man  should  come  to  reside,  it  was 
further  enacted  by  the  same  statute  that  he 
should  gain  no  settlement  there  by  any  means 
whatever,  except  either  by  renting  a  tenement 
cr  ten  pounds  a  year,  or  by  serving  upon  his 
own  account  in  an  annual  parish  office  for  one 
whole  year;  and  consequently  neither  by  no¬ 
tice,  nor  by  service,  nor  by  apprenticeship, 
nor  by  paying  parish  rates.  By  the  12th  of 


Queen  Anne,  too,  stat.  1,  c.  18,  it  was  further 
enacted  that  neither  the  servants  nor  appren¬ 
tices  of  such  certificated  man  should  gain  any 
settlement  in  the  parish  where  he  resided  un¬ 
der  such  certificate. 

How  far  this  invention  has  restored  that 
free  circulation  of  labour  which  the  preced¬ 
ing  statutes  had  almost  entirely  taken  away, 
we  may  learn  from  the  following  very  judi¬ 
cious  observation  of  Doctor  Burn.  “It  is  ob¬ 
vious,”  says  he,  “that  there  are  divers  good 
reasons  for  requiring  certificates  with  persons 
coming  to  settle  in  any  place;  namely,  that 
persons  residing  under  them  can  gain  no  set¬ 
tlement,  neither  by  apprenticeship,  nor  by 
service,  nor  by  giving  notice,  nor  by  paying 
parish  rates;  that  they  can  settle  neither  ap¬ 
prentices  nor  servants;  that  if  they  become 
chargeable,  it  is  certainly  known  whither  to 
remove  them,  and  the  parish  shall  be  paid  for 
the  removal,  and  for  their  maintenance  in 
the  meantime;  and  that  if  they  fall  sick,  and 
cannot  be  removed,  the  parish  which  gave 
the  certificate  must  maintain  them:  none  of 
all  which  can  be  without  a  certificate.  Which 
reasons  will  hold  proportionably  for  parishes 
not  granting  certificates  in  ordinary  cases;  for 
it  is  far  more  than  an  equal  chance,  but  that 
they  will  have  the  certificated  persons  again, 
and  in  a  worse  condition.”  The  moral  of  this 
observation  seems  to  be  that  certificates 
ought  always  to  be  required  by  the  parish 
where  any  poor  man  comes  to  reside,  and  that 
they  ought  very  seldom  to  be  granted  by  that 
which  he  proposes  to  leave.  “There  is  some¬ 
what  of  hardship  in  this  matter  of  certifi¬ 
cates,”  says  the  same  very  intelligent  author 
in  his  History  of  the  Poor  Laws ,  “by  putting 
it  in  the  power  of  a  parish  officer  to  imprison 
a  man  as  it  were  for  life;  however  inconven¬ 
ient  it  may  be  for  him  to  continue  at  that 
place  where  he  has  had  the  misfortune  to  ac¬ 
quire  what  is  called  a  settlement,  or  whatever 
advantage  he  may  propose  to  himself  by  liv¬ 
ing  elsewhere.” 

Though  a  certificate  carries  along  with  it 
no  testimonial  of  good  behaviour,  and  certifies 
nothing  but  that  the  person  belongs  to  the 
parish  to  which  he  really  does  belong,  it  is  al¬ 
together  discretionary  in  the  parish  officers 
either  to  grant  or  to  refuse  it.  A  mandamus 
was  once  moved  for,  says  Doctor  Burn,  to 
compel  the  churchwardens  and  overseers  to 
sign  a  certificate;  but  the  court  of  King’s 
Bench  rejected  the  motion  as  a  very  strange 
attempt. 

The  very  unequal  price  of  labour  which  we 
frequently  find  in  England  in  places  at  no 
great  distance  from  one  another  is  probably 
owing  to  the  obstruction  which  the  law  of 
settlements  gives  to  a  poor  man  who  would 
carry  his  industry  from  one  parish  to  another 


61 


Wages  and  Profit 


without  a  certificate.  A  single  man,  indeed, 
who  is  healthy  and  industrious,  may  some¬ 
times  reside  by  sufferance  without  one;  but  a 
man  with  a  wife  and  family  who  should  at¬ 
tempt  to  do  so  would  in  most  parishes  be 
sure  of  being  removed,  and  if  the  single  man 
should  afterwards  marry,  he  would  generally 
be  removed  likewise.  The  scarcity  of  hands 
in  one  parish,  therefore,  cannot  always  be  re¬ 
lieved  by  their  superabundance  in  another,  as 
it  is  constantly  in  Scotland,  and,  I  believe, 
in  all  other  countries  where  there  is  no  diffi¬ 
culty  of  settlement.  In  such  countries,  though 
wages  may  sometimes  rise  a  little  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  great  town,  or  wherever 
else  there  is  an  extraordinary  demand  for 
labour,  and  sink  gradually  as  the  distance 
from  such  places  increases,  till  they  fall  back 
to  the  common  rate  of  the  country;  yet  we 
never  meet  with  those  sudden  and  unaccount¬ 
able  differences  in  the  wages  of  neighbouring 
places  which  we  sometimes  find  in  England, 
where  it  is  often  more  difficult  for  a  poor  man 
to  pass  the  artificial  boundary  of  a  parish 
than  an  arm  of  the  sea  or  a  ridge  of  high 
mountains,  natural  boundaries  which  some¬ 
times  separate  very  distinctly  different  rates 
of  wages  in  other  countries. 

To  remove  a  man  who  has  committed  no 
misdemeanour  from  the  parish  where  he 
chooses  to  reside  is  an  evident  violation  of 
natural  liberty  and  justice.  The  common  peo¬ 
ple  of  England,  however,  so  jealous  of  their 
liberty,  but  like  the  common  people  of  most 
other  countries  never  rightly  understanding 
wherein  it  consists,  have  now  for  more  than  a 
century  together  suffered  themselves  to  be 
exposed  to  this  oppression  without  a  remedy. 
Though  men  of  reflection,  too,  have  some¬ 
times  complained  of  the  law  of  settlements 
as  a  public  grievance;  yet  it  has  never  been 
the  object  of  any  general  popular  clamour, 
such  as  that  against  general  warrants,  an 
abusive  practice  undoubtedly,  but  such  a  one 
as  was  not  likely  to  occasion  any  general  op¬ 
pression.  There  is  scarce  a  poor  man  in  Eng¬ 
land  of  forty  years  of  age,  I  will  venture  to 
say,  who  has  not  in  some  part  of  his  life  felt 
himself  most  cruelly  oppressed  by  this  ill- 
contrived  law  of  settlements. 

I  shall  conclude  this  long  chapter  with  ob¬ 
serving  that,  though  anciently  it  was  usual  to 
rate  wages,  first  by  general  laws  extending 
over  the  whole  kingdom,  and  afterwards  by 
particular  orders  of  the  justices  of  peace  in 
every  particular  county,  both  these  practices 
have  now  gone  entirely  into  disuse.  “By  the 
experience  of  above  four  hundred  years,”  says 
Doctor  Burn,  “it  seems  time  to  lay  aside  all 
endeavours  to  bring  under  strict  regulations, 
what  in  its  own  nature  seems  incapable  of 
minute  limitation;  for  if  all  persons  in  the 


same  kind  of  work  were  to  receive  equal 
wages,  there  would  be  no  emulation,  and  no 
room  left  for  industry  or  ingenuity.” 

Particular  Acts  of  Parliament,  however, 
still  attempt  sometimes  to  regulate  wages  in 
particular  trades  and  in  particular  places. 
Thus  the  8th  of  George  III  prohibits  under 
heavy  penalties  all  master  tailors  in  London, 
and  five  miles  round  it,  from  giving,  and  their 
workmen  from  accepting,  more  than  two  shil¬ 
lings  and  sevenpence  halfpenny  a  day,  except 
in  the  case  of  a  general  mourning.  Whenever 
the  legislature  attempts  to  regulate  the  differ¬ 
ences  between  masters  and  their  workmen,  its 
counsellors  are  always  the  masters.  When  the 
regulation,  therefore,  is  in  favour  of  the  work¬ 
men,  it  is  always  just  and  equitable;  but  it  is 
sometimes  otherwise  when  in  favour  of  the 
masters.  Thus  the  law  which  obliges  the  mas¬ 
ters  in  several  different  trades  to  pay  their 
workmen  in  money  and  not  in  goods  is  quite 
just  and  equitable.  It  imposes  no  real  hard¬ 
ship  upon  the  masters.  It  only  obliges  them  to 
pay  that  value  in  money,  which  they  pretend¬ 
ed  to  pay,  but  did  not  always  really  pay,  in 
goods.  This  law  is  in  favour  of  the  workmen: 
but  the  8th  of  George  III  is  in  favour  of  the 
masters.  When  masters  combine  together  in 
order  to  reduce  the  wages  of  their  workmen, 
they  commonly  enter  into  a  private  bond  or 
agreement  not  to  give  more  than  a  certain 
wage  under  a  certain  penalty.  Were  the  work¬ 
men  to  enter  into  a  contrary  combination  of 
the  same  kind,  not  to  accept  of  a  certain  wage 
under  a  certain  penalty,  the  law  would  punish 
them  very  severely;  and  if  it  dealt  impartially, 
it  would  treat  the  masters  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner.  But  the  8th  of  George  III  enforces  by 
law  that  very  regulation  which  masters  some¬ 
times  attempt  to  establish  by  such  combina¬ 
tions.  The  complaint  of  the  workmen,  that  it 
puts  the  ablest  and  most  industrious  upon  the 
same  footing  with  an  ordinary  workman, 
seems  perfectly  well  founded. 

In  ancient  times,  too,  it  was  usual  to  at¬ 
tempt  to  regulate  the  profits  of  merchants 
and  other  dealers,  by  rating  the  price  both 
of  provisions  and  other  goods.  The  assize  of 
bread  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  only  remnant 
of  this  ancient  usage.  Where  there  is  an  ex¬ 
clusive  corporation,  it  may  perhaps  be  proper 
to  regulate  the  price  of  the  first  necessary  of 
life.  But  where  there  is  none,  the  competition 
will  regulate  it  much  better  than  any  assize. 
The  method  of  fixing  the  assize  of  bread  es¬ 
tablished  by  the  31st  of  George  II  could  not 
be  put  in  practice  in  Scotland,  on  account  of 
a  defect  in  the  law;  its  execution  depending 
upon  the  office  of  a  clerk  of  the  market,  which 
does  not  exist  there.  This  defect  was  not 
remedied  till  the  3rd  of  George  III.  The  want 
of  an  assize  occasioned  no  sensible  inconven- 


62 


The  Wealth 

iency,  and  the  establishment  of  one,  in  the 
few  places  where  it  has  yet  taken  place,  has 
produced  no  sensible  advantage.  In  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  the  towns  of  Scotland,  however, 
there  is  an  incorporation  of  bakers  who  claim 
exclusive  privileges,  though  they  are  not  very 
strictly  guarded. 

The  proportion  between  the  different  rates 
both  of  wages  and  profit  in  the  different 
employments  of  labour  and  stock,  seems  not 
to  be  much  affected,  as  has  already  been  ob¬ 
served,  by  the  riches  or  poverty,  the  advanc¬ 
ing,  stationary,  or  declining  state  of  the  so¬ 
ciety.  Such  revolutions  in  the  public  welfare, 
though  they  affect  the  general  rates  both  of 
wages  and  profit,  must  in  the  end  affect  them 
equally  in  all  different  employments.  The  pro¬ 
portion  between  them,  therefore,  must  re¬ 
main  the  same,  and  cannot  well  be  altered,  at 
least  for  any  considerable  time,  by  any  such 
revolutions. 

CHAPTER  XI 
Of  the  Rent  of  Land 

Rent,  considered  as  the  price  paid  for  the 
use  of  land,  is  naturally  the  highest  which  the 
tenant  can  afford  to  pay  in  the  actual  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  land.  In  adjusting  the  terms  of 
the  lease,  the  landlord  endeavours  to  leave 
him  no  greater  share  of  the  produce  than 
what  is  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  stock  from 
which  he  furnishes  the  seed,  pays  the  labour, 
and  purchases  and  maintains  the  cattle  and 
other  instruments  of  husbandry,  together  with 
the  ordinary  profits  of  farming  stock  in  the 
neighbourhood.  This  is  evidently  the  smallest 
share  with  which  the  tenant  can  content  him¬ 
self  without  being  a  loser,  and  the  landlord 
seldom  means  to  leave  him  any  more.  What¬ 
ever  part  of  the  produce,  or,  what  is  the  same 
thing,  whatever  part  of  its  price  is  over  and 
above  this  share,  he  naturally  endeavours  to 
reserve  to  himself  as  the  rent  of  his  land, 
which  is  evidently  the  highest  the  tenant  can 
afford  to  pay  in  the  actual  circumstances  of 
the  land.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  liberality, 
more  frequently  the  ignorance,  of  the  land¬ 
lord,  makes  him  accept  of  somewhat  less  than 
this  portion;  and  sometimes  too,  though  more 
rarely,  the  ignorance  of  the  tenant  makes  him 
undertake  to  pay  somewhat  more,  or  to  con¬ 
tent  himself  with  somewhat  less  than  the  or¬ 
dinary  profits  of  farming  stock  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  This  portion,  however,  may  still  be 
considered  as  the  natural  rent  of  land,  or  the 
rent  for  which  it  is  naturally  meant  that  land 
should  for  the  most  part  be  let. 

The  rent  of  land,  it  may  be  thought,  is  fre¬ 
quently  no  more  than  a  reasonable  profit  or 
interest  for  the  stock  laid  out  by  the  landlord 
upon  its  improvement.  This,  no  doubt,  may 


of  Nations 

be  partly  the  case  upon  some  occasions;  for 
it  can  scarce  ever  be  more  than  partly  the 
case.  The  landlord  demands  a  rent  even  for 
unimproved  land,  and  the  supposed  interest 
or  profit  upon  the  expense  of  improvement  is 
generally  an  addition  to  this  original  rent. 
Those  improvements,  besides,  are  not  always 
made  by  the  stock  of  the  landlord,  but  some¬ 
times  by  that  of  the  tenant.  When  the  lease 
comes  to  be  renewed,  however,  the  landlord 
commonly  demands  the  same  augmentation 
of  rent  as  if  they  had  been  all  made  by  his 
own. 

He  sometimes  demands  rent  for  what  is  al¬ 
together  incapable  of  human  improvement. 
Kelp  is  a  species  of  sea-weed,  which,  when 
burnt,  yields  an  alkaline  salt,  useful  for  mak¬ 
ing  glass,  soap,  and  for  several  other  pur¬ 
poses.  It  grows  in  several  parts  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain,  particularly  in  Scotland,  upon  such  rocks 
only  as  lie  within  the  high  water  mark,  which 
are  twice  every  day  covered  with  the  sea, 
and  of  which  the  produce,  therefore,  was 
never  augmented  by  human  industry.  The 
landlord,  however,  whose  estate  is  bounded 
by  a  kelp  shore  of  this  kind,  demands  a  rent 
for  it  as  much  as  for  his  corn  fields. 

The  sea  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  islands 
of  Shetland  is  more  than  commonly  abundant 
in  fish,  which  makes  a  great  part  of  the  sub¬ 
sistence  of  their  inhabitants.  But  in  order  to 
profit  by  the  produce  of  the  water,  they  must 
have  a  habitation  upon  the  neighbouring  land. 
The  rent  of  the  landlord  is  in  proportion,  not 
to  what  the  farmer  can  make  by  the  land,  but 
to  what  he  can  make  both  by  the  land  and 
by  the  water.  It  is  partly  paid  in  sea-fish;  and 
one  of  the  very  few  instances  in  which  rent 
makes  a  part  of  the  price  of  that  commodity 
is  to  be  found  in  that  country. 

The  rent  of  the  land,  therefore,  considered 
as  the  price  paid  for  the  use  of  the  land,  is 
naturally  a  monopoly  price.  It  is  not  at  all 
proportioned  to  what  the  landlord  may  have 
laid  out  upon  the  improvement  of  the  land, 
or  to  what  he  can  afford  to  take;  but  to  what 
the  farmer  can  afford  to  give. 

Such  parts  only  of  the  produce  of  land  can 
commonly  be  brought  to  market  of  which  the 
ordinary  price  is  sufficient  to  replace  the  stock 
which  must  be  employed  in  bringing  them 
thither,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits.  If 
the  ordinary  price  is  more  than  this,  the  sur¬ 
plus  part  of  it  will  naturally  go  to  the  rent 
of  land.  If  it  is  not  more,  though  the  commod¬ 
ity  may  be  brought  to  market,  it  can  afford 
no  rent  to  the  landlord.  Whether  the  price  is 
or  is  not  more  depends  upon  the  demand. 

There  are  some  parts  of  the  produce  of  land 
for  which  the  demand  must  always  be  such 
as  to  afford  a  greater  price  than  what  is  suffi¬ 
cient  to  bring  them  to  market;  and  there  are 


The  Rent  of  Land 


others  for  which  it  either  may  or  may  not  be 
such  as  to  afford  this  greater  price.  The  for¬ 
mer  must  always  afford  a  rent  to  the  land¬ 
lord.  The  latter  sometimes  may,  and  some¬ 
times  may  not,  according  to  different  circum¬ 
stances. 

Rent,  it  is  to  be  observed,  therefore,  enters 
into  the  composition  of  the  price  of  commod¬ 
ities  in  a  different  way  from  wages  and  profit. 
High  or  low  wages  and  profit  are  the  causes 
of  high  or  low  price;  high  or  low  rent  is  the 
effect  of  it.  It  is  because  high  or  low  wages 
and  profit  must  be  paid,  in  order  to  bring  a 
particular  commodity  to  market,  that  its 
price  is  high  or  low.  But  it  is  because  its  price 


63 

is  high  or  low;  a  great  deal  more,  or  very  lit¬ 
tle  more,  or  no  more,  than  what  is  sufficient 
to  pay  those  wages  and  profit,  that  it  affords 
a  high  rent,  or  a  low  rent,  or  no  rent  at  all. 

The  particular  consideration,  first,  of  those 
parts  of  the  produce  of  land  which  always 
afford  some  rent;  secondly,  of  those  which 
sometimes  may  and  sometimes  may  not  afford 
rent;  and,  thirdly,  of  the  variations  which,  in 
the  different  periods  of  improvement,  natur¬ 
ally  take  place  in  the  relative  value  of  those 
two  different  sorts  of  rude  produce,  when 
compared  both  with  one  another  and  with 
manufactured  commodities,  will  divide  this 
chapter  into  three  parts. 


Part  1 

Of  the  Produce  of  Land  which  always  affords  Rent 


As  men,  like  all  other  animals,  naturally 
multiply  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  their 
subsistence,  food  is  always,  more  or  less,  in 
demand.  It  can  always  purchase  or  command 
a  greater  or  smaller  quantity  of  labour,  and 
somebody  can  always  be  found  who  is  will¬ 
ing  to  do  something  in  order  to  obtain  it.  The 
quantity  of  labour,  indeed,  which  it  can  pur¬ 
chase  is  not  always  equal  to  what  it  could 
maintain,  if  managed  in  the  most  economical 
manner,  on  account  of  the  high  wages  which 
are  sometimes  given  to  labour.  But  it  can 
always  purchase  such  a  quantity  of  labour 
as  it  can  maintain,  according  to  the  rate  at 
which  the  sort  of  labour  is  commonly  main¬ 
tained  in  the  neighbourhood. 

But  land,  in  almost  any  situation,  produces 
a  greater  quantity  of  food  than  what  is  suffi¬ 
cient  to  maintain  all  the  labour  necessary  for 
bringing  it  to  market  in  the  most  liberal  way 
in  which  that  labour  is  ever  maintained.  The 
surplus,  too,  is  always  more  than  sufficient 
to  replace  the  stock  which  employed  that  la¬ 
bour,  together  with  its  profits.  Something, 
therefore,  always  remains  for  a  rent  to  the 
landlord. 

The  most  desert  moors  in  Norway  and  Scot¬ 
land  produce  some  sort  of  pasture  for  cattle, 
of  which  the  milk  and  the  increase  are  always 
more  than  sufficient,  not  only  to  maintain  all 
the  labour  necessary  for  tending  them,  and  to 
pay  the  ordinary  profit  to  the  farmer  or  own¬ 
er  of  the  herd  or  flock;  but  to  afford  some 
small  rent  to  the  landlord.  The  rent  increases 
in  proportion  to  the  goodness  of  the  pasture. 
The  same  extent  of  ground  not  only  main¬ 
tains  a  greater  number  of  cattle,  but  as  they 
are  brought  within  a  smaller  compass,  less 
labour  becomes  requisite  to  tend  them,  and  to 
collect  their  produce.  The  landlord  gains  both 
ways,  by  the  increase  of  the  produce  and  by 
the  diminution  of  the  labour  which  must  be 
maintained  out  of  it. 


The  rent  of  land  not  only  varies  with  its 
fertility,  whatever  be  its  produce,  but  with  its 
situation,  whatever  be  its  fertility.  Land  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  a  town  gives  a  greater 
rent  than  land  equally  fertile  in  a  distant  part 
of  the  country.  Though  it  may  cost  no  more 
labour  to  cultivate  the  one  than  the  other,  it 
must  always  cost  more  to  bring  the  produce 
of  the  distant  land  to  market.  A  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour,  therefore,  must  be  maintained 
out  of  it;  and  the  surplus,  from  which  are 
drawn  both  the  profit  of  the  farmer  and  the 
rent  of  the  landlord,  must  be  diminished.  But 
in  remote  parts  of  the  country  the  rate  of 
profits,  as  has  already  been  shown,  is  general¬ 
ly  higher  than  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  large 
town.  A  smaller  proportion  of  this  diminished 
surplus,  therefore,  must  belong  to  the  land¬ 
lord. 

Good  roads,  canals,  and  navigable  rivers, 
by  diminishing  the  expense  of  carriage,  put 
the  remote  parts  of  the  country  more  nearly 
upon  a  level  with  those  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  town.  They  are  upon  that  account  the 
greatest  of  all  improvements.  They  encourage 
the  cultivation  of  the  remote,  which  must  al¬ 
ways  be  the  most  extensive  circle  of  the  coun¬ 
try.  They  are  advantageous  to  the  town,  by 
breaking  down  the  monopoly  of  the  country 
in  its  neighbourhood.  They  are  advantageous 
even  to  that  part  of  the  country.  Though  they 
introduce  some  rival  commodities  into  the  old 
market,  they  open  many  new  markets  to  its 
produce.  Monopoly,  besides,  is  a  great  enemy 
to  good  management,  which  can  never  be  uni¬ 
versally  established  but  in  consequence  of 
that  free  and  universal  competition  which 
forces  everybody  to  have  recourse  to  it  for 
the  sake  of  self-defence.  It  is  not  more  than 
fifty  years  ago  that  some  of  the  counties  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  London  petitioned  the 
Parliament  against  the  extension  of  the  turn¬ 
pike  roads  into  the  remoter  counties.  Those 


64  The  Wealth 

remoter  counties,  they  pretended,  from  the 
cheapness  of  labour,  would  be  able  to  sell 
their  grass  and  corn  cheaper  in  the  London 
market  than  themselves,  and  would  thereby 
reduce  their  rents,  and  ruin  their  cultivation. 
Their  rents,  however,  have  risen,  and  their 
cultivation  has  been  improved  since  that  time. 

A  cornfield  of  moderate  fertility  produces 
a  much  greater  quantity  of  food  for  man  than 
the  best  pasture  of  equal  extent.  Though  its 
cultivation  requires  much  more  labour,  yet 
the  surplus  which  remains  after  replacing  the 
seed  and  maintaining  all  that  labour,  is  like¬ 
wise  much  greater.  If  a  pound  of  butcher’s 
meat,  therefore,  was  never  supposed  to  be 
worth  more  than  a  pound  of  bread,  this  great¬ 
er  surplus  would  everywhere  be  of  greater 
value,  and  constitute  a  greater  fund  both  for 
the  profit  of  the  farmer  and  the  rent  of  the 
landlord.  It  seems  to  have  done  so  universal¬ 
ly  in  the  rude  beginnings  of  agriculture. 

But  the  relative  values  of  those  two  differ¬ 
ent  species  of  food,  bread  and  butcher’s  meat, 
are  very  different  in  the  different  periods  of 
agriculture.  In  its  rude  beginnings,  the  unim¬ 
proved  wilds,  which  then  occupy  the  far 
greater  part  of  the  country,  are  all  abandoned 
to  cattle.  There  is  more  butcher’s  meat  than 
bread,  and  bread,  therefore,  is  the  food  for 
which  there  is  the  greatest  competition,  and 
which  consequently  brings  the  greatest  price. 
At  Buenos  Ayres,  we  are  told  by  Ulloa,  four 
reals,  one-and-twenty  pence  halfpenny  ster¬ 
ling,  was,  forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  the  ordinary 
price  of  an  ox,  chosen  from  a  herd  of  two  or 
three  hundred.  He  says  nothing  of  the  price 
of  bread,  probably  because  he  found  nothing 
remarkable  about  it.  An  ox  there,  he  says, 
cost  little  more  than  the  labour  of  catching 
him.  But  corn  can  nowhere  be  raised  without 
a  great  deal  of  labour,  and  in  a  country  which 
lies  upon  the  river  Plate,  at  that  time  the  di¬ 
rect  road  from  Europe  to  the  silver  mines  of 
Potosi,  the  money  price  of  labour  could  not 
be  very  cheap.  It  is  otherwise  when  cultiva¬ 
tion  is  extended  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
country.  There  is  then  more  bread  than 
butcher’s  meat.  The  competition  changes  its 
direction,  and  the  price  of  butcher’s  meat  be¬ 
comes  greater  than  the  price  of  bread. 

By  the  extension  besides  of  cultivation,  the 
unimproved  wilds  become  insufficient  to  sup¬ 
ply  the  demand  for  butcher’s  meat.  A  great 
part  of  the  cultivated  lands  must  be  employed 
in  rearing  and  fattening  cattle,  of  which  the 
price,  therefore,  must  be  sufficient  to  pay,  not 
only  the  labour  necessary  for  tending  them, 
but  the  rent  which  the  landlord  and  the  profit 
which  the  farmer  could  have  drawn  from  such 
land  employed  in  tillage.  The  cattle  bred  upon 
the  most  uncultivated  moors,  when  brought 
to  the  same  market,  are,  in  proportion  to  their 


of  Nations 

weight  or  goodness,  sold  at  the  same  price  as 
those  which  are  reared  upon  the  most  im¬ 
proved  land.  The  proprietors  of  those  moors 
profit  by  it,  and  raise  the  rent  of  their  land  in 
proportion  to  the  price  of  their  cattle.  It  is 
not  more  than  a  century  ago  that  in  many 
parts  of  the  highlands  of  Scotland,  butcher’s 
meat  was  as  cheap  or  cheaper  than  even  bread 
made  of  oatmeal.  The  union  opened  the  mar¬ 
ket  of  England  to  the  highland  cattle.  Their 
ordinary  price  is  at  present  about  three  times 
greater  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  century, 
and  the  rents  of  many  highland  estates  have 
been  tripled  and  quadrupled  in  the  same  time. 
In  almost  every  part  of  Great  Britain  a 
pound  of  the  best  butcher’s  meat  is,  in  the 
present  times,  generally  worth  more  than  two 
pounds  of  the  best  white  bread;  and  in  plen¬ 
tiful  years  it  is  sometimes  worth  three  or  four 
pounds. 

It  is  thus  that  in  the  progress  of  improve¬ 
ment  the  rent  and  profit  of  unimproved  pas¬ 
ture  come  to  be  regulated  in  some  measure 
by  the  rent  and  profit  of  what  is  improved, 
and  these  again  by  the  rent  and  profit  of 
corn.  Corn  is  an  annual  crop.  Butcher’s  meat, 
a  crop  which  requires  four  or  five  years  to 
grow.  As  an  acre  of  land,  therefore,  will  pro¬ 
duce  a  much  smaller  quantity  of  the  one 
species  of  food  than  of  the  other,  the  inferior¬ 
ity  of  the  quantity  must  be  compensated  by 
the  superiority  of  the  price.  If  it  was  more 
than  compensated,  more  corn  land  would  be 
turned  into  pasture;  and  if  it  was  not  com¬ 
pensated,  part  of  what  was  in  pasture  would 
be  brought  back  into  corn. 

This  equality,  however,  between  the  rent 
and  profit  of  grass  and  those  of  corn;  of  the 
land  of  which  the  immediate  produce  is  food 
for  cattle,  and  of  that  of  which  the  imme¬ 
diate  produce  is  food  for  men;  must  be  un¬ 
derstood  to  take  place  only  through  the 
greater  part  of  the  improved  lands  of  a  great 
country.  In  some  particular  local  situations  it 
is  quite  otherwise,  and  the  rent  and  profit  of 
grass  are  much  superior  to  what  can  be  made 
by  corn. 

Thus  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  great  town 
the  demand  for  milk  and  for  forage  to  horses 
frequently  contribute,  together  with  the  high 
price  of  butcher’s  meat,  to  raise  the  value  of 
grass  above  what  may  be  called  its  natural 
proportion  to  that  of  corn.  This  local  advan¬ 
tage,  it  is  evident,  cannot  be  communicated 
to  the  lands  at  a  distance. 

Particular  circumstances  have  sometimes 
rendered  some  countries  so  populous  that  the 
whole  territory,  like  the  lands  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  a  great  town,  has  not  been  suffi¬ 
cient  to  produce  both  the  grass  and  the  corn 
necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  their  inhabi¬ 
tants.  Their  lands,  therefore,  have  been  prin- 


65 


The  Rent  of  Land 


cipally  employed  in  the  production  of  grass, 
the  more  bulky  commodity,  and  which  can¬ 
not  be  so  easily  brought  from  a  great  dis¬ 
tance;  and  corn,  the  food  of  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  has  been  chiefly  imported  from 
foreign  countries.  Holland  is  at  present  in 
this  situation,  and  a  considerable  part  of  an¬ 
cient  Italy  seems  to  have  been  so  during  the 
prosperity  of  the  Romans.  To  feed  well,  old 
Cato  said,  as  we  are  told  by  Cicero,  was  the 
first  and  most  profitable  thing  in  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  a  private  estate;  to  feed  tolerably 
well,  the  second;  and  to  feed  ill,  the  third. 
To  plough,  he  ranked  only  in  the  fourth  place 
of  profit  and  advantage.  Tillage,  indeed,  in 
that  part  of  ancient  Italy  which  lay  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Rome,  must  have  been  very 
much  discouraged  by  the  distributions  of 
corn  which  were  frequently  made  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  either  gratuitously,  or  at  a  very  low  price. 
This  corn  was  brought  from  the  conquered 
provinces,  of  which  several,  instead  of  taxes, 
were  obliged  to  furnish  a  tenth  part  of  their 
produce  at  a  stated  price,  about  sixpence  a 
peck,  to  the  republic.  The  low  price  at  which 
this  corn  was  distributed  to  the  people  must 
necessarily  have  sunk  the  price  of  what  could 
be  brought  to  the  Roman  market  from  La- 
tium,  or  the  ancient  territory  of  Rome,  and 
must  have  discouraged  its  cultivation  in  that 
country. 

In  an  open  country  too,  of  which  the  prin¬ 
cipal  produce  is  corn,  a  well-enclosed  piece 
of  grass  will  frequently  rent  higher  than  any 
corn  field  in  its  neighbourhood.  It  is  conven¬ 
ient  for  the  maintenance  of  the  cattle  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  cultivation  of  the  corn,  and  its 
high  rent  is,  in  this  case,  not  so  properly  paid 
from  the  value  of  its  own  produce  as  from 
that  of  the  corn  lands  which  are  cultivated  by 
means  of  it.  It  is  likely  to  fall,  if  ever  the 
neighbouring  lands  are  completely  enclosed. 
The  present  high  rent  of  enclosed  land  in 
Scotland  seems  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  en¬ 
closure,  and  will  probably  last  no  longer  than 
that  scarcity.  The  advantage  of  enclosure  is 
greater  for  pasture  than  for  corn.  It  saves 
the  labour  of  guarding  the  cattle,  which  feed 
better,  too,  when  they  are  not  liable  to  be 
disturbed  by  their  keeper  or  his  dog. 

But  where  there  is  no  local  advantage  of 
this  kind,  the  rent  and  profit  of  corn,  or  what¬ 
ever  else  is  the  common  vegetable  food  of 
the  people,  must  naturally  regulate,  upon  the 
land  which  is  fit  for  producing  it,  the  rent 
and  profit  of  pasture. 

The  use  of  the  artificial  grasses,  of  turnips, 
carrots,  cabbages,  and  the  other  expedients 
which  have  been  fallen  upon  to  make  an  equal 
quantity  of  land  feed  a  greater  number  of 
cattle  than  when  in  natural  grass,  should 
somewhat  reduce,  it  might  be  expected,  the 


superiority  which,  in  an  improved  country, 
the  price  of  butcher’s  meat  naturally  has 
over  that  of  bread.  It  seems  accordingly  to 
have  done  so;  and  there  is  some  reason  for 
believing  that,  at  least  in  the  London  market, 
the  price  of  butcher’s  meat  in  proportion  to 
the  price  of  bread  is  a  good  deal  lower  in  the 
present  times  than  it  was  in  the  beginning 
of  the  last  century. 

In  the  appendix  to  the  Life  of  Prince  Henry , 
Doctor  Birch  has  given  us  an  account  of  the 
prices  of  butcher’s  meat  as  commonly  paid  by 
that  prince.  It  is  there  said  that  the  four  quar¬ 
ters  of  an  ox  weighing  six  hundred  pounds 
usually  cost  him  nine  pounds  ten  shillings, 
or  thereabouts;  that  is,  thirty-one  shillings 
and  eightpence  per  hundred  pounds  weight. 
Prince  Henry  died  on  the  6th  of  November 
1612,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  his  age. 

In  March  1764,  there  was  a  Parliamentary 
inquiry  into  the  causes  of  the  high  price  of 
provisions  at  that  time.  It  was  then,  among 
other  proof  to  the  same  purpose,  given  in  evi¬ 
dence  by  a  Virginia  merchant,  that  in  March 
1763,  he  had  victualled  his  ships  for  twenty- 
four  or  twenty-five  shillings  the  hundred¬ 
weight  of  beef,  which  he  considered  as  the 
ordinary  price;  whereas,  in  that  dear  year,  he 
had  paid  twenty-seven  shillings  for  the  same 
weight  and  sort.  This  high  price  in  1764  is, 
however,  four  shillings  and  eightpence  cheaper 
than  the  ordinary  price  paid  by  Prince  Henry; 
and  it  is  the  best  beef  only,  it  must  be  ob¬ 
served,  which  is  fit  to  be  salted  for  those  dis¬ 
tant  voyages. 

The  price  paid  by  Prince  Henry  amounts  to 
3%d.  per  pound  weight  of  the  whole  carcase, 
coarse  and  choice  pieces  taken  together;  and 
at  that  rate  the  choice  pieces  could  not  have 
been  sold  by  retail  for  less  than  41/6d.  or  5d. 
the  pound. 

In  the  Parliamentary  inquiry  in  1764,  the 
witnesses  stated  the  price  of  the  choice  pieces 
of  the  best  beef  to  be  to  the  consumer  4d. 
and  41/4d.  the  pound;  and  the  coarse  pieces 
in  general  to  be  from  seven  farthings  to  2%d. 
and  2%d.;  and  this  they  said  was  in  general 
one  halfpenny  dearer  than  the  same  sort  of 
pieces  had  usually  been  sold  in  the  month  of 
March.  But  even  this  high  price  is  still  a  good 
deal  cheaper  than  what  we  can  well  suppose 
the  ordinary  retail  price  to  have  been  in  the 
time  of  Prince  Henry. 

During  the  twelve  first  years  of  the  last 
century,  the  average  price  of  the  best  wheat 
at  the  Windsor  market  was  £1  18s.  3%d. 
the  quarter  of  nine  Winchester  bushels. 

But  in  the  twelve  years  preceding  1764,  in¬ 
cluding  that  year,  the  average  price  of  the 
same  measure  of  the  best  wheat  at  the  same 
market  was  £2  Is.  iP/sjd. 


66 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


In  the  twelve  first  years  of  the  last  century, 
therefore,  wheat  appears  to  have  been  a  good 
deal  cheaper,  and  butcher’s  meat  a  good  deal 
dearer,  than  in  the  twelve  years  preceding  1764, 
including  that  year. 

In  all  great  countries  the  greater  part  of  the 
cultivated  lands  are  employed  in  producing  ei¬ 
ther  food  for  men  or  food  for  cattle.  The  rent 
and  profit  of  these  regulate  the  rent  and  profit 
of  all  other  cultivated  land.  If  any  particular 
produce  afforded  less,  the  land  would  soon  be 
turned  into  corn  or  pasture;  and  if  any  afford¬ 
ed  more,  some  part  of  the  lands  in  corn  or 
pasture  would  soon  be  turned  to  that  produce. 

Those  productions,  indeed,  which  require 
either  a  greater  original  expense  of  improve¬ 
ment,  or  a  greater  annual  expense  of  cultiva¬ 
tion,  in  order  to  fit  the  land  for  them,  appear 
commonly  to  afford,  the  one  a  greater  rent, 
the  other  a  greater  profit  than  corn  or  pas¬ 
ture.  This  superiority,  however,  will  seldom 
be  found  to  amount  to  more  than  a  reasonable 
interest  or  compensation  for  this  superior  ex¬ 
pense. 

In  a  hop  garden,  a  fruit  garden,  a  kitchen 
garden,  both  the  rent  of  the  landlord,  and  the 
profit  of  the  farmer,  are  generally  greater 
than  in  a  corn  or  grass  field.  But  to  bring  the 
ground  into  this  condition  requires  more  ex¬ 
pense.  Hence  a  greater  rent  becomes  due  to 
the  landlord.  It  requires,  too,  a  more  attentive 
and  skilful  management.  Hence  a  greater 
profit  becomes  due  to  the  farmer.  The  crop 
too,  at  least  in  the  hop  and  fruit  garden,  is 
more  precarious.  Its  price,  therefore,  besides 
compensating  all  occasional  losses,  must  af¬ 
ford  something  like  the  profit  of  insurance. 
The  circumstances  of  gardeners,  generally 
mean,  and  always  moderate,  may  satisfy  us 
that  their  great  ingenuity  is  not  commonly 
over-recompensed.  Their  delightful  art  is  prac¬ 
tised  by  so  many  rich  people  for  amusement, 
that  little  advantage  is  to  be  made  by  those 
who  practise  it  for  profit;  because  the  persons 
who  should  naturally  be  their  best  customers 
supply  themselves  with  all  their  most  precious 
productions. 

The  advantage  which  the  landlord  derives 
from  such  improvements  seems  at  no  time  to 
have  been  greater  than  what  was  sufficient  to 
compensate  the  original  expense  of  making 
them.  In  the  ancient  husbandry,  after  the 
vineyard,  a  well-watered  kitchen  garden  seems 
to  have  been  the  part  of  the  farm  which  was 
supposed  to  yield  the  most  valuable  produce. 
But  Democritus,  who  wrote  upon  husbandry 
about  two  thousand  years  ago,  and  who  was 
regarded  by  the  ancients  as  one  of  the  fathers 
of  the  art,  thought  they  did  not  act  wisely 
who  enclosed  a  kitchen  garden.  The  profit,  he 
said,  would  not  compensate  the  expense  of  a 
stone  wall;  and  bricks  (he  meant,  I  suppose, 


bricks  baked  in  the  sun)  mouldered  with  the 
rain,  and  the  winter  storm,  and  required  con¬ 
tinual  repairs.  Columella,  who  reports  this 
judgment  of  Democritus,  does  not  controvert 
it,  but  proposes  a  very  frugal  method  of  en¬ 
closing  with  a  hedge  of  brambles  and  briars, 
which,  he  says,  he  had  found  by  experience 
to  be  both  a  lasting  and  an  impenetrable 
fence;  but  which,  it  seems,  was  not  commonly 
known  in  the  time  of  Democritus.  Palladius 
adopts  the  opinion  of  Columella,  which  had 
before  been  recommended  by  Varro.  In  the 
judgment  of  those  ancient  improvers,  the 
produce  of  a  kitchen  garden  had,  it  seems, 
been  little  more  than  sufficient  to  pay  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  culture  and  the  expense  of  water¬ 
ing;  for  in  countries  so  near  the  sun,  it  was 
thought  proper,  in  those  times  as  in  the  pres¬ 
ent,  to  have  the  command  of  a  stream  of  wa¬ 
ter  which  could  be  conducted  to  every  bed 
in  the  garden.  Through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe  a  kitchen  garden  is  not  at  present 
supposed  to  deserve  a  better  enclosure  than 
that  recommended  by  Columella.  In  Great 
Britain,  and  some  other  northern  countries, 
the  finer  fruits  cannot  be  brought  to  perfec¬ 
tion  but  by  the  assistance  of  a  wall.  Their 
price,  therefore,  in  such  countries  must  be 
sufficient  to  pay  the  expense  of  building  and 
maintaining  what  they  cannot  be  had  with¬ 
out.  The  fruit- wall  frequently  surrounds  the 
kitchen  garden,  which  thus  enjoys  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  an  enclosure  which  its  own  produce 
could  seldom  pay  for. 

That  the  vineyard,  when  properly  planted 
and  brought  to  perfection,  was  the  most  val¬ 
uable  part  of  the  farm,  seems  to  have  been 
an  undoubted  maxim  in  the  ancient  agricul¬ 
ture,  as  it  is  in  the  modern  through  all  the 
wine  countries.  But  whether  it  was  advanta¬ 
geous  to  plant  a  new  vineyard  was  a  matter  of 
dispute  among  the  ancient  Italian  husband¬ 
men,  as  we  learn  from  Columella.  He  decides, 
like  a  true  lover  of  all  curious  cultivation,  in 
favour  of  the  vineyard,  and  endeavours  to 
show,  by  a  comparison  of  the  profit  and  ex¬ 
pense,  that  it  was  a  most  advantageous  im¬ 
provement.  Such  comparisons,  however,  be¬ 
tween  the  profit  and  expense  of  new  projects 
are  commonly  very  fallacious,  and  in  nothing 
more  so  than  in  agriculture.  Had  the  gain 
actually  made  by  such  plantations  been  com¬ 
monly  as  great  as  he  imagined  it  might  have 
been,  there  could  have  been  no  dispute  about 
it.  The  same  point  is  frequently  at  this  day 
a  matter  of  controversy  in  the  wine  countries. 
Their  writers  on  agriculture,  indeed,  the  lov¬ 
ers  and  promoters  of  high  cultivation,  seem 
generally  disposed  to  decide  with  Columella 
in  favour  of  the  vineyard.  In  France  the 
anxiety  of  the  proprietors  of  the  old  vineyards 
to  prevent  the  planting  of  any  new  ones, 


The  Rent 

seems  to  favour  their  opinion,  and  to  indicate 
a  consciousness  in  those  who  must  have  the 
experience  that  this  species  of  cultivation  is  at 
present  in  that  country  more  profitable  than 
any  other.  It  seems  at  the  same  time,  how¬ 
ever,  to  indicate  another  opinion,  that  this  su¬ 
perior  profit  can  last  no  longer  than  the  laws 
which  at  present  restrain  the  free  cultivation 
of  the  vine.  In  1731,  they  obtained  an  order 
of  council  prohibiting  both  the  planting  of 
new  vineyards  and  the  renewal  of  those  old 
ones,  of  which  the  cultivation  had  been  inter¬ 
rupted  for  two  years,  without  a  particular 
permission  from  the  king,  to  be  granted  only 
in  consequence  of  an  information  from  the 
intendant  of  the  province,  certifying  that  he 
had  examined  the  land,  and  that  it  was  in¬ 
capable  of  any  other  culture.  The  pretence 
of  this  order  was  the  scarcity  of  corn  and 
pasture,  and  the  superabundance  of  wine.  But 
had  this  superabundance  been  real,  it  would, 
without  any  order  of  council,  have  effectually 
prevented  the  plantation  of  new  vineyards, 
by  reducing  the  profits  of  this  species  of  cul¬ 
tivation  below  their  natural  proportion  to 
those  of  corn  and  pasture.  With  regard  to  the 
supposed  scarcity  of  corn,  occasioned  by  the 
multiplication  of  vineyards,  corn  is  nowhere 
in  France  more  carefully  cultivated  than  in 
the  wine  provinces,  where  the  land  is  fit  for 
producing  it;  as  in  Burgundy,  Guienne,  and 
the  Upper  Languedoc.  The  numerous  hands 
employed  in  the  one  species  of  cultivation 
necessarily  encourage  the  other,  by  affording 
a  ready  market  for  its  produce.  To  diminish 
the  number  of  those  who  are  capable  of  pay¬ 
ing  for  it  is  surely  a  most  unpromising  expe¬ 
dient  for  encouraging  the  cultivation  of  corn. 
It  is  like  the  policy  which  would  promote  agri¬ 
culture  by  discouraging  manufactures. 

The  rent  and  profit  of  those  productions, 
therefore,  which  require  either  a  greater  origi¬ 
nal  expense  of  improvement  in  order  to  fit  the 
land  for  them,  or  a  greater  annual  expense 
of  cultivation,  though  often  much  superior  to 
those  of  corn  and  pasture,  yet  when  they  do 
no  more  than  compensate  such  extraordinary 
expense,  are  in  reality  regulated  by  the  rent 
and  profit  of  those  common  crops. 

It  sometimes  happens,  indeed,  that  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  land,  which  can  be  fitted  for  some 
particular  produce,  is  too  small  to  supply  the 
effectual  demand.  The  whole  produce  can  be 
disposed  of  to  those  who  are  willing  to  give 
somewhat  more  than  what  is  sufficient  to  pay 
the  whole  rent,  wages,  and  profit  necessary 
for  raising  and  bringing  it  to  market,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  natural  rates,  or  according  to  the 
rates  at  which  they  are  paid  in  the  greater 
part  of  other  cultivated  land.  The  surplus 
part  of  the  price  which  remains  after  defraying 
the  whole  expense  of  improvement  and  cul¬ 


of  Land  67 

tivation  may  commonly,  in  this  case,  and  in 
this  case  only,  bear  no  regular  proportion  to 
the  like  surplus  in  corn  or  pasture,  but  may 
exceed  it  in  almost  any  degree;  and  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  this  excess  naturally  goes  to  the 
rent  of  the  landlord. 

The  usual  and  natural  proportion,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  between  the  rent  and  profit  of  wine 
and  those  of  corn  and  pasture  must  be  under¬ 
stood  to  take  place  only  with  regard  to  those 
vineyards  which  produce  nothing  but  good 
common  wine,  such  as  can  be  raised  almost 
anywhere,  upon  any  light,  gravelly,  or  sandy 
soil,  and  which  has  nothing  to  recommend  it 
but  its  strength  and  wholesomeness.  It  is  with 
such  vineyards  only  that  the  common  land 
of  the  country  can  be  brought  into  competi¬ 
tion;  for  with  those  of  a  peculiar  quality  it  is 
evident  that  it  cannot. 

The  vine  is  more  affected  by  the  difference 
of  soils  than  any  other  fruit  tree.  From  some 
it  derives  a  flavour  which  no  culture  or  man¬ 
agement  can  equal,  it  is  supposed,  upon  any 
other.  This  flavour,  real  or  imaginary,  is  some¬ 
times  peculiar  to  the  produce  of  a  few  vine¬ 
yards;  sometimes  it  extends  through  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  a  small  district,  and  sometimes 
through  a  considerable  part  of  a  large  prov¬ 
ince.  The  whole  quantity  of  such  wines  that 
is  brought  to  market  falls  short  of  the  effec¬ 
tual  demand,  or  the  demand  of  those  who 
would  be  willing  to  pay  the  whole  rent,  profit, 
and  wages,  necessary  for  preparing  and  bring¬ 
ing  them  thither,  according  to  the  ordinary 
rate,  or  according  to  the  rate  at  which  they 
are  paid  in  common  vineyards.  The  whole 
quantity,  therefore,  can  be  disposed  of  to 
those  who  are  willing  to  pay  more,  which 
necessarily  raises  the  price  above  that  of  com¬ 
mon  wine.  The  difference  is  greater  or  less 
according  as  the  fashiouableness  and  scarcity 
of  the  wine  render  the  competition  of  the 
buyers  more  or  less  eager.  Whatever  it  be, 
the  greater  part  of  it  goes  to  the  rent  of  the 
landlord.  For  though  such  vineyards  are  in 
general  more  carefully  cultivated  than  most 
others,  the  high  price  of  the  wine  seems  to  be 
not  so  much  the  effect  as  the  cause  of  this 
careful  cultivation.  In  so  valuable  a  produce 
the  loss  occasioned  by  negligence  is  so  great 
as  to  force  even  the  most  careless  to  atten¬ 
tion.  A  small  part  of  this  high  price,  there¬ 
fore,  is  sufficient  to  pay  the  wages  of  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  labour  bestowed  upon  their  cul¬ 
tivation,  and  the  profits  of  the  extraordinary 
stock  which  puts  that  labour  into  motion. 

The  sugar  colonies  possessed  by  the  Euro¬ 
pean  nations  in  the  West  Indies  may  be  com¬ 
pared  to  those  precious  vineyards.  Their 
whole  produce  falls  short  of  the  effectual  de¬ 
mand  of  Europe,  and  can  be  disposed  of  to 
those  who  are  willing  to  give  more  than  what 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


68 

is  sufficient  to  pay  the  whole  rent,  profit,  and 
wages  necessary  for  preparing  and  bringing 
it  to  market,  according  to  the  rate  at  which 
they  are  commonly  paid  by  any  other  pro¬ 
duce.  In  Cochin  China  the  finest  white  sugar 
commonly  sells  for  three  piasters  the  quintal, 
about  thirteen  shillings  and  sixpence  of  our 
money,  as  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Poivre,1  a  very 
careful  observer  of  the  agriculture  of  that 
country.  What  is  there  called  the  quintal 
weighs  from  a  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hun¬ 
dred  Paris  pounds,  or  a  hundred  and  seventy- 
five  Paris  pounds  at  a  medium,  which  reduces 
the  price  of  the  hundred-weight  English  to 
about  eight  shillings  sterling,  not  a  fourth  part 
of  what  is  commonly  paid  for  the  brown  or 
muskavada  sugars  imported  from  our  colonies, 
and  not  a  sixth  part  of  what  is  paid  for  the 
finest  white  sugar.  The  greater  part  of  the 
cultivated  lands  in  Cochin  China  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  producing  corn  and  rice,  the  food 
of  the  great  body  of  the  people.  The  respec¬ 
tive  prices  of  corn,  rice,  and  sugar,  are  there 
probably  in  the  natural  proportion,  or  in  that 
which  naturally  takes  place  in  the  different 
crops  of  the  greater  part  of  cultivated  land, 
and  which  recompenses  the  landlord  and  farm¬ 
er,  as  nearly  as  can  be  computed,  according 
to  what  is  usually  the  original  expense  of 
improvement  and  the  annual  expense  of  cul¬ 
tivation.  But  in  our  sugar  colonies  the  price 
of  sugar  bears  no  such  proportion  to  that 
of  the  produce  of  a  rice  or  corn  field  either 
in  Europe  or  in  America.  It  is  commonly  said 
that  a  sugar  planter  expects  that  the  rum  and 
molasses  should  defray  the  whole  expense  of 
his  cultivation,  and  that  his  sugar  should  be 
all  clear  profit.  If  this  be  true,  for  I  pretend 
not  to  affirm  it,  it  is  as  if  a  corn  farmer  ex¬ 
pected  to  defray  the  expense  of  his  cultiva¬ 
tion  with  the  chaff  and  the  straw,  and  that 
the  grain  should  be  all  clear  profit.  We  see 
frequently  societies  of  merchants  in  London 
and  other  trading  towns  purchase  waste  lands 
in  our  sugar  colonies,  which  they  expect  to 
improve  and  cultivate  with  profit  by  means  of 
factors  and  agents,  notwithstanding  the  great 
distance  and  the  uncertain  returns  from  the 
defective  administration  of  justice  in  those 
countries.  Nobody  will  attempt  to  improve 
and  cultivate  in  the  same  manner  the  most 
fertile  lands  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  or  the  corn 
provinces  of  North  America,  though  from  the 
more  exact  administration  of  justice  in  these 
countries  more  regular  returns  might  be  ex¬ 
pected. 

In  Virginia  and  Maryland  the  cultivation  of 
tobacco  is  preferred,  as  more  profitable,  to 
that  of  corn.  Tobacco  might  be  cultivated 
with  advantage  through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe;  but  in  almost  every  part  of  Europe 

1 Voyages  d’un  philosophe. 


it  has  become  a  principal  subject  of  taxation, 
and  to  collect  a  tax  from  every  different  farm 
in  the  country  where  this  plant  might  happen 
to  be  cultivated  would  be  more  difficult,  it 
has  been  supposed,  than  to  levy  one  upon  its 
importation  at  the  custom-house.  The  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  tobacco  has  upon  this  account  been 
most  absurdly  prohibited  through  the  greater 
part  of  Europe,  which  necessarily  gives  a  sort 
of  monopoly  to  the  countries  where  it  is  al¬ 
lowed;  and  as  Virginia  and  Maryland  produce 
the  greatest  quantity  of  it,  they  share  largely, 
though  with  some  competitors,  in  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  this  monopoly.  The  cultivation  of  to¬ 
bacco,  however,  seems  not  to  be  so  advanta¬ 
geous  as  that  of  sugar.  I  have  never  even  heard 
of  any  tobacco  plantation  that  was  improved 
and  cultivated  by  the  capital  of  merchants 
who  resided  in  Great  Britain,  and  our  tobac¬ 
co  colonies  send  us  home  no  such  wealthy 
planters  as  we  see  frequently  arrive  from  our 
sugar  islands.  Though  from  the  preference 
given  in  those  colonies  to  the  cultivation  of 
tobacco  above  that  of  corn,  it  would  appear 
that  the  effectual  demand  of  Europe  for  to¬ 
bacco  is  not  completely  supplied,  it  probably 
is  more  nearly  so  than  that  for  sugar;  and 
though  the  present  price  of  tobacco  is  prob¬ 
ably  more  than  sufficient  to  pay  the  whole 
rent,  wages,  and  profit  necessary  for  prepar¬ 
ing  and  bring  it  to  market,  according  to  the 
rate  at  which  they  are  commonly  paid  in  corn 
land,  it  must  not  be  so  much  more  as  the 
present  price  of  sugar.  Our  tobacco  planters, 
accordingly,  have  shown  the  same  fear  of 
the  superabundance  of  tobacco  which  the 
proprietors  of  the  old  vineyards  in  France 
have  of  the  superabundance  of  wine.  By  act 
of  assembly  they  have  restrained  its  cultiva¬ 
tion  to  six  thousand  plants,  supposed  to  yield 
a  thousand  weight  of  tobacco,  for  every  negro 
between  sixteen  and  sixty  years  of  age.  Such 
a  negro,  over  and  above  this  quantity  of  to¬ 
bacco,  can  manage,  they  reckon,  four  acres  of 
Indian  corn.  To  prevent  the  market  from  be¬ 
ing  overstocked,  too,  they  have  sometimes,  in 
plentiful  years,  we  are  told  by  Dr.  Douglas2 
(I  suspect  he  has  been  ill  informed) ,  burnt 
a  certain  quantity  of  tobacco  for  every  negro, 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Dutch  are  said  to 
do  of  spices.  If  such  violent  methods  are  neces¬ 
sary  to  keep  up  the  present  price  of  tobacco, 
the  superior  advantage  of  its  culture  over 
that  of  corn,  if  it  still  has  any,  will  not  prob¬ 
ably  be  of  long  continuance. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  rent  of  the  cul¬ 
tivated  land,  of  which  the  produce  is  human 
food,  regulates  the  rent  of  the  greater  part  of 
other  cultivated  land.  No  particular  produce 
can  long  afford  less;  because  the  land  would 
immediately  be  turned  to  another  use.  And  if 

2  Douglas’  Summary,  vol.  ii,  pp.  372,  373. 


The  Rent  of  Land 


any  particular  produce  commonly  affords 
more,  it  is  because  the  quantity  of  land  which 
can  be  fitted  for  it  is  too  small  to  supply  the 
effectual  demand. 

In  Europe,  corn  is  the  principal  produce  of 
land  which  serves  immediately  for  human 
food.  Except  in  particular  situations,  there¬ 
fore,  the  rent  of  corn  land  regulates  in  Eu¬ 
rope  that  of  all  other  cultivated  land.  Britain 
need  envy  neither  the  vineyards  of  France  nor 
the  olive  plantations  of  Italy.  Except  in  par¬ 
ticular  situations,  the  value  of  these  is  regu¬ 
lated  by  that  of  corn,  in  which  the  fertility 
of  Britain  is  not  much  inferior  to  that  of  ei¬ 
ther  of  those  two  countries. 

If  in  any  country  the  common  and  favourite 
vegetable  food  of  the  people  should  be  drawn 
from  a  plant  of  which  the  most  common  land, 
with  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  culture, 
produced  a  much  greater  quantity  than  the 
most  fertile  does  of  corn,  the  rent  of  the  land¬ 
lord,  or  the  surplus  quantity  of  food  which 
would  remain  to  him,  after  paying  the  labour 
and  replacing  the  stock  of  the  farmer,  together 
with  its  ordinary  profits,  would  necessarily  be 
much  greater.  Whatever  was  the  rate  at  which 
labour  was  commonly  maintained  in  that  coun¬ 
try,  this  greater  surplus  could  always  maintain 
a  greater  quantity  of  it,  and  consequently  en¬ 
able  the  landlord  to  purchase  or  command  a 
greater  quantity  of  it.  The  real  value  of  his 
rent,  his  real  power  and  authority,  his  com¬ 
mand  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniencies  of 
life  with  which  the  labour  of  other  people  could 
supply  him,  would  necessarily  be  much  greater. 

A  rice  field  produces  a  much  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  food  than  the  most  fertile  corn  field. 
Two  crops  in  the  year  from  thirty  to  sixty 
bushels  each,  are  said  to  be  the  ordinary  pro¬ 
duce  of  an  acre.  Though  its  cultivation,  there¬ 
fore,  requires  more  labour,  a  much  greater 
surplus  remains  after  maintaining  all  that  la¬ 
bour.  In  those  rice  countries,  therefore,  where 
rice  is  the  common  and  favourite  vegetable 
food  of  the  people,  and  where  the  cultivators 
are  chiefly  maintained  with  it,  a  greater  share 
of  this  greater  surplus  should  belong  to  the 
landlord  than  in  corn  countries.  In  Carolina, 
where  the  planters,  as  in  other  British  colo¬ 
nies,  are  generally  both  farmers  and  landlords, 
and  where  rent  consequently  is  confounded 
with  profit,  the  cultivation  of  rice  is  found  to 
be  more  profitable  than  that  of  corn,  though 
their  fields  produce  only  one  crop  in  the  year, 
and  though,  from  the  prevalence  of  the  cus¬ 
toms  of  Europe,  rice  is  not  there  the  common 
and  favourite  vegetable  food  of  the  people. 

A  good  rice  field  is  a  bog  at  all  seasons,  and 
at  one  season  a  bog  covered  with  water.  It  is 
unfit  either  for  corn,  or  pasture,  or  vineyard, 
or,  indeed,  for  any  other  vegetable  produce 


69 

that  is  very  useful  to  men;  and  the  lands 
which  are  fit  for  those  purposes  are  not  fit 
for  rice.  Even  in  the  rice  countries,  therefore, 
the  rent  of  rice  lands  cannot  regulate  the  rent 
of  the  other  cultivated  land,  which  can  never 
be  turned  to  that  produce. 

The  food  produced  by  a  field  of  potatoes  is 
not  inferior  in  quantity  to  that  produced  by 
a  field  of  rice,  and  much  superior  to  what  is 
produced  by  a  field  of  wheat.  Twelve  thou¬ 
sand  weight  of  potatoes  from  an  acre  of  land 
is  not  a  greater  produce  than  two  thousand 
weight  of  wheat.  The  food  or  solid  nourish¬ 
ment,  indeed,  which  can  be  drawn  from  each 
of  those  two  plants,  is  not  altogether  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  their  weight,  on  account  of  the  wa¬ 
tery  nature  of  potatoes.  Allowing,  however, 
half  the  weight  of  this  root  to  go  to  water,  a 
very  large  allowance,  such  an  acre  of  potatoes 
will  still  produce  six  thousand  weight  of  solid 
nourishment,  three  times  the  quantity  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  acre  of  wheat.  An  acre  of  pota¬ 
toes  is  cultivated  with  less  expense  than  an 
acre  of  wheat;  the  fallow,  which  generally  pre¬ 
cedes  the  sowing  of  wheat,  more  than  compen¬ 
sating  the  hoeing  and  other  extraordinary  cul¬ 
ture  which  is  always  given  to  potatoes.  Should 
this  root  ever  become  in  any  part  of  Europe, 
like  rice  in  some  rice  countries,  the  common 
and  favourite  vegetable  food  of  the  people,  so 
as  to  occupy  the  same  proportion  of  the  lands 
in  tillage  which  wheat  and  other  sorts  of 
grain  for  human  food  do  at  present,  the  same 
quantity  of  cultivated  land  would  maintain  a 
much  greater  number  of  people,  and  the  la¬ 
bourers  being  generally  fed  with  potatoes,  a 
greater  surplus  would  remain  after  replacing 
all  the  stock  and  maintaining  all  the  labour 
employed  in  cultivation.  A  greater  share  of 
this  surplus,  too,  would  belong  to  the  land¬ 
lord.  Population  would  increase,  and  rents 
would  rise  much  beyond  what  they  are  at 
present. 

The  land  which  is  fit  for  potatoes  is  fit  for 
almost  every  other  useful  vegetable.  If  they 
occupied  the  same  proportion  of  cultivated 
land  which  corn  does  at  present,  they  would 
regulate,  in  the  same  manner,  the  rent  of  the 
greater  part  of  other  cultivated  land. 

In  some  parts  of  Lancashire  it  is  pretended, 

I  have  been  told,  that  bread  of  oatmeal  is  a 
heartier  food  for  labouring  people  than  wheat- 
en  bread,  and  I  have  frequently  heard  the 
same  doctrine  held  in  Scotland.  I  am,  how¬ 
ever,  somewhat  doubtful  of  the  truth  of  it. 
The  common  people  in  Scotland,  who  are  fed 
with  oatmeal,  are  in  general  neither  so  strong, 
nor  so  handsome  as  the  same  rank  of  people 
in  England  who  are  fed  with  wheaten  bread. 
They  neither  work  so  well,  nor  look  so  well; 
and  as  there  is  not  the  same  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  people  of  fashion  in  the  two  coun- 


70 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


tries,  experience  would  seem  to  show  that  the 
food  of  the  common  people  in  Scotland  is  not 
so  suitable  to  the  human  constitution  as  that 
of  their  neighbours  of  the  same  rank  in  Eng¬ 
land.  But  it  seems  to  be  otherwise  with  pota¬ 
toes.  The  chairmen,  porters,  and  coalheavers 
in  London,  and  those  unfortunate  women  who 
live  by  prostitution,  the  strongest  men  and 
the  most  beautiful  women  perhaps  in  the 
British  dominions,  are  said  to  be  the  greater 
part  of  them  from  the  lowest  rank  of  people 
in  Ireland,  who  are  generally  fed  with  this 
root.  No  food  can  afford  a  more  decisive  proof 


of  its  nourishing  quality,  or  of  its  being  pe¬ 
culiarly  suitable  to  the  health  of  the  human 
constitution. 

It  is  difficult  to  preserve  potatoes  through 
the  year,  and  impossible  to  store  them  like 
corn,  for  two  or  three  years  together.  The  fear 
of  not  being  able  to  sell  them  before  they  rot 
discourages  their  cultivation,  and  is,  perhaps, 
the  chief  obstacle  to  their  ever  becoming  in 
any  great  country,  like  bread,  the  principal 
vegetable  food  of  all  the  different  ranks  of  the 
people. 


Part  2 

Of  the  Produce  of  Land  which  sometimes  does,  and  sometimes  does  not,  afford  Rent 


Human  food  seems  to  be  the  only  produce 
of  land  which  always  and  necessarily  affords 
some  rent  to  the  landlord.  Other  sorts  of  pro¬ 
duce  sometimes  may  and  sometimes  may  not, 
according  to  different  circumstances. 

After  food,  clothing  and  lodging  are  the 
two  great  wants  of  mankind. 

Land  in  its  original  rude  state  can  afford 
the  materials  of  clothing  and  lodging  to  a 
much  greater  number  of  people  than  it  can 
feed.  In  its  improved  state  it  can  sometimes 
feed  a  greater  number  of  people  than  it  can 
supply  with  those  materials;  at  least  in  the 
way  in  which  they  require  them,  and  are  will¬ 
ing  to  pay  for  them.  In  the  one  state,  there¬ 
fore,  there  is  always  a  superabundance  of 
those  materials,  which  are  frequently,  upon 
that  account,  of  little  or  no  value.  In  the 
other  there  is  often  a  scarcity,  which  neces¬ 
sarily  augments  their  value.  In  the  one  state 
a  great  part  of  them  is  thrown  away  as  use¬ 
less,  and  the  price  of  what  is  used  is  consid¬ 
ered  as  equal  only  to  the  labour  and  expense 
of  fitting  it  for  use,  and  can,  therefore,  afford 
no  rent  to  the  landlord.  In  the  other  they  are 
all  made  use  of,  and  there  is  frequently  a  de¬ 
mand  for  more  than  can  be  had.  Somebody 
is  always  willing  to  give  more  for  every  part 
of  them  than  what  is  sufficient  to  pay  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  bringing  them  to  market.  Their 
price,  therefore,  can  always  afford  some  rent 
to  the  landlord. 

The  skins  of  the  larger  animals  were  the 
original  materials  of  clothing.  Among  nations 
of  hunters  and  shepherds,  therefore,  whose 
food  consists  chiefly  in  the  flesh  of  those  ani¬ 
mals,  every  man,  by  providing  himself  with 
food,  provides  himself  with  the  materials  of 
more  clothing  than  he  can  wear.  If  there  was 
no  foreign  commerce,  the  greater  part  of  them 
would  be  thrown  away  as  things  of  no  value. 
This  was  probably  the  case  among  the  hunt¬ 
ing  nations  of  North  America  before  their 
country  was  discovered  by  the  Europeans, 


with  whom  they  now  exchange  their  surplus 
peltry  for  blankets,  fire-arms,  and  brandy, 
which  gives  it  some  value.  In  the  present  com¬ 
mercial  state  of  the  known  world,  the  most 
barbarous  nations,  I  believe,  among  whom 
land  property  is  established,  have  some  for¬ 
eign  commerce  of  this  kind,  and  find  among 
their  wealthier  neighbours  such  a  demand  for 
all  the  materials  of  clothing  which  their  land 
produces,  and  which  can  neither  be  wrought 
up  nor  consumed  at  home,  as  raises  their  price 
above  what  it  costs  to  send  them  to  those 
wealthier  neighbours.  It  affords,  therefore, 
some  rent  to  the  landlord.  When  the  greater 
part  of  the  highland  cattle  were  consumed 
on  their  own  hills,  the  exportation  of  their 
hides  made  the  most  considerable  article  of 
the  commerce  of  that  country,  and  what  they 
were  exchanged  for  afforded  some  addition 
to  the  rent  of  the  highland  estates.  The  wool 
of  England,  which  in  old  times  could  neither 
be  consumed  nor  wrought  up  at  home,  found 
a  market  in  the  then  wealthier  and  more  in¬ 
dustrious  country  of  Flanders,  and  its  price 
afforded  something  to  the  rent  of  the  land 
which  produced  it.  In  countries  not  better 
cultivated  than  England  was  then,  or  than 
the  highlands  of  Scotland  are  now,  and  which 
had  no  foreign  commerce,  the  materials  of 
clothing  would  evidently  be  so  superabun¬ 
dant  that  a  great  part  of  them  would  be 
thrown  away  as  useless,  and  no  part  could 
afford  any  rent  to  the  landlord. 

The  materials  of  lodging  cannot  always  be 
transported  to  so  great  a  distance  as  those  of 
clothing,  and  do  not  so  readily  become  an 
object  of  foreign  commerce.  When  they  are 
superabundant  in  the  country  which  produces 
them,  it  frequently  happens,  even  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  commercial  state  of  the  world,  that  they 
are  of  no  value  to  the  landlord.  A  good  stone 
quarry  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London 
would  afford  a  considerable  rent.  In  many 
parts  of  Scotland  and  Wales  it  affords  none. 


The  Rent  of  Land 


Barren  timber  for  building  is  of  great  value 
in  a  populous  and  well-cultivated  country, 
and  the  land  which  produces  it  affords  a  con¬ 
siderable  rent.  But  in  many  parts  of  North 
America  the  landlord  would  be  much  obliged 
to  anybody  who  would  carry  away  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  his  large  trees.  In  some  parts  of 
the  highlands  of  Scotland  the  bark  is  the  only 
part  of  the  wood  which,  for  want  of  roads 
and  water-carriage,  can  be  sent  to  market. 
The  timber  is  left  to  rot  upon  the  ground. 
When  the  materials  of  lodging  are  so  super¬ 
abundant,  the  part  made  use  of  is  worth  only 
the  labour  and  expense  of  fitting  it  for  that 
use.  It  affords  no  rent  to  the  landlord,  who 
generally  grants  the  use  of  it  to  whoever 
takes  the  trouble  of  asking  it.  The  demand  of 
wealthier  nations,  however,  sometimes  en¬ 
ables  him  to  get  a  rent  for  it.  The  paving  of 
the  streets  of  London  has  enabled  the  owners 
of  some  barren  rocks  on  the  coast  of  Scotland 
to  draw  a  rent  from  what  never  afforded  any 
before.  The  woods  of  Norway  and  of  the 
coasts  of  the  Baltic  find  a  market  in  many 
parts  of  Great  Britain  which  they  could  not 
find  at  home,  and  thereby  afford  some  rent  to 
their  proprietors. 

Countries  are  populous  not  in  proportion 
to  the  number  of  people  whom  their  produce 
can  clothe  and  lodge,  but  in  proportion  to 
that  of  those  whom  it  can  feed.  When  food  is 
provided,  it  is  easy  to  find  the  necessary  cloth¬ 
ing  and  lodging.  But  though  these  are  at 
hand,  it  may  often  be  difficult  to  find  food. 
In  some  parts  even  of  the  British  dominions 
what  is  called  a  house  may  be  built  by  one 
day’s  labour  of  one  man.  The  simplest  spe¬ 
cies  of  clothing,  the  skins  of  animals,  require 
somewhat  more  labour  to  dress  and  prepare 
them  for  use.  They  do  not,  however,  require 
a  great  deal.  Among  savage  and  barbarous 
nations,  a  hundredth  or  little  more  than  a 
hundredth  part  of  the  labour  of  the  whole 
year  will  be  sufficient  to  provide  them  with 
such  clothing  and  lodging  as  satisfy  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  the  people.  All  the  other  ninety- 
nine  parts  are  frequently  no  more  than 
enough  to  provide  them  with  food. 

But  when  by  the  improvement  and  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  land  the  labour  of  one  family  can  pro¬ 
vide  food  for  two,  the  labour  of  half  the  so¬ 
ciety  becomes  sufficient  to  provide  food  for 
the  whole.  The  other  half,  therefore,  or  at 
least  the  greater  part  of  them,  can  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  providing  other  things,  or  in  satis¬ 
fying  the  other  wants  and  fancies  of  man¬ 
kind.  Clothing  and  lodging,  household  furni¬ 
ture,  and  what  is  called  Equipage,  are  the 
principal  objects  of  the  greater  part  of  those 
wants  and  fancies.  The  rich  man  consumes 
no  more  food  than  his  poor  neighbour.  In 
quality  it  may  be  very  different,  and  to  se¬ 


71 

lect  and  prepare  it  may  require  more  labour 
and  art;  but  in  quantity  it  is  very  nearly 
the  same.  But  compare  the  spacious  palace 
and  great  wardrobe  of  the  one  with  the  hovel 
and  the  few  rags  of  the  other,  and  you  will 
be  sensible  that  the  difference  between  their 
clothing,  lodging,  and  household  furniture  is 
almost  as  great  in  quantity  as  it  is  in  quality. 
The  desire  of  food  is  limited  in  every  man  by 
the  narrow  capacity  of  the  human  stomach; 
but  the  desire  of  the  conveniences  and  orna¬ 
ments  of  building,  dress,  equipage,  and  house¬ 
hold  furniture,  seems  to  have  no  limit  or  cer¬ 
tain  boundary.  Those,  therefore,  who  have 
the  command  of  more  food  than  they  them¬ 
selves  can  consume,  are  always  willing  to  ex¬ 
change  the  surplus,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  price  of  it,  for  gratifications  of  this  other 
kind.  What  is  over  and  above  satisfying  the 
limited  desire  is  given  for  the  amusement  of 
those  desires  which  cannot  be  satisfied,  but 
seem  to  be  altogether  endless.  The  poor,  in 
order  to  obtain  food,  exert  themselves  to  grati¬ 
fy  those  fancies  of  the  rich,  and  to  obtain  it 
more  certainly  they  vie  with  one  another  in 
the  cheapness  and  perfection  of  their  work. 
The  number  of  workmen  increases  with  the 
increasing  quantity  of  food,  or  with  the  grow¬ 
ing  improvement  and  cultivation  of  the  lands; 
and  as  the  nature  of  their  business  admits  of 
the  utmost  subdivisions  of  labour,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  materials  which  they  can  work  up  in¬ 
creases  in  a  much  greater  proportion  than 
their  numbers.  Hence  arises  a  demand  for 
every  sort  of  material  which  human  invention 
can  employ,  either  usefully  or  ornamentally, 
in  building,  dress,  equipage,  or  household  fur¬ 
niture;  for  the  fossils  and  minerals  contained 
in  the  bowels  of  the  earth;  the  precious  metals, 
and  the  precious  stones. 

Food  is  in  this  manner  not  only  the  original 
source  of  rent,  but  every  other  part  of  the 
produce  of  land  which  afterwards  affords  rent 
derives  that  part  of  its  value  from  the  im¬ 
provement  of  the  powers  of  labour  in  pro¬ 
ducing  food  by  means  of  the  improvement 
and  cultivation  of  land. 

Those  other  parts  of  the  produce  of  land, 
however,  which  afterwards  afford  rent,  do  not 
afford  it  always.  Even  in  improved  and  culti¬ 
vated  countries,  the  demand  for  them  is  not 
always  such  as  to  afford  a  greater  price  than 
what  is  sufficient  to  pay  the  labour,  and  re¬ 
place,  together  with  it  ordinary  profits,  the 
stock  which  must  be  employed  in  bringing 
them  to  market.  Whether  it  is  or  is  not  such 
depends  upon  different  circumstances. 

Whether  a  coal-mine,  for  example,  can  af¬ 
ford  any  rent  depends  partly  upon  its  fer¬ 
tility,  and  partly  upon  its  situation. 

A  mine  of  any  kind  may  be  said  to  be  either 
fertile  or  barren,  according  as  the  quantity  of 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


72 

mineral  which  can  be  brought  from  it  by  a 
certain  quantity  of  labour  is  greater  or  less 
than  what  can  be  brought  by  an  equal  quan¬ 
tity  from  the  greater  part  of  other  mines 
of  the  same  kind. 

Some  coal-mines  advantageously  situated 
cannot  be  wrought  on  account  of  their  bar¬ 
renness.  The  produce  does  not  pay  the  ex¬ 
pense.  They  can  afford  neither  profit  nor  rent. 

There  are  some  of  which  the  produce  is 
barely  sufficient  to  pay  the  labour,  and  re¬ 
place,  together  with  it  ordinary  profits,  the 
stock  employed  in  working  them.  They  afford 
some  profit  to  the  undertaker  of  the  work,  but 
no  rent  to  the  landlord.  They  can  be  wrought 
advantageously  by  nobody  but  the  landlord, 
who,  being  himself  undertaker  of  the  work, 
gets  the  ordinary  profit  of  the  capital  which 
he  employs  in  it.  Many  coal-mines  in  Scot¬ 
land  are  wrought  in  this  manner,  and  can  be 
wrought  in  no  other.  The  landlord  will  allow 
nobody  else  to  work  them  without  paying 
some  rent,  and  nobody  can  afford  to  pay  any. 

Other  coal-mines  in  the  same  country,  suffi¬ 
ciently  fertile,  cannot  be  wrought  on  account 
of  their  situation.  A  quantity  of  mineral  suffi¬ 
cient  to  defray  the  expense  of  working  could 
be  brought  from  the  mine  by  the  ordinary,  or 
even  less  than  the  ordinary,  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour;  but  in  an  inland  country,  thinly  in¬ 
habited,  and  without  either  good  roads  or 
water-carriage,  this  quantity  could  not  be 
sold. 

Coals  are  a  less  agreeable  fuel  than  wood: 
they  are  said,  too,  to  be  less  wholesome.  The 
expense  of  coals,  therefore,  at  the  place  where 
they  are  consumed,  must  generally  be  some¬ 
what  less  than  that  of  wood. 

The  price  of  wood  again  varies  with  the 
state  of  agriculture,  nearly  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner,  and  exactly  for  the  same  reason,  as  the 
price  of  cattle.  In  its  rude  beginnings  the 
greater  part  of  every  country  is  covered  with 
wood,  which  is  then  a  mere  encumberance  of 
no  value  to  the  landlord,  who  would  gladly 
give  it  to  anybody  for  the  cutting.  As  agricul¬ 
ture  advances,  the  woods  are  partly  cleared 
by  the  progress  of  tillage,  and  partly  go  to 
decay  in  consequence  of  the  increased  number 
of  cattle.  These,  though  they  do  not  increase 
in  the  same  proportion  as  corn,  which  is  al¬ 
together  the  acquisition  of  human  industry, 
yet  multiply  under  the  care  and  protection  of 
men,  who  store  up  in  the  season  of  plenty 
what  may  maintain  them  in  that  of  scarcity, 
who  through  the  whole  year  furnish  them  with 
a  greater  quantity  of  food  than  uncultivated 
nature  provides  for  them,  and  who  by  de¬ 
stroying  and  extirpating  their  enemies,  secure 
them  in  the  free  enjoyment  of  all  that  she  pro¬ 
vides.  Numerous  herds  of  cattle,  when  al¬ 
lowed  to  wander  through  the  woods,  though 


they  do  not  destroy  the  old  trees,  hinder  any 
young  ones  from  coming  up  so  that  in  the 
course  of  a  century  or  two  the  whole  forest 
goes  to  ruin.  The  scarcity  of  wood  then  raises 
its  price.  It  affords  a  good  rent,  and  the  land¬ 
lord  sometimes  finds  that  he  can  scarce  em¬ 
ploy  his  best  lands  more  advantageously  than 
in  growing  barren  timber,  of  which  the  great¬ 
ness  of  the  profit  often  compensates  the  late¬ 
ness  of  the  returns.  This  seems  in  the  present 
times  to  be  nearly  the  state  of  things  in  sev¬ 
eral  parts  of  Great  Britain,  where  the  profit 
of  planting  is  found  to  be  equal  to  that  of 
either  corn  or  pasture.  The  advantage  which 
the  landlord  derives  from  planting  can  no¬ 
where  exceed,  at  least  for  any  considerable 
time,  the  rent  which  these  could  afford  him; 
and  in  an  inland  country  which  is  highly  cul¬ 
tivated,  it  will  frequently  not  fall  much  short 
of  this  rent.  Upon  the  sea-coast  of  a  well  im¬ 
proved  country,  indeed,  if  coals  can  con¬ 
veniently  be  had  for  fuel,  it  may  sometimes 
be  cheaper  to  bring  barren  timber  for  build¬ 
ing  from  less  cultivated  foreign  countries  than 
to  raise  it  at  home.  In  the  new  town  of  Edin¬ 
burgh,  built  within  these  few  years,  there  is 
not,  perhaps,  a  single  stick  of  Scotch  timber. 

Whatever  may  be  the  price  of  wood,  if  that 
of  coals  is  such  that  the  expense  of  a  coal  fire 
is  nearly  equal  to  that  of  a  wood  one,  we  may 
be  assured  that  at  that  place,  and  in  these 
circumstances,  the  price  of  coals  is  as  high  as 
it  can  be.  It  seems  to  be  so  in  some  of  the  in¬ 
land  parts  of  England,  particularly  in  Oxford¬ 
shire,  where  it  is  usual,  even  in  the  fires  of  the 
common  people,  to  mix  coals  and  wood  to¬ 
gether,  and  where  the  difference  in  the  expense 
of  those  two  sorts  of  fuel  cannot,  therefore,  be 
very  great. 

Coals,  in  the  coal  countries,  are  everywhere 
much  below  this  highest  price.  If  thejr  were 
not,  they  could  not  bear  the  expense  of  a  dis¬ 
tant  carriage,  either  by  land  or  by  water.  A 
small  quantity  only  could  be  sold,  and  the 
coal  masters  and  coal  proprietors  find  it  more 
for  their  interest  to  sell  a  great  quantity  at 
a  price  somewhat  above  the  lowest,  than  a 
small  quantity  at  the  highest.  The  most  fertile 
coal-mine,  too,  regulates  the  price  of  coals  at 
all  the  other  mines  in  its  neighbourhood.  Both 
the  proprietor  and  the  undertaker  of  the  work 
find,  the  one  that  he  can  get  a  greater  rent, 
the  other  that  he  can  get  a  greater  profit,  by 
somewhat  underselling  all  their  neighbours. 
Their  neighbours  are  soon  obliged  to  sell  at 
the  same  price,  though  they  cannot  so  well 
afford  it,  and  though  it  always  diminishes,  and 
sometimes  takes  away  altogether  both  their 
rent  and  their  profit.  Some  works  are  aban¬ 
doned  altogether;  others  can  afford  no  rent, 
and  can  be  wrought  only  by  the  proprietor. 

The  lowest  price  at  which  coals  can  be  sold 


73 


The  Rent 

for  any  considerable  time  is.  like  that  of  all 
other  commodities,  the  price  which  is  barely 
sufficient  to  replace,  together  with  its  ordi¬ 
nary  profits,  the  stock  which  must  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  bringing  them  to  market.  At  as 
coal-mine  for  which  the  landlord  can  get  no 
rent,  but  which  he  must  either  work  himself 
or  let  it  alone  altogether,  the  price  of  coals 
must  generally  be  nearly  about  this  price. 

Rent,  even  where  coals  afford  one,  has  gen¬ 
erally  a  smaller  share  in  their  prices  than  in 
that  of  most  other  parts  of  the  rude  produce 
of  land.  The  rent  of  an  estate  above  ground 
commonly  amounts  to  what  is  supposed  to  be 
a  third  of  the  gross  produce;  and  it  is  gen¬ 
erally  a  rent  certain  and  independent  of  the 
occasional  variations  in  the  crop.  In  coal-mines 
a  fifth  of  the  gross  produce  is  a  very  great 
rent;  a  tenth  the  common  rent,  and  it  is  sel¬ 
dom  a  rent  certain,  but  depends  upon  the  oc¬ 
casional  variations  in  the  produce.  These  are 
so  great  that,  in  a  country  where  thirty  years' 
purchase  is  considered  as  a  moderate  price  for 
the  property  of  a  landed  estate,  ten  years’ 
purchase  is  regarded  as  a  good  price  for  that 
of  a  coal-mine. 

The  value  of  a  coal-mine  to  the  proprietor 
frequently  depends  as  much  upon  its  situation 
as  upon  its  fertility.  That  of  a  metallic  mine 
depends  more  upon  its  fertility,  and  less  up¬ 
on  its  situation.  The  coarse,  and  still  more  the 
precious  metals,  when  separated  from  the  ore, 
are  so  valuable  that  they  can  generally  bear 
the  expense  of  a  very  long  land,  and  of  the 
most  distant  sea  carriage.  Their  market  is  not 
confined  to  the  countries  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  the  mine,  but  extends  to  the  whole 
world.  The  copper  of  Japan  makes  an  article 
of  commerce  in  Europe;  the  iron  of  Spain  in 
that  of  Chili  and  Peru.  The  silver  of  Peru 
finds  its  way,  not  only  to  Europe,  but  from 
Europe  to  China. 

The  price  of  coals  in  Westmoreland  or  Shrop¬ 
shire  can  have  little  effect  on  their  price 
at  Newcastle;  and  their  price  in  the  Lionnois 
can  have  none  at  all.  The  productions  of  such 
distant  coal-mines  can  never  be  brought  into 
competition  with  one  another.  But  the  pro¬ 
ductions  of  the  most  distant  metallic  mines 
frequently  may,  and  in  fact  commonly  are. 
The  price,  therefore,  of  the  coarse,  and  still 
more  that  of  the  precious  metals,  at  the  most 
fertile  mines  in  the  world,  must  necessarily 
more  or  less  affect  their  price  at  every  other 
in  it.  The  price  of  copper  in  Japan  must  have 
some  influence  upon  its  price  at  the  copper 
mines  in  Europe.  The  price  of  silver  in  Peru, 
or  the  quantity  either  of  labour  or  of  other 
goods  which  it  will  purchase  there,  must  have 
some  influence  on  its  price,  not  only  at  the 
silver  mines  of  Europe,  but  at  those  of  China. 
After  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Peru,  the 


of  Land 

silver  mines  of  Europe  were,  the  greater  part 
of  them,  abandoned.  The  value  of  silver  was 
so  much  reduced  that  their  produce  could  no 
longer  pay  the  expense  of  working  them,  or 
replace,  with  a  profit,  the  food,  clothes,  lodg¬ 
ing,  and  other  necessaries  which  were  con¬ 
sumed  in  that  operation.  This  was  the  case, 
too,  with  the  mines  of  Cuba  and  St.  Domingo, 
and  even  with  the  ancient  mines  of  Peru,  after 
the  discovery  of  those  of  Potosi. 

The  price  of  every  metal  at  every  mine, 
therefore,  being  regulated  in  some  measure  by 
its  price  at  the  most  fertile  mine  in  the  world 
that  is  actually  wrought,  it  can  at  the  greater 
part  of  mines  do  very  little  more  than  pay  the 
expense  of  working,  and  can  seldom  afford  a 
very  high  rent  to  the  landlord.  Rent,  accord¬ 
ingly,  seems  at  the  greater  part  of  mines  to 
have  but  a  small  share  in  the  price  of  the 
coarse,  and  a  still  smaller  in  that  of  the  pre¬ 
cious  metals.  Labour  and  profit  make  up  the 
greater  part  of  both. 

A  sixth  part  of  the  gross  produce  may  be 
reckoned  the  average  rent  of  the  tin  mines  of 
Cornwall,  the  most  fertile  that  are  known  in 
the  world,  as  we  are  told  by  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Borlace,  vice-warden  of  the  stannaries.  Some, 
he  says,  afford  more,  and  some  do  not  afford 
so  much.  A  sixth  part  of  the  gross  produce  is 
the  rent,  too,  of  several  very  fertile  lead  mines 
in  Scotland. 

In  the  silver  mines  of  Peru,  we  are  told  by 
Frezier  and  Ulloa,  the  proprietor  frequently 
exacts  no  other  acknowledgment  from  the 
undertaker  of  the  mine,  but  that  he  will  grind 
the  ore  at  his  mill,  paying  him  the  ordinary 
multure  or  price  of  grinding.  Till  1736,  indeed, 
the  tax  of  the  King  of  Spain  amounted  to 
one-fifth  of  the  standard  silver,  which  till  then 
might  be  considered  as  the  real  rent  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  silver  mines  of  Peru,  the 
richest  which  have  been  known  in  the  world. 
If  there  had  been  no  tax  this  fifth  would  nat¬ 
urally  have  belonged  to  the  landlord,  and 
many  mines  might  have  been  wrought  which 
could  not  then  be  wrought,  because  they 
could  not  afford  this  tax.  The  tax  of  the  Duke 
of  Cornwall  upon  tin  is  supposed  to  amount 
to  more  than  five  per  cent  or  one  twentieth 
part  of  the  value;  and  whatever  may  be  his 
proportion,  it  would  naturally,  too,  belong  to 
the  proprietor  of  the  mine,  if  tin  was  duty 
free.  But  if  you  add  one-twentieth  to  one- 
sixth,  you  will  find  that  the  whole  average 
rent  of  the  tin  mines  of  Cornwall  was  to  the 
whole  average  rent  of  the  silver  mines  of  Peru 
as  thirteen  to  twelve.  But  the  silver  mines  of 
Peru  are  not  now  able  to  pay  even  this  low 
rent,  and  the  tax  upon  silver  was,  in  1736,  re¬ 
duced  from  one-fifth  to  one-tenth.  Even  this 
tax  upon  silver,  too,  gives  more  temptation 
to  smuggling  than  the  tax  of  one-twentieth 


74  The  Wealth 

upon  tin;  and  smuggling  must  be  much  easier 
in  the  precious  than  in  the  bulky  commodity. 
The  tax  of  the  King  of  Spain  accordingly  is 
said  to  be  very  ill  paid,  and  that  of  the  Duke 
of  Cornwall  very  well.  Rent,  therefore,  it  is 
probable,  makes  a  greater  part  of  the  price  of 
tin  at  the  most  fertile  tin  mines  than  it  does 
of  silver  at  the  most  fertile  silver  mines  in  the 
world.  After  replacing  the  stock  employed  in 
working  those  different  mines,  together  with 
its  ordinary  profits,  the  residue  which  remains 
to  the  proprietor  is  greater,  it  seems,  in  the 
coarse  than  in  the  precious  metal. 

Neither  are  the  profits  of  the  undertakers 
of  silver  mines  commonly  very  great  in  Peru. 
The  same  most  respectable  and  well-informed 
authors  acquaint  us,  that  when  any  person 
undertakes  to  work  a  new  mine  in  Peru,  he  is 
universally  looked  upon  as  a  man  destined  to 
bankruptcy  and  ruin,  and  is  upon  that  ac¬ 
count  shunned  and  avoided  by  everybody. 
Mining,  it  seems,  is  considered  there  in  the 
same  light  as  here,  as  a  lottery,  in  which  the 
prizes  do  not  compensate  the  blanks,  though 
the  greatness  of  some  tempts  many  adven¬ 
turers  to  throw  away  their  fortunes  in  such 
unprosperous  projects. 

As  the  sovereign,  however,  derives  a  con¬ 
siderable  part  of  his  revenue  from  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  silver  mines,  the  law  in  Peru  gives 
every  possible  encouragement  to  the  discovery 
and  working  of  new  ones.  Whoever  discovers 
a  new  mine  is  entitled  to  measure  off  two 
hundred  and  forty-six  feet  in  length,  accord¬ 
ing  to  what  he  supposes  to  be  the  direction 
of  the  vein,  and  half  as  much  in  breadth.  He 
becomes  proprietor  of  this  portion  of  the  mine, 
and  can  work  it  without  paying  any  acknowl¬ 
edgment  to  the  landlord.  The  interest  of  the 
Duke  of  Cornwall  has  given  occasion  to  a 
regulation  nearly  of  the  same  kind  in  that 
ancient  duchy.  In  waste  and  unenclosed  lands 
any  person  who  discovers  a  tin  mine  may 
mark  out  its  limits  to  a  certain  extent,  which 
is  called  bounding  a  mine.  The  bounder  be¬ 
comes  the  real  proprietor  of  the  mine,  and 
may  either  work  it  himself,  or  give  it  in  lease 
to  another,  without  the  consent  of  the  owner 
of  the  land,  to  whom,  however,  a  very  small 
acknowledgment  must  be  paid  upon  working 
it.  In  both  regulations  the  sacred  rights  of 
private  property  are  sacrificed  to  the  sup¬ 
posed  interests  of  public  revenue. 

The  same  encouragement  is  given  in  Peru 
to  the  discovery  and  working  of  new  gold 
mines;  and  in  gold  the  king’s  tax  amounts  only 
to  a  twentieth  part  of  the  standard  metal.  It 
was  once  a  fifth,  and  afterwards  a  tenth,  as  in 
silver;  but  it  was  found  that  the  work  could 
not  bear  even  the  lowest  of  these  two  taxes. 
If  it  is  rare,  however,  say  the  same  authors, 
Frezier  and  Ulloa,  to  find  a  person  who  has 


of  Nations 

made  his  fortune  by  a  silver,  it  is  still  much 
rarer  to  find  one  who  has  done  so  by  a  gold 
mine.  This  twentieth  part  seems  to  be  the 
whole  rent  which  is  paid  by  the  greater  part 
of  the  gold  mines  in  Chili  and  Peru.  Gold,  too, 
is  much  more  liable  to  be  smuggled  than  even 
silver;  not  only  on  account  of  the  superior 
value  of  the  metal  in  proportion  to  its  bulk, 
but  on  account  of  the  peculiar  way  in  which 
nature  produces  it.  Silver  is  very  seldom  found 
virgin,  but,  like  most  other  metals,  is  gener¬ 
ally  mineralized  with  some  other  body,  from 
which  it  is  impossible  to  separate  it  in  such 
quantities  as  will  pay  for  the  expense,  but  by 
a  very  laborious  and  tedious  operation,  which 
cannot  well  be  carried  on  but  in  workhouses 
erected  for  the  purpose,  and  therefore  exposed 
to  the  inspection  of  the  king’s  officers.  Gold, 
on  the  contrary,  is  almost  always  found  vir¬ 
gin.  It  is  sometimes  found  in  pieces  of  some 
bulk;  and  even  when  mixed  in  small  and  al¬ 
most  insensible  particles  with  sand,  earth,  and 
other  extraneous  bodies,  it  can  be  separated 
from  them  by  a  very  short  and  simple  oper¬ 
ation,  which  can  be  carried  on  in  any  private 
house  by  anybody  who  is  possessed  of  a  small 
quantity  of  mercury.  If  the  king’s  tax,  there¬ 
fore,  is  but  ill  paid  upon  silver,  it  is  likely  to 
be  much  worse  paid  upon  gold;  and  rent  must 
make  a  much  smaller  part  of  the  price  of  gold 
than  even  of  that  of  silver. 

The  lowest  price  at  which  the  precious  met¬ 
als  can  be  sold,  or  the  smallest  quantity  of 
other  goods  for  which  they  can  be  exchanged 
during  any  considerable  time,  is  regulated  by 
the  same  principles  which  fix  the  lowest  ordi¬ 
nary  price  of  all  other  goods.  The  stock  which 
must  commonly  be  employed,  the  food,  the 
clothes,  and  lodging  which  must  commonly 
be  consumed  in  bringing  them  from  the  mine 
to  the  market,  determine  it.  It  must  at  least 
be  sufficient  to  replace  that  stock,  with  the 
ordinary  profits. 

Their  highest  price,  however,  seems  not  to 
be  necessarily  determined  by  anything  but 
the  actual  scarcity  or  plenty  of  those  metals 
themselves.  It  is  not  determined  by  that  of 
any  other  commodity,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  price  of  coals  is  by  that  of  wood,  beyond 
which  no  scarcity  can  ever  raise  it.  Increase 
the  scarcity  of  gold  to  a  certain  degree,  and 
the  smallest  bit  of  it  may  become  more  pre¬ 
cious  than  a  diamond,  and  exchange  for  a 
greater  quantity  of  other  goods. 

The  demand  for  those  metals  arises  partly 
from  their  utility  and  partly  from  their  beau¬ 
ty.  If  you  except  iron,  they  are  more  useful 
than,  perhaps,  any  other  metal.  As  they  are 
less  liable  to  rust  and  impurity,  they  can  more 
easily  be  kept  clean,  and  the  utensils  either  of 
the  table  or  the  kitchen  are  often  upon  that 
account  more  agreeable  when  made  of  them. 


75 


The  Rent 

A  silver  boiler  is  more  cleanly  than  a  lead, 
copper,  or  tin  one;  and  the  same  quality  would 
render  a  gold  boiler  still  better  than  a  silver 
one.  Their  principal  merit,  however,  arises 
from  their  beauty,  which  renders  them  pe¬ 
culiarly  fit  for  the  ornaments  of  dress  and 
furniture.  No  paint  or  dye  can  give  so  splen¬ 
did  a  colour  as  gilding.  The  merit  of  their 
beauty  is  greatly  enhanced  by  their  scarcity. 
With  the  greater  part  of  rich  people,  the  chief 
enjoyment  of  riches  consists  in  the  parade  of 
riches,  which  in  their  eye  is  never  so  com¬ 
plete  as  when  they  appear  to  possess  those 
decisive  marks  of  opulence  which  nobody  can 
possess  but  themselves.  In  their  eyes  the  merit 
of  an  object  which  is  in  any  degree  either 
useful  or  beautiful  is  greatly  enhanced  by  its 
scarcity,  or  by  the  great  labour  which  it  re¬ 
quires  to  collect  any  considerable  quantity  of 
it,  a  labour  which  nobody  can  afford  to  pay 
but  themselves.  Such  objects  they  are  willing 
to  purchase  at  a  higher  price  than  things 
much  more  beautiful  and  useful,  but  more 
common.  These  qualities  of  utility,  beauty, 
and  scarcity,  are  the  original  foundation  of 
the  high  price  of  those  metals,  or  of  the  great 
quantity  of  other  goods  for  which  they  can 
everywhere  be  exchanged.  This  value  was  an¬ 
tecedent  to  and  independent  of  their  being 
employed  as  coin,  and  was  the  quality  which 
fitted  them  for  that  employment.  That  em¬ 
ployment,  however,  by  occasioning  a  new  de¬ 
mand,  and  by  diminishing  the  quantity  which 
could  be  employed  in  any  other  way,  may 
have  afterwards  contributed  to  keep  up  or  in¬ 
crease  their  value. 

The  demand  for  the  precious  stones  arises 
altogether  from  their  beauty.  They  are  of  no 
use  but  as  ornaments;  and  the  merit  of  their 
beauty  is  greatly  enhanced  by  their  scarcity, 
or  by  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  getting 
them  from  the  mine.  Wages  and  profit  ac¬ 
cordingly  make  up,  upon  most  occasions,  al¬ 
most  the  whole  of  their  high  price.  Rent  comes 
in  but  for  a  very  small  share;  frequently  for 
no  share;  and  the  most  fertile  mines  only 
afford  any  considerable  rent.  When  Tavernier, 
a  jeweller,  visited  the  diamond  mines  of  Gol- 
conda  and  Visiapour,  he  was  informed  that 
the  sovereign  of  the  country,  for  whose  bene¬ 
fit  they  were  wrought,  had  ordered  all  of  them 
to  be  shut  up,  except  those  which  yield  the 
largest  and  finest  stones.  The  others,  it  seems, 
were  to  the  proprietor  not  worth  the  working. 

As  the  price  both  of  the  precious  metals  and 
of  the  precious  stones  is  regulated  all  over  the 
world  by  their  price  at  the  most  fertile  mine 
in  it,  the  rent  which  a  mine  of  either  can 
afford  to  its  proprietor  is  in  proportion,  not 
to  its  absolute,  but  to  what  may  be  called  its 
relative  fertility,  or  to  its  superiority  over 
other  mines  of  the  same  kind.  If  new  mines 


of  Land 

were  discovered  as  much  superior  to  those  of 
Potosi  as  they  were  superior  to  those  of 
Europe,  the  value  of  silver  might  be  so  much 
degraded  as  to  render  even  the  mines  of  Po¬ 
tosi  not  worth  the  working.  Before  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies,  the  most 
fertile  mines  in  Europe  may  have  afforded  as 
great  a  rent  to  their  proprietor  as  the  richest 
mines  in  Peru  do  at  present.  Though  the 
quantity  of  silver  was  much  less,  it  might 
have  exchanged  for  an  equal  quantity  of  other 
goods,  and  the  proprietor’s  share  might  have 
enabled  him  to  purchase  or  command  an 
equal  quantity  either  of  labour  or  of  com¬ 
modities.  The  value  both  of  the  produce  and 
of  the  rent,  the  real  revenue  which  they  af¬ 
forded  both  to  the  public  and  to  the  pro¬ 
prietor,  might  have  been  the  same. 

The  most  abundant  mines  either  of  the  pre¬ 
cious  metals  or  of  the  precious  stones  could 
add  little  to  the  wealth  of  the  world.  A  pro¬ 
duce  of  which  the  value  is  principally  derived 
from  its  scarcity,  is  necessarily  degraded  by 
its  abundance.  A  service  of  plate,  and  the 
other  frivolous  ornaments  of  dress  and  furni¬ 
ture,  could  be  purchased  for  a  smaller  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour,  or  for  a  smaller  quantity  of 
commodities;  and  in  this  would  consist  the 
sole  advantage  which  the  world  could  derive 
from  that  abundance. 

It  is  otherwise  in  estates  above  ground.  The 
value  both  of  their  produce  and  of  their  rent 
is  in  proportion  to  their  absolute,  and  not  to 
their  relative  fertility.  The  land  which  pro¬ 
duces  a  certain  quantity  of  food,  clothes,  and 
lodging,  can  always  feed,  clothe,  and  lodge  a 
certain  number  of  people;  and  whatever  may 
be  the  proportion  of  the  landlord,  it  will  al¬ 
ways  give  him  a  proportionable  command  of 
the  labour  of  those  people,  and  of  the  com¬ 
modities  with  which  that  labour  can  supply 
him.  The  value  of  the  most  barren  lands  is 
not  diminished  by  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
most  fertile.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  generally 
increased  by  it.  The  great  number  of  people 
maintained  by  the  fertile  lands  afford  a  mar¬ 
ket  to  many  parts  of  the  produce  of  the  bar¬ 
ren,  which  they  could  never  have  found  among 
those  whom  their  own  produce  could  main¬ 
tain. 

Whatever  increases  the  fertility  of  land  in 
producing  food  increases  not  only  the  value 
of  the  lands  upon  which  the  improvement  is 
bestowed,  but  contributes  likewise  to  increase 
that  of  many  other  lands  by  creating  a  new 
demand  for  their  produce.  That  abundance  of 
food,  of  which,  in  consequence  of  the  im¬ 
provement  of  land,  many  people  have  the  dis¬ 
posal  beyond  what  they  themselves  can  con¬ 
sume,  is  the  great  cause  of  the  demand  both 
for  the  precious  metals  and  the  precious 
stone,  as  well  as  for  every  other  conveniency 


76 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


and  ornament  of  dress,  lodging,  household  fur¬ 
niture,  and  equipage.  Food  not  only  consti¬ 
tutes  the  principal  part  of  the  riches  of  the 
world,  but  it  is  the  abundance  of  food  which 
gives  the  principal  part  of  their  value  to  many 
other  sorts  of  riches.  The  poor  inhabitants  of 
Cuba  and  St.  Domingo,  when  they  were  first 
discovered  by  the  Spaniards,  used  to  wear 
little  bits  of  gold  as  ornaments  in  their  hair 
and  other  parts  of  their  dress.  They  seemed 
to  value  them  as  we  would  do  any  little 
pebbles  of  somewhat  more  than  ordinary 
beauty,  and  to  consider  them  as  just  worth 
the  picking  up,  but  not  worth  the  refusing  to 
anybody  who  asked  them.  They  gave  them 


to  their  new  guests  at  the  first  request,  with¬ 
out  seeming  to  think  that  they  had  made 
them  any  very  valuable  present.  They  were 
astonished  to  observe  the  rage  of  the  Span¬ 
iards  to  obtain  them;  and  had  no  notion  that 
there  could  anywhere  be  a  country  in  which 
many  people  had  the  disposal  of  so  great  a 
superfluity  of  food,  so  scanty  always  among 
themselves,  that  for  a  very  small  quantity  of 
those  glittering  baubles  they  would  willingly 
give  as  much  as  might  maintain  a  whole  fam¬ 
ily  for  many  years.  Could  they  have  been 
made  to  understand  this,  the  passion  of  the 
Spaniards  would  not  have  surprised  them. 


Part  3 


Of  the  Variations  in  the  Proportion  between  the  respective  Values  of  that  Sort  of  Produce  which  always 
affords  Rent,  and  of  that  which  sometimes  does  and  sometimes  does  not  afford  Rent 


The  increasing  abundance  of  food,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  increasing  improvement  and  culti¬ 
vation,  must  necessarily  increase  the  demand 
for  every  part  of  the  produce  of  land  which 
is  not  food,  and  which  can  be  applied  either 
to  use  or  to  ornament.  In  the  whole  progress 
of  improvement,  it  might  therefore  be  ex¬ 
pected,  there  should  be  only  one  variation  in 
the  comparative  values  of  those  two  different 
sorts  of  produce.  The  value  of  that  sort  which 
sometimes  does  and  sometimes  does  not  af¬ 
ford  rent,  should  constantly  rise  in  proportion 
to  that  which  always  affords  some  rent.  As 
art  and  industry  advance,  the  materials  of 
clothing  and  lodging,  the  useful  fossils  and 
minerals  of  the  earth,  the  precious  metals  and 
the  precious  stones  should  gradually  come  to 
be  more  and  more  in  demand,  should  grad¬ 
ually  exchange  for  a  greater  and  a  greater 
quantity  of  food,  or  in  other  words,  should 
gradually  become  dearer  and  dearer.  This  ac¬ 
cordingly  has  been  the  case  with  most  of  these 
things  upon  most  occasions,  and  would  have 
been  the  case  with  all  of  them  upon  all  oc¬ 
casions,  if  particular  accidents  had  not  upon 
some  occasions  increased  the  supply  of  some 
of  them  in  a  still  greater  proportion  than  the 
demand. 

The  value  of  a  free-stone  quarry,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  will  necessarily  increase  with  the  increas¬ 
ing  improvement  and  population  of  the  coun¬ 
try  round  about  it,  especially  if  it  should  be 
the  only  one  in  the  neighbourhood.  But  the 
value  of  a  silver  mine,  even  though  there 
should  not  be  another  within  a  thousand  miles 
of  it,  will  not  necessarily  increase  with  the  im¬ 
provement  of  the  country  in  which  it  is  sit¬ 
uated.  The  market  for  the  produce  of  a  free¬ 
stone  quarry  can  seldom  extend  more  than  a 
few  miles  round  about  it,  and  the  demand 
must  generally  be  in  proportion  to  the  im¬ 
provement  and  population  of  that  small  dis¬ 


trict.  But  the  market  for  the  produce  of  a 
silver  mine  may  extend  over  the  whole  known 
world.  Unless  the  world  in  general,  therefore, 
be  advancing  in  improvement  and  popula¬ 
tion,  the  demand  for  silver  might  not  be  at 
all  increased  by  the  improvement  even  of  a 
large  country  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
mine.  Even  though  the  world  in  general  were 
improving,  yet  if,  in  the  course  of  its  improve¬ 
ment,  new  mines  should  be  discovered,  much 
more  fertile  than  any  which  had  been  known 
before,  though  the  demand  for  silver  would 
necessarily  increase,  yet  the  supply  might  in¬ 
crease  in  so  much  a  greater  proportion  that 
the  real  price  of  that  metal  might  gradually 
fall;  that  is,  any  given  quantity,  a  pound 
weight  of  it,  for  example,  might  gradually 
purchase  or  command  a  smaller  and  a  smaller 
quantity  of  labour,  or  exchange  for  a  smaller 
and  a  smaller  quantity  of  corn,  the  principal 
part  of  the  subsistence  of  the  labourer. 

The  great  market  for  silver  is  the  commer¬ 
cial  and  civilised  part  of  the  world. 

If  by  the  general  progress  of  improvement 
the  demand  of  this  market  should  increase, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  supply  did  not 
increase  in  the  same  proportion,  the  value  of 
silver  would  gradually  rise  in  proportion  to 
that  of  corn.  Any  given  quantity  of  silver 
would  exchange  for  a  greater  and  a  greater 
quantity  of  corn;  or,  in  other  words,  the  aver¬ 
age  money  price  of  corn  would  gradually  be¬ 
come  cheaper  and  cheaper. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  supply  by  some  ac¬ 
cident  should  increase  for  many  years  to¬ 
gether  in  a  greater  proportion  than  the  de¬ 
mand,  that  metal  would  gradually  become 
cheaper  and  cheaper;  or,  in  other  words,  the 
average  money  price  of  corn  would,  in  spite 
of  all  improvements,  gradually  become  dearer 
and  dearer. 

But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  supply  of  the 


The  Rent 

metal  should  increase  nearly  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  as  the  demand,  it  would  continue  to 
purchase  or  exchange  for  nearly  the  same 
quantity  of  corn,  and  the  average  money 
price  of  corn  would,  in  spite  of  all  improve¬ 
ments,  continue  very  nearly  the  same. 

These  three  seem  to  exhaust  all  the  possible 
combinations  of  events  which  can  happen  in 
the  progress  of  improvement;  and  during  the 
course  of  the  four  centuries  preceding  the 
present,  if  we  may  judge  by  what  has  hap¬ 
pened  both  in  France  and  Great  Britain,  each 
of  those  three  different  combinations  seem  to 
have  taken  place  in  the  European  market,  and 
nearly  in  the  same  order,  too,  in  which  I  have 
here  set  them  down. 

DIGRESSION  CONCERNING  THE  VARIA¬ 
TIONS  IN  THE  VALUE  OF  SILVER 
DURING  THE  COURSE  OF  THE 
FOUR  LAST  CENTURIES 

FIRST  PERIOD 

In  1350,  and  for  some  time  before,  the  aver¬ 
age  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  in  England 
seems  not  to  have  been  estimated  lower  than 
four  ounces  of  silver,  Tower  weight,  equal  to 
about  twenty  shillings  of  our  present  money. 
From  this  price  it  seems  to  have  fallen  grad¬ 
ually  to  two  ounces  of  silver,  equal  to  about 
ten  shillings  of  our  present  money,  the  price 
at  which  we  find  it  estimated  in  the  beginning 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  at  which  it  seems 
to  have  continued  to  be  estimated  till  about 
1570. 

In  1350,  being  the  25th  of  Edward  III,  was 
enacted  what  is  called  The  Statute  of  Labour¬ 
ers.  In  the  preamble  it  complains  much  of  the 
insolence  of  servants,  who  endeavoured  to 
raise  their  wages  upon  their  masters.  It  there¬ 
fore  ordains  that  all  servants  and  labourers 
should  for  the  future  be  contented  with  the 
same  wages  and  liveries  (liveries  in  those 
times  signified  not  only  clothes  but  provi¬ 
sions)  which  they  had  been  accustomed  to 
receive  in  the  20th  year  of  the  king,  and  the 
four  preceding  years;  that  upon  this  account 
their  livery  wheat  should  nowhere  be  esti¬ 
mated  higher  than  tenpence  a  bushel,  and 
that  it  should  always  be  in  the  option  of  the 
master  to  deliver  them  either  the  wheat  or  the 
money.  Tenpence  a  bushel,  therefore,  had,  in 
the  25th  of  Edward  III,  been  reckoned  a  very 
moderate  price  of  wheat,  since  it  required  a 
particular  statute  to  oblige  servants  to  accept 
of  it  in  exchange  for  their  usual  livery  of  pro¬ 
visions;  and  it  had  been  reckoned  a  reason¬ 
able  price  ten  years  before  that,  or  in  the  16th 
year  of  the  king,  the  term  to  which  the  statute 
refers.  But  in  the  16th  year  of  Edward  III, 
tenpence  contained  about  half  an  ounce  of 
silver,  Tower  weight,  and  was  nearly  equal  to 


of  Land  77 

half-a-crown  of  our  present  money.  Four 
ounces  of  silver,  Tower  weight,  therefore, 
equal  to  six  shillings  and  eightpence  of  the 
money  of  those  times,  and  to  near  twenty 
shillings  of  that  of  the  present,  must  have  been 
reckoned  a  moderate  price  for  the  quarter  of 
eight  bushels. 

This  statute  is  surely  a  better  evidence  of 
what  was  reckoned  in  those  times  a  moderate 
price  of  grain  than  the  prices  of  some  par¬ 
ticular  years  which  have  generally  been  re¬ 
corded  by  historians  and  other  writers  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  extraordinary  dearness  or 
cheapness,  and  from  which,  therefore,  it  is 
difficult  to  form  any  judgment  concerning 
what  may  have  been  the  ordinary  price.  There 
are,  besides,  other  reasons  for  believing  that 
in  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
and  for  some  time  before,  the  common  price 
of  wheat  was  not  less  than  four  ounces  of 
silver  the  quarter,  and  that  of  other  grain  in 
proportion. 

In  1309,  Ralph  de  Bom,  prior  of  St.  Au¬ 
gustine’s,  Canterbury,  gave  a  feast  upon  his 
installation-day,  of  which  William  Thorn  has 
preserved  not  only  the  bill  of  fare  but  the 
prices  of  many  particulars.  In  that  feast  were 
consumed,  first,  fifty-three  quarters  of  wheat, 
which  cost  nineteen  pounds,  or  seven  shillings 
and  twopence  a  quarter,  equal  to  about  one- 
and-twenty  shillings  and  sixpence  of  our  pres¬ 
ent  money;  secondly,  fifty-eight  quarters  of 
malt,  which  cost  seventeen  pounds  ten  shil¬ 
lings,  or  six  shillings  a  quarter,  equal  to  about 
eighteen  shillings  of  our  present  money;  third¬ 
ly,  twenty  quarters  of  oats,  which  cost  four 
pounds,  or  four  shillings  a  quarter,  equal  to 
about  twelve  shillings  of  our  present  money. 
The  prices  of  malt  and  oats  seem  here  to  be 
higher  than  their  ordinary  proportion  to  the 
price  of  wheat. 

These  prices  are  not  recorded  on  account  of 
their  extraordinary  dearness  or  cheapness,  but 
are  mentioned  accidentally  as  the  prices  ac¬ 
tually  paid  for  large  quantities  of  grain  con¬ 
sumed  at  a  feast  which  was  famous  for  its 
magnificence. 

In  1262,  being  the  51st  of  Henry  III,  was 
revived  an  ancient  statute  called  The  Assize 
of  Bread  and  Ale,  which  the  king  says  in  the 
preamble  had  been  made  in  the  times  of  his 
progenitors,  sometime  kings  of  England.  It  is 
probably,  therefore,  as  old  at  least  as  the 
time  of  his  grandfather  Henry  II,  and  may 
have  been  as  old  as  the  Conquest.  It  regulates 
the  price  of  bread  according  as  the  prices  of 
wheat  may  happen  to  be,  from  one  shilling  to 
twenty  shillings  the  quarter  of  the  money  of 
those  times.  But  statutes  of  this  kind  are  gen¬ 
erally  presumed  to  provide  with  equal  care  for 
all  deviations  from  the  middle  price,  for  those 
below  it  as  well  as  for  those  above  it.  Ten 


78  The  Wealth 

shillings,  therefore,  containing  six  ounces  of 
silver,  Tower  weight,  and  equal  to  about 
thirty  shillings  of  our  present  money,  must, 
upon  this  supposition,  have  been  reckoned  the 
middle  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  when  this 
statute  was  first  enacted,  and  must  have  con¬ 
tinued  to  be  so  in  the  51st  of  Henry  III.  We 
cannot  therefore  be  very  wrong  in  supposing 
that  the  middle  price  was  not  less  than  one- 
third  of  the  highest  price  at  which  this  stat¬ 
ute  regulates  the  price  of  bread,  or  than  six 
shillings  and  eightpence  of  the  money  of  those 
times,  containing  four  ounces  of  silver,  Tower 
weight. 

From  these  different  facts,  therefore,  we 
seem  to  have  some  reason  to  conclude  that, 
about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
and  for  a  considerable  time  before,  the  average 
or  ordinary  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  was 
not  supposed  to  be  less  than  four  ounces  of 
silver,  Tower  weight. 

From  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth 
to  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
what  was  reckoned  the  reasonable  and  mod¬ 
erate,  that  is  the  ordinary  or  average  price  of 
wheat,  seems  to  have  sunk  gradually  to  about 
one-half  of  this  price;  so  as  at  last  to  have 
fallen  to  about  two  ounces  of  silver,  Tower 
weight,  equal  to  about  ten  shillings  of  our 
present  money.  It  continued  to  be  estimated 
at  this  price  till  about  1570. 

In  the  household  book  of  Henry,  the  fifth 
Earl  of  Northumberland,  drawn  up  in  1512, 
there  are  two  different  estimations  of  wheat. 
In  one  of  them  it  is  computed  at  six  shillings 
and  eightpence  the  quarter,  in  the  other  at 
five  shillings  and  eightpence  only.  In  1512,  six 
shillings  and  eightpence  contained  only  two 
ounces  of  silver,  Tower  weight,  and  were  equal 
to  about  ten  shillings  of  our  present  money. 

From  the  25th  of  Edward  III  to  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  during  the 
space  of  more  than  two  hundred  years,  six 
shillings  and  eightpence,  it  appears  from  sev¬ 
eral  different  statutes,  had  continued  to  be 
considered  as  what  is  called  the  moderate  and 
reasonable,  that  is  the  ordinary  or  average 
price  of  wheat.  The  quantity  of  silver,  how¬ 
ever,  contained  in  that  nominal  sum  was,  dur¬ 
ing  the  course  of  this  period,  continually  di¬ 
minishing,  in  consequence  of  some  alterations 
which  were  made  in  the  coin.  But  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  value  of  silver  had,  it  seems,  so 
far  compensated  the  diminution  of  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  it  contained  in  the  same  nominal  sum 
that  the  legislature  did  not  think  it  worth 
while  to  attend  to  this  circumstance. 

Thus  in  1436  it  was  enacted  that  wheat 
might  be  exported  without  a  licence  when  the 
price  was  so  low  as  six  shillings  and  eight- 
pence;  and  in  1463  it  was  enacted  that  no 
wheat  should  be  imported  if  the  price  was  not 


of  Nations 

above  six  shillings  and  eightpence  the  quarter. 
The  legislature  had  imagined  that  when  the 
price  was  so  low  there  could  be  no  inconven- 
iency  in  exportation,  but  that  when  it  rose 
higher  it  became  prudent  to  allow  importa¬ 
tion.  Six  shillings  and  eightpence,  therefore, 
containing  about  the  same  quantity  of  silver 
as  thirteen  shillings  and  fourpence  of  our  pres¬ 
ent  money  (one  third  part  less  than  the  same 
nominal  sum  contained  in  the  time  of  Edward 
III) ,  had  in  those  times  been  considered  as 
what  is  called  the  moderate  and  reasonable 
price  of  wheat. 

In  1554,  by  the  1st  and  2nd  of  Philip  and 
Mary;  and  in  1558,  by  the  1st  of  Elizabeth, 
the  exportation  of  wheat  was  in  the  same 
manner  prohibited,  whenever  the  price  of  the 
quarter  should  exceed  six  shillings  and  eight- 
pence,  which  did  not  then  contain  two  penny¬ 
worth  more  silver  than  the  same  nominal  sum 
does  at  present.  But  it  had  soon  been  found 
that  to  restrain  the  exportation  of  wheat  till 
the  price  was  so  very  low  was,  in  reality,  to 
prohibit  it  altogether.  In  1562,  therefore,  by 
the  5th  of  Elizabeth,  the  exportation  of  wheat 
was  allowed  from  certain  ports  whenever  the 
price  of  the  quarter  should  not  exceed  ten 
shillings,  containing  nearly  the  same  quantity 
of  silver  as  the  like  nominal  sum  does  at 
present.  This  price  had  at  this  time,  therefore, 
been  considered  as  what  is  called  the  moder¬ 
ate  and  reasonable  price  of  wheat.  It  agrees 
nearly  with  the  estimation  of  the  North¬ 
umberland  book  in  1512. 

That  in  France  the  average  price  of  grain 
was,  in  the  same  manner,  much  lower  in  the 
end  of  the  fifteenth  and  beginning  of  the  six¬ 
teenth  century  than  in  the  two  centuries  pre¬ 
ceding  has  been  observed  both  by  Mr.  Dupre 
de  St.  Maur,  and  by  the  elegant  author  of  the 
Essay  on  the  police  of  grain.  Its  price,  during 
the  same  period,  had  probably  sunk  in  the 
same  manner  through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe. 

This  rise  in  the  value  of  silver  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  that  of  corn,  may  either  have  been  ow¬ 
ing  altogether  to  the  increase  of  the  demand 
for  that  metal,  in  consequence  of  increasing 
improvement  and  cultivation,  the  supply  in 
the  meantime  continuing  the  same  as  before; 
or,  the  demand  continuing  the  same  as  before, 
it  may  have  been  owing  altogether  to  the 
gradual  diminution  of  the  supply;  the  greater 
part  of  the  mines  which  were  then  known  in 
the  world  being  much  exhausted,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  expense  of  working  them  much 
increased;  or  it  may  have  been  owing  partly 
to  the  other  of  those  two  circumstances.  In 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  and  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  centuries,  the  greater  part  of  Europe 
was  approaching  towards  a  more  settled  form 
of  government  than  it  had  enjoyed  for  several 


79 


The  Rent  of  Land 


ages  before.  The  increase  of  security  would 
naturally  increase  industry  and  improvement; 
and  the  demand  for  the  precious  metals,  as 
well  as  for  every  other  luxury  and  ornament, 
would  naturally  increase  with  the  increase  of 
riches.  A  greater  annual  produce  would  re¬ 
quire  a  greater  quantity  of  coin  to  circulate  it; 
and  a  greater  number  of  rich  people  would 
require  a  greater  quantity  of  plate  and  other 
ornaments  of  silver.  It  is  natural  to  suppose, 
too,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  mines  which 
then  supplied  the  European  market  with  sil¬ 
ver  might  be  a  good  deal  exhausted,  and  have 
become  more  expensive  in  the  working.  They 
had  been  wrought  many  of  them  from  the 
time  of  the  Romans. 

It  has  been  the  opinion,  however,  of  the 
greater  part  of  those  who  have  written  upon 
the  price  of  commodities  in  ancient  times  that, 
from  the  Conquest,  perhaps  from  the  inva¬ 
sion  of  Julius  Caesar  till  the  discovery  of  the 
mines  of  America,  the  value  of  silver  was  con¬ 
tinually  diminishing.  This  opinion  they  seem 
to  have  been  led  into,  partly  by  the  observa¬ 
tions  which  they  had  occasion  to  make  upon 
the  prices  both  of  corn  and  of  some  other 
parts  of  the  rude  produce  of  land;  and  partly 
by  the  popular  notion  that  as  the  quantity  of 
silver  naturally  increases  in  every  country 
with  the  increase  of  wealth,  so  its  value  di¬ 
minishes  as  its  quantity  increases. 

In  their  observations  upon  the  prices  of 
com,  three  different  circumstances  seem  fre¬ 
quently  to  have  misled  them. 

First,  in  ancient  times  almost  all  rents  were 
paid  in  kind;  in  a  certain  quantity  of  corn, 
cattle,  poultry,  etc.  It  sometimes  happened, 
however,  that  the  landlord  would  stipulate 
that  he  should  be  at  liberty  to  demand  of  the 
tenant,  either  the  annual  payment  in  kind,  or 
a  certain  sum  of  money  instead  of  it.  The  price 
at  which  the  payment  in  kind  was  in  this 
manner  exchanged  for  a  certain  sum  of  money 
is  in  Scotland  called  the  conversion  price.  As 
the  option  is  always  in  the  landlord  to  take 
either  the  substance  or  the  price,  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  safety  of  the  tenant  that  the 
conversion  price  should  rather  be  below  than 
above  the  average  market  price.  In  many 
places,  accordingly,  it  is  not  much  above  one- 
half  of  this  price.  Through  the  greater  part  of 
Scotland  this  custom  still  continues  with  re¬ 
gard  to  poultry,  and  in  some  places  with  re¬ 
gard  to  cattle.  It  might  probably  have  contin¬ 
ued  to  take  place,  too,  with  regard  to  corn, 
had  not  the  institution  of  the  public  liars  put 
an  end  to  it.  These  are  annual  valuations,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  judgment  of  an  assize,  of  the 
average  price  of  all  the  different  sorts  of  grain, 
and  of  all  the  different  qualities  of  each,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  actual  market  price  in  every 
different  county.  This  institution  rendered  it 


sufficiently  safe  for  the  tenant,  and  much 
more  convenient  for  the  landlord,  to  convert, 
as  they  call  it,  the  corn  rent,  rather  at  what 
should  happen  to  be  the  price  of  the  fiars  of 
each  year,  than  at  any  certain  fixed  price.  But 
the  writers  who  have  collected  the  prices  of 
corn  in  ancient  times  seem  frequently  to  have 
mistaken  what  is  called  in  Scotland  the  con¬ 
version  price  for  the  actual  market  price. 
Fleetwood  acknowledges,  upon  one  occasion, 
that  he  had  made  this  mistake.  As  he  wrote 
his  book,  however,  for  a  particular  purpose, 
he  does  not  think  proper  to  make  this  ac¬ 
knowledgment  till  after  transcribing  this  con¬ 
version  price  fifteen  times.  The  price  is  eight 
shillings  the  quarter  of  wheat.  This  sum  in 
1423,  the  year  at  which  he  begins  with  it, 
contained  the  same  quantity  of  silver  as  six¬ 
teen  shillings  of  our  present  money.  But  in 
1562,  the  year  at  which  he  ends  with  it,  it 
contained  no  more  than  the  same  nominal 
sum  does  at  present. 

Secondly,  they  have  been  misled  by  the 
slovenly  manner  in  which  some  ancient  stat¬ 
utes  of  assize  had  been  sometimes  transcribed 
by  lazy  copiers;  and  sometimes  perhaps  ac¬ 
tually  composed  by  the  legislature. 

The  ancient  statutes  of  assize  seem  to  have 
begun  always  with  determining  what  ought 
to  be  the  price  of  bread  and  ale  when  the 
price  of  wheat  and  barley  were  at  the  lowest, 
and  to  have  proceeded  gradually  to  determine 
what  it  ought  to  be,  according  as  the  prices  of 
those  two  sorts  of  grain  should  gradually  rise 
above  this  lowest  price.  But  the  transcribers 
of  those  statutes  seem  frequently  to  have 
thought  it  sufficient  to  copy  the  regulation  as 
far  as  the  three  or  four  first  and  lowest  prices, 
saving  in  this  manner  their  own  labour,  and 
judging,  I  suppose,  that  this  was  enough  to 
show  what  proportion  ought  to  be  observed 
in  all  higher  prices. 

Thus  in  the  Assize  of  Bread  and  Ale,  of  the 
51st  of  Henry  III,  the  price  of  bread  was  reg¬ 
ulated  according  to  the  different  prices  of 
wheat,  from  one  shilling  to  twenty  shillings 
the  quarter,  of  the  money  of  those  times.  But 
in  the  manuscripts  from  which  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  editions  of  the  statutes,  preceding  that  of 
Mr.  Ruffhead,  were  printed,  the  copiers  had 
never  transcribed  this  regulation  beyond  the 
price  of  twelve  shillings.  Several  writers,  there¬ 
fore,  being  misled  by  this  faulty  transcription, 
very  naturally  concluded  that  the  middle 
price,  or  six  shillings  the  quarter,  equal  to 
about  eighteen  shillings  of  our  present  money, 
was  the  ordinary  or  average  price  of  wheat  at 
that  time. 

In  the  Statute  of  Tumbrel  and  Pillory, 
enacted  nearly  about  the  same  time,  the 
price  of  ale  is  regulated  according  to  every 
sixpence  rise  in  the  price  of  barley,  from  two 


80 


The  Wealth 

shillings  to  four  shillings  the  quarter.  That 
four  shillings,  however,  was  not  considered 
as  the  highest  price  to  which  barley  might 
frequently  rise  in  those  times,  and  that  these 
prices  were  only  given  as  an  example  of  the 
proportion  which  ought  to  be  observed  in  all 
other  prices,  whether  higher  or  lower,  we  may 
infer  from  the  last  words  of  the  statute:  et 
sic  deinceps  crescetur  vel  diminuetur  per  sex 
denarios.  The  expression  is  very  slovenly,  but 
the  meaning  is  plain  enough:  “That  the  price 
of  ale  is  in  this  manner  to  be  increased  or 
diminished  according  to  every  sixpence  rise 
or  fall  in  the  price  of  barley.”  In  the  composi¬ 
tion  of  this  statute  the  legislature  itself  seems 
to  have  been  as  negligent  as  the  copiers  were 
in  the  transcription  of  the  others. 

In  an  ancient  manuscript  of  the  Regiam 
Majestatem ,  an  old  Scotch  law  book,  there  is 
a  statute  of  assize  in  which  the  price  of 
bread  is  regulated  according  to  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  prices  of  wheat,  from  tenpence  to  three 
shillings  the  Scotch  boll,  equal  to  about  half 
an  English  quarter.  Three  shillings  Scotch,  at 
the  time  when  this  assize  is  supposed  to  have 
been  enacted  were  equal  to  about  nine  shil¬ 
lings  sterling  of  our  present  money.  Mr.  Rud- 
diman  seems  to  conclude  from  this,  that  three 
shillings  was  the  highest  price  to  which  wheat 
ever  rose  in  those  times,  and  that  tenpence, 
a  shilling,  or  at  most  two  shillings,  were  the 
ordinary  prices.  Upon  consulting  the  manu¬ 
script,  however,  it  appears  evidently1  that  all 
these  prices  are  only  set  down  as  examples 
of  the  proportion  which  ought  to  be  observed 
between  the  respective  prices  of  wheat  and 
bread.  The  last  words  of  the  statute  are: 
reliqua  judicabis  secundum  prcescripta  ha- 
bendo  respectum  ad  pretium  bladi.  “You 
shall  judge  of  the  remaining  cases  according 
to  what  is  above  written,  having  a  respect  to 
the  price  of  corn.” 

Thirdly,  they  seem  to  have  been  misled, 
too,  by  the  very  low  price  at  which  wheat  was 
sometimes  sold  in  very  ancient  times;  and 
to  have  imagined  that  as  its  lowest  price  was 
then  much  lower  than  in  later  times,  its  ordi¬ 
nary  price  must  likewise  have  been  much 
lower.  They  might  have  found,  however,  that 
in  those  ancient  times  its  highest  price  was 
fully  as  much  above,  as  its  lowest  price  was 
below  anything  that  had  even  been  known 
in  later  times.  Thus  in  1270,  Fleetwood  gives 
us  two  prices  of  the  quarter  of  wheat.  The 
one  is  four  pounds  sixteen  shillings  of  the 
money  of  those  times,  equal  to  fourteen 
pounds  eight  shillings  of  that  of  the  present; 
the  other  is  six  pounds  eight  shillings,  equal 
to  nineteen  pounds  four  shillings  of  our  pres¬ 
ent  money.  No  price  can  be  found  in  the  end 

1  See  his  preface  to  Anderson’s  Diplomata,  etc ., 
Scotice. 


of  Nations 

of  the  fifteenth,  or  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  which  approaches  to  the  extrava¬ 
gance  of  these.  The  price  of  corn,  though  at 
all  times  liable  to  variation,  varies  most  in 
those  turbulent  and  disorderly  societies,  in 
which  the  interruption  of  all  commerce  and 
communication  hinders  the  plenty  of  one  part 
of  the  country  from  relieving  the  scarcity  of 
another.  In  the  disorderly  state  of  England 
under  the  Plantagenets,  who  governed  it  from 
about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  till  towards 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  one  district 
might  be  in  plenty,  while  another  at  no  great 
distance,  by  having  its  crop  destroyed  either 
by  some  accident  of  the  seasons,  or  by  the 
incursion  of  some  neighbouring  baron,  might 
be  suffering  all  the  horrors  of  a  famine;  and 
yet  if  the  lands  of  some  hostile  lord  were  in¬ 
terposed  between  them,  the  one  might  not 
be  able  to  give  the  least  assistance  to  the 
other.  Under  the  vigorous  administration  of 
the  Tudors,  who  governed  England  during 
the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  and  through 
the  whole  of  the  sixteenth  century,  no  baron 
was  powerful  enough  to  dare  to  disturb  the 
public  security. 

The  reader  will  find  at  the  end  of  this  chap¬ 
ter  all  the  prices  of  wheat  which  have  been 
collected  by  Fleetwood  from  1202  to  1597, 
both  inclusive,  reduced  to  the  money  of  the 
present  times,  and  digested  according  to  the 
order  of  time,  into  seven  divisions  of  twelve 
years  each.  At  the  end  of  each  division,  too, 
he  will  find  the  average  price  of  the  twelve 
years  of  which  it  consists.  In  that  long  period 
of  time,  Fleetwood  has  been  able  to  collect 
the  prices  of  no  more  than  eighty  years,  so 
that  four  years  are  wanting  to  make  out  the 
last  twelve  years.  I  have  added,  therefore, 
from  the  accounts  of  Eton  college,  the  prices 
of  1598,  1599,  1600,  and  1601.  It  is  the  only 
addition  which  I  have  made.  The  reader  will 
see  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
till  after  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century 
the  average  price  of  each  twelve  years  grows 
gradually  lower  and  lower;  and  that  towards 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  it  begins  to 
rise  again.  The  prices,  indeed,  which  Fleet- 
wood  has  been  able  to  collect,  seem  to  have 
been  those  chiefly  which  were  remarkable  for 
extraordinary  dearness  or  cheapness;  and  I 
do  not  pretend  that  any  very  certain  conclu¬ 
sion  can  be  drawn  from  them.  So  far,  how¬ 
ever,  as  they  prove  anything  at  all,  they  con¬ 
firm  the  account  which  I  have  been  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  give.  Fleetwood  himself,  however, 
seems,  with  most  other  writers,  to  have  be¬ 
lieved  that  during  all  this  period  the  value  of 
silver,  in  consequence  of  its  increasing  abun¬ 
dance,  was  continually  diminishing.  The 
prices  of  corn  which  he  himself  has  collected 
certainly  do  not  agree  with  this  opinion.  They 


81 


The  Rent 

agree  perfectly  with  that  of  Mr.  Dupre  de 
St.  Maur,  and  with  that  which  I  have  been 
endeavouring  to  explain.  Bishop  Fleetwood 
and  Mr.  Dupre  de  St.  Maur  are  the  two  au¬ 
thors  who  seem  to  have  collected,  with  the 
greatest  diligence  and  fidelity,  the  prices  of 
things  in  ancient  times.  It  is  somewhat  cu¬ 
rious  that,  though  their  opinions  are  so  very 
different,  their  facts,  so  far  as  they  relate  to 
the  price  of  corn  at  least,  should  coincide  so 
very  exactly. 

It  is  not,  however,  so  much  from  the  low 
price  of  corn  as  from  that  of  some  other  parts 
of  the  rude  produce  of  land  that  the  most 
judicious  writers  have  inferred  the  great  value 
of  silver  in  those  very  ancient  times.  Corn,  it 
has  been  said,  being  a  sort  of  manufacture, 
was,  in  those  rude  ages,  much  dearer  in  pro¬ 
portion  than  the  greater  part  of  other  com¬ 
modities;  it  is  meant,  I  suppose,  than  the 
greater  part  of  unmanufactured  commodities, 
such  as  cattle,  poultry,  game  of  all  kinds,  etc. 
That  in  those  times  of  poverty  and  barbarism 
these  were  proportionally  much  cheaper  than 
corn  is  undoubtedly  true.  But  this  cheapness 
was  not  the  effect  of  the  high  value  of  silver, 
but  of  the  low  value  of  those  commodities.  It 
was  not  because  silver  would  in  such  times 
purchase  or  represent  a  greater  quantity  of 
labour,  but  because  such  commodities  would 
purchase  or  represent  a  much  smaller  quan¬ 
tity  than  in  times  of  more  opulence  and  im¬ 
provement.  Silver  must  certainly  be  cheaper 
in  Spanish  America  than  in  Europe;  in  the 
country  where  it  is  produced  than  in  the  coun¬ 
try  to  which  it  is  brought,  at  the  expense  of 
a  long  carriage  both  by  land  and  by  sea,  of 
a  freight  and  an  insurance.  One-and-twenty 
pence  halfpenny  sterling,  however,  we  are 
told  by  Ulloa,  was,  not  many  years  ago,  at 
Buenos  Ayres,  the  price  of  an  ox  chosen  from 
a  herd  of  three  or  four  hundred.  Sixteen 
shillings  sterling,  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Byron 
was  the  price  of  a  good  horse  in  the  capital 
of  Chili.  In  a  country  naturally  fertile,  but 
of  which  the  far  greater  part  is  altogether 
uncultivated,  cattle,  poultry,  game  of  all 
kinds,  etc.,  as  they  can  be  acquired  with  a 
very  small  quantity  of  labour,  so  they  will  pur¬ 
chase  or  command  but  a  very  small  quantity. 
The  low  money  price  for  which  they  may  be 
sold  is  no  proof  that  the  real  value  of  silver 
is  there  very  high,  but  that  the  real  value  of 
those  commodities  is  very  low. 

Labour,  it  must  always  be  remembered,  and 
not  any  particular  commodity  or  set  of  com¬ 
modities,  is  the  real  measure  of  the  value  both 
of  silver  and  of  all  other  commodities. 

But  in  countries  almost  waste,  or  but  thin¬ 
ly  inhabited,  cattle,  poultry,  game  of  all  kinds, 
etc.,  as  they  are  the  spontaneous  produc¬ 
tions  of  nature,  so  she  frequently  produces 


of  Land 

them  in  much  greater  quantities  than  the 
consumption  of  the  inhabitants  requires.  In 
such  a  state  of  things  the  supply  commonly 
exceeds  the  demand.  In  different  states  of  so¬ 
ciety,  in  different  stages  of  improvement, 
therefore,  such  commodities  will  represent,  or 
be  equivalent  to,  very  different  quantities  of 
labour. 

In  every  state  of  society,  in  every  stage  of 
improvement,  corn  is  the  production  of  hu¬ 
man  industry.  But  the  average  produce  of 
every  sort  of  industry  is  always  suited,  more 
or  less  exactly,  to  the  average  consumption; 
the  average  supply  to  the  average  demand.  In 
every  different  stage  of  improvement,  besides, 
the  raising  of  equal  quantities  of  corn  in  the 
same  soil  and  climate  will,  at  an  average,  re¬ 
quire  nearly  equal  quantities  of  labour;  or 
what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  price  of 
nearly  equal  quantities;  the  continual  increase 
of  the  productive  powers  of  labour  in  an  im¬ 
proving  state  of  cultivation  being  more  or  less 
counterbalanced  by  the  continually  increasing 
price  of  cattle,  the  principal  instruments  of 
agriculture.  Upon  all  these  accounts,  there¬ 
fore,  we  may  rest  assured  that  equal  quanti¬ 
ties  of  corn  will,  in  every  state  of  society,  in 
every  stage  of  improvement,  more  nearly 
represent,  or  be  equivalent  to,  equal  quanti¬ 
ties  of  labour  than  equal  quantities  of  any 
other  part  of  the  rude  produce  of  land.  Corn, 
accordingly,  it  has  already  been  observed,  is, 
in  all  the  different  stages  of  wealth  and  im¬ 
provement,  a  more  accurate  measure  of  value 
than  any  other  commodity  or  set  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  In  all  those  different  stages,  therefore,  we 
can  judge  better  of  the  real  value  of  silver  by 
comparing  it  with  corn  than  by  comparing  it 
wTith  any  other  commodity  or  set  of  commodi¬ 
ties. 

Corn,  besides,  or  whatever  else  is  the  com¬ 
mon  and  favourite  vegetable  food  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  constitutes,  in  every  civilised  country, 
the  principal  part  of  the  subsistence  of  the 
labourer.  In  consequence  of  the  extension  of 
agriculture,  the  land  of  every  country  pro¬ 
duces  a  much  greater  quantity  of  vegetable 
than  of  animal  food,  and  the  labourer  every¬ 
where  lives  chiefly  upon  the  wholesome  food 
that  is  cheapest  and  most  abundant.  Butch¬ 
er’s  meat,  except  in  the  most  thriving  coun¬ 
tries,  or  where  labour  is  most  highly  rewarded, 
makes  but  an  insignificant  part  of  his  sub¬ 
sistence;  poultry  makes  a  still  smaller  part 
of  it,  and  game  no  part  of  it.  In  France,  and 
even  in  Scotland,  where  labour  is  somewhat 
better  rewarded  than  in  France,  the  labour¬ 
ing  poor  seldom  eat  butcher’s  meat,  except 
upon  holidays,  and  other  extraordinary  occa¬ 
sions.  The  money  price  of  labour,  therefore, 
depends  much  more  upon  the  average  money 
price  of  corn,  the  subsistence  of  the  labourer, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


82 

than  upon  that  of  butcher’s  meat,  or  of  any 
other  part  of  the  rude  produce  of  land.  The 
real  value  of  gold  and  silver,  therefore,  the 
real  quantity  of  labour  which  they  can  pur¬ 
chase  or  command,  depends  much  more  upon 
the  quantity  of  corn  which  they  can  purchase 
or  command  than  upon  that  of  butcher’s 
meat,  or  any  other  part  of  the  rude  produce 
of  land. 

Such  slight  observations,  however,  upon  the 
prices  either  of  corn  or  of  other  commodities, 
would  not  probably  have  misled  so  many  in¬ 
telligent  authors  had  they  not  been  influenced, 
at  the  same  time,  by  the  popular  notion,  that 
as  the  quantity  of  silver  naturally  increases 
in  every  country  with  the  increase  of  wealth, 
so  its  value  diminishes  as  its  quantity  in¬ 
creases.  This  notion,  however,  seems  to  be 
altogether  groundless. 

The  quantity  of  the  precious  metals  may 
increase  in  any  country  from  two  different 
causes;  either,  first,  from  the  increased  abun¬ 
dance  of  the  mines  which  supply  it;  or,  sec¬ 
ondly,  from  the  increased  wealth  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  from  the  increased  produce  of  their  an¬ 
nual  labour.  The  first  of  these  causes  is  no 
doubt  necessarily  connected  with  the  diminu¬ 
tion  of  the  value  of  the  precious  metals,  but 
the  second  is  not. 

When  more  abundant  mines  are  discovered, 
a  greater  quantity  of  the  precious  metals  is 
brought  to  market,  and  the  quantity  of  the 
necessaries  and  conveniencies  of  life  for  which 
they  must  be  exchanged  being  the  same  as 
before,  equal  quantities  of  the  metals  must 
be  exchanged  for  smaller  quantities  of  com¬ 
modities.  So  far,  therefore,  as  the  increase  of 
the  quantity  of  the  precious  metals  in  any 
country  arises  from  the  increased  abundance 
of  the  mines,  it  is  necessarily  connected  with 
some  diminution  of  their  value. 

When,  on  the  contrary,  the  wealth  of  any 
country  increases,  when  the  annual  produce 
of  its  labour  becomes  gradually  greater  and 
greater,  a  greater  quantity  of  coin  becomes 
necessary  in  order  to  circulate  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  commodities;  and  the  people,  as  they 
can  afford  it,  as  they  have  more  commodities 
to  give  for  it,  will  naturally  purchase  a  great¬ 
er  and  a  greater  quantity  of  plate.  The  quan¬ 
tity  of  their  coin  will  increase  from  necessity; 
the  quantity  of  their  plate  from  vanity  and 
ostentation,  or  from  the  same  reason  that  the 
quantity  of  fine  statues,  pictures,  and  of  every 
other  luxury  and  curiosity,  is  likely  to  increase 
among  them.  But  as  statuaries  and  painters 
are  not  likely  to  be  worse  rewarded  in  times 
of  wealth  and  prosperity  than  in  times  of 
poverty  and  depression,  so  gold  and  silver  are 
not  likely  to  be  worse  paid  for. 

The  price  of  gold  and  silver,  when  the  acci¬ 
dental  discovery  of  more  abundant  mines  does 


not  keep  it  down,  as  it  naturally  rises  with 
the  wealth  of  every  country,  so,  whatever  be 
the  state  of  the  mines,  it  is  at  all  times  nat¬ 
urally  higher  in  a  rich  than  in  a  poor  coun¬ 
try.  Gold  and  silver,  like  all  other  commodi¬ 
ties,  naturally  seek  the  market  where  the  best 
price  is  given  for  them,  and  the  best  price 
is  commonly  given  for  every  thing  in  the 
country  which  can  best  afford  it.  Labour,  it 
must  be  remembered,  is  the  ultimate  price 
which  is  paid  for  everything,  and  in  countries 
where  labour  is  equally  well  regarded,  the 
money  price  of  labour  will  be  in  proportion 
to  that  of  the  subsistence  of  the  labourer.  But 
gold  and  silver  will  naturally  exchange  for  a 
greater  quantity  of  subsistence  in  a  rich  than 
in  a  poor  country,  in  a  country  which  abounds 
with  subsistence  than  in  one  which  is  but  in¬ 
differently  supplied  with  it.  If  the  two  coun¬ 
tries  are  at  a  great  distance,  the  difference 
may  be  very  great;  because  though  the  metals 
naturally  fly  from  the  worse  to  the  better 
market,  yet  it  may  be  difficult  to  transport 
them  in  such  quantities  as  to  bring  their 
price  nearly  to  a  level  in  both.  If  the  coun¬ 
tries  are  near,  the  difference  will  be  smaller, 
and  may  sometimes  be  scarce  perceptible; 
because  in  this  case  the  transportation  will 
be  easy.  China  is  a  much  richer  country  than 
any  part  of  Europe,  and  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  price  of  subsistence  in  China  and 
in  Europe  is  very  great.  Rice  in  China  is 
much  cheaper  than  wheat  is  anywhere  in  Eu¬ 
rope.  England  is  a  much  richer  country  than 
Scotland;  but  the  difference  between  the  mon¬ 
ey-price  of  corn  in  those  two  countries  is  much 
smaller,  and  is  but  just  perceptible.  In  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  quantity  or  measure,  Scotch 
corn  generally  appears  to  be  a  good  deal 
cheaper  than  English;  but  in  proportion  to 
its  quality,  it  is  certainly  somewhat  dearer. 
Scotland  receives  almost  every  year  very 
large  supplies  from  England,  and  every  com¬ 
modity  must  commonly  be  somewhat  dearer 
in  the  country  to  which  it  is  brought  than  in 
that  from  which  it  comes.  English  corn,  there¬ 
fore,  must  be  dearer  in  Scotland  than  in  Eng¬ 
land,  and  yet  in  proportion  to  its  quality,  or 
to  the  quantity  and  goodness  of  the  flour  or 
meal  which  can  be  made  from  it,  it  cannot 
commonly  be  sold  higher  there  than  the 
Scotch  corn  which  comes  to  market  in  compe¬ 
tition  with  it. 

The  difference  between  the  money  price  of 
labour  in  China  and  in  Europe  is  still  greater 
than  that  between  the  money  price  of  sub¬ 
sistence;  because  the  real  recompense  of  la¬ 
bour  is  higher  in  Europe  than  in  China,  the 
greater  part  of  Europe  being  in  an  improv¬ 
ing  state,  while  China  seems  to  be  standing 
still.  The  money  price  of  labour  is  lower  in 
Scotland  than  in  England  because  the  real 


83 


The  Rent 

recompense  of  labour  is  much  lower;  Scotland, 
though  advancing  to  greater  wealth,  advanc¬ 
ing  much  more  slowly  than  England.  The  fre¬ 
quency  of  emigration  from  Scotland,  and  the 
rarity  of  it  from  England,  sufficiently  prove 
that  the  demand  for  labour  is  very  different 
in  the  two  countries.  The  proportion  between 
the  real  recompense  of  labour  in  different 
countries,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  naturally 
regulated  not  by  their  actual  wealth  or  pov¬ 
erty,  but  by  their  advancing,  stationary,  or 
declining  condition. 

Gold  and  silver,  as  they  are  naturally  of 
the  greatest  value  among  the  richest,  so  they 
are  naturally  of  the  least  value  among  the 
poorest  nations.  Among  savages,  the  poorest 
of  all  nations,  they  are  of  scarce  any  value. 

In  great  towns  corn  is  always  dearer  than 
in  remote  parts  of  the  country.  This,  however, 
is  the  effect,  not  of  the  real  cheapness  of  sil¬ 
ver,  but  of  the  real  dearness  of  corn.  It  does 
not  cost  less  labour  to  bring  silver  to  the 
great  town  than  to  the  remote  parts  of  the 
country;  but  it  costs  a  great  deal  more  to 
bring  corn. 

In  some  very  rich  and  commercial  coun¬ 
tries,  such  as  Holland  and  the  territory  of 
Genoa,  corn  is  dear  for  the  same  reason  that 
it  is  dear  in  great  towns.  They  do  not  pro¬ 
duce  enough  to  maintain  their  inhabitants. 
They  are  rich  in  the  industry  and  skill  of 
their  artificers  and  manufacturers;  in  every 
sort  of  machinery  which  can  facilitate  and 
abridge  labour;  in  shipping,  and  in  all  the 
other  instruments  and  means  of  carriage  and 
commerce:  but  they  are  poor  in  corn,  which, 
as  it  must  be  brought  to  them  from  distant 
countries,  must,  by  an  addition  to  its  price, 
pay  for  the  carriage  from  those  countries.  It 
does  not  cost  less  labour  to  bring  silver  to 
Amsterdam  than  to  Dantzic;  but  it  costs  a 
great  deal  more  to  bring  corn.  The  real  cost 
of  silver  must  be  nearly  the  same  in  both 
places;  but  that  of  corn  must  be  very  differ¬ 
ent.  Diminish  the  real  opulence  either  of 
Holland  or  of  the  territory  of  Genoa,  while 
the  number  of  their  inhabitants  remains  the 
same:  diminish  their  power  of  supplying 
themselves  from  distant  countries;  and  the 
price  of  corn,  instead  of  sinking  with  that 
diminution  in  the  quantity  of  their  silver, 
which  must  necessarily  accompany  this  de¬ 
clension  either  as  its  cause  or  as  its  effect, 
will  rise  to  the  price  of  a  famine.  When  we 
are  in  want  of  necessaries  we  must  part  with 
all  superfluities,  of  which  the  value,  as  it 
rises  in  times  of  opulence  and  prosperity,  so 
it  sinks  in  times  of  poverty  and  distress.  It 
is  otherwise  with  necessaries.  Their  real  price, 
the  quantity  of  labour  which  they  can  pur¬ 
chase  or  command,  rises  in  times  of  poverty 
and  distress,  and  sinks  in  times  of  opulence 


of  Land 

and  prosperity,  which  are  always  times  of 
great  abundance;  for  they  could  not  other¬ 
wise  be  times  of  opulence  and  prosperity. 
Corn  is  a  necessary,  silver  is  only  a  super¬ 
fluity. 

Whatever,  therefore,  may  have  been  the 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  the  precious  met¬ 
als,  which,  during  the  period  between  the 
middle  of  the  fourteenth  and  that  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  arose  from  the  increase 
of  wealth  and  improvement,  it  could  have 
no  tendency  to  diminish  their  value  either  in 
Great  Britain  or  in  any  other  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  If  those  who  have  collected  the  prices 
of  things  in  ancient  times,  therefore,  had, 
during  this  period,  no  reason  to  infer  the 
diminution  of  the  value  of  silver,  from  any 
observations  which  they  had  made  upon  the 
prices  either  of  corn  or  of  other  commodities, 
they  had  still  less  reason  to  infer  it  from  any 
supposed  increase  of  wealth  and  improve¬ 
ment. 

SECOND  PERIOD 

But  how  various  soever  may  have  been 
the  opinions  of  the  learned  concerning  the 
progress  of  the  value  of  silver  during  this 
first  period,  they  are  unanimous  concerning 
it  during  the  second. 

From  about  1570  to  about  1640,  during  a 
period  of  about  seventy  years,  the  variation 
in  the  proportion  between  the  value  of  sil¬ 
ver  and  that  of  corn  held  a  quite  opposite 
course.  Silver  sunk  in  its  real  value,  or  would 
exchange  for  a  smaller  quantity  of  labour 
than  before;  and  corn  rose  in  its  nominal 
price,  and  instead  of  being  commonly  sold  for 
about  two  ounces  of  silver  the  quarter,  or 
about  ten  shillings  of  our  present  money, 
came  to  be  sold  for  six  and  eight  ounces  of 
silver  the  quarter,  or  about  thirty  and  forty 
shillings  of  our  present  money. 

The  discovery  of  the  abundant  mines  of 
America  seems  to  have  been  the  sole  cause 
of  this  diminution  in  the  value  of  silver  in 
proportion  to  that  of  corn.  It  is  accounted 
for  accordingly  in  the  same  manner  by  every¬ 
body;  and  there  never  has  been  any  dispute 
either  about  the  fact  or  about  the  cause  of 
it.  The  greater  part  of  Europe  was,  during 
this  period,  advancing  in  industry  and  im¬ 
provement,  and  the  demand  for  silver  must 
consequently  have  been  increasing.  But  the 
increase  of  the  supply  had,  it  seems,  so  far 
exceeded  that  of  the  demand,  that  the  value 
of  that  metal  sunk  considerably.  The  discov¬ 
ery  of  the  mines  of  America,*  it  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served,  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any  very 
sensible  effect  upon  the  prices  of  things  in 
England  till  after  1570;  though  even  the 
mines  of  Potosi  had  been  discovered  more 
than  twenty  years  before. 

From  1595  to  1620,  both  inclusive,  the 


84 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


average  price  of  the  quarter  of  nine  bushels 
of  the  best  wheat  at  Windsor  market  appears, 
from  the  accounts  of  Eton  College,  to  have 
been  £2  Is.  6%d.  From  which  sum,  neglect¬ 
ing  the  fraction,  and  deducting  a  ninth,  or 
4s.  71/ki.,  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  eight 
bushels  comes  out  to  have  been  £1  16s.  10%d. 
And  from  this  sum,  neglecting  likewise  the 
fraction,  and  deducting  a  ninth,  or  4s.  Id., 
for  the  difference  between  the  price  of  the 
best  wheat  and  that  of  the  middle  wheat,  the 
price  of  the  middle  wheat  comes  out  to  have 
been  about  £1  12s.  9d.,  or  about  six  ounces 
and  one-third  of  an  ounce  of  silver. 

From  1621  to  1636,  both  inclusive,  the  aver¬ 
age  price  of  the  same  measure  of  the  best 
wheat  at  the  same  market  appears,  from  the 
same  accounts,  to  have  been  £2.  10s.;  from 
which  making  the  like  deductions  as  in  the 
foregoing  case,  the  average  price  of  the  quar¬ 
ter  of  eight  bushels  of  middle  wheat  comes 
out  to  have  been  £1  19s.  6d.,  or  about  seven 
ounces  and  two-thirds  of  an  ounce  of  silver. 

THIRD  PERIOD 

Between  1630  and  1640,  or  about  1636,  the 
effect  of  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Amer¬ 
ica  in  reducing  the  value  of  silver  appears  to 
have  been  completed,  and  the  value  of  that 
metal  seems  never  to  have  sunk  lower  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  that  of  corn  than  it  was  about  that 
time.  It  seems  to  have  risen  somewhat  in  the 
course  of  the  present  century,  and  it  had 
probably  begun  to  do  so  even  some  time  be¬ 
fore  the  end  of  the  last. 

From  1637  to  1700,  both  inclusive,  being 
the  sixty-four  last  years  of  the  last  century, 
the  average  price  of  the  quarter  of  nine  bush¬ 
els  of  the  best  wheat  at  Windsor  market  ap¬ 
pears,  from  the  same  accounts,  to  have  been 
£2  11s.  OVsd.,  which  is  only  Is  0%d.  dearer 
than  it  had  been  during  the  sixteen  years  be¬ 
fore.  But  in  the  course  of  these  sixty-four 
years  there  happened  two  events  which  must 
have  produced  a  much  greater  scarcity  of 
corn  than  what  the  course  of  the  seasons 
would  otherwise  have  occasioned,  and  which, 
therefore,  without  supposing  any  further  re¬ 
duction  in  the  value  of  silver,  will  much  more 
than  account  for  this  very  small  enhancement 
of  price. 

The  first  of  these  events  was  the  civil  war, 
which,  by  discouraging  tillage  and  interrupt¬ 
ing  commerce,  must  have  raised  the  price  of 
corn  much  above  what  the  course  of  the  sea¬ 
sons  would  otherwise  have  occasioned.  It 
must  have  had  this  effect  more  or  less  at  all 
the  different  markets  in  the  kingdom,  but 
particularly  at  those  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
London,  which  require  to  be  supplied  from 
the  greatest  distance.  In  1648,  accordingly, 
the  price  of  the  best  wheat  at  Windsor  mar¬ 


ket  appears,  from  the  same  accounts,  to  have 
been  £4  5s.,  and  in  1649  to  have  been  £4  the 
quarter  of  nine  bushels.  The  excess  of  those 
two  years  above  £2  10s.  (the  average  price 
of  the  sixteen  years  preceding  1637)  is  £3 
5s.;  which  divided  among  the  sixty-four  last 
years  of  the  last  century  will  alone  very  near¬ 
ly  account  for  that  small  enhancement  of 
price  which  seems  to  have  taken  place  in 
them.  These,  however,  though  the  highest, 
are  by  no  means  the  only  high  prices  which 
seem  to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  civil 
wars. 

The  second  event  was  the  bounty  upon 
the  exportation  of  corn  granted  in  1688.  The 
bounty,  it  has  been  thought  by  many  people, 
by  encouraging  tillage,  may,  in  a  long  course 
of  years,  have  occasioned  a  greater  abun¬ 
dance,  and  consequently  a  greater  cheapness 
of  corn  in  the  home-market  than  what  would 
otherwise  have  taken  place  there.  How  far 
the  bounty  could  produce  this  effect  at  any 
time,  I  shall  examine  hereafter;  I  shall  only 
observe  at  present  that,  between  1688  and 
1700,  it  had  not  time  to  produce  any  such 
effect.  During  this  short  period  its  only  ef¬ 
fect  must  have  been,  by  encouraging  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  the  surplus  produce  of  every 
year,  and  thereby  hindering  the  abundance 
of  one  year  from  compensating  the  scarcity 
of  another,  to  raise  the  price  in  the  home- 
market.  The  scarcity  which  prevailed  in  Eng¬ 
land  from  1693  to  1699,  both  inclusive, 
though  no  doubt  principally  owing  to  the 
badness  of  the  seasons,  and,  therefore,  ex¬ 
tending  through  a  considerable  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  must  have  been  somewhat  enhanced 
by  the  bounty.  In  1699,  accordingly,  the 
further  exportation  of  corn  was  prohibited 
for  nine  months. 

There  was  a  third  event  which  occurred  in 
the  course  of  the  same  period,  and  which, 
though  it  could  not  occasion  any  scarcity  of 
corn,  nor,  perhaps,  any  augmentation  in  the 
real  quantity  of  silver  which  was  usually  paid 
for  it,  must  necessarily  have  occasioned  some 
augmentation  in  the  nominal  sum.  This  event 
was  the  great  debasement  of  the  silver  coin, 
by  clipping  and  wearing.  This  evil  had  begun 
in  the  reign  of  Charles  II  and  had  gone  on 
continually  increasing  till  1695;  at  which  time, 
as  we  may  learn  from  Mr.  Lowndes,  the  cur¬ 
rent  silver  coin  was,  at  an  average,  near  five- 
and-twenty  per  cent  below  its  standard  value. 
But  the  nominal  sum  which  constitutes  the 
market  price  of  every  commodity  is  neces¬ 
sarily  regulated,  not  so  much  by  the  quantity 
of  silver,  which,  according  to  the  standard, 
ought  to  be  contained  in  it,  as  by  that  which, 
it  is  found  by  experience,  actually  is  con¬ 
tained  in  it.  This  nominal  sum,  therefore,  is 
necessarily  higher  when  the  coin  is  much 


85 


The  Rent  of  Land 


debased  by  clipping  and  wearing  than  when 
near  to  its  standard  value. 

In  the  course  of  the  present  century,  the 
silver  coin  has  not  at  any  time  been  more 
below  its  standard  weight  than  it  is  at  pres¬ 
ent.  But  though  very  much  defaced,  its  value 
has  been  kept  up  by  that  of  the  gold  coin 
for  which  it  is  exchanged.  For  though  before 
the  late  recoinage,  the  gold  coin  was  a  good 
deal  defaced  too,  it  was  less  so  than  the  sil¬ 
ver.  In  1695,  on  the  contrary,  the  value  of  the 
silver  coin  was  not  kept  up  by  the  gold  coin; 
a  guinea  then  commonly  exchanging  for  thirty 
shillings  of  the  worn  and  dipt  silver.  Before 
the  late  recoinage  of  the  gold,  the  price  of 
silver  bullion  was  seldom  higher  than  five 
shillings  and  sevenpence  an  ounce,  which  is 
but  fivepence  above  the  mint  price.  But  in 
1695,  the  common  price  of  silver  bullion  was 
six  shillings  and  fivepence  an  ounce,1  which 
is  fifteenpence  above  the  mint  price.  Even 
before  the  late  recoinage  of  the  gold,  there¬ 
fore,  the  coin,  gold  and  silver  together,  when 
compared  with  silver  bullion,  was  not  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  more  than  eight  per  cent  below 
its  standard  value.  In  1695,  on  the  contrary, 
it  had  been  supposed  to  be  near  five-and- 
twenty  per  cent  below  that  value.  But  in  the 
beginning  of  the  present  century,  that  is,  im¬ 
mediately  after  the  great  recoinage  in  King 
William’s  time,  the  greater  part  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  silver  coin  must  have  been  still  nearer 
to  its  standard  weight  than  it  is  at  present. 
In  the  course  of  the  present  century,  too, 
there  has  been  no  great  public  calamity,  such 
as  the  civil  war,  which  could  either  discourage 
tillage,  or  interrupt  the  interior  commerce  of 
the  country.  And  though  the  bounty,  which 
has  taken  place  through  the  greater  part  of 
this  century,  must  always  raise  the  price  of 
corn  somewhat  higher  than  it  otherwise  would 
be  in  the  actual  state  of  tillage;  yet  as,  in  the 
course  of  this  century,  the  bounty  has  had 
full  time  to  produce  all  the  good  effects  com¬ 
monly  imputed  to  it,  to  encourage  tillage, 
and  thereby  to  increase  the  quantity  of  corn 
in  the  home  market,  it  may,  upon  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  a  system  which  I  shall  explain  and 
examine  hereafter,  be  supposed  to  have  done 
something  to  lower  the  price  of  that  commod¬ 
ity  the  one  way,  as  well  as  to  raise  it  the 
other.  It  is  by  many  people  supposed  to  have 
done  more.  In  the  sixty-four  first  years  of 
the  present  century  accordingly  the  average 
price  of  the  quarter  of  nine  bushels  of  the 
best  wheat  at  Windsor  market  appears,  by 
the  accounts  of  Eton  College,  to  have  been 
£2  os.  6V2d.,  which  is  about  ten  shillings  and 
sixpence,  or  more  than  five-and-twenty  per 
cent,  cheaper  than  it  had  been  during  the 
sixty-four  last  years  of  the  last  century;  and 

1  Lowndes’  Essay  on  the  Silver  Coin ,  p.  68. 


about  9s.  6d.  cheaper  than  it  had  been  during 
the  sixteen  years  preceding  1636,  when  the 
discovery  of  the  abundant  mines  of  America 
may  be  supposed  to  have  produced  its  full 
effect;  and  about  one  shilling  cheaper  than  it 
had  been  in  the  twenty-six  years  preceding 
1620,  before  that  discovery  can  well  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  produced  its  full  effect.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  this  account,  the  average  price  of 
middle  wheat,  during  these  sixty-four  first 
years  of  the  present  century,  comes  out  to 
have  been  about  thirty-two  shillings  the  quar¬ 
ter  of  eight  bushels. 

The  value  of  silver,  therefore,  seems  to  have 
risen  somewhat  in  proportion  to  that  of  corn 
during  the  course  of  the  present  century,  and 
it  had  probably  begun  to  do  so  even  some 
time  before  the  end  of  the  last. 

In  1687,  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  nine 
bushels  of  the  best  wheat  at  Windsor  mar¬ 
ket  was  £1  5s.  2d.,  the  lowest  price  at  which 
it  had  ever  been  from  1595. 

In  1688,  Mr.  Gregory  King,  a  man  famous 
for  his  knowledge  in  matters  of  this  kind,  es¬ 
timated  the  average  price  of  wheat  in  years 
of  moderate  plenty  to  be  to  the  grower  3s. 
6d.  the  bushel,  or  eight-and-twenty  shillings 
the  quarter.  The  grower’s  price  I  understand 
to  be  the  same  with  what  is  sometimes  called 
the  contract  price,  or  the  price  at  which  a 
farmer  contracts  for  a  certain  number  of 
years  to  deliver  a  certain  quantity  of  corn  to 
a  dealer.  As  a  contract  of  this  kind  saves  the 
farmer  the  expense  and  trouble  of  marketing, 
the  contract  price  is  generally  lower  than 
what  is  supposed  to  be  the  average  market 
price.  Mr.  King  had  judged  eight-and-twenty 
shillings  the  quarter  to  be  at  that  time  the 
ordinary  contract  price  in  years  of  moderate 
plenty.  Before  the  scarcity  occasioned  by  the 
late  extraordinary  course  of  bad  seasons,  it 
was,  I  have  been  assured,  the  ordinary  con¬ 
tract  price  in  all  common  years. 

In  1688  was  granted  the  Parliamentary 
bounty  upon  the  exportation  of  corn.  The 
country  gentlemen,  who  then  composed  a  still 
greater  proportion  of  the  legislature  than  they 
do  at  present,  had  felt  that  the  money  price 
of  corn  was  falling.  The  bounty  was  an  expe¬ 
dient  to  raise  it  artificially  to  the  high  price 
at  which  it  had  frequently  been  sold  in  the 
times  of  Charles  I  and  II.  It  was  to  take 
place,  therefore,  till  wheat  was  so  high  as 
forty-eight  shillings  the  quarter,  that  is,  twen¬ 
ty  shillings,  or  five-sevenths  dearer  than  Mr. 
King  had  in  that  very  year  estimated  the 
grower’s  price  to  be  in  times  of  moderate 
plenty.  If  his  calculations  deserve  any  part 
of  the  reputation  which  they  have  obtained 
very  universally,  eight-and-forty  shillings  the 
quarter  was  a  price  which,  without  some  such 
expedient  as  the  bounty,  could  not  at  that 


86  The  Wealth 

time  be  expected,  except  in  years  of  extraor¬ 
dinary  scarcity.  But  the  government  of 
King  William  was  not  then  fully  settled.  It 
was  in  no  condition  to  refuse  anything  to 
the  country  gentlemen,  from  whom  it  was  at 
that  very  time  soliciting  the  first  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  annual  land-tax. 

The  value  of  silver,  therefore,  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  that  of  corn,  had  probably  risen  some¬ 
what  before  the  end  of  the  last  century;  and 
it  seems  to  have  continued  to  do  so  during 
the  course  of  the  greater  part  of  the  present; 
though  the  necessary  operation  of  the  bounty 
must  have  hindered  that  rise  from  being  so 
sensible  as  it  otherwise  would  have  been  in 
the  actual  state  of  tillage. 

In  plentiful  years  the  bounty,  by  occasion¬ 
ing  an  extraordinary  exportation,  necessarily 
raises  the  price  of  corn  above  what  it  other¬ 
wise  would  be  in  those  years.  To  encourage 
tillage,  by  keeping  up  the  price  of  corn  even 
in  the  most  plentiful  years,  was  the  avowed 
end  of  the  institution. 

In  years  of  great  scarcity,  indeed,  the  boun¬ 
ty  has  generally  been  suspended.  It  must, 
however,  have  had  some  effect  even  upon  the 
prices  of  many  of  those  years.  By  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  exportation  which  it  occasions  in  years 
of  plenty,  it  must  frequently  hinder  the  plenty 
of  one  year  from  compensating  the  scarcity  of 
another. 

Both  in  years  of  plenty  and  in  years  of 
scarcity,  therefore,  the  bounty  raises  the  price 
of  corn  above  what  it  naturally  would  be  in 
the  actual  state  of  tillage.  If,  during  the 
sixty-four  first  years  of  the  present  century, 
therefore,  the  average  price  has  been  lower 
than  during  the  sixty-four  last  years  of  the 
last  century,  it  must,  in  the  same  state  of 
tillage,  have  been  much  more  so,  had  it  not 
been  for  this  operation  of  the  bounty. 

But  without  the  bounty,  it  may  be  said,  the 
state  of  tillage  would  not  have  been  the  same. 
What  may  have  been  the  effects  of  this  in¬ 
stitution  upon  the  agriculture  of  the  country, 

I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  hereafter,  when 
I  come  to  treat  particularly  of  bounties.  I 
shall  only  observe  at  present  that  this  rise  in 
the  value  of  silver,  in  proportion  to  that  of 
corn,  has  not  been  peculiar  to  England.  It 
has  been  observed  to  have  taken  place  in 
France,  during  the  same  period,  and  nearly 
in  the  same  proportion  too,  by  three  very 
faithful,  diligent,  and  laborious  collectors  of 
the  prices  of  corn,  Mr.  Dupre  de  St.  Maur, 
Mr.  Messance,  and  the  author  of  the  Essay  on 
the  police  of  grain.  But  in  France,  till  1764, 
the  exportation  of  grain  was  by  law  prohibit¬ 
ed;  and  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  suppose 
that  nearly  the  same  diminution  of  price 
which  took  place  in  one  country,  notwith¬ 
standing  this  prohibition,  should  in  another 


of  Nations 

be  owing  to  the  extraordinary  encouragement 
given  to  exportation. 

It  would  be  more  proper,  perhaps,  to  con¬ 
sider  this  variation  in  the  average  money  price 
of  corn  as  the  effect  rather  of  some  gradual 
rise  in  the  real  value  of  silver  in  the  European 
market  than  of  any  fall  in  the  real  average 
value  of  corn.  Corn,  it  has  already  been  ob¬ 
served,  is  at  distant  periods  of  time  a  more 
accurate  measure  of  value  than  either  silver, 
or  perhaps  any  other  commodity.  When,  after 
the  discovery  of  the  abundant  mines  of  Amer¬ 
ica,  corn  rose  to  three  and  four  times  its  for¬ 
mer  money  price,  this  change  was  universally 
ascribed,  not  to  any  rise  in  the  real  value  of 
corn,  but  to  a  fall  in  the  real  value  of  silver. 
If  during  the  sixty-four  first  years  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  century,  therefore,  the  average  money 
price  of  corn  has  fallen  somewhat  below  what 
it  had  been  during  the  greater  part  of  the  last 
century,  we  should  in  the  same  manner  im¬ 
pute  this  change,  not  to  any  fall  in  the  real 
value  of  corn,  but  to  some  rise  in  the  real 
value  of  silver  in  the  European  market. 

The  high  price  of  corn  during  these  ten  or 
twelve  years  past,  indeed,  has  occasioned  a 
suspicion  that  the  real  value  of  silver  still 
continues  to  fall  in  the  European  market. 
This  high  price  of  corn,  however,  seems  evi¬ 
dently  to  have  been  the  effect  of  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  unfavourableness  of  the  seasons,  and 
ought  therefore  to  be  regarded,  not  as  a  per¬ 
manent,  but  as  a  transitory  and  occasional 
event.  The  seasons  for  these  ten  or  twelve 
years  past  have  been  unfavourable  through 
the  greater  part  of  Europe;  and  the  disorders 
of  Poland  have  very  much  increased  the 
scarcity  in  all  those  countries  which,  in  dear 
years,  used  to  be  supplied  from  that  market. 
So  long  a  course  of  bad  seasons,  though  not 
a  very  common  event,  is  by  no  means  a  sin¬ 
gular  one;  and  whoever  has  inquired  much 
into  the  history  of  the  prices  of  corn  in  for¬ 
mer  times  will  be  at  no  loss  to  recollect  several 
other  examples  of  the  same  kind.  Ten  years 
of  extraordinary  scarcity,  besides,  are  not 
more  wonderful  than  ten  years  of  extraordi¬ 
nary  plenty.  The  low  price  of  corn  from  1741 
to  1750,  both  inclusive,  may  very  well  be  set 
in  opposition  to  its  high  price  during  these 
last  eight  or  ten  years.  From  1741  to  1750, 
the  average  price  of  the  quarter  of  nine  bush¬ 
els  of  the  best  wheat  at  Windsor  market,  it 
appears  from  the  accounts  of  Eton  College, 
was  only  £1  13s.  9%d.,  which  is  nearly  6s. 
3d.  below  the  average  price  of  the  sixty-four 
first  years  of  the  present  century.  The  aver¬ 
age  price  of  the  quarter  of  eight  bushels  of 
middle  wheat  comes  out,  according  to  this  ac¬ 
count,  to  have  been,  during  these  ten  years, 
only  £1  6s.  8d. 

Between  1741  and  1750,  however,  the  bounty 


The  Rent  of  Land 


must  have  hindered  the  price  of  corn  from 
falling  so  low  in  the  home  market  as  it  nat¬ 
urally  would  have  done.  During  these  ten 
years  the  quantity  of  all  sorts  of  grain  ex¬ 
ported,  it  appears  from  the  custom-house 
books,  amounted  to  no  less  than  eight  mil¬ 
lions  twenty-nine  thousand  one  hundred  and 
fifty-six  quarters  one  bushel.  The  bounty  paid 
for  this  amounted  to  £1,514,962  17s.  4%d.  In 
1749  accordingly,  Mr.  Pelham,  at  that  time 
Prime  Minister,  observed  to  the  House  of 
Commons  that  for  the  three  years  preceding 
a  very  extraordinary  sum  had  been  paid  as 
bounty  for  the  exportation  of  corn,  fie  had 
good  reason  to  make  this  observation,  and  in 
the  following  year  he  might  have  had  still 
better.  In  that  single  year  the  bounty  paid 
amounted  to  no  less  than  £924,176  10s.  6d.1 
It  is  unnecessary  to  observe  how  much  this 
forced  exportation  must  have  raised  the  price 
of  corn  above  what  it  otherwise  would  have 
been  in  the  home  market. 

At  the  end  of  the  accounts  annexed  to  this 
chapter  the  reader  will  find  the  particular  ac¬ 
count  of  those  ten  years  separated  from  the 
rest.  He  will  find  there,  too,  the  particular 
account  of  the  preceding  ten  years,  of  which 
the  average  is  likewise  below,  though  not  so 
much  below,  the  general  average  of  the  sixty- 
four  first  years  of  the  century.  The  year  1740, 
however,  was  a  year  of  extraordinary  scar¬ 
city.  These  twenty  years  preceding  1750  may 
very  well  be  set  in  opposition  to  the  twenty 
preceding  1770.  As  the  former  were  a  good 
deal  below  the  general  average  of  the  cen¬ 
tury,  notwithstanding  the  intervention  of  one 
or  two  dear  years;  so  the  latter  have  been  a 
good  deal  above  it,  notwithstanding  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  one  or  two  cheap  ones,  of  1759, 
for  example.  If  the  former  have  not  been  as 
much  below  the  general  average  as  the  latter 
have  been  above  it,  we  ought  probably  to  im¬ 
pute  it  to  the  bounty.  The  change  has  evi¬ 
dently  been  too  sudden  to  be  ascribed  to  any 
change  in  the  value  of  silver,  which  is  always 
slow  and  gradual.  The  suddenness  of  the  ef¬ 
fect  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  a  cause 
which  can  operate  suddenly,  the  accidental 
variation  of  the  seasons. 

The  money  price  of  labour  in  Great  Britain 
has,  indeed,  risen  during  the  course  of  the 
present  century.  This,  however,  seems  to  be 
the  effect,  not  so  much  of  any  diminution 
in  the  value  of  silver  in  the  European  mar¬ 
ket,  as  of  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  la¬ 
bour  in  Great  Britain,  arising  from  the  great, 
and  almost  universal  prosperity  of  the  coun¬ 
try.  In  France,  a  country  not  altogether  so 
prosperous,  the  money  price  of  labour  has, 
since  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  been  ob¬ 
served  to  sink  gradually  with  the  average 

1  See  Tracts  on  the  Corn  Trade ,  Tract  3. 


87 

money  price  of  corn.  Both  in  the  last  cen¬ 
tury  and  in  the  present  the  day-wages  of 
common  labour  are  there  said  to  have  been 
pretty  uniformly  about  the  twentieth  part 
of  the  average  price  of  the  septier  of  wheat, 
a  measure  which  contains  a  little  more  than 
four  Winchester  bushels.  In  Great  Britain  the 
real  recompense  of  labour,  it  has  already  been 
shown,  the  real  quantities  of  the  necessaries 
and  conveniencies  of  life  which  are  given  to 
the  labourer,  has  increased  considerably  dur¬ 
ing  the  course  of  the  present  century.  The 
rise  in  its  money  price  seems  to  have  been 
the  effect,  not  of  any  diminution  of  the  value 
of  silver  in  the  general  market  of  Europe,  but 
of  a  rise  in  the  real  price  of  labour  in  the  par¬ 
ticular  market  of  Great  Britain,  owing  to  the 
peculiarly  happy  circumstances  of  the  coun¬ 
try. 

For  some  time  after  the  first  discovery  of 
America,  silver  would  continue  to  sell  at  its 
former,  or  not  much  below  its  former  price. 
The  profits  of  mining  would  for  some  time  be 
very  great,  and  much  above  their  natural 
rate.  Those  who  imported  that  metal  into  Eu¬ 
rope,  however,  would  soon  find  that  the  whole 
annual  importation  could  not  be  disposed  of 
at  this  high  price.  Silver  would  gradually 
exchange  for  a  smaller  and  a  smaller  quantity 
of  goods.  Its  price  would  sink  gradually  lower 
and  lower  till  it  fell  to  its  natural  price,  or  to 
what  was  just  sufficient  to  pay,  according  to 
their  natural  rates,  the  wages  of  the  labour, 
the  profits  of  the  stock,  and  the  rent  of  the 
land,  which  must  be  paid  in  order  to  bring 
it  from  the  mine  to  the  market.  In  the  greater 
part  of  the  silver  mines  of  Peru,  the  tax  of 
the  King  of  Spain,  amounting  to  a  tenth  of 
the  gross  produce,  eats  up,  it  has  already 
been  observed,  the  whole  rent  of  the  land. 
This  tax  was  originally  a  half;  it  soon  after¬ 
wards  fell  to  a  third,  then  to  a  fifth,  and  at 
last  to  a  tenth,  at  which  rate  it  still  con¬ 
tinues.  In  the  greater  part  of  the  silver  mines 
of  Peru  this,  it  seems,  is  all  that  remains  after 
replacing  the  stock  of  the  undertaker  of  the 
work,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits;  and 
it  seems  to  be  universally  acknowledged  that 
these  profits,  which  were  once  very  high,  are 
now  as  low  as  they  can  well  be,  consistently 
with  carrying  on  their  works. 

The  tax  of  the  King  of  Spain  was  reduced 
to  a  fifth  part  of  the  registered  silver  in  150  4, 3 
one-and-forty  years  before  1545,  the  date  of 
the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Potosi.  In  the 
course  of  ninety  years,  or  before  1636,  these 
mines,  the  most  fertile  in  all  America,  had 
time  sufficient  to  produce  their  full  effect,  or 
to  reduce  the  value  of  silver  in  the  European 
market  as  low  as  it  could  well  fall,  while  it 
continued  to  pay  this  tax  to  the  King  of 

2  Solorzano,  vol.  ii. 


88 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


Spain.  Ninety  years  is  time  sufficient  to  re¬ 
duce  any  commodity,  of  which  there  is  no 
monopoly,  to  its  natural  price,  or  to  the  low¬ 
est  price  at  which,  while  it  pays  a  particular 
tax,  it  can  continue  to  be  sold  for  any  consid¬ 
erable  time  together. 

The  price  of  silver  in  the  European  market 
might  perhaps  have  fallen  still  lower,  and  it 
might  have  become  necessary  either  to  re¬ 
duce  the  tax  upon  it,  not  only  to  one  tenth, 
as  in  1736,  but  to  one  twentieth,  in  the  same 
manner  as  that  upon  gold,  or  to  give  up  work¬ 
ing  the  greater  part  of  the  American  mines 
which  are  now  wrought.  The  gradual  increase 
of  the  demand  for  silver,  or  the  gradual  en¬ 
largement  of  the  market  for  the  produce  of 
the  silver  mines  of  America,  is  probably  the 
cause  which  has  prevented  this  from  happen¬ 
ing,  and  which  has  not  only  kept  up  the  value 
of  silver  in  the  European  market,  but  has 
perhaps  even  raised  it  somewhat  higher  than 
it  was  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century. 

Since  the  first  discovery  of  America,  the 
market  for  the  produce  of  its  silver  mines  has 
been  growing  gradually  more  and  more  ex¬ 
tensive. 

First,  the  market  of  Europe  has  become 
gradually  more  and  more  extensive.  Since  the 
discovery  of  America,  the  greater  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope  has  been  much  improved.  England,  Hol¬ 
land,  France,  and  Germany;  even  Sweden, 
Denmark,  and  Russia,  have  all  advanced  con¬ 
siderably  both  in  agriculture  and  in  manufac¬ 
tures.  Italy  seems  not  to  have  gone  back¬ 
wards.  The  fall  of  Italy  preceded  the  conquest 
of  Peru.  Since  that  time  it  seems  rather  to 
have  recovered  a  little.  Spain  and  Portugal, 
indeed,  are  supposed  to  have  gone  backwards. 
Portugal,  however,  is  but  a  very  small  part 
of  Europe,  and  the  declension  of  Spain  is  not, 
perhaps,  so  great  as  is  commonly  imagined. 
In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
Spain  was  a  very  poor  country,  even  in  com¬ 
parison  with  France,  which  has  been  so  much 
improved  since  that  time.  It  was  the  well- 
known  remark  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V, 
who  had  travelled  so  frequently  through  both 
countries,  that  everything  abounded  in 
France,  but  that  everything  was  wanting  in 
Spain.  The  increasing  produce  of  the  agri¬ 
culture  and  manufactures  of  Europe  must 
necessarily  have  required  a  gradual  increase 
in  the  quantity  of  silver  coin  to  circulate  it; 
and  the  increasing  number  of  wealthy  indi¬ 
viduals  must  have  required  the  like  increase 
in  the  quantity  of  their  plate  and  other  orna¬ 
ments  of  silver. 

Secondly,  America  is  itself  a  new  market 
for  the  produce  of  its  own  silver  mines;  and 
as  its  advances  in  agriculture,  industry,  and 
population  are  much  more  rapid  than  those 
of  the  most  thriving  countries  in  Europe,  its 


demand  must  increase  much  more  rapidly. 
The  English  colonies  are  altogether  a  new 
market,  which,  partly  for  coin  and  partly  for 
plate,  requires  a  continually  augmenting  sup¬ 
ply  of  silver  through  a  great  continent  where 
there  never  was  any  demand  before.  The 
greater  part,  too,  of  the  Spanish  and  Portu¬ 
guese  colonies  are  altogether  new  markets.  New 
Granada,  the  Yucatan,  Paraguay,  and  the 
Brazils  were,  before  discovered  by  the  Eu¬ 
ropeans,  inhabited  by  savage  nations  who  had 
neither  arts  nor  agriculture.  A  considerable 
degree  of  both  has  now  been  introduced  into 
all  of  them.  Even  Mexico  and  Peru,  though 
they  cannot  be  considered  as  altogether  new 
markets,  are  certainly  much  more  extensive 
ones  than  they  ever  were  before.  After  all 
the  wonderful  tales  which  have  been  pub¬ 
lished  concerning  the  splendid  state  of  those 
countries  in  ancient  times,  whoever  reads, 
with  any  degree  of  sober  judgment,  the  his¬ 
tory  of  their  first  discovery  and  conquest,  will 
evidently  discern  that,  in  arts,  agriculture,  and 
commerce,  their  inhabitants  were  much  more 
ignorant  than  the  Tartars  of  the  Ukraine 
are  at  present.  Even  the  Peruvians,  the  more 
civilised  nation  of  the  two,  though  they  made 
use  of  gold  and  silver  as  ornaments,  had 
no  coined  money  of  any  kind.  Their  whole 
commerce  was  carried  on  by  barter,  and  there 
was  accordingly  scarce  any  division  of  la¬ 
bour  among  them.  Those  who  cultivated  the 
ground  were  obliged  to  build  their  own  houses, 
to  make  their  own  household  furniture,  their 
own  clothes,  shoes,  and  instruments  of  agri¬ 
culture.  The  few  artificers  among  them  are 
said  to  have  been  all  maintained  by  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  the  nobles,  and  the  priests,  and  were 
probably  their  servants  or  slaves.  All  the  an¬ 
cient  arts  of  Mexico  and  Peru  have  never 
furnished  one  single  manufacture  to  Europe. 
The  Spanish  armies,  though  they  scarce  ever 
exceeded  five  hundred  men,  and  frequently 
did  not  amount  to  half  that  number,  found 
almost  everywhere  great  difficulty  in  procur¬ 
ing  subsistence.  The  famines  which  they  are 
said  to  have  occasioned  almost  wherever  they 
went,  in  countries,  too,  which  at  the  same 
time  are  represented  as  very  populous  and 
well  cultivated,  sufficiently  demonstrate  that 
the  story  of  this  populousness  and  high  cul¬ 
tivation  is  in  a  great  measure  fabulous.  The 
Spanish  colonies  are  under  a  government  in 
many  respects  less  favourable  to  agriculture, 
improvement,  and  population  than  that  of  the 
English  colonies.  They  seem,  however,  to  be 
advancing  in  all  these  much  more  rapidly  than 
any  country  in  Europe.  In  a  fertile  soil  and 
happy  climate,  the  great  abundance  and 
cheapness  of  land,  a  circumstance  common 
to  all  new  colonies,  is,  it  seems,  so  great  an  ad¬ 
vantage  as  to  compensate  many  defects  in 


89 


The  Rent  of  Land 


civil  government.  Frezier,  who  visited  Peru 
in  1713,  represents  Lima  as  containing  be¬ 
tween  twenty -hive  and  twenty-eight  thou¬ 
sand  inhabitants.  Ulloa,  who  resided  in  the 
same  country  between  1740  and  1746,  repre¬ 
sents  it  as  containing  more  than  fifty  thou¬ 
sand.  The  difference  in  their  accounts  of  the 
populousness  of  several  other  principal  towns 
in  Chili  and  Peru  is  nearly  the  same;  and  as 
there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  of  the 
good  information  of  either,  it  marks  an  in¬ 
crease  which  is  scarce  inferior  to  that  of  the 
English  colonies.  America,  therefore,  is  a  new 
market  for  the  produce  of  its  own  silver  mines, 
of  which  the  demand  must  increase  much 
more  rapidly  than  that  of  the  most  thriving 
country  in  Europe. 

Thirdly,  the  East  Indies  is  another  market 
for  the  produce  of  the  silver  mines  of  Amer¬ 
ica,  and  a  market  which,  from  the  time  of 
the  first  discovery  of  those  mines,  has  been 
continually  taking  off  a  greater  and  a  greater 
quantity  of  silver.  Since  that  time,  the  direct 
trade  between  America  and  the  East  Indies, 
which  is  carried  on  by  means  of  the  Acapulco 
ships,  has  been  continually  augmenting,  and 
the  indirect  intercourse  by  the  way  of  Eu¬ 
rope  has  been  augmenting  in  a  still  greater 
proportion.  During  the  sixteenth  century,  the 
Portuguese  were  the  only  European  nation  who 
carried  on  any  regular  trade  to  the  East  In¬ 
dies.  In  the  last  years  of  that  century  the 
Dutch  begun  to  encroach  upon  this  monopoly, 
and  in  a  few  years  expelled  them  from  their 
principal  settlements  in  India.  During  the 
greater  part  of  the  last  century  those  two  na¬ 
tions  divided  the  most  considerable  part  of 
the  East  India  trade  between  them;  the  trade 
of  the  Dutch  continually  augmenting  in  a 
still  greater  proportion  than  that  of  the  Por¬ 
tuguese  declined.  The  English  and  French  car¬ 
ried  on  some  trade  with  India  in  the  last 
century,  but  it  has  been  greatly  augmented 
in  the  course  of  the  present.  The  East  India 
trade  of  the  Swedes  and  Danes  began  in  the 
course  of  the  present  century.  Even  the  Mus¬ 
covites  now  trade  regularly  with  China  by  a 
sort  of  caravans  which  go  overland  through 
Siberia  and  Tartary  to  Pekin.  The  East  India 
trade  of  all  these  nations,  if  we  except  that 
of  the  French,  which  the  last  war  had  well 
nigh  annihilated,  had  been  almost  continually 
augmenting.  The  increasing  consumption  of 
East  India  goods  in  Europe  is,  it  seems,  so 
great  as  to  afford  a  gradual  increase  of  em¬ 
ployment  to  them  all.  Tea,  for  example,  was 
a  drug  very  little  used  in  Europe  before  the 
middle  of  the  last  century.  At  present  the 
value  of  the  tea  annually  imported  by  the 
English  East  India  Company,  for  the  use  of 
their  own  countrymen,  amounts  to  more  than 
a  million  and  a  half  a  year;  and  even  this  is 


not  enough;  a  great  deal  more  being  con¬ 
stantly  smuggled  into  the  country  from  the 
ports  of  Holland,  from  Gottenburg  in  Swe¬ 
den,  and  from  the  coast  of  France  too,  as 
long  as  the  French  East  India  Company  was 
in  prosperity.  The  consumption  of  the  porce¬ 
lain  of  China,  of  the  spiceries  of  the  Moluccas, 
of  the  piece  goods  of  Bengal,  and  of  innumer¬ 
able  other  articles,  has  increased  very  near¬ 
ly  in  a  like  proportion.  The  tonnage  accord¬ 
ingly  of  all  the  European  shipping  employed 
in  the  East  India  trade,  at  any  one  time  dur¬ 
ing  the  last  century,  was  not,  perhaps,  much 
greater  than  that  of  the  English  East  India 
Company  before  the  late  reduction  of  their 
shipping. 

But  in  the  East  Indies,  particularly  in 
China  and  Indostan,  the  value  of  the  precious 
metals,  when  the  Europeans  first  began  to 
trade  to  those  countries,  was  much  higher 
than  in  Europe;  and  it  still  continues  to  be 
so.  In  rice  countries,  which  generally  yield 
two,  sometimes  three  crops  in  the  year,  each 
of  them  more  plentiful  than  any  common  crop 
of  corn,  the  abundance  of  food  must  be  much 
greater  than  in  any  corn  country  of  equal 
extent.  Such  countries  are  accordingly  much 
more  populous.  In  them,  too,  the  rich,  having 
a  greater  superabundance  of  food  to  dispose 
of  beyond  what  they  themselves  can  consume, 
have  the  means  of  purchasing  a  much  greater 
quantity  of  the  labour  of  other  people.  The 
retinue  of  a  grandee  in  China  or  Indostan 
accordingly  is,  by  all  accounts,  much  more 
numerous  and  splendid  than  that  of  the  rich¬ 
est  subjects  in  Europe.  The  same  superabun¬ 
dance  of  food,  of  which  they  have  the  dis¬ 
posal,  enables  them  to  give  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  it  for  all  those  singular  and  rare  pro¬ 
ductions  which  nature  furnishes  but  in  very 
small  quantities;  such  as  the  precious  metals 
and  the  precious  stones,  the  great  objects  of 
the  competition  of  the  rich.  Though  the 
mines,  therefore,  which  supplied  the  Indian 
market  had  been  as  abundant  as  those  which 
supplied  the  European,  such  commodities 
would  naturally  exchange  for  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  food  in  India  than  in  Europe.  But  the 
mines  which  supplied  the  Indian  market  with 
the  precious  metals  seem  to  have  been  a  good 
deal  less  abundant,  and  those  which  supplied 
it  with  the  precious  stones  a  good  deal  more 
so,  than  the  mines  which  supplied  the  Euro¬ 
pean.  The  precious  metals,  therefore,  would 
naturally  exchange  in  India  for  somewhat  a 
greater  quantity  of  the  precious  stones,  and 
for  a  much  greater  quantity  of  food  than  in 
Europe.  The  money  price  of  diamonds,  the 
greatest  of  all  superfluities,  would  be  some¬ 
what  lower,  and  that  of  food,  the  first  of  all 
necessaries,  a  great  deal  lower  in  the  one  coun¬ 
try  than  in  the  other.  But  the  real  price  of 


90 


The  Wealth 

labour,  the  real  quantity  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  which  is  given  to  the  labourer,  it  has 
already  been  observed,  is  lower  both  in  China 
and  Indostan,  the  two  great  markets  of  In¬ 
dia,  than  it  is  through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe.  The  wages  of  the  labourer  will  there 
purchase  a  smaller  quantity  of  food;  and  as 
the  money  price  of  food  is  much  lower  in  In¬ 
dia  than  in  Europe,  the  money  price  of  la¬ 
bour  is  there  lower  upon  a  double  account; 
upon  account  both  of  the  small  quantity  of 
food  which  it  will  purchase,  and  of  the  low 
price  of  that  food.  But  in  countries  of  equal 
art  and  industry,  the  money  price  of  the 
greater  part  of  manufactures  will  be  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  money  price  of  labour;  and  in 
manufacturing  art  and  industry,  China  and 
Indostan,  though  inferior,  seem  not  to  be 
much  inferior  to  any  part  of  Europe.  The 
money  price  of  the  greater  part  of  manufac¬ 
tures,  therefore,  will  naturally  be  much  lower 
in  those  great  empires  than  it  is  anywhere  in 
Europe.  Through  the  greater  part  of  Europe, 
too,  the  expense  of  land-carriage  increases 
very  much  both  the  real  and  nominal  price 
of  most  manufactures.  It  costs  more  labour, 
and  therefore  more  money,  to  bring  first  the 
materials,  and  afterwards  the  complete  manu¬ 
facture  to  market.  In  China  and  Indostan 
the  extent  and  variety  of  inland  navigation 
save  the  greater  part  of  this  labour,  and  con¬ 
sequently  of  this  money,  and  thereby  reduce 
still  lower  both  the  real  and  the  nominal 
price  of  the  greater  part  of  their  manufac¬ 
tures.  Upon  all  those  accounts  the  precious 
metals  are  a  commodity  which  it  always  has 
been,  and  still  continues  to  be,  extremely  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  carry  from  Europe  to  India. 
There  is  scarce  any  commodity  which  brings 
a  better  price  there;  or  which,  in  proportion 
to  the  quantity  of  labour  and  commodities 
which  it  costs  in  Europe,  will  purchase  or 
command  a  greater  quantity  of  labour  and 
commodities  in  India.  It  is  more  advanta¬ 
geous,  too,  to  carry  silver  thither  than  gold; 
because  in  China,  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
other  markets  of  India,  the  proportion  be¬ 
tween  fine  silver  and  fine  gold  is  but  as  ten, 
or  at  most  as  twelve,  to  one;  whereas  in  Eu¬ 
rope  it  is  as  fourteen  or  fifteen  to  one.  In 
China,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  other  mar¬ 
kets  of  India,  ten,  or  at  most  twelve,  ounces 
of  silver  will  purchase  an  ounce  of  gold;  in 
Europe  it  requires  from  fourteen  to  fifteen 
ounces.  In  the  cargoes,  therefore,  of  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  European  ships  which  sail  to  In¬ 
dia,  silver  has  generally  been  one  of  the  most 
valuable  articles.  It  is  the  most  valuable  ar¬ 
ticle  in  the  Acapulco  ships  which  sail  to 
Manilla.  The  silver  of  the  new  continent 
seems  in  this  manner  to  be  one  of  the  princi¬ 
pal  commodities  by  which  the  commerce  be¬ 


of  Nations 

tween  the  two  extremities  of  the  old  one  is 
carried  on,  and  it  is  by  means  of  it,  in  a 
great  measure,  that  those  distant  parts  of 
the  world  are  connected  with  one  another. 

In  order  to  supply  so  very  widely  extend¬ 
ed  a  market,  the  quantity  of  silver  annually 
brought  from  the  mines  must  not  only  be 
sufficient  to  support  that  continual  increase 
both  of  coin  and  of  plate  which  is  required 
in  all  thriving  countries;  but  to  repair  that 
continual  waste  and  consumption  of  silver 
which  takes  place  in  all  countries  where  that 
metal  is  used. 

The  continual  consumption  of  the  precious 
metals  in  coin  by  wearing,  and  in  plate  both 
by  wearing  and  cleaning,  is  very  sensible,  and 
in  commodities  of  which  the  use  is  so  very 
widely  extended,  would  alone  require  a  very 
great  annual  supply.  The  consumption  of 
those  metals  in  some  particular  manufactures, 
though  it  may  not  perhaps  be  greater  upon 
the  whole  than  this  gradual  consumption,  is, 
however,  much  more  sensible,  as  it  is  much 
more  rapid.  In  the  manufactures  of  Birming¬ 
ham  alone  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
annually  employed  in  gilding  and  plating,  and 
thereby  disqualified  from  ever  afterwards  ap¬ 
pearing  in  the  shape  of  those  metals,  is  said 
to  amount  to  more  than  fifty  thousand 
pounds  sterling.  We  may  from  thence  form 
some  notion  how  great  must  be  the  annual 
consumption  in  all  the  different  parts  of  the 
world  either  in  manufactures  of  the  same 
kind  with  those  of  Birmingham,  or  in  laces, 
embroideries,  gold  and  silver  stuffs,  the  gild¬ 
ing  of  books,  furniture,  etc.  A  considerable 
quantity,  too,  must  be  annually  lost  in  trans¬ 
porting  those  metals  from  one  place  to  an¬ 
other  both  by  sea  and  by  land.  In  the  greater 
part  of  the  governments  of  Asia,  besides,  the 
almost  universal  custom  of  concealing  treas¬ 
ures  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  of  which  the 
knowledge  frequently  dies  with  the  person 
who  makes  the  concealment,  must  occasion 
the  loss  of  a  still  greater  quantity. 

The  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  imported 
at  both  Cadiz  and  Lisbon  (including  not 
only  what  comes  under  register,  but  what 
may  be  supposed  to  be  smuggled)  amounts, 
according  to  the  best  accounts,  to  about  six 
millions  sterling  a  year. 

According  to  Mr.  Meggens1  the  annual  im¬ 
portation  of  the  precious  metals  into  Spain, 
at  an  average  of  six  years,  viz.,  from  1748 
to  1753,  both  inclusive;  and  into  Portugal, 
at  an  average  of  seven  years,  viz.,  from  1747 

Tostscript  to  the  Universal  Merchant  pp.  15 
and  16.  This  postscript  was  not  printed  till  1756, 
three  years  after  the  publication  of  the  book, 
which  has  never  had  a  second  edition.  The  post¬ 
script  is,  therefore,  to  be  found  in  few  copies:  it 
corrects  several  errors  in  the  book. 


91 


The  Rent  of  Land 


to  1753,  both  inclusive,  amounted  in  silver 
to  1,101,107  pounds  weight;  and  in  gold  to 
29,940  pounds  weight.  The  silver,  at  sixty- 
two  shillings  the  pound  Troy,  amounts  to 
£3,413,431  10s.  sterling.  The  gold,  at  forty- 
four  guineas  and  a  half  the  pound  Troy, 
amounts  to  £2,333,446  14s.  sterling.  Both  to¬ 
gether  amount  to  £5,746,878  4s.  sterling.  The 
account  of  what  was  imported  under  register 
he  assures  us  is  exact.  He  gives  us  the  detail 
of  the  particular  places  from  which  the  gold 
and  silver  were  brought,  and  of  the  the  par¬ 
ticular  quantity  of  each  metal,  which,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  register,  each  of  them  afforded. 
He  makes  an  allowance,  too,  for  the  quantity 
of  each  metal  which  he  supposes  may  have 
been  smuggled.  The  great  experience  of  this 
judicious  merchant  renders  his  opinion  of 
considerable  weight. 

According  to  the  eloquent  and,  sometimes, 
well-informed  author  of  the  Philosophical 
and  Political  History  of  the  Establishment  of 
the  Europeans  in  the  two  Indies ,  the  annual 
importation  of  registered  gold  and  silver  into 
Spain,  at  an  average  of  eleven  years,  viz., 
from  1754  to  1764,  both  inclusive,  amounted 
to  13,984,185%  piastres  of  ten  reals.  On  ac¬ 
count  of  what  may  have  been  smuggled,  how¬ 
ever,  the  whole  annual  importation,  he  sup¬ 
poses,  may  have  amounted  to  seventeen  mil¬ 
lions  of  piastres,  which,  at  4s.  6d.  the  pias¬ 
tre,  is  equal  to  £3,825,000  sterling.  He  gives 
the  detail,  too,  of  the  particular  places  from 
which  the  gold  and  silver  were  brought,  and 
of  the  particular  quantities  of  each  metal 
which,  according  to  the  register,  each  of  them 
afforded.  He  informs  us,  too,  that  if  we  were 
to  judge  of  the  quantity  of  gold  annually 
imported  from  the  Brazils  into  Lisbon  by 
the  amount  of  the  tax  paid  to  the  King  of 
Portugal,  which  it  seems  is  one-fifth  of  the 
standard  metal,  we  might  value  it  at  eighteen 
millions  of  cruzadoes,  or  forty-five  millions  of 
French  livres,  equal  to  about  two  millions 
sterling.  On  account  of  what  may  have  been 
smuggled,  however,  we  may  safely,  he  says, 
add  to  the  sum  an  eighth  more,  or  £250,000 
sterling,  so  that  the  whole  will  amount  to 
£2,250,000  sterling.  According  to  this  account, 
therefore,  the  whole  annual  importation  of  the 
precious  metals  into  both  Spain  and  Portugal 
amounts  to  about  £6,075,000  sterling. 

Several  other  very  well  authenticated, 
though  manuscript,  accounts,  I  have  been  as¬ 
sured,  agree  in  making  this  whole  annual  im¬ 
portation  amount  at  an  average  to  about  six 
millions  sterling;  sometimes  a  little  more, 
sometimes  a  little  less. 

The  annual  importation  of  the  precious 
metals  into  Cadiz  and  Lisbon,  indeed,  is  not 
equal  to  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the 
mines  of  America.  Some  part  is  sent  annually 


by  the  Acapulco  ships  to  Manilla;  some  part 
is  employed  in  the  contraband  trade  which 
the  Spanish  colonies  carry  on  with  those  of 
other  European  nations;  and  some  part,  no 
doubt  remains  in  the  country.  The  mines  of 
America,  besides,  are  by  no  means  the  only 
gold  and  silver  mines  in  the  world.  They  are, 
however,  by  far  the  most  abundant.  The  pro¬ 
duce  of  all  the  other  mines  which  are  known 
is  insignificant,  it  is  acknowledged,  in  compari¬ 
son  with  theirs;  and  the  far  greater  part  of 
their  produce,  it  is  likewise  acknowledged,  is 
annually  imported  into  Cadiz  and  Lisbon. 
But  the  consumption  of  Birmingham  alone,  at 
the  rate  of  fifty  thousand  pounds  a  year,  is 
equal  to  the  hundred-and-twentieth  part  of 
this  annual  importation  at  the  rate  of  six  mil¬ 
lions  a  year.  The  wdiole  annual  consumption 
of  gold  and  silver,  therefore,  in  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  countries  of  the  world  where  those  metals 
are  used,  may  perhaps  be  nearly  equal  to  the 
whole  annual  produce.  The  remainder  may  be 
no  more  than  sufficient  to  supply  the  increas¬ 
ing  demand  of  all  thriving  countries.  It  may 
even  have  fallen  so  far  short  of  this  demand 
as  somewhat  to  raise  the  price  of  those  metals 
in  the  European  market. 

The  quantity  of  brass  and  iron  annually 
brought  from  the  mine  to  the  market  is  out  of 
all  proportion  greater  than  that  of  gold  and 
silver.  We  do  not,  however,  upon  this  ac¬ 
count,  imagine  that  those  coarse  metals  are 
likely  to  multiply  beyond  the  demand,  or  to 
become  gradually  cheaper  and  cheaper.  Why 
should  we  imagine  that  the  precious  metals 
are  likely  to  do  so?  The  coarse  metals,  indeed, 
though  harder,  are  put  to  much  harder  uses, 
and,  as  they  are  of  less  value,  less  care  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  their  preservation.  The  precious 
metals,  however,  are  not  necessarily  immor¬ 
tal  any  more  than  they,  but  are  liable,  too, 
to  be  lost,  wasted,  and  consumed  in  a  great 
variety  of  ways. 

The  price  of  all  metals,  though  liable  to 
slow  and  gradual  variations,  varies  less  from 
year  to  year  than  that  of  almost  any  other 
part  of  the  rude  produce  of  land:  and  the  price 
of  the  precious  metals  is  even  less  liable  to 
sudden  variations  than  that  of  the  coarse  ones. 
The  durableness  of  metals  is  the  foundation 
of  this  extraordinary  steadiness  of  price.  The 
corn  which  was  brought  to  market  last  year 
w'ill  be  all  or  almost  all  consumed  long  before 
the  end  of  this  year.  But  some  part  of  the 
iron  which  was  brought  from  the  mine  two  or 
three  hundred  years  ago  may  be  still  in  use, 
and  perhaps  some  part  of  the  gold  which  was 
brought  from  it  two  or  three  thousand  years 
ago.  The  different  masses  of  corn  which  in 
different  years  must  supply  the  consumption 
of  the  world  will  always  be  nearly  in  propor¬ 
tion  *to  the  respective  produce  of  those  differ- 


92  The  Wealth 

ent  years.  But  the  proportion  between  the 
different  masses  of  iron  which  may  be  in  use 
in  two  different  years  will  be  very  little  af¬ 
fected  by  any  accidental  difference  in  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  the  iron  mines  of  those  two  years;  and 
the  proportion  between  the  masses  of  gold  will 
be  still  less  affected  by  any  such  difference  in 
the  produce  of  the  gold  mines.  Though  the 
produce  of  the  greater  part  of  metallic  mines, 
therefore,  varies,  perhaps,  still  more  from  year 
to  year  than  that  of  the  greater  part  of  corn 
fields,  those  variations  have  not  the  same  ef¬ 
fect  upon  the  price  of  the  one  species  of  com¬ 
modities  as  upon  that  of  the  other. 

VARIATIONS  IN  THE  PROPORTION  BE¬ 
TWEEN  THE  RESPECTIVE  VALUES 
OF  GOLD  AND  SILVER 

Before  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Am¬ 
erica,  the  value  of  fine  gold  to  fine  silver  was 
regulated  in  the  different  mints  of  Europe  be¬ 
tween  the  proportions  of  one  to  ten  and  one 
to  twelve;  that  is,  an  ounce  of  fine  gold  was 
supposed  to  be  worth  from  ten  to  twelve 
ounces  of  fine  silver.  About  the  middle  of  the 
last  century  it  came  to  be  regulated,  between 
the  proportions  of  one  to  fourteen  and  one  to 
fifteen;  that  is,  an  ounce  of  fine  gold  came  to 
be  supposed  to  be  worth  between  fourteen  and 
fifteen  ounces  of  fine  silver.  Gold  rose  in  its 
nominal  value,  or  in  the  quantity  of  silver 
which  was  given  for  it.  Both  metals  sunk  in 
their  real  value,  or  in  the  quantity  of  labour 
which  they  could  purchase;  but  silver  sunk 
more  than  gold.  Though  both  the  gold  and 
silver  mines  of  America  exceeded  in  fertility 
all  those  which  had  ever  been  known  before, 
the  fertility  of  the  silver  mines  had,  it  seems, 
been  proportionably  still  greater  than  that  of 
the  gold  ones. 

The  great  quantities  of  silver  carried  an¬ 
nually  from  Europe  to  India  have,  in  some  of 
the  English  settlements,  gradually  reduced  the 
value  of  that  metal  in  proportion  to  gold.  In 
the  mint  of  Calcutta  an  ounce  of  fine  gold  is 
supposed  to  be  worth  fifteen  ounces  of  fine 
silver,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  Europe.  It  is 
in  the  mint  perhaps  rated  too  high  for  the 
value  which  it  bears  in  the  market  of  Bengal. 
In  China,  the  proportion  of  gold  to  silver  still 
continues  as  one  to  ten,  or  one  to  twelve.  In 
Japan  it  is  said  to  be  as  one  to  eight. 

The  proportion  between  the  quantities  of 
gold  and  silver  annually  imported  into  Eu¬ 
rope,  according  to  Mr.  Meggens’s  account, 
is  as  one  to  twenty-two  nearly;  that  is,  for 
one  ounce  of  gold  there  are  imported  a  little 
more  than  twenty-two  ounces  of  silver.  The 
great  quantity  of  silver  sent  annually  to  the 
East  Indies  reduces,  he  supposes,  the  quan¬ 
tities  of  those  metals  which  remain  in  Europe 
to  the  proportion  of  one  to  fourteen  or  fifteen, 


of  Nations 

the  proportion  of  their  values.  The  proportion 
between  their  values,  he  seems  to  think,  must 
necessarily  be  the  same  as  that  between  their 
quantities,  and  would  therefore  be  as  one  to 
twenty-two,  were  it  not  for  this  greater  ex¬ 
portation  of  silver. 

But  the  ordinary  proportion  between  the 
respective  values  of  two  commodities  is  not 
necessarily  the  same  as  that  between  the 
quantities  of  them  which  are  commonly  in  the 
market.  The  price  of  an  ox,  reckoned  at  ten 
guineas,  is  about  threescore  times  the  price  of 
a  lamb,  reckoned  at  3s.  6d.  It  would  be  absurd, 
however,  to  infer  from  thence  that  there  are 
commonly  in  the  market  threescore  lambs  for 
one  ox:  and  it  would  be  just  as  absurd  to  in¬ 
fer,  because  an  ounce  of  gold  will  commonly 
purchase  from  fourteen  to  fifteen  ounces  of 
silver,  that  there  are  commonly  in  the  market 
only  fourteen  or  fifteen  ounces  of  silver  for 
one  ounce  of  gold. 

The  quantity  of  silver  commonly  in  the 
market,  it  is  probable  is  much  greater  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  that  of  gold  than  the  value  of  a 
certain  quantity  of  gold  is  to  that  of  an  equal 
quantity  of  silver.  The  whole  quantity  of  a 
cheap  commodity  brought  to  market  is  com¬ 
monly  not  only  greater,  but  of  greater  value, 
than  the  whole  quantity  of  a  dear  one.  The 
whole  quantity  of  bread  annually  brought  to 
market  is  not  only  greater,  but  of  greater  val¬ 
ue  than  the  whole  quantity  of  butcher’s  meat; 
the  whole  quantity  of  butcher’s  meat,  than 
the  whole  quantity  of  poultry;  and  the  whole 
quantity  of  poultry,  than  the  whole  quantity 
of  wild  fowl.  There  are  so  many  more  pur¬ 
chasers  for  the  cheap  than  for  the  dear  com¬ 
modity  that  not  only  a  greater  quantity  of  it, 
but  a  greater  value,  can  commonly  be  disposed 
of.  The  whole  quantity,  therefore,  of  the  cheap 
commodity  must  commonly  be  greater  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  whole  quantity  of  the  dear  one 
than  the  value  of  a  certain  quantity  of  the 
dear  one  is  to  the  value  of  an  equal  quantity 
of  the  cheap  one.  When  we  compare  the  pre¬ 
cious  metals  with  one  another,  silver  is  a 
cheap  and  gold  a  dear  commodity.  We  ought 
naturally  to  expect,  therefore,  that  there 
should  always  be  in  the  market  ont  only  a 
greater  quantity,  but  a  greater  value  of  silver 
than  of  gold.  Let  any  man  who  has  a  little  of 
both  compare  his  own  silver  with  his  gold 
plate,  and  he  will  probably  find  that,  not  only 
the  quantity,  but  the  value  of  the  former 
greatly  exceeds  that  of  the  latter.  Many  peo¬ 
ple,  besides,  have  a  good  deal  of  silver  who 
have  no  gold  plate,  which,  even  with  those 
who  have  it,  is  generally  confined  to  watch- 
cases,  snuff-boxes,  and  such  like  trinkets,  of 
which  the  whole  amount  is  seldom  of  great 
value.  In  the  British  coin,  indeed,  the  value 
of  the  gold  preponderates  greatly,  but  it  is 


93 


The  Rent 

not  so  in  that  of  all  countries.  In  the  coin  of 
some  countries  the  value  of  the  two  metals  is 
nearly  equal.  In  the  Scotch  coin,  before  the 
union  with  England,  the  gold  preponderated 
very  little,  though  it  did  somewhat,1  as  it  ap¬ 
pears  by  the  accounts  of  the  mint.  In  the 
coin  of  many  countries  the  silver  preponder¬ 
ates.  In  France,  the  largest  sums  are  common¬ 
ly  paid  in  that  metal,  and  it  is  there  difficult 
to  get  more  gold  than  what  is  necessary  to 
carry  about  in  your  pocket.  The  superior  val¬ 
ue,  however,  of  the  silver  plate  above  that  of 
the  gold,  which  takes  place  in  all  countries, 
will  much  more  than  compensate  the  pre- 
ponderancy  of  the  gold  coin  above  the  silver, 
which  takes  place  only  in  some  countries. 

Though,  in  one  sense  of  the  word,  silver  al¬ 
ways  has  been,  and  probably  always  will  be, 
much  cheaper  than  gold;  yet  in  another  sense 
gold  may,  perhaps,  in  the  present  state  of  the 
Spanish  market,  be  said  to  be  somewhat 
cheaper  than  silver.  A  commodity  may  be  said 
to  be  dear  or  cheap,  not  only  according  to  the 
absolute  greatness  or  smallness  of  its  usual 
price,  but  according  as  that  price  is  more  or 
less  above  the  lowest  for  which  it  is  possible 
to  bring  it  to  market  for  any  considerable  time 
together.  This  lowest  price  is  that  which 
barely  replaces,  with  a  moderate  profit,  the 
stock  which  must  be  employed  in  bringing 
the  commodity  thither.  It  is  the  price  which 
affords  nothing  to  the  landlord,  of  which  rent 
makes  not  any  component  part,  but  which  re¬ 
solves  itself  altogether  into  wages  and  profit. 
But,  in  the  present  state  of  the  Spanish  mar¬ 
ket,  gold  is  certainly  somewhat  nearer  to  this 
lowest  price  than  silver.  The  tax  of  the  King 
of  Spain  upon  gold  is  only  one-twentieth  part 
of  the  standard  metal,  or  five  per  cent;  where¬ 
as  his  tax  upon  silver  amounts  to  one-tenth 
part  of  it,  or  to  ten  per  cent.  In  these  taxes 
too,  it  has  already  been  observed,  consists  the 
whole  rent  of  the  greater  part  of  the  gold  and 
silver  mines  of  Spanish  America;  and  that  up¬ 
on  gold  is  still  worse  paid  than  that  upon 
silver.  The  profits  of  the  undertakers  of  gold 
mines  too,  as  they  more  rarely  make  a  for¬ 
tune,  must,  in  general,  be  still  more  moderate 
than  those  of  the  undertakers  of  silver  mines. 
The  price  of  Spanish  gold,  therefore,  as  it  af¬ 
fords  both  less  rent  and  less  profit,  must,  in 
the  Spanish  market,  be  somewhat  nearer  to 
the  lowest  price  for  which  it  is  possible  to 
bring  it  thither  than  the  price  of  Spanish 
silver.  When  all  expenses  are  computed,  the 
whole  quantity  of  the  one  metal,  it  would 
seem,  cannot,  in  the  Spanish  market,  be  dis¬ 
posed  of  so  advantageously  as  the  whole  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  other.  The  tax,  indeed,  of  the 
King  of  Portugal  upon  the  gold  of  the  Brazils 

'See  Ruddiman’s  preface  to  Anderson’s  Diplo- 
mata,  etc.,  Scotice. 


of  Land 

is  the  same  with  the  ancient  tax  of  the  King 
of  Spain  upon  the  silver  of  Mexico  and  Peru; 
or  one-fifth  part  of  the  standard  metal.  It  may, 
therefore,  be  uncertain  whether  to  the  general 
market  of  Europe  the  whole  mass  of  American 
gold  comes  at  a  price  nearer  to  the  lowest 
for  which  it  is  possible  to  bring  it  thither  than 
the  whole  mass  of  American  silver. 

The  price  of  diamonds  and  other  precious 
stones  may,  perhaps,  be  still  nearer  to  the 
lowest  price  at  which  it  is  possible  to  bring 
them  to  market  than  even  the  price  of  gold. 

Though  it  is  not  very  probable  that  any 
part  of  a  tax,  which  is  not  only  imposed  upon 
one  of  the  most  proper  subjects  of  taxation,  a 
mere  luxury  and  superfluity,  but  which  af¬ 
fords  so  very  important  a  revenue  as  the  tax 
upon  silver,  will  ever  be  given  up  as  long  as  it 
is  possible  to  pay  it;  yet  the  same  impossibil¬ 
ity  of  paying  it,  which  in  1736  made  it  nec¬ 
essary  to  reduce  it  from  one-fifth  to  one-tenth, 
may  in  time  make  it  necessary  to  reduce  it 
still  further;  in  the  same  manner  as  it  made 
it  necessary  to  reduce  the  tax  upon  gold  to 
one-twentieth.  That  the  silver  mines  of  Span¬ 
ish  America,  like  all  other  mines,  become 
gradually  more  expensive  in  the  working,  on 
account  of  the  greater  depths  at  which  it  is 
necessary  to  carry  on  the  works,  and  of  the 
greater  expense  of  drawing  out  the  water  and 
of  supplying  them  with  fresh  air  at  those 
depths,  is  acknowledged  by  everybody  who 
has  inquired  into  the  state  of  those  mines. 

These  causes,  which  are  equivalent  to  a 
growing  scarcity  of  silver  (for  a  commodity 
may  be  said  to  grow  scarcer  when  it  becomes 
more  difficult  and  expensive  to  collect  a  cer¬ 
tain  quantity  of  it)  must,  in  time,  produce 
one  or  other  of  the  three  following  events.  The 
increase  of  the  expense  must  either,  first,  be 
compensated  altogether  by  a  proportionable 
increase  in  the  price  of  the  metal;  or,  secondly, 
it  must  be  compensated  altogether  by  a  pro¬ 
portionable  diminution  of  the  tax  upon  silver; 
or,  thirdly,  it  must  be  compensated  partly  by 
the  one,  and  partly  by  the  other  of  those  two 
expedients.  This  third  event  is  very  possible. 
As  gold  rose  in  its  price  in  proportion  to  silver, 
notwithstanding  a  great  diminution  of  the  tax 
upon  gold,  so  silver  might  rise  in  its  price  in 
proportion  to  labour  and  commodities,  not¬ 
withstanding  an  equal  diminution  of  the  tax 
upon  silver. 

Such  successive  reductions  of  the  tax,  how¬ 
ever,  though  they  may  not  prevent  altogether, 
must  certainly  retard,  more  or  less,  the  rise 
of  the  value  of  silver  in  the  European  market. 
In  consequence  of  such  reductions  many  mines 
may  be  wrought  which  could  not  be  wrought 
before,  because  they  could  not  afford  to  pay 
the  old  tax;  and  the  quantity  of  silver  annual¬ 
ly  brought  to  market  must  always  be  some- 


94  The  Wealth 

what  greater,  and,  therefore,  the  value  of  any 
given  quantity  somewhat  less,  than  it  other¬ 
wise  would  have  been.  In  consequence  of  the 
reduction  in  1736,  the  value  of  silver  in  the 
European  market,  though  it  may  not  at  this 
day  be  lower  than  before  that  reduction,  is, 
probably,  at  least  ten  per  cent  lower  than  it 
would  have  been  had  the  Court  of  Spain 
continued  to  exact  the  old  tax. 

That,  notwithstanding  this  reduction,  the 
value  of  silver  has,  during  the  course  of  the 
present  century,  begun  to  rise  somewhat  in 
the  European  market,  the  facts  and  argu¬ 
ments  which  have  been  alleged  above  dispose 
me  to  believe,  or  more  properly  to  suspect  and 
conjecture;  for  the  best  opinion  which  I  can 
form  upon  this  subject  scarce,  perhaps,  de¬ 
serves  the  name  of  belief.  The  rise,  indeed, 
supposing  there  has  been  any,  has  hitherto 
been  so  very  small  that  after  all  that  has  been 
said  it  may,  perhaps,  appear  to  many  people 
uncertain,  not  only  whether  this  event  has 
actually  taken  place;  but  whether  the  con¬ 
trary  may  not  have  taken  place,  or  whether 
the  value  of  the  silver  may  not  still  continue 
to  fall  in  the  European  market. 

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  what¬ 
ever  may  be  the  supposed  annual  importa¬ 
tion  of  gold  and  silver,  there  must  be  a  cer¬ 
tain  period  at  which  the  annual  consump¬ 
tion  of  those  metals  will  be  equal  to  that 
annual  importation.  Their  consumption  must 
increase  as  their  mass  increases,  or  rather  in 
a  much  greater  proportion.  As  their  mass 
increases,  their  value  diminishes.  They  are 
more  used  and  less  cared  for,  and  their  con¬ 
sumption  consequently  increases  in  a  greater 
proportion  than  their  mass.  After  a  certain 
period,  therefore,  the  annual  consumption  of 
those  metals  must,  in  this  manner,  become 
equal  to  their  annual  importation,  provided 
that  importation  is  not  continually  increasing; 
which,  in  the  present  times,  is  not  supposed 
to  be  the  case. 

If,  when  the  annual  consumption  has  be¬ 
come  equal  to  the  annual  importation,  the 
annual  importation  should  gradually  diminish, 
the  annual  consumption  may,  for  some  time, 
exceed  the  annual  importation.  The  mass  of 
those  metals  may  gradually  and  insensibly 
diminish,  and  their  value  gradually  and  insen¬ 
sibly  rise,  till  the  annual  importation  become 
again  stationary,  the  annual  consumption 
will  gradually  and  insensibly  accommodate 
itself  to  what  that  annual  importation  can 
maintain. 

GROUNDS  OF  THE  SUSPICION  THAT  THE 

VALUE  OF  SILVER  STILL  CONTINUES 
TO  DECREASE 

The  increase  of  the  wealth  of  Europe,  and 
the  popular  notion  that,  as  the  quantity  of  the 


of  Nations 

precious  metals  naturally  increases  with  the 
increase  of  wealth  so  their  value  diminishes 
as  their  quantity  increases,  may,  perhaps, 
dispose  many  people  to  believe  that  their 
value  still  continues  to  fall  in  the  European 
market;  and  the  still  gradually  increasing 
price  of  many  parts  of  the  rude  produce  of 
land  may  confirm  them  still  further  in  this 
opinion. 

That  that  increase  in  the  quantity  of  the 
precious  metals,  which  arises  in  any  country 
from  the  increase  of  wealth,  has  no  tendency 
to  diminish  their  value,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  show  already.  Gold  and  silver  naturally  re¬ 
sort  to  a  rich  country,  for  the  same  reason 
that  all  sorts  of  luxuries  and  curiosities  re¬ 
sort  to  it;  not  because  they  are  cheaper  there 
than  in  poorer  countries,  but  because  they  are 
dearer,  or  because  a  better  price  is  given  for 
them.  It  is  the  superiority  of  price  which 
attracts  them,  and  as  soon  as  that  superiority 
ceases,  they  necessarily  cease  to  go  thither. 

If  you  except  corn  and  such  other  vegeta¬ 
bles  as  are  raised  altogether  by  human  indus¬ 
try,  that  all  other  sorts  of  rude  produce,  cattle, 
poultry,  game  of  all  kinds,  the  useful  fossils 
and  minerals  of  the  earth,  etc.,  naturally  grow 
dearer  as  the  society  advances  in  wealth  and 
improvement,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  al¬ 
ready.  Though  such  commodities,  therefore, 
come  to  exchange  for  a  greater  quantity  of 
silver  than  before,  it  will  not  from  thence  fol¬ 
low  that  silver  has  become  really  cheaper,  or 
will  purchase  less  labour  than  before,  but  that 
such  commodities  have  become  really  dearer, 
or  will  purchase  more  labour  than  before.  It 
is  not  their  nominal  price  only,  but  their  real 
price  which  rises  in  the  progress  of  improve¬ 
ment.  The  rise  of  their  nominal  price  is  the 
effect,  not  of  any  degradation  of  the  value  of 
silver,  but  of  the  rise  in  their  real  price. 

DIFFERENT  EFFECTS  OF  THE  PROGRESS 
OF  IMPROVEMENT  UPON  THREE  DIFFER¬ 
ENT  SORTS  OF  RUDE  PRODUCE 

These  different  sorts  of  rude  produce  may 
be  divided  into  three  classes.  The  first  com¬ 
prehends  those  which  it  is  scarce  in  the  power 
of  human  industry  to  multiply  at  all.  The  sec¬ 
ond,  those  which  it  can  multiply  in  proportion 
to  the  demand.  The  third,  those  in  which  the 
efficacy  of  industry  is  either  limited  or  un¬ 
certain.  In  the  progress  of  wealth  and  im¬ 
provement,  the  real  price  of  the  first  may 
rise  to  any  degree  of  extravagance,  and  seems 
not  to  be  limited  by  any  certain  boundary. 
That  of  the  second,  though  it  may  rise  great¬ 
ly,  has,  however,  a  certain  boundary  beyond 
which  it  cannot  well  pass  for  any  considerable 
time  together.  That  of  the  third,  though  its 
natural  tendency  is  to  rise  in  the  progress  of 
improvement,  yet  in  the  same  degree  of  im- 


95 


The  Rent  of  Land 


provement  it  may  sometimes  happen  even  to 
fall,  sometimes  to  continue  the  same,  and 
sometimes  to  rise  more  or  less,  according  as 
different  accidents  render  the  efforts  of  hu¬ 
man  industry,  in  multiplying  this  sort  of  rude 
produce,  more  or  less  successful. 

FIRST  SORT 

The  first  sort  of  rude  produce  of  which  the 
price  rises  in  the  progress  of  improvement  is 
that  which  it  is  scarce  in  the  power  of  human 
industry  to  multiply  at  all.  It  consists  in  those 
things  which  nature  produces  only  in  certain 
quantities,  and  which,  being  of  a  very  perish¬ 
able  nature,  it  is  impossible  to  accumulate  to¬ 
gether  the  produce  of  many  different  seasons. 
Such  are  the  greater  part  of  rare  and  singular 
birds  and  fishes,  many  different  sorts  of  game, 
almost  all  wild-fowl,  all  birds  of  passage  in 
particular,  as  well  as  many  other  things.  When 
wealth  and  the  luxury  which  accompanies  it 
increase,  the  demand  for  these  is  likely  to  in¬ 
crease  with  them,  and  no  effort  of  human  in¬ 
dustry  may  be  able  to  increase  the  supply 
much  beyond  what  it  was  before  this  in¬ 
crease  of  the  demand.  The  quantity  of  such 
commodities,  therefore,  remaining  the  same, 
or  nearly  the  same,  while  the  competition  to 
purchase  them  is  continually  increasing,  their 
price  may  rise  to  any  degree  of  extravagance, 
and  seems  not  to  be  limited  by  any  certain 
boundary.  If  woodcocks  should  become  so 
fashionable  as  to  sell  for  twenty  guineas 
apiece,  no  effort  of  human  industry  could  in¬ 
crease  the  number  of  those  brought  to  market 
much  beyond  what  it  is  at  present.  The  high 
price  paid  by  the  Romans,  in  the  time  of  their 
greatest  grandeur,  for  rare  birds  and  fishes, 
may  in  this  manner  easily  be  accounted  for. 
These  prices  were  not  the  effects  of  the  low 
value  of  silver  in  those  times,  but  of  the  high 
value  of  such  rarities  and  curiosities  as  human 
industry  could  not  multiply  at  pleasure.  The 
real  value  of  silver  was  higher  at  Rome,  for 
some  time  before  and  after  the  fall  of  the  re¬ 
public,  than  it  is  through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe  at  present.  Three  sestertii ,  equal  to 
about  sixpence  sterling,  was  the  price  which 
the  republic  paid  for  the  modius  or  peck  of  the 
tithe  wheat  of  Sicily.  This  price,  however, 
was  probably  below  the  average  market  price, 
the  obligation  to  deliver  their  wheat  at  this 
rate  being  considered  as  a  tax  upon  the  Sicil¬ 
ian  farmers.  When  the  Romans,  therefore,  had 
occasion  to  order  more  corn  than  the  tithe  of 
wheat  amounted  to,  they  were  bound  by  ca¬ 
pitulation  to  pay  for  the  surplus  at  the  rate 
of  four  sestertii,  or  eightpence  sterling,  the 
peck;  and  this  had  probably  been  reckoned 
the  moderate  and  reasonable,  that  is,  the  or¬ 
dinary  or  average  contract  price  of  those 
times;  it  is  equal  to  about  one-and-twenty 


shillings  the  quarter.  Eight-and-twenty  shil¬ 
lings  the  quarter  was,  before  the  late  years  of 
scarcity,  the  ordinary  contract  price  of  Eng¬ 
lish  wheat,  which  in  quality  is  inferior  to  the 
Sicilian,  and  generally  sells  for  a  lower  price 
in  the  European  market.  The  value  of  silver, 
therefore,  in  those  ancient  times,  must  have 
been  to  its  value  in  the  present  as  three  to 
four  inversely;  that  is,  three  ounces  of  silver 
would  then  have  purchased  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  and  commodities  which  four 
ounces  will  do  at  present.  When  wc  read  in 
Pliny,  therefore,  that  Seius1  bought  a  white 
nightingale,  as  a  present  for  the  Empress 
Agrippina,  at  a  price  of  six  thousand  sestertii, 
equal  to  about  fifty  pounds  of  our  present 
money;  and  that  Asinius  Celer2  purchased 
a  surmullet  at  the  price  of  eight  thousand  ses¬ 
tertii,  equal  to  about  sixty-six  pounds  thirteen 
shillings  and  fourpence  of  our  present  money, 
the  extravagance  of  those  prices,  how  much 
soever  it  may  surprise  us,  is  apt,  notwith¬ 
standing,  to  appear  to  us  about  one-third  less 
than  it  really  was.  Their  real  price,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  and  subsistence  which  was  given 
away  for  them,  was  about  one- third  more 
than  their  nominal  price  is  apt  to  express  to 
us  in  the  present  times.  Seius  gave  for  the 
nightingale  the  command  of  a  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  and  subsistence  equal  to  what  £66  13s. 
4d.  would  purchase  in  the  present  times;  and 
Asinius  Celer  gave  for  the  surmullet  the  com¬ 
mand  of  a  quantity  equal  to  what  £88  17s. 
9 id.  would  purchase.  What  occasioned  the  ex¬ 
travagance  of  those  high  prices  was,  not  so 
much  the  abundance  of  silver  as  the  abun¬ 
dance  of  labour  and  subsistence  of  which  those 
Romans  had  the  disposal  beyond  what  was 
necessary  for  their  own  use.  The  quantity  of 
silver  of  which  they  had  the  disposal  was  a 
good  deal  less  than  what  the  command  of  the 
same  quantity  of  labour  and  subsistence 
would  have  procured  to  them  in  the  present 
times. 

SECOND  SORT 

The  second  sort  of  rude  procedure  of  which 
the  price  rises  in  the  progress  of  improve¬ 
ment  is  that  which  human  industry  can  multi¬ 
ply  in  proportion  to  the  demand.  It  consists 
in  those  useful  plants  and  animals  which,  in 
uncultivated  countries,  nature  produces  with 
such  profuse  abundance  that  they  are  of  little 
or  no  value,  and  which,  as  cultivation  ad¬ 
vances  are  therefore  forced  to  give  place  to 
some  more  profitable  produce.  During  a  long 
period  in  the  progress  of  improvement,  the 
quantity  of  these  is  continually  diminishing, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  demand  for  them 
is  continually  increasing.  Their  real  value, 
therefore,  the  real  quantity  of  labour  which 

1  Pliny,  x,  29.  2  Pliny,  ix,  17. 


96 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


they  will  purchase  or  command,  gradually 
rises,  till  at  last  it  gets  so  high  as  to  render 
them  as  profitable  a  produce  as  anything  else 
which  human  industry  can  raise  upon  the 
most  fertile  and  best  cultivated  land.  When 
it  has  got  so  high  it  cannot  well  go  higher. 
If  it  did,  more  land  and  more  industry  would 
soon  be  employed  to  increase  their  quantity. 

When  the  price  of  cattle,  for  example,  rises 
so  high  that  it  is  as  profitable  to  cultivate 
land  in  order  to  raise  food  for  them  as  in 
order  to  raise  food  for  man,  it  cannot  well  go 
higher.  If  it  did,  more  corn  land  would  soon 
be  turned  into  pasture.  The  extension  of  til¬ 
lage,  by  diminishing  the  quantity  of  wild 
pasture,  diminishes  the  quantity  of  butcher’s 
meat  which  the  country  naturally  produces 
without  labour  or  cultivation,  and  by  increas¬ 
ing  the  number  of  those  who  have  either  corn, 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  price  of 
corn,  to  give  in  exchange  for  it,  increases  the 
demand.  The  price  of  butcher’s  meat,  there¬ 
fore,  and  consequently  of  cattle,  must  grad¬ 
ually  rise  till  it  gets  so  high  that  it  becomes 
as  profitable  to  employ  the  most  fertile  and 
best  cultivated  lands  in  raising  food  for  them 
as  in  raising  corn.  But  it  must  always  be  late 
in  the  progress  of  improvement  before  tillage 
can  be  so  far  extended  as  to  raise  the  price  of 
cattle  to  this  height;  and  till  it  has  got  to  this 
height,  if  the  country  is  advancing  at  all,  their 
price  must  be  continually  rising.  There  are, 
perhaps,  some  parts  of  Europe  in  which  the 
price  of  cattle  has  not  yet  got  to  this  height. 
It  had  not  got  to  this  height  in  any  part  of 
Scotland  before  the  union.  Had  the  Scotch 
cattle  been  always  confined  to  the  market  of 
Scotland,  in  a  country  in  which  the  quantity 
of  land  which  can  be  applied  to  no  other  pur¬ 
pose  but  the  feeding  of  cattle  is  so  great  in 
proportion  to  what  can  be  applied  to  other 
purposes,  it  is  scarce  possible,  perhaps,  that 
their  price  could  ever  have  risen  so  high  as  to 
render  it  profitable  to  cultivate  land  for  the 
sake  of  feeding  them.  In  England,  the  price 
of  cattle,  it  has  already  been  observed,  seems, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  to  have  got 
to  this  height  about  the  beginning  of  the  last 
century;  but  it  was  much  later  probably  be¬ 
fore  it  got  to  it  through  the  greater  part  of 
the  remoter  counties;  in  some  of  which,  per¬ 
haps,  it  may  scarce  yet  have  got  to  it.  Of  all 
the  different  substances,  however,  which  com¬ 
pose  this  second  sort  of  rude  produce,  cattle 
is,  perhaps,  that  of  which  the  price,  in  the 
progress  of  improvement,  first  rises  to  this 
height. 

Till  the  price  of  cattle,  indeed,  has  got  to 
this  height,  it  seems  scarce  possible  that  the 
greater  part,  even  of  those  lands  which  are  ca¬ 
pable  of  the  highest  cultivation,  can  be  com¬ 
pletely  cultivated.  In  all  farms  too  distant 


from  any  town  to  carry  manure  from  it,  that 
is,  in  the  far  greater  part  of  those  of  every 
extensive  country,  the  quantity  of  well-culti¬ 
vated  land  must  be  in  proportion  to  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  manure  which  the  farm  itself  produces; 
and  this  again  must  be  in  proportion  to  the 
stock  of  cattle  which  are  maintained  upon  it. 
The  land  is  manured  either  by  pasturing  the 
cattle  upon  it,  or  by  feeding  them  in  the 
stable,  and  from  thence  carrying  out  their 
dung  to  it.  But  unless  the  price  of  the  cattle 
be  sufficient  to  pay  both  the  rent  and  profit  of 
cultivated  land,  the  farmer  cannot  afford  to 
pasture  them  upon  it;  and  he  can  still  less 
afford  to  feed  them  in  the  stable.  It  is  with 
the  produce  of  improved  and  cultivated  land 
only  that  cattle  can  be  fed  in  the  stable;  be¬ 
cause  to  collect  the  scanty  and  scattered  pro¬ 
duce  of  waste  and  unimproved  lands  would 
require  too  much  labour  and  be  too  expensive. 
If  the  price  of  cattle,  therefore,  is  not  suffi¬ 
cient  to  pay  for  the  produce  of  improved  and 
cultivated  land,  when  they  are  allowed  to 
pasture  it,  that  price  will  be  still  less  suffi¬ 
cient  to  pay  for  that  produce  when  it  must 
be  collected  with  a  good  deal  of  additional  la¬ 
bour,  and  brought  into  the  stable  to  them.  In 
these  circumstances,  therefore,  no  more  cattle 
can,  with  profit,  be  fed  in  the  stable  than 
what  are  necessary  for  tillage.  But  these  can 
never  afford  manure  enough  for  keeping  con¬ 
stantly  in  good  condition  all  the  lands  which 
they  are  capable  of  cultivating.  What  they 
afford  being  insufficient  for  the  whole  farm 
will  naturally  be  reserved  for  the  lands  to 
which  it  can  be  most  advantageously  or  con¬ 
veniently  applied;  the  most  fertile,  or  those, 
perhaps,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  farm¬ 
yard.  These,  therefore,  will  be  kept  constantly 
in  good  condition  and  fit  for  tillage.  The  rest 
will,  the  greater  part  of  them,  be  allowed  to 
lie  waste,  producing  scarce  anything  but  some 
miserable  pasture,  just  sufficient  to  keep  alive 
a  few  straggling,  half-starved  cattle;  the  farm, 
though  much  understocked  in  proportion  to 
what  would  be  necessary  for  its  complete 
cultivation,  being  very  frequently  overstocked 
in  proportion  to  its  actual  produce.  A  portion 
of  this  waste  land,  however,  after  having  been 
pastured  in  this  wretched  manner  for  six  or 
seven  years  together,  may  be  ploughed  up, 
when  it  will  yield,  perhaps,  a  poor  crop  or  two 
of  bad  oats,  or  of  some  other  coarse  grain, 
and  then,  being  entirely  exhausted,  it  must  be 
rested  and  pastured  again  as  before  and  an¬ 
other  portion  ploughed  up  to  be  in  the  same 
manner  exhausted  and  rested  again  in  its  turn. 
Such  accordingly  was  the  general  system  of 
management  all  over  the  low  country  of  Scot¬ 
land  before  the  union.  The  lands  which  were 
kept  constantly  well  manured  and  in  good 
condition  seldom  exceeded  a  third  or  a  fourth 


The  Rent 

part  of  the  whole  farm,  and  sometimes  did 
not  amount  to  a  fifth  or  a  sixth  part  of  it.  The 
rest  were  never  manured,  but  a  certain  por¬ 
tion  of  them  was  in  its  turn,  notwithstanding, 
regularly  cultivated  and  exhausted.  Under  this 
system  of  management,  it  is  evident,  even 
that  part  of  the  land  of  Scotland  which  is 
capable  of  good  cultivation  could  produce  but 
little  in  comparison  of  what  it  may  be  ca¬ 
pable  of  producing.  But  how  disadvantageous 
soever  this  system  may  appear,  yet  before  the 
union  the  low  price  of  cattle  seems  to  have 
rendered  it  almost  unavoidable.  If,  notwith¬ 
standing  a  great  rise  in  their  price,  it  still  con¬ 
tinues  to  prevail  through  a  considerable  part 
of  the  country,  it  is  owing,  in  many  places, 
no  doubt,  to  ignorance  and  attachment  to  old 
customs,  but  in  most  places  to  the  unavoid¬ 
able  obstructions  which  the  natural  course  of 
things  opposes  to  the  immediate  or  speedy 
establishment  of  a  better  system:  first,  to  the 
poverty  of  the  tenants,  to  their  not  having 
yet  had  time  to  acquire  a  stock  of  cattle  suffi¬ 
cient  to  cultivate  their  lands  more  completely, 
the  same  rise  of  price  which  would  render  it 
advantageous  for  them  to  maintain  a  greater 
stock  rendering  it  more  difficult  for  them  to 
acquire  it;  and,  secondly,  to  their  not  having 
yet  had  time  to  put  their  lands  in  condition 
to  maintain  this  greater  stock  properly,  sup¬ 
posing  they  were  capable  of  acquiring  it.  The 
increase  of  stock  and  the  improvement  of  land 
are  two  events  which  must  go  hand  in  hand, 
and  of  which  the  one  can  nowhere  much  out¬ 
run  the  other.  Without  some  increase  of  stock 
there  can  be  scarce  any  improvement  of  land, 
but  there  can  be  no  considerable  increase  of 
stock  but  in  consequence  of  a  considerable 
improvement  of  land;  because  otherwise  the 
land  could  not  maintain  it.  These  natural  ob¬ 
structions  to  the  establishment  of  a  better  sys¬ 
tem  cannot  be  removed  but  by  a  long  course 
of  frugality  and  industry;  and  half  a  century 
or  a  century  more,  perhaps,  must  pass 
away  before  the  old  system,  which  is  wearing 
out  gradually,  can  be  completely  abolished 
through  all  the  different  parts  of  the  country. 
Of  all  the  commercial  advantages,  however, 
which  Scotland  has  derived  from  the  union 
with  England,  this  rise  in  the  price  of  cattle 
is,  perhaps,  the  greatest.  It  has  not  only  raised 
the  value  of  all  highland  estates,  but  it  has, 
perhaps,  been  the  principal  cause  of  the  im¬ 
provement  of  the  low  country. 

In  all  new  colonies  the  great  quantity  of 
waste  land,  which  can  for  many  years  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  no  other  purpose  but  the  feeding  of 
cattle,  soon  renders  them  extremely  abundant, 
and  in  everything  great  cheapness  is  the  neces¬ 
sary  consequence  of  great  abundance.  Though 
all  the  cattle  of  the  European  colonies  in 
America  were  originally  carried  from  Europe, 


of  Land  97 

they  soon  multiplied  so  much  there,  and  be¬ 
came  of  so  little  value  that  even  horses  were 
allowed  to  run  wild  in  the  woods  without  any 
owner  thinking  it  worth  while  to  claim  them. 
It  must  be  a  long  time,  after  the  first  estab¬ 
lishment  of  such  colonies,  before  it  can  become 
profitable  to  feed  cattle  upon  the  produce  of 
cultivated  land.  The  same  causes,  therefore, 
the  want  of  manure,  and  the  disproportion 
between  the  stock  employed  in  cultivation, 
and  the  land  which  it  is  destined  to  cultivate, 
are  likely  to  introduce  there  a  system  of  hus¬ 
bandry  not  unlike  that  which  still  continues 
to  take  place  in  so  many  parts  of  Scotland. 
Mr.  Kalm,  the  Swedish  traveller,  when  he 
gives  an  account  of  the  husbandry  of  some  of 
the  English  colonies  in  North  America,  as  he 
found  it  in  1749,  observes,  accordingly,  that 
he  can  with  difficulty  discover  there  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  English  nation,  so  well  skilled  in 
all  the  different  branches  of  agriculture.  They 
make  scarce  any  manure  for  their  corn  fields, 
he  says;  but  when  one  piece  of  ground  has 
been  exhausted  by  continual  cropping,  they 
clear  and  cultivate  another  piece  of  fresh  land; 
and  when  that  is  exhausted,  proceed  to  the 
third.  Their  cattle  are  allowed  to  wander 
through  the  woods  and  other  uncultivated 
grounds,  where  they  are  half-starved;  having 
long  ago  extirpated  almost  all  the  annual 
grasses  by  cropping  them  too  early  in  the 
spring,  before  they  had  time  to  form  their 
flowers,  or  to  shed  their  seeds.1  The  annual 
grasses  were,  it  seems,  the  best  natural  grasses 
in  that  part  of  North  America;  and  when  the 
Europeans  first  settled  there,  they  used  to 
grow  very  thick,  and  to  rise  three  or  four  feet 
high.  A  piece  of  ground  which,  when  he  wrote, 
could  not  maintain  one  cow,  would  in  former 
times,  he  was  assured,  have  maintained  four, 
each  of  which  would  have  given  four  times  the 
quantity  of  milk  which  that  one  was  capable 
of  giving.  The  poorness  of  the  pasture  had,  in 
his  opinion,  occasioned  the  degradation  of 
their  cattle,  which  degenerated  sensibly  from 
one  generation  to  another.  They  were  prob¬ 
ably  not  unlike  that  stunted  breed  which  was 
common  all  over  Scotland  thirty  or  forty 
years  ago,  and  which  is  now  so  much  mended 
through  the  greater  part  of  the  low  country, 
not  so  much  by  a  change  of  the  breed,  though 
that  expedient  has  been  employed  in  some 
places,  as  by  a  more  plentiful  method  of 
feeding  them. 

Though  it  is  late,  therefore,  in  the  progress 
of  improvement  before  cattle  can  bring  such 
a  price  as  to  render  it  profitable  to  cultivate 
land  for  the  sake  of  feeding  them;  yet  of  all 
the  different  parts  which  compose  this  second 
sort  of  rude  produce,  they  are  perhaps  the 
first  which  bring  this  price;  because  till  they 

1Kalms’  Travels ,  vol.  i,  pp.  343,  344. 


98 


The  Wealth 

bring  it,  it  seems  impossible  that  improve¬ 
ment  can  be  brought  near  even  to  that  de¬ 
gree  of  perfection  to  which  it  has  arrived  in 
many  parts  of  Europe. 

As  cattle  are  among  the  first,  so  perhaps 
venison  is  among  the  last  parts  of  this  sort  of 
rude  produce  which  bring  this  price.  The  price 
of  venison  in  Great  Britain,  how  extravagant 
soever  it  may  appear,  is  not  near  sufficient  to 
compensate  the  expense  of  a  deer  park,  as  is 
well  known  to  all  those  who  have  had  any 
experience  in  the  feeding  of  deer.  If  it  was 
otherwise,  the  feeding  of  deer  would  soon  be¬ 
come  an  article  of  common  farming,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  feeding  of  those  small 
birds  called  Turdi  was  among  the  ancient 
Romans.  Varro  and  Columella  assure  us  that 
it  was  a  most  profitable  article.  The  fattening 
of  ortolans,  birds  of  passage  which  arrive  lean 
in  the  country,  is  said  to  be  so  in  some  parts 
of  France.  If  venison  continues  in  fashion,  and 
the  wealth  and  luxury  of  Great  Britain  in¬ 
crease  as  they  have  done  for  some  time  past, 
its  price  may  very  probably  rise  still  higher 
than  it  is  at  present. 

Between  that  period  in  the  progress  of  im¬ 
provement  which  brings  to  its  height  the 
price  of  so  necessary  an  article  as  cattle,  and 
that  which  brings  to  it  the  price  of  such  a 
superfluity  as  venison,  there  is  a  very  long 
interval,  in  the  course  of  which  many  other 
sorts  of  rude  produce  gradually  arrive  at  their 
highest  price,  some  sooner  and  some  later,  ac¬ 
cording  to  different  circumstances. 

Thus  in  every  farm  the  offals  of  the  barn 
and  stables  will  maintain  a  certain  number  of 
poultry.  These,  as  they  are  fed  with  what 
would  otherwise  be  lost,  are  a  mere  save-all; 
and  as  they  cost  the  farmer  scarce  anything, 
so  he  can  afford  to  sell  them  for  very  little. 
Almost  all  that  he  gets  is  pure  gain,  and  their 
price  can  scarce  be  so  low  as  to  discourage 
him  from  feeding  this  number.  But  in  coun¬ 
tries  ill  cultivated,  and  therefore  but  thinly 
inhabited,  the  poultry,  which  are  thus  raised 
without  expense,  are  often  fully  sufficient  to 
supply  the  whole  demand.  In  this  state  of 
things,  therefore,  they  are  often  as  cheap  as 
butcher’s  meat,  or  any  other  sort  of  animal 
food.  But  the  whole  quantity  of  poultry,  which 
the  farm  in  this  manner  produces  without  ex¬ 
pense,  must  always  be  much  smaller  than  the 
whole  quantity  of  butcher’s  meat  which  is 
reared  upon  it;  and  in  times  of  wealth  and 
luxury  what  is  rare,  with  only  nearly  equal 
merit,  is  always  preferred  to  what  is  common. 
As  wealth  and  luxury  increase,  therefore,  in 
consequence  of  improvement  and  cultivation, 
the  price  of  poultry  gradually  rises  above  that 
of  butcher’s  meat,  till  at  last  it  gets  so  high 
that  it  becomes  profitable  to  cultivate  land 
for  the  sake  of  feeding  them.  When  it  has  got 


of  Nations 

to  this  height  it  cannot  well  go  higher.  If  it 
did,  more  land  would  soon  be  turned  to  this 
purpose.  In  several  provinces  of  France,  the 
feeding  of  poultry  is  considered  as  a  very  im¬ 
portant  article  in  rural  economy,  and  suffi¬ 
ciently  profitable  to  encourage  the  farmer  to 
raise  a  considerable  quantity  of  Indian  corn 
and  buck-wheat  for  this  purpose.  A  middling 
farmer  will  there  sometimes  have  four  hun¬ 
dred  fowls  in  his  yard.  The  feeding  of  poultry 
seems  scarce  yet  to  be  generally  considered  as 
a  matter  of  so  much  importance  in  England. 
They  are  certainly,  however,  dearer  in  Eng¬ 
land  than  in  France,  as  England  receives  con¬ 
siderable  supplies  from  France.  In  the  progress 
of  improvement,  the  period  at  which  every 
particular  sort  of  animal  food  is  dearest  must 
naturally  be  that  which  immediately  precedes 
the  general  practice  of  cultivating  land  for 
the  sake  of  raising  it.  For  some  time  before 
this  practice  becomes  general,  the  scarcity 
must  necessarily  raise  the  price.  After  it 
has  become  general,  new  methods  of  feeding 
are  commonly  fallen  upon,  which  enable  the 
farmer  to  raise  upon  the  same  quantity  of 
ground  a  much  greater  quantity  of  that  par¬ 
ticular  sort  of  animal  food.  The  plenty  not 
only  obliges  him  to  sell  cheaper,  but  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  these  improvements  he  can  afford 
to  sell  cheaper;  for  if  he  could  not  afford  it, 
the  plenty  would  not  be  of  long  continuance. 
It  has  been  probably  in  this  manner  that  the 
introduction  of  clover,  turnips,  carrots,  cab¬ 
bage,  etc.,  has  contributed  to  sink  the  com¬ 
mon  price  of  butcher’s  meat  in  the  London 
market  somewhat  below  what  it  was  about 
the  beginning  of  the  last  century. 

The  hog,  that  finds  his  food  among  ordure 
and  greedily  devours  many  things  rejected  by 
every  other  useful  animal,  is,  like  poultry, 
originally  kept  as  a  save-all.  As  long  as  the 
number  of  such  animals,  which  can  thus  be 
reared  at  little  or  no  expense,  is  fully  suffi¬ 
cient  to  supply  the  demand,  this  sort  of 
butcher’s  meat  comes  to  market  at  a  much 
lower  price  than  any  other.  But  when  the 
demand  rises  beyond  what  this  quantity  can 
supply,  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  raise 
food  on  purpose  for  feeding  and  fattening 
hogs,  in  the  same  manner  as  for  feeding  and 
fattening  other  cattle,  the  price  necessarily 
rises,  and  becomes  proportionably  higher  or 
lower  than  that  of  other  butcher’s  meat,  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  the 
state  of  its  agriculture,  happen  to  render  the 
feeding  of  hogs  more  or  less  expensive  than 
that  of  other  cattle.  In  France,  according  to 
Mr.  Buff  on,  the  price  of  pork  is  nearly  equal 
to  that  of  beef.  In  most  parts  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  it  is  at  present  somewhat  higher. 

The  great  rise  in  the  price  of  both  hogs  and 
poultry  has  in  Great  Britain  been  frequently 


99 


The  Rent 

imputed  to  the  diminution  of  the  number  of 
cottagers  and  other  small  occupiers  of  land; 
an  event  which  has  in  every  part  of  Europe 
been  the  immediate  forerunner  of  improve¬ 
ment  and  better  cultivation,  but  which  at  the 
same  time  may  have  contributed  to  raise  the 
price  of  those  articles  both  somewhat  sooner 
and  somewhat  faster  than  it  would  otherwise 
have  risen.  As  the  poorest  family  can  often 
maintain  a  cat  or  a  dog  without  any  expense, 
so  the  poorest  occupiers  of  land  can  com¬ 
monly  maintain  a  few  poultry,  or  a  sow  and 
a  few  pigs,  at  very  little.  The  little  offals  of 
their  own  table,  their  whey,  skimmed  milk, 
and  buttermilk,  supply  those  animals  with  a 
part  of  their  food,  and  they  find  the  rest  in 
the  neighbouring  fields  without  doing  any  sen¬ 
sible  damage  to  anybody.  By  diminishing 
the  number  of  those  small  occupiers,  there¬ 
fore,  the  quantity  of  this  sort  of  provisions, 
which  is  thus  produced  at  little  or  no  expense, 
must  certainly  have  been  a  good  deal  di¬ 
minished,  and  their  price  must  consequently 
have  been  raised  both  sooner  and  faster  than 
it  would  otherwise  have  risen.  Sooner  or  later, 
however,  in  the  progress  of  improvement,  it 
must  at  any  rate  have  risen  to  the  utmost 
height  to  which  it  is  capable  of  rising;  or 
to  the  price  which  pays  the  labour  and  ex¬ 
pense  of  cultivating  the  land  which  furnishes 
them  with  food  as  well  as  these  are  paid 
upon  the  greater  part  of  other  cultivated 
land. 

The  business  of  the  dairy,  like  the  feed¬ 
ing  of  hogs  and  poultry,  is  originally  carried 
on  as  a  save-all.  The  cattle  necessarily  kept 
upon  the  farm  produce  more  milk  than  either 
the  rearing  of  their  own  young  or  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  farmer’s  family  requires; 
and  they  produce  most  at  one  particular  sea¬ 
son.  But  of  all  the  productions  of  land,  milk 
is  perhaps  the  most  perishable.  In  the  warm 
season,  when  it  is  most  abundant,  it  will 
scarce  keep  four-and-twenty  hours.  The 
farmer,  by  making  it  into  fresh  butter,  stores 
a  small  part  of  it  for  a  week:  by  making  it 
into  salt  butter,  for  a  year:  and  by  making 
it  into  cheese,  he  stores  a  much  greater  part 
of  it  for  several  years.  Part  of  all  these  is 
reserved  for  the  use  of  his  own  family.  The 
rest  goes  to  market,  in  order  to  find  the  best 
price  which  is  to  be  had,  and  which  can  scarce 
be  so  low  as  to  discourage  him  from  sending 
thither  whatever  is  over  and  above  the  use 
of  his  own  family.  If  it  is  very  low,  indeed, 
he  will  be  likely  to  manage  his  dairy  in  a 
very  slovenly  and  dirty  manner,  and  will 
scarce  perhaps  think  it  worth  while  to  have 
a  particular  room  or  building  on  purpose  for 
it,  but  will  suffer  the  business  to  be  carried 
on  amidst  the  smoke,  filth,  and  nastiness  of 
his  own  kitchen;  as  was  the  case  of  almost 


of  Land 

all  the  farmers’  dairies  in  Scotland  thirty 
or  forty  years  ago,  and  as  is  the  case  of  many 
of  them  still.  The  same  causes  which  gradual¬ 
ly  raise  the  price  of  butcher’s  meat,  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  demand,  and,  in  consequence  of 
the  improvement  of  the  country,  the  diminu¬ 
tion  of  the  quantity  which  can  be  fed  at  little 
or  no  expense,  raise,  in  the  same  manner,  that 
of  the  produce  of  the  dairy,  of  which  the 
price  naturally  connects  with  that  of  butch¬ 
er’s  meat,  or  with  the  expense  of  feeding  cat¬ 
tle.  The  increase  of  price  pays  for  more  la¬ 
bour,  care,  and  cleanliness.  The  dairy  becomes 
more  worthy  of  the  farmer’s  attention,  and 
the  quality  of  its  produce  gradually  im¬ 
proves.  The  price  at  last  gets  so  high  that 
it  becomes  worth  while  to  employ  some  of 
the  most  fertile  and  best  cultivated  lands 
in  feeding  cattle  merely  for  the  purpose  of 
the  dairy;  and  when  it  has  got  to  this  height, 
it  cannot  well  go  higher.  If  it  did,  more  land 
would  soon  be  turned  to  this  purpose.  It 
seems  to  have  got  to  this  height  through  the 
greater  part  of  England,  where  much  good 
land  is  commonly  employed  in  this  manner. 
If  you  except  the  neighbourhood  of  a  few 
considerable  towns,  it  seems  not  yet  to  have 
got  to  this  height  anywhere  in  Scotland, 
where  common  farmers  seldom  employ  much 
good  land  in  raising  food  for  cattle  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  the  dairy.  The  price  of  the 
produce,  though  it  has  risen  very  consider¬ 
ably  within  these  few  years,  is  probably  still 
too  low  to  admit  of  it.  The  inferiority  of  the 
quality,  indeed,  compared  with  that  of  the 
produce  of  English  dairies,  is  fully  equal  to 
that  of  the  price.  But  this  inferiority  of  qual¬ 
ity  is,  perhaps,  rather  the  effect  of  this  low¬ 
ness  of  price  than  the  cause  of  it.  Though  the 
quality  was  much  better,  the  greater  part 
of  what  is  brought  to  market  could  not,  I 
apprehend,  in  the  present  circumstances  of 
the  country,  be  disposed  of  at  a  much  better 
price;  and  the  present  price,  it  is  probable, 
would  not  pay  the  expense  of  the  land  and 
labour  necessary  for  producing  a  much  bet¬ 
ter  quality.  Though  the  greater  part  of  Eng¬ 
land,  notwithstanding  the  superiority  of  price, 
the  dairy  is  not  reckoned  a  more  profitable 
employment  of  land  than  the  raising  of  corn, 
or  the  fattening  of  cattle,  the  two  great  ob¬ 
jects  of  agriculture.  Through  the  greater  part 
of  Scotland,  therefore,  it  cannot  yet  be  even 
so  profitable. 

The  lands  of  no  country,  it  is  evident,  can 
ever  be  completely  cultivated  and  improved 
till  once  the  price  of  every  produce,  which 
human  industry  is  obliged  to  raise  upon  them, 
has  got  so  high  as  to  pay  for  the  expense  of 
complete  improvement  and  cultivation.  In 
order  to  do  this,  the  price  of  each  particular 
produce  must  be  sufficient,  first,  to  pay  the 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


IOC 

rent  of  good  corn  land,  as  it  is  that  which 
regulates  the  rent  of  the  greater  part  of  other 
cultivated  land;  and,  secondly,  to  pay  the 
labour  and  expense  of  the  farmer  as  well  as 
they  are  commonly  paid  upon  good  corn 
land;  or,  in  other  words,  to  replace  with  the 
ordinary  profits  the  stock  which  he  employs 
about  it.  This  rise  in  the  price  of  each  par¬ 
ticular  produce  must  evidently  be  previous 
to  the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  the 
land  which  is  destined  for  raising  it.  Gain  is 
the  end  of  all  improvement,  and  nothing 
could  deserve  that  name  of  which  loss  was 
to  be  the  necessary  consequence.  But  loss 
must  be  the  necessary  consequence  of  im¬ 
proving  land  for  the  sake  of  a  produce  of 
which  the  price  could  never  bring  back  the 
expense.  If  the  complete  improvement  and 
cultivation  of  the  country  be,  as  it  most  cer¬ 
tainly  is,  the  greatest  of  all  public  advantages, 
this  rise  in  the  price  of  all  those  different 
sorts  of  rude  produce,  instead  of  being  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  public  calamity,  ought  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  necessary  forerunner  and  at¬ 
tendant  of  the  greatest  of  all  public  advan¬ 
tages. 

This  rise,  too,  in  the  nominal  or  money- 
price  of  all  those  different  sorts  of  rude  pro¬ 
duce  has  been  the  effect,  not  of  any  degrada¬ 
tion  in  the  value  of  silver,  but  of  a  rise  in 
their  real  price.  They  have  become  worth, 
not  only  a  greater  quantity  of  silver,  but  a 
greater  quantity  of  labour  and  subsistence 
than  before.  As  it  costs  a  greater  quantity 
of  labour  and  subsistence  to  bring  them  to 
market,  so  when  they  are  brought  thither, 
they  represent  or  are  equivalent  to  a  greater 
quantity. 

THIRD  SORT 

The  third  and  last  sort  of  rude  produce, 
of  which  the  price  naturally  rises  in  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  improvement,  is  that  in  which  the 
efficacy  of  human  industry,  in  augmenting 
the  quantity,  is  either  limited  or  uncertain. 
Though  the  real  price  of  this  sort  of  rude 
produce,  therefore,  naturally  tends  to  rise  in 
the  progress  of  improvement,  yet,  according 
as  different  accidents  happen  to  render  the 
efforts  of  human  industry  more  or  less  suc¬ 
cessful  in  augmenting  the  quantity,  it  may 
happen  sometimes  even  to  fall,  sometimes  to 
continue  the  same  in  very  different  periods 
of  improvement,  and  sometimes  to  rise  more 
or  less  in  the  same  period. 

There  are  some  sorts  of  rude  produce  which 
nature  has  rendered  a  kind  of  appendages  to 
other  sorts;  so  that  the  quantity  of  the  one 
which  any  country  can  afford,  is  necessarily 
limited  by  that  of  the  other.  The  quantity 
of  wool  or  of  raw  hides,  for  example,  which 
any  country  can  afford  is  necessarily  limited 
by  the  number  of  great  and  small  cattle  that 


are  kept  in  it.  The  state  of  its  improvement, 
and  the  nature  of  its  agriculture,  again  neces¬ 
sarily  determine  this  number. 

The  same  causes  which,  in  the  progress  of 
improvement,  gradually  raise  the  price  of 
butcher's  meat,  should  have  the  same  effect, 
it  may  be  thought,  upon  the  prices  of  wool 
and  raw  hides,  and  raise  them,  too,  nearly  in 
the  same  proportion.  It  probably  would  be 
so  if,  in  the  rude  beginnings  of  improvement, 
the  market  for  the  latter  commodities  was 
confined  within  as  narrow  bounds  as  that  for 
the  former.  But  the  extent  of  their  respective 
markets  is  commonly  extremely  different. 

The  market  for  butcher’s  meat  is  almost 
everywhere  confined  to  the  country  which 
produces  it.  Ireland,  and  some  part  of  British 
America  indeed,  carry  on  a  considerable  trade 
in  salt  provisions;  but  they  are,  I  believe,  the 
only  countries  in  the  commercial  world  which 
do  so,  or  which  export  to  other  countries 
any  considerable  part  of  their  butcher’s  meat. 

The  market  for  wool  and  raw  hides,  on  the 
contrary,  is  in  the  rude  beginnings  of  improve¬ 
ment  very  seldom  confined  to  the  country 
which  produces  them.  They  can  easily  be 
transported  to  distant  countries,  wool  with¬ 
out  any  preparation,  and  raw  hides  with  very 
little:  and  as  they  are  the  materials  of  many 
manufactures,  the  industry  of  other  countries 
may  occasion  a  demand  for  them,  though  that 
of  the  country  which  produces  them  might 
not  occasion  any. 

In  countries  ill  cultivated,  and  therefore  but 
thinly  inhabited,  the  price  of  the  wool  and 
the  hide  bears  always  a  much  greater  propor¬ 
tion  to  that  of  the  whole  beast  than  in  coun¬ 
tries  where,  improvement  and  population  be¬ 
ing  further  advanced,  there  is  more  demand 
for  butcher’s  meat.  Mr.  Hume  observes  that 
in  the  Saxon  times  the  fleece  was  estimated 
at  two-fifths  of  the  value  of  the  whole  sheep, 
and  that  this  was  much  above  the  proportion 
of  its  present  estimation.  In  some  provinces 
of  Spain,  I  have  been  assured,  the  sheep  is 
frequently  killed  merely  for  the  sake  of  the 
fleece  and  the  tallow.  The  carcase  is  often 
left  to  rot  upon  the  ground,  or  to  be  de¬ 
voured  by  beasts  and  birds  of  prey.  If  this 
sometimes  happens  even  in  Spain,  it  hap¬ 
pens  almost  constantly  in  Chili,  at  Buenos 
Ayres,  and  in  many  other  parts  of  Spanish 
America,  where  the  horned  cattle  are  almost 
constantly  killed  merely  for  the  sake  of  the 
hide  and  the  tallow.  This,  too,  used  to  hap¬ 
pen  almost  constantly  in  Hispaniola,  while  it 
was  infested  by  the  Buccaneers,  and  before 
the  settlement,  improvement,  and  populous¬ 
ness  of  the  French  plantations  (which  now 
extend  round  the  coast  of  almost  the  whole 
western  half  of  the  island)  had  given  some 
value  to  the  cattle  of  the  Spaniards,  who  still 


101 


The  Rent  of  Land 


continue  to  possess,  not  only  the  eastern  part 
of  the  coast,  but  the  whole  inland  and  moun¬ 
tainous  part  of  the  country. 

Though  in  the  progress  of  improvement  and 
population  the  price  of  the  whole  beast  neces¬ 
sarily  rises,  yet  the  price  of  the  carcase  is 
likely  to  be  much  more  affected  by  this  rise 
than  that  of  the  wool  and  the  hide.  The  mar¬ 
ket  for  the  carcase,  being  in  the  rude  state  of 
society  confined  always  to  the  country  which 
produces  it,  must  necessarily  be  extended  in 
proportion  to  the  improvement  and  popula¬ 
tion  of  that  country.  But  the  market  for  the 
wool  and  the  hides  even  of  a  barbarous  coun¬ 
try  often  extending  to  the  whole  commercial 
world,  it  can  very  seldom  be  enlarged  in  the 
same  proportion.  The  state  of  the  whole  com¬ 
mercial  world  can  seldom  be  much  affected 
by  the  improvement  of  any  particular  coun¬ 
try;  and  the  market  for  such  commodities 
may  remain  the  same  or  very  nearly  the 
same  after  such  improvements  as  before.  It 
should,  however,  in  the  natural  course  of 
things  rather  upon  the  whole  be  somewhat 
extended  in  consequence  of  them.  If  the 
manufactures,  especially,  of  which  those  com¬ 
modities  are  the  materials  should  ever  come 
to  flourish  in  the  country,  the  market,  though 
it  might  not  be  much  enlarged,  would  at 
least  be  brought  much  nearer  to  the  place 
of  growth  than  before;  and  the  price  of  those 
materials  might  at  least  be  increased  by  what 
had  usually  been  the  expense  of  transport¬ 
ing  them  to  distant  countries.  Though  it 
might  not  rise  therefore  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  as  that  of  butcher’s  meat,  it  ought  nat¬ 
urally  to  rise  somewhat,  and  it  ought  cer¬ 
tainly  not  to  fall. 

In  England,  however,  notwithstanding  the 
flourishing  state  of  its  woollen  manufacture, 
the  price  of  English  wool  has  fallen  very  con¬ 
siderably  since  the  time  of  Edward  III.  There 
are  many  authentic  records  which  demon¬ 
strate  that  during  the  reign  of  that  prince 
(towards  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  or  about  1339)  what  was  reckoned  the 
moderate  and  reasonable  price  of  the  tod,  or 
twenty-eight  pounds  of  English  wool,  was 
not  less  than  ten  shillings  of  the  money  of 
those  times,1  containing  at  the  rate  of  twenty- 
pence  the  ounce,  six  ounces  of  silver  Tower 
weight,  equal  to  about  thirty  shillings  of  our 
present  money.  In  the  present  times,  one-and- 
twenty  shillings  the  tod  may  be  reckoned  a 
good  price  for  very  good  English  wool.  The 
money-price  of  wool,  therefore,  in  the  time 
of  Edward  III,  was  to  its  money-price  in  the 
present  times  as  ten  to  seven.  The  superior¬ 
ity  of  its  real  price  was  still  greater.  At  the 
rate  of  six  shillings  and  eightpence  the  quar- 

1  See  Smith’s  Memoirs  of  Wool ,  vol.  i,  c.  5,  6, 
and  7;  also,  vol.  ii,  c.  176. 


ter,  ten  shillings  was  in  those  ancient  times 
the  price  of  twelve  bushels  of  wheat.  At  the 
rate  of  twenty -eight  shillings  the  quarter,  one- 
and-twenty  shillings  is  in  the  present  times 
the  price  of  six  bushels  only.  The  proportion 
between  the  real  prices  of  ancient  and  mod¬ 
ern  times,  therefore,  is  as  twelve  to  six,  or 
as  two  to  one.  In  those  ancient  times  a  tod 
of  wool  would  have  purchased  twice  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  subsistence  which  it  will  purchase  at 
present;  and  consequently  twice  the  quantity 
of  labour,  if  the  real  recompense  of  labour 
had  been  the  same  in  both  periods. 

This  degradation  both  in  the  real  and  nomi¬ 
nal  value  of  wool  could  never  have  happened 
in  consequence  of  the  natural  course  of  things. 
It  has  accordingly  been  the  effect  of  violence 
and  artifice:  first,  of  the  absolute  prohibition 
of  exporting  wool  from  England;  secondly,  of 
the  permission  of  importing  it  from  Spain 
duty  free;  thirdly,  of  the  prohibition  of  ex¬ 
porting  it  from  Ireland  to  any  other  country 
but  England.  In  consequence  of  these  regu¬ 
lations  the  market  for  English  wool,  instead 
of  being  somewhat  extended  in  consequence 
of  the  improvement  of  England,  has  been 
confined  to  the  home  market,  where  the  wool 
of  several  other  countries  is  allowed  to  come 
into  competition  with  it,  and  where  that  of 
Ireland  is  forced  into  competition  with  it. 
As  the  woollen  manufactures,  too,  of  Ireland 
are  fully  as  much  discouraged  as  is  consistent 
with  justice  and  fair  dealing,  the  Irish  can 
work  up  but  a  small  part  of  their  own  wool 
at  home,  and  are,  therefore,  obliged  to  send 
a  greater  proportion  of  it  to  Great  Britain, 
the  only  market  they  are  allowed. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  such  au¬ 
thentic  records  concerning  the  price  of  raw 
hides  in  ancient  times.  Wool  was  commonly 
paid  as  a  subsidy  to  the  king,  and  its  valua¬ 
tion  in  that  subsidy  ascertains,  at  least  in 
some  degree,  what  was  its  ordinary  price. 
But  this  seems  not  to  have  been  the  case 
with  raw  hides.  Fleetwood,  however,  from 
an  account  in  1425,  between  the  prior  of 
Burcester  Oxford  and  one  of  his  canons,  gives 
us  their  price,  at  least  as  it  was  stated  upon 
that  particular  occasion,  viz.,  five  ox  hides 
at  twelve  shillings;  five  cow  hides  at  seven 
shillings  and  threepence;  thirty-six  sheep 
skins  of  two  years  old  at  nine  shillings;  six¬ 
teen  calves  skins  at  two  shillings.  In  1425, 
twelve  shillings  contained  about  the  same 
quantity  of  silver  as  four-and-twenty  shil¬ 
lings  of  our  present  money.  An  ox  hide,  there¬ 
fore,  was  in  this  account  valued  at  the  same 
quantity  of  silver  as  4s.  four-fifths  of  our 
present  money.  Its  nominal  price  was  a  good 
deal  lower  than  at  present.  But  at  the  rate 
of  six  shillings  and  eightpence  the  quarter, 
twelve  shillings  would  in  those  times  have 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


102 

purchased  fourteen  bushels  and  four-fifths  of 
a  bushel  of  wheat,  which,  at  three  and  six¬ 
pence  the  bushel,  would  in  the  present  times 
cost  51s.  4d.  An  ox  hide,  therefore,  would  in 
those  times  have  purchased  as  much  corn  as 
ten  shillings  and  threepence  would  purchase 
at  present.  Its  real  value  was  equal  to  ten 
shillings  and  threepence  of  our  present  money. 
In  those  ancient  times,  when  the  cattle  were 
half  starved  during  the  greater  part  of  the 
winter,  we  cannot  suppose  that  they  were  of  a 
very  large  size.  An  ox  hide  which  weighs  four 
stone  of  sixteen  pounds  avoirdupois  is  not 
in  the  present  times  reckoned  a  bad  one;  and 
in  those  ancient  times  would  probably  have 
been  reckoned  a  very  good  one.  But  at  half- 
a-crown  the  stone,  which  at  this  moment 
(February  1773)  I  understand  to  be  the  com¬ 
mon  price,  such  a  hide  would  at  present  cost 
only  ten  shillings.  Though  its  nominal  price, 
therefore,  is  higher  in  the  present  than  it  was 
in  those  ancient  times,  its  real  price,  the  real 
quantity  of  subsistence  which  it  will  purchase 
or  command,  is  rather  somewhat  lower.  The 
price  of  cow  hides,  as  stated  in  the  above 
account,  is  nearly  in  the  common  proportion 
tc  that  of  ox  hides.  That  of  sheep  skins  is 
a  good  deal  above  it.  They  had  probably  been 
sold  with  the  wool.  That  of  calves  skins,  on 
the  contrary,  is  greatly  below  it.  In  coun¬ 
tries  where  the  price  of  cattle  is  very  low, 
the  calves,  which  are  not  intended  to  be 
reared  in  order  to  keep  up  the  stock,  are  gen¬ 
erally  killed  very  young;  as  was  the  case  in 
Scotland  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago.  It  saves 
the  milk,  which  their  price  would  not  pay  for. 
Their  skins,  therefore,  are  commonly  good  for 
little. 

The  price  of  raw  hides  is  a  good  deal  lower 
at  present  than  it  was  a  few  years  ago,  owing 
probably  to  the  taking  off  the  duty  upon  seal¬ 
skins,  and  to  the  allowing,  for  a  limited  time, 
the  importation  of  raw  hides  from  Ireland 
and  from  the  plantations  duty  free,  which 
was  done  in  1769.  Take  the  whole  of  the 
present  century  at  an  average,  their  real  price 
has  probably  been  somewhat  higher  than  it 
was  in  those  ancient  times.  The  nature  of  the 
commodity  renders  it  not  quite  so  proper  for 
being  transported  to  distant  markets  as  wool. 
It  suffers  more  by  keeping.  A  salted  hide  is 
reckoned  inferior  to  a  fresh  one,  and  sells 
for  a  lower  price.  This  circumstance  must 
necessarily  have  some  tendency  to  sink  the 
price  of  raw  hides  produced  in  a  country 
which  does  not  manufacture  them,  but  is 
obliged  to  export  them;  and  comparatively 
to  raise  that  of  those  produced  in  a  country 
which  does  manufacture  them.  It  must  have 
some  tendency  to  sink  their  price  in  a  bar¬ 
barous,  and  to  raise  it  in  an  improved  and 
manufacturing  country.  It  must  have  had 


some  tendency,  therefore,  to  sink  it  in  am 
cient  and  to  raise  it  in  modem  times.  Our 
tanners,  besides,  have  not  been  quite  so  suc¬ 
cessful  as  our  clothiers  in  convincing  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  nation  that  the  safety  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth  depends  upon  the  prosperity  of 
their  particular  manufacture.  They  have  ac¬ 
cordingly  been  much  less  favoured.  The  ex¬ 
portation  of  raw  hides  has,  indeed,  been  pro¬ 
hibited,  and  declared  a  nuisance;  but  their 
importation  from  foreign  countries  has  been 
subjected  to  a  duty;  and  though  this  duty 
has  been  taken  off  from  those  of  Ireland  and 
the  plantations  (for  the  limited  time  of  five 
years  only) ,  yet  Ireland  has  not  been  con¬ 
fined  to  the  market  of  Great  Britain  for  the 
sale  of  its  surplus  hides,  or  of  those  which  are 
not  manufactured  at  home.  The  hides  of 
common  cattle  have  but  within  these  few 
years  been  put  among  the  enumerated  com¬ 
modities  which  the  plantations  can  send  no¬ 
where  but  to  the  mother  country;  neither  has 
the  commerce  of  Ireland  been  in  this  case 
oppressed  hitherto  in  order  to  support  the 
manufactures  of  Great  Britain. 

Whatever  regulations  tend  to  sink  the  price 
either  of  wool  or  of  raw  hides  below  what  it 
naturally  would  be  must,  in  an  improved  and 
cultivated  country,  have  some  tendency  to 
raise  the  price  of  butcher’s  meat.  The  price 
both  of  the  great  and  small  cattle,  which  are 
fed  on  improved  and  cultivated  land,  must 
be  sufficient  to  pay  the  rent  which  the  land¬ 
lord  and  the  profit  which  the  farmer  has  rea¬ 
son  to  expect  from  improved  and  cultivated 
land.  If  it  is  not,  they  will  soon  cease  to  feed 
them.  Whatever  part  of  this  price,  therefore, 
is  not  paid  by  the  wool  and  the  hide  must 
be  paid  by  the  carcase.  The  less  there  is 
paid  for  the  one,  the  more  must  be  paid  for 
the  other.  In  what  manner  this  price  is  to  be 
divided  upon  the  different  parts  of  the  beast 
is  indifferent  to  the  landlords  and  farmers, 
provided  it  is  all  paid  to  them.  In  an  im¬ 
proved  and  cultivated  country,  therefore, 
their  interest  as  landlords  and  farmers  can¬ 
not  be  much  affected  by  such  regulations, 
though  their  interest  as  consumers  may,  by 
the  rise  in  the  price  of  provisions.  It  would 
be  quite  otherwise,  however,  in  an  unim¬ 
proved  and  uncultivated  country,  where  the 
greater  part  of  the  lands  could  be  applied  to 
no  other  purpose  but  the  feeding  of  cattle, 
and  where  the  wool  and  the  hide  made  the 
principal  part  of  the  value  of  those  cattle. 
Their  interest  as  landlords  and  farmers  would 
in  this  case  be  very  deeply  affected  by  such 
regulations,  and  their  interest  as  consumers 
very  little.  The  fall  in  the  price  of  wool  and 
the  hide  would  not  in  this  case  raise  the  price 
of  the  carcase,  because  the  greater  part  of  the 
lands  of  the  country  being  applicable  to  no 


103 


The  Rent  of  Land 


other  purpose  but  the  feeding  of  cattle,  the 
same  number  would  still  continue  to  be  fed. 
The  same  quantity  of  butcher’s  meat  would 
still  come  to  market.  The  demand  for  it 
would  be  no  greater  than  before.  Its  price, 
therefore,  would  be  the  same  as  before.  The 
whole  price  of  cattle  would  fall,  and  along 
with  it  both  the  rent  and  the  profit  of  all 
those  lands  of  which  cattle  was  the  principal 
produce,  that  is,  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
lands  of  the  country.  The  perpetual  prohi¬ 
bition  of  the  exportation  of  wool,  which  is 
commonly,  but  very  falsely,  ascribed  to  Ed¬ 
ward  III,  would,  in  the  then  circumstances 
of  the  country,  have  been  the  most  destruc¬ 
tive  regulation  which  could  well  have  been 
thought  of.  It  would  not  only  have  reduced 
the  actual  value  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
lands  of  the  kingdom,  but  by  reducing  the 
price  of  the  most  important  species  of  small 
cattle  it  would  have  retarded  very  much  its 
subsequent  improvement. 

The  wool  of  Scotland  fell  very  considerably 
in  its  price  in  consequence  of  the  union  with 
England,  by  which  it  was  excluded  from  the 
great  market  of  Europe,  and  confined  to  the 
narrow  one  of  Great  Britain.  The  value  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  lands  in  the  southern 
counties  of  Scotland,  which  are  chiefly  a 
sheep  country,  would  have  been  very  deeply 
affected  by  this  event,  had  not  the  rise  in  the 
price  of  butcher’s  meat  fully  compensated  the 
fall  in  the  price  of  wool. 

As  the  efficacy  of  human  industry,  in  in¬ 
creasing  the  quantity  either  of  wool  or  of 
raw  hides,  is  limited,  so  far  as  it  depends  upon 
the  produce  of  the  country  where  it  is  exert¬ 
ed;  so  it  is  uncertain  so  far  as  it  depends  upon 
the  produce  of  other  countries.  It  so  far  de¬ 
pends,  not  so  much  upon  the  quantity  which 
they  produce,  as  upon  that  which  they  do 
not  manufacture;  and  upon  the  restraints 
which  they  may  or  may  not  think  proper 
to  impose  upon  the  exportation  of  this  sort 
of  rude  produce.  These  circumstances,  as 
they  are  altogether  independent  of  domestic 
industry,  so  they  necessarily  render  the  effi¬ 
cacy  of  its  efforts  more  or  less  uncertain.  In 
multiplying  this  sort  of  rude  produce,  there¬ 
fore,  the  efficacy  of  human  industry  is  not 
only  limited,  but  uncertain. 

In  multiplying  another  very  important  sort 
of  rude  produce,  the  quantity  of  fish  that  is 
brought  to  market,  it  is  likewise  both  limited 
and  uncertain.  It  is  limited  by  the  local  sit¬ 
uation  of  the  country,  by  the  proximity  or 
distance  of  its  different  provinces  from  the 
sea,  by  the  number  of  its  lakes  and  rivers, 
and  by  what  may  be  called  the  fertility  or 
barrenness  of  those  seas,  lakes,  and  rivers,  as 
to  this  sort  of  rude  produce.  As  population 
increases,  as  the  annual  produce  of  the  land 


and  labour  of  the  country  grows  greater  and 
greater,  there  come  to  be  more  buyers  of 
fish,  and  those  buyers,  too,  have  a  greater 
quantity  and  variety  of  other  goods,  or,  what 
is  the  same  thing,  the  price  of  a  greater 
quantity  and  variety  of  other  goods  to  buy 
with.  But  it  will  generally  be  impossible  to 
supply  the  great  and  extended  market  with¬ 
out  employing  a  quantity  of  labour  greater 
than  in  proportion  to  what  had  been  requi¬ 
site  for  supplying  the  narrow  and  confined 
one.  A  market  which,  from  requiring  only  one 
thousand,  comes  to  require  annually  ten  thou¬ 
sand  tons  of  fish,  can  seldom  be  supplied 
without  employing  more  than  ten  times  the 
quantity  of  labour  which  had  before  been 
sufficient  to  supply  it.  The  fish  must  generally 
be  fought  for  at  a  greater  distance,  larger 
vessels  must  be  employed,  and  more  expensive 
machinery  of  every  kind  made  use  of.  The 
real  price  of  this  commodity,  therefore,  nat¬ 
urally  rises  in  the  progress  of  improvement. 
It  has  accordingly  done  so,  I  believe,  more 
or  less  in  every  country. 

Though  the  success  of  a  particular  day’s 
fishing  may  be  a  very  uncertain  matter,  yet, 
the  local  situation  of  the  country  being  sup¬ 
posed,  the  general  efficacy  of  industry  in 
bringing  a  certain  quantity  of  fish  to  market, 
taking  the  course  of  a  year,  or  of  several 
years  together,  it  may  perhaps  be  thought  is 
certain  enough;  and  it  no  doubt  is  so.  As  it 
depends  more,  however,  upon  the  local  situa¬ 
tion  of  the  country  than  upon  the  state  of 
its  wealth  and  industry;  as  upon  this  account 
it  may  in  different  countries  be  the  same  in 
very  different  periods  of  improvement,  and 
very  different  in  the  same  period;  its  con¬ 
nection  with  the  state  of  improvement  is 
uncertain,  and  it  is  of  this  sort  of  uncertainty 
that  I  am  here  speaking. 

In  increasing  the  quantity  of  the  different 
minerals  and  metals  which  are  drawn  from 
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  that  of  the  more 
precious  ones  particularly,  the  efficacy  of  hu¬ 
man  industry  seems  not  to  be  limited,  but  to 
be  altogether  uncertain. 

The  quantity  of  the  precious  metals  which 
is  to  be  found  in  any  country  is  not  limited 
by  anything  in  its  local  situation,  such  as  the 
fertility  or  barrenness  of  its  own  mines.  Those 
metals  frequently  abound  in  countries  which 
possess  no  mines.  Their  quantity  in  every  par¬ 
ticular  country  seems  to  depend  upon  two 
different  circumstances;  first,  upon  its  power 
of  purchasing,  upon  the  state  of  its  indus¬ 
try,  upon  the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and 
labour,  in  consequence  of  which  it  can  afford 
to  employ  a  greater  or  a  smaller  quantity  of 
labour  and  subsistence  in  bringing  or  pur¬ 
chasing  such  superfluities  as  gold  and  silver, 
either  from  its  own  mines  or  from  those  of 


104  The  Wealth 

other  countries;  and,  secondly,  upon  the  fer¬ 
tility  or  barrenness  of  the  mines  which  may 
happen  at  any  particular  time  to  supply  the 
commercial  world  with  those  metals.  The 
quantity  of  those  metals  in  the  countries  most 
remote  from  the  mines  must  be  more  or  less 
affected  by  this  fertility  or  barrenness,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  easy  and  cheap  transportation 
of  those  metals,  of  their  small  bulk  and  great 
value.  Their  quantity  in  China  and  Indostan 
must  have  been  more  or  less  affected  by  the 
abundance  of  the  mines  of  America. 

So  far  as  their  quantity  in  any  particular 
country  depends  upon  the  former  of  those 
two  circumstances  (the  power  of  purchasing) , 
their  real  price,  like  that  of  all  other  luxuries 
and  superfluities,  is  likely  to  rise  with  the 
wealth  and  improvement  of  the  country,  and 
to  fall  with  its  poverty  and  depression.  Coun¬ 
tries  which  have  a  great  quantity  of  labour 
and  subsistence  to  spare  can  afford  to  pur¬ 
chase  any  particular  quantity  of  those  metals 
at  the  expense  of  a  greater  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  and  subsistence  than  countries  which 
have  less  to  spare. 

So  far  as  their  quantity  in  any  particular 
country  depends  upon  the  latter  of  those  two 
circumstances  (the  fertility  or  barrenness  of 
the  mines  which  happen  to  supply  the  com¬ 
mercial  world) ,  their  real  price,  the  real  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  and  subsistence  which  they  will 
purchase  or  exchange  for,  will,  no  doubt,  sink 
more  or  less  in  proportion  to  the  fertility,  and 
rise  in  proportion  to  the  barrenness  of  those 
mines. 

The  fertility  or  barrenness  of  the  mines, 
however,  which  may  happen  at  any  particular 
time  to  supply  the  commercial  world,  is  a 
circumstance  which,  it  is  evident,  may  have 
no  sort  of  connection  with  the  state  of  indus¬ 
try  in  a  particular  country.  It  seems  even  to 
have  no  very  necessary  connection  with  that 
of  the  world  in  general.  As  arts  and  commerce, 
indeed,  gradually  spread  themselves  over  a 
greater  and  a  greater  part  of  the  earth,  the 
search  for  new  mines,  being  extended  over  a 
wider  surface,  may  have  somewhat  a  better 
chance  for  being  successful  than  when  con¬ 
fined  within  narrower  bounds.  The  discovery 
of  new  mines,  however,  as  the  old  ones  come 
to  be  gradually  exhausted,  is  a  matter  of  the 
greatest  uncertainty,  and  such  as  no  human 
skill  or  industry  can  ensure.  All  indications, 
it  is  acknowledged,  are  doubtful,  and  the  ac¬ 
tual  discovery  and  successful  working  of  a 
new  mine  can  alone  ascertain  the  reality  of 
its  value,  or  even  of  its  existence.  In  this 
search  there  seem  to  be  no  certain  limits  ei¬ 
ther  to  the  possible  success  or  to  the  possible 
disappointment  of  human  industry.  In  the 
course  of  a  century  or  two,  it  is  possible  that 
new  mines  may  be  discovered  more  fertile 


of  Nations 

than  any  that  have  ever  yet  been  known;  and 
it  is  just  equally  possible  that  the  most  fertile 
mine  then  known  may  be  more  barren  than 
any  that  was  wrought  before  the  discovery 
of  the  mines  of  America.  Whether  the  one  or 
the  other  of  those  two  events  may  happen 
to  take  place  is  of  very  little  importance  to 
the  real  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  world, 
to  the  real  value  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  mankind.  Its  nominal 
value,  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  by 
which  this  annual  produce  could  be  expressed 
or  represented,  would,  no  doubt,  be  very  dif¬ 
ferent;  but  its  real  value,  the  real  quantity 
of  labour  which  it  could  purchase  or  com¬ 
mand,  would  be  precisely  the  same.  A  shil¬ 
ling  might  in  the  one  case  represent  no  more 
labour  than  a  penny  does  at  present;  and  a 
penny  in  the  other  might  represent  as  much 
as  a  shilling  does  now.  But  in  the  one  case 
he  who  had  a  shilling  in  his  pocket  would  be 
no  richer  than  he  who  has  a  penny  at  pres¬ 
ent;  and  in  the  other  he  who  had  a  penny 
would  be  just  as  rich  as  he  who  has  a  shil¬ 
ling  now.  The  cheapness  and  abundance  of 
gold  and  silver  plate  would  be  the  sole  ad¬ 
vantage  which  the  world  could  derive  from 
the  one  event,  and  the  dearness  and  scarcity 
of  those  trifling  superfluities  the  only  incon- 
veniency  it  could  suffer  from  the  other. 

CONCLUSION  OF  THE  DIGRESSION  CON¬ 
CERNING  THE  VARIATIONS  IN 
THE  VALUE  OF  SILVER 
The  greater  part  of  the  writers  who  have 
collected  the  money  prices  of  things  in  ancient 
times  seem  to  have  considered  the  low  money- 
price  of  corn,  and  of  goods  in  general,  or,  in 
other  words,  the  high  value  of  gold  and  silver, 
as  a  proof,  not  only  of  the  scarcity  of  those 
metals,  but  of  the  poverty  and  barbarism  of 
the  country  at  the  time  when  it  took  place. 
This  notion  is  connected  with  the  system  of 
political  economy  which  represents  national 
wealth  as  consisting  in  the  abundance,  and 
national  poverty  in  the  scarcity  of  gold  and 
silver;  a  system  which  I  shall  endeavour  to 
explain  and  examine  at  great  length  in  the 
fourth  book  of  this  inquiry.  I  shall  only  ob¬ 
serve  at  present  that  the  high  value  of  the 
precious  metals  can  be  no  proof  of  the  pov¬ 
erty  or  barbarism  of  any  particular  country 
at  the  time  when  it  took  place.  It  is  a  proof 
only  of  the  barrenness  of  the  mines  which 
happened  at  that  time  to  supply  the  commer¬ 
cial  world.  A  poor  country,  as  it  cannot  af¬ 
ford  to  buy  more,  so  it  can  as  little  afford  to 
pay  dearer  for  gold  and  silver  than  a  rich 
one;  and  the  value  of  those  metals,  therefore, 
is  not  likely  to  be  higher  in  the  former  than 
in  the  latter.  In  China,  a  country  much  richer 
than  any  part  of  Europe,  the  value  of  the 


105 


The  Rent 

precious  metals  is  much  higher  than  in  any 
part  of  Europe.  As  the  wealth  of  Europe,  in¬ 
deed,  has  increased  greatly  since  the  discovery 
of  the  mines  of  America,  so  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver  has  gradually  diminished.  This 
diminution  of  their  value,  however,  has  not 
been  owing  to  the  increase  of  the  real  wealth 
of  Europe,  of  the  annual  produce  of  its  land 
and  labour,  but  to  the  accidental  discovery 
of  more  abundant  mines  than  any  that  were 
known  before.  The  increase  of  the  quantity 
of  gold  and  silver  in  Europe,  and  the  in¬ 
crease  of  its  manufactures  and  agriculture, 
are  two  events  which,  though  they  have  hap¬ 
pened  nearly  about  the  same  time,  yet  have 
arisen  from  very  different  causes,  and  have 
scarce  any  natural  connection  with  one  an¬ 
other.  The  one  has  arisen  from  a  mere  acci¬ 
dent,  in  which  neither  prudence  nor  policy 
either  had  or  could  have  any  share.  The  other 
from  the  fall  of  the  feudal  system,  and  from 
the  establishment  of  a  government  which 
afforded  to  industry  the  only  encouragement 
which  it  requires,  some  tolerable  security  that 
it  shall  enjoy  the  fruits  of  its  own  labour. 
Poland,  where  the  feudal  system  still  con¬ 
tinues  to  take  place,  is  at  this  day  as  beggarly 
a  country  as  it  was  before  the  discovery  of 
America.  The  money  price  of  corn,  however, 
has  risen;  the  real  value  of  the  precious  met¬ 
als  has  fallen  in  Poland,  in  the  same  manner 
as  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  Their  quantity, 
therefore,  must  have  increased  there  as  in 
other  places,  and  nearly  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and 
labour.  This  increase  of  the  quantity  of  those 
metals,  however,  has  not,  it  seems,  increased 
that  annual  produce,  has  neither  improved 
the  manufactures  and  agriculture  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  nor  mended  the  circumstances  of  its  in¬ 
habitants.  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  countries 
which  possess  the  mines,  are,  after  Poland, 
perhaps,  the  two  most  beggarly  countries  in 
Europe.  The  value  of  the  precious  metals, 
however,  must  be  lower  in  Spain  and  Portu¬ 
gal  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe;  as  they 
come  from  those  countries  to  all  other  parts 
of  Europe,  loaded,  not  only  with  a  freight  and 
an  insurance,  but  with  the  expense  of  smuggl¬ 
ing,  their  exportation  being  either  prohibited, 
or  subjected  to  a  duty.  In  proportion  to  the 
annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour,  there¬ 
fore,  their  quantity  must  be  greater  in  those 
countries  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe. 
Those  countries,  however,  are  poorer  than  the 
greater  part  of  Europe.  Though  the  feudal 
system  has  been  abolished  in  Spain  and  Por¬ 
tugal,  it  has  not  been  succeeded  by  a  much 
better. 

As  the  low  value  of  gold  and  silver,  there¬ 
fore,  is  no  proof  of  the  wealth  and  flourishing 
state  of  the  country  where  it  takes  place;  so 


of  Land 

neither  is  their  high  value,  or  the  low  money 
price  either  of  goods  in  general,  or  of  corn  in 
particular,  any  proof  of  its  poverty  and  bar¬ 
barism. 

But  though  the  low  money  price  either  of 
goods  in  general,  or  of  corn  in  particular,  be 
no  proof  of  the  poverty  or  barbarism  of  the 
times,  the  low  money  price  of  some  particular 
sorts  of  goods,  such  as  cattle,  poultry,  game 
of  all  kinds,  etc.,  in  proportion  to  that  of 
corn,  is  a  most  decisive  one.  It  clearly  dem¬ 
onstrates,  first,  their  great  abundance  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  that  of  corn,  and  consequently  the 
great  extent  of  the  land  which  they  occupied 
in  proportion  to  what  was  occupied  by  corn; 
and,  secondly,  the  low  value  of  this  land  in 
proportion  to  that  of  corn  land,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  uncultivated  and  unimproved 
state  of  the  far  greater  part  of  the  lands  of 
the  country.  It  clearly  demonstrates  that  the 
stock  and  population  of  the  country  did  not 
bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  extent  of  its 
territory  which  they  commonly  do  in  civilised 
countries,  and  that  society  was  at  that  time, 
and  in  that  country,  but  in  its  infancy.  From 
the  high  or  low  money  price  either  of  goods 
in  general,  or  of  corn  in  particular,  we  can  in¬ 
fer  only  that  the  mines  which  at  that  time 
happened  to  supply  the  commercial  world 
with  gold  and  silver  were  fertile  or  barren,  not 
that  the  country  was  rich  or  poor.  But  from 
the  high  or  low  money  price  of  some  sorts  of 
goods  in  proportion  to  that  of  others,  we  can 
infer,  with  a  degree  of  probability  that  ap¬ 
proaches  almost  to  certainty,  that  it  was  rich 
or  poor,  that  the  greater  part  of  its  lands 
were  improved  or  unimproved,  and  that  it 
was  either  in  a  more  or  less  barbarous  state, 
or  in  a  more  or  less  civilised  one. 

Any  rise  in  the  money  price  of  goods  which 
proceeded  altogether  from  the  degradation 
of  the  value  of  silver  would  affect  all  sorts 
of  goods  equally,  and  raise  their  price  univer¬ 
sally  a  third,  or  a  fourth,  or  a  fifth  part  high¬ 
er,  according  as  silver  happened  to  lose  a 
third,  or  a  fourth,  or  a  fifth  part  of  its  former 
value.  But  the  rise  in  the  price  of  provisions, 
which  has  been  the  subject  of  so  much  reason¬ 
ing  and  conversation,  does  not  affect  all  sorts 
of  provisions  equally.  Taking  the  course  of 
the  present  century  at  an  average,  the  price 
of  corn,  it  is  acknowledged,  even  by  those 
who  account  for  this  rise  by  the  degradation 
of  the  value  of  silver,  has  risen  much  less 
than  that  of  some  other  sorts  of  provisions. 
The  rise  in  the  price  of  those  other  sorts  of 
provisions,  therefore,  cannot  be  owing  alto¬ 
gether  to  the  degradation  of  the  value  of  sil¬ 
ver.  Some  other  causes  must  be  taken  into  the 
account,  and  those  which  have  been  above  as¬ 
signed  will,  perhaps,  without  having  recourse 
to  the  supposed  degradation  of  the  value  of 


106 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


silver,  sufficiently  explain  this  rise  in  those 
particular  sorts  of  provisions  of  which  the 
price  has  actually  risen  in  proportion  to  that 
of  corn. 

As  to  the  price  of  corn  itself,  it  has,  during 
the  sixty-four  first  years  of  the  present  cen¬ 
tury,  and  before  the  late  extraordinary  course 
of  bad  seasons,  been  somewhat  lower  than  it 
was  during  the  sixty-four  last  years  of  the 
preceding  century.  This  fact  is  attested,  not 
only  by  the  accounts  of  Windsor  market,  but 
by  the  public  fiars  of  all  the  different  coun¬ 
ties  of  Scotland,  and  by  the  accounts  of  sev¬ 
eral  different  markets  in  France,  which  have 
been  collected  with  great  diligence  and  fidelity 
by  Mr.  Messance  and  by  Mr.  Dupre  de  St. 
Maur.  The  evidence  is  more  complete  than 
could  well  have  been  expected  in  a  matter 
which  is  naturally  so  very  difficult  to  be  as¬ 
certained. 

As  to  the  high  price  of  corn  during  these 
last  ten  or  twelve  years,  it  can  be  sufficiently 
accounted  for  from  the  badness  of  the  sea¬ 
sons,  without  supposing  any  degradation  in 
the  value  of  silver.  The  opinion,  therefore, 
that  silver  is  continually  sinking  in  its  value, 
seems  not  to  be  founded  upon  any  good  ob¬ 
servations,  either  upon  the  prices  of  corn,  or 
upon  those  of  other  provisions. 

The  same  quantity  of  silver,  it  may,  per¬ 
haps,  be  said,  will  in  the  present  times,  even 
according  to  the  account  which  has  been  here 
given,  purchase  a  much  smaller  quantity  of 
several  sorts  of  provisions  than  it  would  have 
done  during  some  part  of  the  last  century; 
and  to  ascertain  whether  this  change  be  ow¬ 
ing  to  a  rise  in  the  value  of  those  goods,  or 
to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  silver,  is  only  to  es¬ 
tablish  a  vain  and  useless  distinction,  which 
can  be  of  no  sort  of  service  to  the  man  who 
has  only  a  certain  quantity  of  silver  to  go 
to  market  with,  or  a  certain  fixed  revenue  in 
money.  I  certainly  do  not  pretend  that  the 
knowledge  of  this  distinction  will  enable  him 
to  buy  cheaper.  It  may  not,  however,  upon 
that  account  be  altogether  useless. 

It  may  be  of  some  use  to  the  public  by 
affording  an  easy  proof  of  the  prosperous  con¬ 
dition  of  the  country.  If  the  rise  in  the  price 
of  some  sorts  of  provisions  be  owing  alto¬ 
gether  to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  silver,  it  is 
owing  to  a  circumstance  from  which  nothing 
can  be  inferred  but  the  fertility  of  the  Amer¬ 
ican  mines.  The  real  wealth  of  the  country, 
the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and  labour, 
may,  notwithstanding  this  circumstance,  be 
either  gradually  declining,  as  in  Portugal  and 
Poland;  or  gradually  advancing,  as  in  most 
other  parts  of  Europe.  But  if  this  rise  in  the 
price  of  some  sorts  of  provisions  be  owing  to 
a  rise  in  the  real  value  of  the  land  which  pro¬ 
duces  them,  to  its  increased  fertility,  or,  in 


consequence  of  more  extended  improvement 
and  good  cultivation,  to  its  having  been  ren¬ 
dered  fit  for  producing  corn;  it  is  owing  to  a 
circumstance  which  indicates  in  the  clearest 
manner  the  prosperous  and  advancing  state 
of  the  country.  The  land  constitutes  by  far 
the  greatest,  the  most  important,  and  the 
most  durable  part  of  the  wealth  of  every 
extensive  country.  It  may  surely  be  of  some 
use,  or,  at  least,  it  may  give  some  satisfaction 
to  the  public,  to  have  so  decisive  a  proof  of 
the  increasing  value  of  by  far  the  greatest, 
the  most  important,  and  the  most  durable 
part  of  its  wealth. 

It  may,  too,  be  of  some  use  to  the  public 
in  regulating  the  pecuniary  reward  of  some  of 
its  inferior  servants.  If  this  rise  in  the  price 
of  some  sorts  of  provisions  be  owing  to  a  fall 
in  the  value  of  silver,  their  pecuniary  reward, 
provided  it  was  not  too  large  before,  ought 
certainly  to  be  augmented  in  proportion  to 
the  extent  of  this  fall.  If  it  is  not  augmented, 
their  real  recompense  will  evidently  be  so 
much  diminished.  But  if  this  rise  of  price  is 
owing  to  the  increased  value,  in  consequence 
of  the  improved  fertility  of  the  land  which 
produces  such  provisions,  it  becomes  a  much 
nicer  matter  to  judge  either  in  what  propor¬ 
tion  any  pecuniary  reward  ought  to  be  aug¬ 
mented,  or  whether  it  ought  to  be  augmented 
at  all.  The  extension  of  improvement  and  cul¬ 
tivation,  as  it  necessarily  raises  more  or  less, 
in  proportion  to  the  price  of  corn,  that  of 
every  sort  of  animal  food,  so  it  as  necessarily 
lowers  that  of,  I  believe,  every  sort  of  vege¬ 
table  food.  It  raises  the  price  of  animal  food; 
because  a  great  part  of  the  land  which  pro¬ 
duces  it,  being  rendered  fit  for  producing  corn, 
must  afford  to  the  landlord  and  farmer  the 
rent  and  profit  of  corn-land.  It  lowers  the 
price  of  vegetable  food;  because,  by  increas¬ 
ing  the  fertility  of  the  land,  it  increases  its 
abundance.  The  improvements  of  agriculture, 
too,  introduce  many  sorts  of  vegetable  food, 
which,  requiring  less  land  and  not  more  la¬ 
bour  than  corn,  come  much  cheaper  to  mar¬ 
ket.  Such  are  potatoes  and  maize,  or  what  is 
called  Indian  corn,  the  two  most  important 
improvements  which  the  agriculture  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  perhaps,  which  Europe  itself  has  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  great  extension  of  its  com¬ 
merce  and  navigation.  Many  sorts  of  vege¬ 
table  food,  besides,  which  in  the  rude  state 
of  agriculture  are  confined  to  the  kitchen- 
garden,  and  raised  only  by  the  spade,  come  in 
its  improved  state  to  be  introduced  into  com¬ 
mon  fields,  and  to  be  raised  by  the  plough: 
such  as  turnips,  carrots,  cabbages,  etc.  If  in 
the  progress  of  improvement,  therefore,  the 
real  price  of  one  species  of  food  necessarily 
rises,  that  of  another  as  necessarily  falls,  and 
it  becomes  a  matter  of  more  nicety  to  judge 


107 


The  Rent  of  Land 


how  far  the  rise  in  the  one  may  be  compen¬ 
sated  by  the  fall  in  the  other.  When  the  real 
price  of  butcher’s  meat  has  once  got  to  its 
height  (which,  with  regard  to  every  sort,  ex¬ 
cept,  perhaps,  that  of  hogs’  flesh,  it  seems  to 
have  done  through  a  great  part  of  England 
more  than  a  century  ago) ,  any  rise  which  can 
afterwards  happen  in  that  of  any  other  sort 
of  animal  food  cannot  much  affect  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  inferior  ranks  of  people. 
The  circumstances  of  the  poor  through  a  great 
part  of  England  cannot  surely  be  so  much 
distressed  by  any  rise  in  the  price  of  poultry, 
fish,  wild-fowl,  or  venison,  as  they  must  be 
relieved  by  the  fall  in  that  of  potatoes. 

In  the  present  season  of  scarcity  the  high 
price  of  corn  no  doubt  distresses  the  poor. 
But  in  times  of  moderate  plenty,  when  corn 
is  at  its  ordinary  or  average  price,  the  natural 
rise  in  the  price  of  any  other  sort  of  rude 
produce  cannot  much  affect  them.  They  suffer 
more,  perhaps,  by  the  artificial  rise  which  has 
been  occasioned  by  taxes  in  the  price  of  some 
manufactured  commodities;  as  of  salt,  soap, 
leather,  candles,  malt,  beer,  and  ale,  etc. 

EFFECTS  OF  THE  PROGRESS  OF 
IMPROVEMENT  UPON  THE  REAL 
PRICE  OF  MANUFACTURES 

It  is  the  natural  effect  of  improvement, 
however,  to  diminish  gradually  the  real  price 
of  almost  all  manufactures.  That  of  the  man¬ 
ufacturing  workmanship  diminishes,  perhaps, 
in  all  of  them  without  exception.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  better  machinery,  of  greater  dex¬ 
terity,  and  of  a  more  proper  division  and  dis¬ 
tribution  of  work,  all  of  which  are  the  natural 
effects  of  improvement,  a  much  smaller  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  becomes  requisite  for  execut¬ 
ing  any  particular  piece  of  work,  and  though, 
in  consequence  of  the  flourishing  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  society,  the  real  price  of  la¬ 
bour  should  rise  very  considerably,  yet  the 
great  diminution  of  the  quantity  will  gener¬ 
ally  much  more  than  compensate  the  greatest 
rise  which  can  happen  in  the  price. 

There  are,  indeed,  a  few  manufactures  in 
which  the  necessary  rise  in  the  real  price  of 
the  rude  materials  will  more  than  compensate 
all  the  advantages  which  improvement  can 
introduce  into  the  execution  of  the  work.  In 
carpenters’  and  joiners’  work,  and  in  the 
coarser  sort  of  cabinet  work,  the  necessary 
rise  in  the  real  price  of  barren  timber,  in 
consequence  of  the  improvement  of  land,  will 
more  than  compensate  all  the  advantages 
which  can  be  derived  from  the  best  machin¬ 
ery,  the  greatest  dexterity,  and  the  most 
proper  division  and  distribution  of  work. 

But  in  all  cases  in  which  the  real  price  of 
the  rude  materials  either  does  not  rise  at  all, 
or  does  not  rise  very  much,  that  of  the  manu¬ 


factured  commodity  sinks  very  considerably. 

This  diminution  of  price  has,  in  the  course 
of  the  present  and  preceding  century,  been 
most  remarkable  in  those  manufactures  of 
which  the  materials  are  the  coarser  metals. 
A  better  movement  of  a  watch,  that  about 
the  middle  of  the  last  century  could  have 
been  bought  for  twenty  pounds,  may  now 
perhaps  be  had  for  twenty  shillings.  In  the 
work  of  cutlers  and  locksmiths,  in  all  the 
toys  which  are  made  of  the  coarser  metals, 
and  in  all  those  goods  which  are  commonly 
known  by  the  name  of  Birmingham  and  Shef¬ 
field  ware,  there  has  been,  during  the  same 
period,  a  very  great  reduction  of  price,  though 
not  altogether  so  great  as  in  watch-work.  It 
has,  however,  been  sufficient  to  astonish  the 
workmen  of  every  other  part  of  Europe,  who 
in  many  cases  acknowledge  that  they  can 
produce  no  work  of  equal  goodness  for  double, 
or  even  for  triple  the  price.  There  are  per¬ 
haps  no  manufactures  in  which  the  division 
of  labour  can  be  carried  further,  or  in  which 
the  machinery  employed  admits  of  a  greater 
variety  of  improvements,  than  those  of  which 
the  materials  are  the  coarser  metals. 

In  the  clothing  manufacture  there  has,  dur¬ 
ing  the  same  period,  been  no  such  sensible 
reduction  of  price.  The  price  of  superfine 
cloth,  I  have  been  assured,  on  the  contrary, 
has,  within  these  five-and-twenty  or  thirty 
years,  risen  somewhat  in  proportion  to  its 
quality;  owing,  it  was  said,  to  a  considerable 
rise  in  the  price  of  the  material,  which  con¬ 
sists  altogether  of  Spanish  wool.  That  of  the 
Yorkshire  cloth,  which  is  made  altogether  of 
English  wool,  is  said  indeed,  during  the  course 
of  the  present  century,  to  have  fallen  a  good 
deal  in  proportion  to  its  quality.  Quality, 
however,  is  so  very  disputable  a  matter  that 
I  look  upon  all  information  of  this  kind  as 
somewhat  uncertain.  In  the  clothing  manufac¬ 
ture,  the  division  of  labour  is  nearly  the  same 
now  as  it  was  a  century  ago,  and  the  ma¬ 
chinery  employed  is  not  very  different.  There 
may,  however,  have  been  some  small  improve¬ 
ments  in  both,  which  may  have  occasioned 
some  reduction  of  price. 

But  the  reduction  will  appear  much  more 
sensible  and  undeniable  if  we  compare  the 
price  of  this  manufacture  in  the  present  times 
with  what  it  was  in  a  much  remoter  period, 
towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century, 
when  the  labour  was  probably  much  less  sub¬ 
divided,  and  the  machinery  employed  much 
more  imperfect,  than  it  is  at  present. 

In  1487,  being  the  4th  of  Henry  VII,  it 
was  enacted  that  “whosoever  shall  sell  by 
retail  a  broad  yard  of  the  finest  scarlet 
grained,  or  of  other  grained  cloth  of  the  finest 
making,  above  sixteen  shillings,  shall  forfeit 
forty  shillings  for  every  yard  so  sold.” 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


108 

Sixteen  shillings,  therefore,  containing  about 
the  same  quantity  of  silver  as  four-and-twenty 
shillings  of  our  present  money,  was,  at  that 
time,  reckoned  not  an  unreasonable  price  for 
a  yard  of  the  finest  cloth;  and  as  this  is  a 
sumptuary  law,  such  cloth,  it  is  probable,  had 
usually  been  sold  somewhat  dearer.  A  guinea 
may  be  reckoned  the  highest  price  in  the 
present  times.  Even  though  the  quality  of  the 
cloths,  therefore,  should  be  supposed  equal, 
and  that  of  the  present  times  is  most  probably 
much  superior,  yet,  even  upon  this  supposi¬ 
tion,  the  money  price  of  the  finest  cloth  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  been  considerably  reduced  since 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  But  its  real 
price  has  been  much  more  reduced.  Six  shil¬ 
lings  and  eightpence  was  then,  and  long  after¬ 
wards,  reckoned  the  average  price  of  a  quar¬ 
ter  of  wheat.  Sixteen  shillings,  therefore,  was 
the  price  of  two  quarters  and  more  than  three 
bushels  of  wheat.  Valuing  a  quarter  of  wheat 
in  the  present  times  at  eight-and-twenty 
shillings,  the  real  price  of  a  yard  of  fine  cloth 
must,  in  those  times,  have  been  equal  to  at 
least  three  pounds  six  shillings  and  sixpence 
of  our  present  money.  The  man  who  bought 
it  must  have  parted  with  the  command  of  a 
quantity  of  labour  and  subsistence  equal  to 
what  that  sum  would  purchase  in  the  present 
times. 

The  reduction  in  the  real  price  of  the  coarse 
manufacture,  though  considerable,  has  not 
been  so  great  as  in  that  of  the  fine. 

In  1643,  being  the  3rd  of  Edward  IV,  it 
was  enacted  that  “no  servant  in  husbandry, 
nor  common  labourer,  nor  servant  to  any  ar¬ 
tificer  inhabiting  out  of  a  city  or  burgh  shall 
use  or  wear  in  their  clothing  any  cloth  above 
two  shillings  the  broad  yard.”  In  the  3rd  of 
Edward  IV,  two  shillings  contained  very 
nearly  the  same  quantity  of  silver  as  four  of 
our  present  money.  But  the  Yorkshire  cloth 
which  is  now  sold  at  four  shillings  the  yard 
is  probably  much  superior  to  any  that  was 
then  made  for  the  wearing  of  the  very  poor¬ 
est  order  of  common  servants.  Even  the 
money  price  of  their  clothing,  therefore,  may, 
in  proportion  to  the  quality,  be  somewhat 
cheaper  in  the  present  than  it  was  in  those 
ancient  times.  The  real  price  is  certainly  a 
good  deal  cheaper.  Tenpence  was  then  reck¬ 
oned  what  is  called  the  moderate  and  reason¬ 
able  price  of  a  bushel  of  wheat.  Two  shil¬ 
lings,  therefore,  was  the  price  of  two  bushels 
and  near  two  pecks  of  wheat,  which  in  the 
present  times,  at  three  shillings  and  sixpence 
the  bushel,  would  be  worth  eight  shillings 
and  ninepence.  For  a  yard  of  this  cloth  the 
poor  servant  must  have  parted  with  the  power 
of  purchasing  a  quantity  of  subsistence  equal 
to  what  eight  shillings  and  ninepence  would 
purchase  in  the  present  times.  This  is  a  sump¬ 


tuary  law  too,  restraining  the  luxury  and  ex¬ 
travagance  of  the  poor.  Their  clothing,  there¬ 
fore,  had  commonly  been  much  more  ex¬ 
pensive. 

The  same  order  of  people  are,  by  the  same 
law,  prohibited  from  wearing  hose,  of  which 
the  price  should  exceed  fourteenpence  the 
pair,  equal  to  about  eight-and-twentypence 
of  our  present  money.  But  fourteenpence  was 
in  those  times  the  price  of  a  bushel  and  near 
two  pecks  of  wheat,  which,  in  the  present 
times,  at  three  and  sixpence  the  bushel,  would 
cost  five  shillings  and  threepence.  We  should 
in  the  present  times  consider  this  as  a  very 
high  price  for  a  pair  of  stockings,  to  a  ser¬ 
vant  of  the  poorest  and  lowest  order.  He  must, 
however,  in  those  times  have  paid  what  was 
really  equivalent  to  this  price  for  them. 

In  the  time  of  Edward  IV  the  art  of  knit¬ 
ting  stockings  was  probably  not  known  in  any 
part  of  Europe.  Their  hose  were  made  of  com¬ 
mon  cloth,  which  may  have  been  one  of  the 
causes  of  their  dearness.  The  first  person  that 
wore  stockings  in  England  is  said  to  have 
been  Queen  Elizabeth.  She  received  them 
as  a  present  from  the  Spanish  ambassador. 

Both  in  the  coarse  and  in  the  fine  woollen 
manufacture,  the  machinery  employed  was 
much  more  imperfect  in  those  ancient  than  it 
is  in  the  present  times.  It  has  since  received 
three  very  capital  improvements,  besides, 
probably,  many  smaller  ones  of  which  it  may 
be  difficult  to  ascertain  either  the  number  or 
the  importance.  The  three  capital  improve¬ 
ments  are:  first,  the  exchange  of  the  rock 
and  spindle  for  the  spinning-wheel,  which, 
with  the  same  quantity  of  labour,  will  per¬ 
form  more  than  double  the  quantity  of  work. 
Secondly,  the  use  of  several  very  ingenious 
machines  which  facilitate  and  abridge  in  a 
still  greater  proportion  the  winding  of  the 
worsted  and  woollen  yarn,  or  the  proper  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  warp  and  woof  before  they 
are  put  into  the  loom;  an  operation  which, 
previous  to  the  invention  of  those  machines, 
must  have  been  extremely  tedious  and  trouble¬ 
some.  Thirdly,  the  employment  of  the  fulling 
mill  for  thickening  the  cloth,  instead  of  tread¬ 
ing  it  in  water.  Neither  wind  nor  water  mills 
of  any  kind  were  known  in  England  so  early 
as  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  nor, 
so  far  as  I  know,  in  any  other  part  of  Europe 
north  of  the  Alps.  They  had  been  introduced 
into  Italy  some  time  before. 

The  consideration  of  these  circumstances 
may,  perhaps,  in  some  measure  explain  to  us 
why  the  real  price  both  of  the  coarse  and  of  the 
fine  manufacture  was  so  much  higher  in  those 
ancient  than  it  is  in  the  present  times.  It  cost  a 
greater  quantity  of  labour  to  bring  the  goods 
to  market.  When  they  were  brought  thither, 
therefore,  they  must  have  purchased  or  ex- 


The  Rent 

changed  for  the  price  of  a  greater  quantity. 

The  coarse  manufacture  probably  was,  in 
those  ancient  times,  carried  on  in  England,  in 
the  same  manner  as  it  always  has  been  in 
countries  where  arts  and  manufactures  are  in 
their  infancy.  It  was  probably  a  household 
manufacture,  in  which  every  different  part  of 
the  work  was  occasionally  performed  by  all 
the  different  members  of  almost  every  private 
family;  but  so  as  to  be  their  work  only  when 
they  had  nothing  else  to  do,  and  not  to  be 
the  principal  business  from  which  any  of  them 
derived  the  greater  part  of  their  subsistence. 
The  work  which  is  performed  in  this  manner, 
it  has  already  been  observed,  comes  always 
much  cheaper  to  market  than  that  which  is 
the  principal  or  sole  fund  of  the  workman’s 
subsistence.  The  fine  manufacture,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  not  in  those  times  carried  on 
in  England,  but  in  the  rich  and  commercial 
country  of  Flanders;  and  it  was  probably  con¬ 
ducted  then,  in  the  same  manner  as  now,  by 
people  who  derived  the  whole,  or  the  princi¬ 
pal  part  of  their  subsistence  from  it.  It  was, 
besides,  a  foreign  manufacture,  and  must 
have  paid  some  duty,  the  ancient  custom  of 
tonnage  and  poundage  at  least,  to  the  king. 
This  duty,  indeed,  would  not  probably  be  very 
great.  It  was  not  then  the  policy  of  Europe  to 
restrain,  by  high  duties,  the  importation  of 
foreign  manufactures,  but  rather  to  encourage 
it,  in  order  that  merchants  might  be  enabled 
to  supply,  at  as  easy  a  rate  as  possible,  the 
great  men  with  the  conveniences  and  luxuries 
which  they  wanted,  and  which  the  industry 
of  their  own  country  could  not  afford  them. 

The  consideration  of  these  circumstances 
may  perhaps  in  some  measure  explain  to  us 
why,  in  those  ancient  times,  the  real  price  of 
the  coarse  manufacture  was,  in  proportion  to 
that  of  the  fine,  so  much  lower  than  in  the 
present  times. 

CONCLUSION  OF  THE  CHAPTER 

I  shall  conclude  this  very  long  chapter  with 
observing  that  every  improvement  in  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  society  tends  either  directly 
or  indirectly  to  raise  the  real  rent  of  land,  to 
increase  the  real  wealth  of  the  landlord,  his 
power  of  purchasing  the  labour,  or  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  the  labour  of  other  people. 

The  extension  of  improvement  and  cultiva¬ 
tion  tends  to  raise  it  directly.  The  landlord’s 
share  of  the  produce  necessarily  increases  with 
the  increase  of  the  produce. 

That  rise  in  the  real  price  of  those  parts  of 
the  rude  produce  of  land,  which  is  first  the 
effect  of  extended  improvement  and  cultiva¬ 
tion,  and  afterwards  the  cause  of  their  being 
still  further  extended,  the  rise  in  the  price  of 
cattle,  for  example,  tends  too  to  raise  the  rent 
of  land  directly,  and  in  a  still  greater  propor¬ 


of  Land  109 

tion.  The  real  value  of  the  landlord’s  share, 
his  real  command  of  the  labour  of  other  peo¬ 
ple,  not  only  rises  with  the  real  value  of  the 
produce,  but  the  proportion  of  his  share  to  the 
whole  produce  rises  with  it.  That  produce, 
after  the  rise  in  its  real  price,  requires  no  more 
labour  to  collect  it  than  before.  A  smaller  pro¬ 
portion  of  it  will,  therefore,  be  sufficient  to 
replace,  with  the  ordinary  profit,  the  stock 
which  employs  that  labour.  A  greater  propor¬ 
tion  of  it  must,  consequently,  belong  to  the 
landlord. 

All  those  improvements  in  the  productive 
powers  of  labour,  which  tend  directly  to  re¬ 
duce  the  real  price  of  manufactures,  tend  in¬ 
directly  to  raise  the  real  rent  of  land.  The 
landlord  exchanges  that  part  of  his  rude  pro¬ 
duce,  which  is  over  and  above  his  own  con¬ 
sumption,  or  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
the  price  of  that  part  of  it,  for  manufactured 
produce.  Whatever  reduces  the  real  price  of 
the  latter,  raises  that  of  the  former.  An  equal 
quantity  of  the  former  becomes  thereby  equiv¬ 
alent  to  a  greater  quantity  of  the  latter;  and 
the  landlord  is  enabled  to  purchase  a  greater 
quantity  of  the  conveniences,  ornaments,  or 
luxuries,  which  he  has  occasion  for. 

Every  increase  in  the  real  wealth  of  the  so¬ 
ciety,  every  increase  in  the  quantity  of  useful 
labour  employed  within  it,  tends  indirectly  to 
raise  the  real  rent  of  land.  A  certain  propor¬ 
tion  of  this  labour  naturally  goes  to  the  land. 
A  greater  number  of  men  and  cattle  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  its  cultivation,  the  produce  increases 
with  the  increase  of  the  stock  which  is  thus 
employed  in  raising  it,  and  the  rent  increases 
with  the  produce. 

The  contrary  circumstances,  the  neglect  of 
cultivation  and  improvement,  the  fall  in  the 
real  price  of  any  part  of  the  rude  produce  of 
land,  the  rise  in  the  real  price  of  manufactures 
from  the  decay  of  manufacturing  art  and  in¬ 
dustry,  the  declension  of  the  real  wealth  of 
the  society,  all  tend,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
lower  the  real  rent  of  land,  to  reduce  the  real 
wealth  of  the  landlord,  to  diminish  his  power 
of  purchasing  either  the  labour,  or  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  the  labour  of  other  people. 

The  whole  annual  produce  of  the  land  and 
labour  of  every  country,  or  what  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  the  whole  price  of  that  annual 
produce,  naturally  divides  itself,  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  observed,  into  three  parts;  the 
rent  of  land,  the  wages  of  labour,  and  the 
profits  of  stock;  and  constitutes  a  revenue  to 
three  different  orders  of  people;  to  those  who 
live  by  rent,  to  those  who  live  by  wages,  and 
to  those  who  live  by  profit.  These  are  the  three 
great,  original,  and  constituent  orders  of 
every  civilised  society,  from  whose  revenue 
that  of  every  other  order  is  ultimately  derived. 

The  interest  of  the  first  of  those  three  great 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


110 

orders,  it  appears  from  what  has  been  just 
now  said,  is  strictly  and  inseparably  con¬ 
nected  with  the  general  interest  of  the  society. 
Whatever  either  promotes  or  obstructs  the 
one,  necessarily  promotes  or  obstructs  the 
other.  When  the  public  deliberates  concern¬ 
ing  any  regulation  of  commerce  or  police,  the 
proprietors  of  land  never  can  mislead  it,  with 
a  view  to  promote  the  interest  of  their  own 
particular  order;  at  least,  if  they  have  any 
tolerable  knowledge  of  that  interest.  They  are, 
indeed,  too  often  defective  in  this  tolerable 
knowledge.  They  are  the  only  one  of  the  three 
orders  whose  revenue  costs  them  neither  la¬ 
bour  nor  care,  but  comes  to  them,  as  it  were, 
of  its  own  accord,  and  independent  of  any 
plan  or  project  of  their  own.  That  indolence, 
which  is  the  natural  effect  of  the  ease  and  se¬ 
curity  of  their  situation,  renders  them  too 
often,  not  only  ignorant,  but  incapable  of  that 
application  of  mind  which  is  necessary  in  or¬ 
der  to  foresee  and  understand  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  any  public  regulation. 

The  interest  of  the  second  order,  that  of 
those  who  live  by  wages,  is  as  strictly  con¬ 
nected  with  the  interest  of  the  society  as  that 
of  the  first.  The  wages  of  the  labourer,  it  has 
already  been  shown,  are  never  so  high  as  when 
the  demand  for  labour  is  continually  rising, 
or  when  the  quantity  employed  is  every  year 
increasing  considerably.  When  this  real  wealth 
of  the  society  becomes  stationary,  his  wages 
are  soon  reduced  to  what  is  barely  enough  to 
enable  him  to  bring  up  a  family,  or  to  con¬ 
tinue  the  race  of  labourers.  When  the  society 
declines,  they  fall  even  below  this.  The  order 
of  proprietors  may,  perhaps,  gain  more  by  the 
prosperity  of  the  society  than  that  of  labour¬ 
ers:  but  there  is  no  order  that  suffers  so  cruelly 
from  its  decline.  But  though  the  interest  of  the 
labourer  is  strictly  connected  with  that  of  the 
society,  he  is  incapable  either  of  comprehend¬ 
ing  that  interest  or  of  understanding  its  con¬ 
nection  with  his  own.  His  condition  leaves  him 
no  time  to  receive  the  necessary  information, 
and  his  education  and  habits  are  commonly 
such  as  to  render  him  unfit  to  judge  even 
though  he  was  fully  informed.  In  the  public 
deliberations,  therefore,  his  voice  is  little  heard 
and  less  regarded,  except  upon  some  particular 
occasions,  when  his  clamour  is  animated,  set 
on  and  supported  by  his  employers,  not  for  his, 
but  their  own  particular  purposes. 

His  employers  constitute  the  third  order, 
that  of  those  who  live  by  profit.  It  is  the  stock 
that  is  employed  for  the  sake  of  profit  which 
puts  into  motion  the  greater  part  of  the  use¬ 
ful  labour  of  every  society.  The  plans  and 
projects  of  the  employers  of  stock  regulate  and 
direct  all  the  most  important  operations  of 
labour,  and  profit  is  the  end  proposed  by  all 
those  plans  and  projects.  But  the  rate  of  profit 


does  not,  like  rent  and  wages,  rise  with  the 
prosperity  and  fall  with  the  declension  of  the 
society.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  naturally  low  in 
rich  and  high  in  poor  countries,  and  it  is  al¬ 
ways  highest  in  the  countries  which  are  going 
fastest  to  ruin.  The  interest  of  this  third  or¬ 
der,  therefore,  has  not  the  same  connection 
with  the  general  interest  of  the  society  as  that 
of  the  other  two.  Merchants  and  master 
manufacturers  are,  in  this  order,  the  two 
classes  of  people  who  commonly  employ  the 
largest  capitals,  and  who  by  their  wealth  draw 
to  themselves  the  greatest  share  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  consideration.  As  during  their  whole  lives 
they  are  engaged  in  plans  and  projects,  they 
have  frequently  more  acuteness  of  under¬ 
standing  than  the  greater  part  of  country 
gentlemen.  As  their  thoughts,  however,  are 
commonly  exercised  rather  about  the  interest 
of  their  own  particular  branch  of  business, 
than  about  that  of  the  society,  their  judg¬ 
ment,  even  when  given  with  the  greatest  can¬ 
dour  (which  it  has  not  been  upon  every  oc¬ 
casion)  is  much  more  to  be  depended  upon 
with  regard  to  the  former  of  those  two  ob¬ 
jects  than  with  regard  to  the  latter.  Their  su¬ 
periority  over  the  country  gentleman  is  not 
so  much  in  their  knowledge  of  the  public  in¬ 
terest,  as  in  their  having  a  better  knowledge 
of  their  own  interest  than  he  has  of  his.  It  is 
by  this  superior  knowledge  of  their  own  in¬ 
terest  that  they  have  frequently  imposed  up¬ 
on  his  generosity,  and  persuaded  him  to  give 
up  both  his  own  interest  and  that  of  the  pub¬ 
lic,  from  a  very  simple  but  honest  conviction 
that  their  interest,  and  not  his,  was  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  public.  The  interest  of  the  dealers, 
however,  in  any  particular  branch  of  trade  or 
manufactures,  is  always  in  some  respects  dif¬ 
ferent  from,  and  even  opposite  to,  that  of  the 
public.  To  widen  the  market  and  to  narrow 
the  competition,  is  always  the  interest  of  the 
dealers.  To  widen  the  market  may  frequently 
be  agreeable  enough  to  the  interest  of  the 
public;  but  to  narrow  the  competition  must 
always  be  against  it,  and  can  serve  only  to  en¬ 
able  the  dealers,  by  raising  their  profits  above 
what  they  naturally  would  be,  to  levy,  for 
their  own  benefit,  an  absurd  tax  upon  the  rest 
of  their  fellow-citizens.  The  proposal  of  any 
new  law  or  regulation  of  commerce  which 
comes  from  this  order  ought  always  to  be 
listened  to  with  great  precaution,  and  ought 
never  to  be  adopted  till  after  having  been 
long  and  carefully  examined,  not  only  with 
the  most  scrupulous,  but  with  the  most  sus¬ 
picious  attention.  It  comes  from  an  order  of 
men  whose  interest  is  never  exactly  the  same 
with  that  of  the  public,  who  have  generally 
an  interest  to  deceive  and  even  to  oppress  the 
public,  and  who  accordingly  have,  upon  many 
occasions,  both  deceived  and  oppressed  it. 


The  Rent  of  Land 
Tables  Referred  to  on  Pages  80,  87. 


Years 

XII 

Price  of  the  Quarter 
of  Wheat  each  Year 

Average  of  the 
different  Prices  of 
the  same  Year 

The  average  Price 
of  each  Year  in 
Money  of  the 
present  Times 

£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

1202 

—  12  — 

— 

1  16  — 

f-  12  -1 

1205 

—  13  4 

—  13  5 

2—3 

—  15  — 

1223 

—  12  — 

— 

1  16  — 

1237 

—  3  4 

— 

—  10  — 

1243 

—  2  — 

— 

—  6  — 

1244 

—  2  — 

— 

—  6  — 

1246 

—  16  — 

— 

2  8  — 

1247 

—  13  4 

— 

2 - 

1257 

1  4  — 

f  J  } 

— 

3  12  — 

1258 

—  15  — 

—  17  — 

2  11  — 

—  16  — 

f  4  16  — | 

1270 

1  6  8  —  1 

5  12  — 

16  16  — 

1 —  2  8! 

1286 

1—  16  — J 

—  9  4 

1  8  — 

Total  £35  9  3 


Average  Price  £2  19  1J4 


£ 


1287 


1288 


1289 


1290 

1294 

1302 

1309 

1315 


1316 


1 


1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 


1317 


2 

4 


1336 

1338 


s.  d. 
3  4 
—  8 
1  — 

1  4 
1  6 
1  8 

2  — 

3  4 

9  4 

12  — 
6  — 
2  — 
10  8 

16  — 
16  — 

4  — 
7  2 


10  — 
12  — 

4  — ' 

14  — 
13  — 

6  8 
2  — ‘ ‘ 

3  4 


£  s.  d. 


£  s.  d. 
—  10  — 


-  3  —M 


-  9-% 


-  10  i  X 


1  10  6 


1  19  6 


1  10  4  y2 


2  8  — 

2  8  — 

—  12  — 

1  1  6 

3 - 


4  11  6 


5  18  6 


-  —  6  — 

-  —  10  — 

Total  £23  4  11^ 

Average  Price  £l  18  8 


111 


112 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


Years 

XII 

Price  of  the  Quarter 
of  Wheat  each  Year 

Average  of  the 
different  Prices  of 
the  same  Year 

The  average  Price 
of  each  Year  in 
Money  of  the 
present  Times 

£ 

s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

£ 

s.  d. 

1339 

— 

9  — 

- . — 

1 

7  — 

1349 

— 

2  — 

— 

— 

5  2 

1359 

1 

6  8 

— 

3 

2  2 

1361 

— 

2  — 

— 

— 

4  8 

1363 

— 

15  — 

— 

1 

15  — 

f  i 

1  2  — 

2 

9  4 

1369 

{! 

4  -} 

1379 

4  — 

— 

— 

9  4 

1387 

— 

2  — 

— 

— 

4  8 

r- 

13  4] 

1390 

- 

14  — 

l-H 

1 

1 

13  7 

1- 

16  —J 

1401 

16  — 

— 

1 

17  4 

1407 

{= 

4 

3  4 

—  3  10 

— 

8  11 

1416 

16  — 

— 

1 

12  — 

Total  £15  9  4 


Average  Price  £1  5  9 }/$ 


1423 

1425 

1434 

1435 

1439 

1440 

1444 

1445 

1447 

1448 

1449 
1452 


£  s.  d. 

—  8  — 

—  4  — 

1  6  8 

—  5  4 

{  1  6  s) 

1  4  — 

{-  ^ 

—  4  6 

—  8  — 
—  6  8 

—  5  — 

—  8  — 


£ 


1 


s.  d . 


3  4 

4  2 


£  5.  d. 

—  16  — 
—  8  — 
2  13  4 
—  10  8 

2  6  8 
2  8  — 

—  84 

—  9  — 

—  16  — 

—  13  4 

—  10  — 
—  16  — 


Total  £12  15  4 

Average  Price  £1  1  3^ 


£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d . 

1453 

— 

5 

4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10 

8 

1455 

— 

1 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2 

4 

1457 

— 

7 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

15 

4 

1459 

— 

5 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10 

— 

1460 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

16 

— 

1463 

2 

1 

— 

1 

10 

— 

3 

8 

1464 

6 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10 

— 

1486 

1 

4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

1 

17 

— 

1491 

— 

14 

8 

— 

— 

— 

1 

2 

— 

1494 

— 

4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

6 

— 

1495 

— 

3 

4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

5 

— 

1497 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

1 

11 

— 

Total  £8  9  — 


Average  Price  —  14  1 


The  Rent  of  Land 


118 


Years 

XU 

Price  of  the  Quarter 
of  Wheat  each  Year 

Average  of  the 
different  Prices  of 
the  same  Year 

The  average  Price 
of  each  Year  in 
Money  of  the 
present  Times 

£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

1499 

—  4  — 

—  —  — 

—  6  — 

1504 

—  5  8 

—  —  — 

—  8  6 

1521 

1 - 

—  —  — 

1  10  — 

1551 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  2  — 

1553 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1554 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1555 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1556 

—  8  — 

’ _  4  _ ' 

— 

—  8  — 

1557 

—  5  — 
—S— 

00 

l> 

pH 

1 

00 

l> 

pH 

1 

2  13  4 

1558 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1559 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1560 

—  8  — 

— 

—  8  — 

Total  £6  0  %y2 


Average  Price  —  10  — x5^ 


£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

£  s.  d. 

1561 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1562 

—  8  — 

—  —  — 

—  8  — 

1574 

f  2  16 
114-/ 

2 - 

2 - 

1587 

3  4  — 

—  —  — 

3  4  — 

1594 

2  16  — 

—  —  — 

2  16  — 

1595 

2  13  — 

—  —  — 

2  13  — 

1596 

4 - 

—  —  — 

4 - 

1597 

/  5  4-1 
\  4 - / 

4  12  — 

4  12  — 

1598 

2  16  8 

—  —  — 

2  16  8 

1599 

1  19  2 

—  —  — 

1  19  2 

1600 

1  17  8 

—  —  — 

1  17  8 

1601 

1  14  10 

— 

1  14  10 

Total  £28  9  4 


Average  Price 


£2 


7 


114 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


Prices  of  the  Quarter  of  nine  Bushels  of  the  best  or  highest 
priced  Wheat  at  Windsor  Market ,  on  Lady-day  and 
Michaelmas ,  from  1595  to  176 both  inclusive;  the  Price 
of  each  Year  being  the  medium  between  the  highest  Prices 
of  those  Two  Market  Days. 


Years 

Years 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

1595 

— 

2 

0 

0 

1621 

— 

1 

10 

4 

1596 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1622 

— 

2 

18 

8 

1597 

— 

3 

9 

6 

1623 

— 

2 

12 

0 

1598 

— 

2 

16 

8 

1624 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1599 

— 

1 

19 

2 

1625 

— 

2 

12 

0 

1600 

— 

1 

17 

8 

1626 

— 

2 

9 

4 

1601 

— 

1 

14 

10 

1627 

— 

1 

16 

0 

1602 

— 

1 

9 

4 

1628 

— 

1 

8 

0 

1603 

— 

1 

15 

4 

1629 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1604 

— 

1 

10 

8 

1630 

— 

2 

15 

8 

1605 

— 

1 

15 

10 

1631 

— 

3 

8 

0 

1606 

— 

1 

13 

0 

1632 

— 

2 

13 

4 

1607 

— 

1 

16 

8 

1633 

— 

2 

18 

0 

1608 

— 

2 

16 

8 

1634 

— 

2 

16 

0 

1609 

— 

2 

10 

0 

1635 

— 

2 

16 

0 

1610 

— 

1 

15 

10 

1636 

— 

2 

16 

8 

1611 

— 

1 

18 

8 

16)  40  0 

0 

1612 

— 

2 

2 

4 

£2  10 

0 

1613 

— 

2 

8 

8 

1614 

— 

2 

1 

m 

1615 

— 

1 

18 

8 

1616 

— 

2 

0 

4 

1617 

— 

2 

8 

8 

1618 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1619 

— 

1 

15 

4 

1620 

— 

1 

10 

4 

26)  54  0  6XA 
£2  1  6^ 


The  Rent  of  Land 


115 


Wheat 

; per 

Wheat 

per 

Years 

quarter 

Fears 

quarter 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

1637 

— 

2 

13 

0 

Brought  over  79 

14 

10 

1638 

— 

2 

17 

4 

1671 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1639 

— 

2 

4 

10 

1672 

— 

2 

1 

0 

1640 

— 

2 

4 

8 

1673 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1641 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1674 

— 

3 

8 

8 

1642 

— 

0 

0 

o1 

1675 

— 

3 

4 

8 

1643 

— 

0 

0 

0 

1676 

— 

1 

18 

0 

1644 

— 

0 

0 

0 

1677 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1645 

— 

0 

0 

0 

1678 

— 

2 

19 

0 

1646 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1679 

— 

3 

0 

0 

1647 

— 

3 

13 

8 

1680 

— 

2 

5 

0 

1648 

— 

4 

5 

0 

1681 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1649 

— 

4 

0 

0 

1682 

— 

2 

4 

0 

1650 

— 

3 

16 

8 

1683 

— 

2 

0 

0 

1651 

— 

3 

13 

4 

1684 

— 

2 

4 

0 

1652 

— 

2 

9 

6 

1685 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1653 

— 

1 

15 

6 

1686 

— 

1 

14 

0 

1654 

— 

1 

6 

0 

1687 

— 

1 

5 

2 

1655 

— 

1 

13 

4 

1688 

— 

2 

6 

0 

1656 

— 

2 

3 

0 

1689 

— 

1 

10 

0 

1657 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1690 

— 

1 

14 

8 

1658 

— 

3 

5 

0 

1691 

— 

1 

14 

0 

1659 

— 

3 

6 

0 

1692 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1660 

— 

2 

16 

6 

1693 

— 

3 

7 

8 

1661 

— 

3 

10 

0 

1694 

— 

3 

4 

0 

1662 

— 

3 

14 

0 

1695 

— 

2 

13 

0 

1663 

— 

2 

17 

0 

1696 

— 

3 

11 

0 

1664 

— 

2 

0 

6 

1697 

— 

3 

0 

0 

1665 

— 

2 

9 

4 

1698 

— 

3 

8 

4 

1666 

— 

1 

16 

0 

1699 

— 

3 

4 

0 

1667 

- 

1 

16 

0 

1700 

— 

2 

0 

0 

1668 

— 

2 

0 

0 

60)  153  1 

8 

1669 

1670 

2 

2 

4 

1 

4 

8 

£2 

11 

0  X 

Carry  over  £79  14  10 


1  Wanting  in  the  account.  The  year  1646  supplied  by  Bishop  Fleetwood. 


116 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


Wheat 

per 

Wheat 

per 

Years 

quarter 

Years 

quarter 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

1701 

— 

1 

17 

8 

Brought  over  69 

8 

8 

1702 

— 

1 

9 

6 

1734 

— 

1 

18 

10 

1703 

— 

1 

16 

0 

1735 

— 

2 

3 

0 

1704 

— 

2 

6 

6 

1736 

— 

2 

0 

4 

1705 

— 

1 

10 

0 

1737 

— 

1 

18 

0 

1706 

— 

1 

6 

0 

1738 

— 

1 

15 

6 

1707 

— 

1 

8 

6 

1739 

— 

1 

18 

6 

1708 

— 

2 

1 

6 

1740 

— 

2 

10 

8 

1709 

— 

3 

18 

6 

1741 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1710 

— 

3 

18 

0 

1742 

— 

1 

14 

0 

1711 

— 

2 

14 

0 

1743 

— 

1 

4 

10 

1712 

— 

2 

6 

4 

1744 

— 

1 

4 

10 

1713 

— 

2 

11 

0 

1745 

— 

1 

7 

6 

1714 

— 

2 

10 

4 

1746 

— 

1 

19 

0 

1715 

— 

2 

3 

0 

1747 

— 

1 

14 

10 

1716 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1748 

— 

1 

17 

0 

1717 

— 

2 

5 

8 

1749 

— 

1 

17 

0 

1718 

— 

1 

18 

10 

1750 

— 

1 

12 

6 

1719 

— 

1 

15 

0 

1751 

— 

1 

18 

6 

1720 

— 

1 

17 

0 

1752 

— 

2 

1 

10 

1721 

— 

1 

17 

6 

1753 

— 

2 

4 

8 

1722 

— 

1 

16 

0 

1754 

— 

1 

14 

8 

1723 

— 

1 

14 

8 

1755 

— 

1 

13 

10 

1724 

— 

1 

17 

0 

1756 

— 

2 

5 

3 

1725 

— 

2 

8 

6 

1757 

— 

3 

0 

0 

1726 

— 

2 

6 

0 

1758 

— 

2 

10 

0 

1727 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1759 

— 

1 

19 

10 

1728 

— 

2 

14 

6 

1760 

— 

1 

16 

6 

1729 

— 

2 

6 

10 

1761 

— 

1 

10 

3 

1730 

— 

1 

16 

6 

1762 

— 

1 

19 

0 

1731 

— 

1 

12 

10 

1763 

— 

2 

0 

9 

1732 

— 

1 

6 

8 

1764 

— 

2 

6 

9 

1733 

— 

1 

8 

4 

64)  129  13 

6 

Carry  over  £69  8 

8 

£2  0 

6% 

£ 

s. 

d. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

1731  — 

1 

12 

10 

1741  — 

2 

6 

8 

1732  — 

1 

6 

8 

1742  — 

1 

14 

0 

1733  — 

1 

8 

4 

1743  — 

1 

4 

10 

1734  — 

1 

18 

10 

1744  — 

1 

4 

10 

1735  — 

2 

3 

0 

1745  — 

1 

7 

6 

1736  — 

2 

0 

4 

1746  — 

1 

19 

0 

1737  — 

1 

18 

0 

1747  — 

1 

14 

10 

1738  — 

1 

15 

6 

1748  — 

1 

17 

0 

1739  — 

1 

18 

6 

1749  — 

1 

17 

0 

1740  — 

2 

10 

8 

1750  — 

1 

12 

6 

10)  18  12  8 
£1  17  3H 


10)  16  18  2 


£1  13  9  H 


Book  Two 


OF  THE  NATURE,  ACCUMULATION,  AND  EMPLOYMENT  OF  STOCK 


INTRODUCTION 

IN  that  rude  state  of  society  in  which  there 
is  no  division  of  labour,  in  which  exchanges 
are  seldom  made,  and  in  which  every  man 
provides  everything  for  himself,  it  is  not  nec¬ 
essary  that  any  stock  should  be  accumulated 
or  stored  up  beforehand  in  order  to  carry  on 
the  business  of  the  society.  Every  man  en¬ 
deavours  to  supply  by  his  own  industry  his 
own  occasional  wants  as  they  occur.  When  he 
is  hungry,  he  goes  to  the  forest  to  hunt;  when 
his  coat  is  worn  out,  he  clothes  himself  with 
the  skin  of  the  first  large  animal  he  kills:  and 
when  his  hut  begins  to  go  to  ruin,  he  repairs 
it,  as  well  as  he  can,  with  the  trees  and  the 
turf  that  are  nearest  it. 

But  when  the  division  of  labour  has  once 
been  thoroughly  introduced,  the  produce  of  a 
man’s  own  labour  can  supply  but  a  very  small 
part  of  his  occasional  wants.  The  far  greater 
part  of  them  are  supplied  by  the  produce  of 
other  men’s  labour,  which  he  purchases  with 
the  produce,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  with 
the  price  of  the  produce  of  his  own.  But  this 
purchase  cannot  be  made  till  such  time  as  the 
produce  of  his  own  labour  has  not  only  been 
completed,  but  sold.  A  stock  of  goods  of  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds,  therefore,  must  be  stored  up 
somewhere  sufficient  to  maintain  him,  and  to 
supply  him  with  the  materials  and  tools  of  his 
work  till  such  time,  at  least,  as  both  these 
events  can  be  brought  about.  A  weaver  can¬ 
not  apply  himself  entirely  to  his  peculiar  busi¬ 
ness,  unless  there  is  beforehand  stored  up 
somewhere,  either  in  his  own  possession  or  in 
that  of  some  other  person,  a  stock  sufficient  to 
maintain  him,  and  to  supply  him  with  the  ma¬ 
terials  and  tools  of  his  work,  till  he  has  not 
only  completed,  but  sold  his  web.  This  ac¬ 
cumulation  must,  evidently,  be  previous  to 
his  applying  his  industry  for  so  long  a  time  to 
such  a  peculiar  business. 

As  the  accumulation  of  stock  must,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  be  previous  to  the  division 
of  labour,  so  labour  can  be  more  and  more 
subdivided  in  proportion  only  as  stock  is  pre¬ 
viously  more  and  more  accumulated.  The 
quantity  of  materials  which  the  same  number 
of  people  can  work  up,  increases  in  a  great 
proportion  as  labour  comes  to  be  more  and 


more  subdivided;  and  as  the  operations  of 
each  workman  are  gradually  reduced  to  a 
greater  degree  of  simplicity,  a  variety  of  new 
machines  come  to  be  invented  for  facilitating 
and  abridging  those  operations.  As  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  advances,  therefore,  in  order 
to  give  constant  employment  to  an  equal 
number  of  workmen,  an  equal  stock  of  pro¬ 
visions,  and  a  greater  stock  of  materials  and 
tools  than  what  would  have  been  necessary 
in  a  ruder  state  of  things,  must  be  accumu¬ 
lated  beforehand.  But  the  number  of  work¬ 
men  in  every  branch  of  business  generally  in¬ 
creases  with  the  division  of  labour  in  that 
branch,  or  rather  it  is  the  increase  of  their 
number  which  enables  them  to  class  and  sub¬ 
divide  themselves  in  this  manner. 

As  the  accumulation  of  stock  is  previously 
necessary  for  carrying  on  this  great  improve¬ 
ment  in  the  productive  powers  of  labour,  so 
that  accumulation  naturally  leads  to  this  im¬ 
provement.  The  person  who  employs  his  stock 
in  maintaining  labour,  necessarily  wishes  to 
employ  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to  produce  as 
great  a  quantity  of  work  as  possible.  He  en¬ 
deavours,  therefore,  both  to  make  among  his 
workmen  the  most  proper  distribution  of  em¬ 
ployment,  and  to  furnish  them  with  the  best 
machines  which  he  can  either  invent  or  afford 
to  purchase.  His  abilities  in  both  these  re¬ 
spects  are  generally  in  proportion  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  his  stock,  or  to  the  number  of  people 
whom  it  can  employ.  The  quantity  of  indus¬ 
try,  therefore,  not  only  increases  in  every 
country  with  the  increase  of  the  stock  which 
employs  it,  but,  in  consequence  of  that  in¬ 
crease,  the  same  quantity  of  industry  pro¬ 
duces  a  much  greater  quantity  of  work. 

Such  are  in  general  the  effects  of  the  in¬ 
crease  of  stock  upon  industry  and  its  produc¬ 
tive  powers. 

In  the  following  book  I  have  endeavoured 
to  explain  the  nature  of  stock,  the  effects  of 
its  accumulation  into  capitals  of  different 
kinds,  and  the  effects  of  the  different  em¬ 
ployments  of  those  capitals.  This  book  is  di¬ 
vided  into  five  chapters.  In  the  first  chapter, 
I  have  endeavoured  to  show  what  are  the 
different  parts  or  branches  into  which  the 
stock,  either  of  an  individual,  or  of  a  great 
society,  naturally  divides  itself.  In  the  second. 


117 


118  The  Wealth 

I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the  nature  and 
operation  of  money  considered  as  a  particular 
branch  of  the  general  stock  of  the  society.  The 
stock  which  is  accumulated  into  a  capital,  may 
either  be  employed  by  the  person  to  whom  it 
belongs,  or  it  may  be  lent  to  some  other  per¬ 
son.  In  the  third  and  fourth  chapters,  I  have 
endeavoured  to  examine  the  manner  in  which 
it  operates  in  both  these  situations.  The  fifth 
and  last  chapter  treats  of  the  different  effects 
which  the  different  employments  of  capital 
immediately  produce  upon  the  quantity  both 
of  national  industry,  and  of  the  annual  pro¬ 
duce  of  land  and  labour. 

CHAPTER  I 
Of  the  Division  of  Stock 

When  the  stock  which  a  man  possesses  is 
no  more  than  sufficient  to  maintain  him  for  a 
few  days  or  a  few  weeks,  he  seldom  thinks  of 
deriving  any  revenue  from  it.  He  consumes 
it  as  sparingly  as  he  can,  and  endeavours  by 
his  labour  to  acquire  something  which  may 
supply  its  place  before  it  be  consumed  alto¬ 
gether.  His  revenue  is,  in  this  case,  derived 
from  his  labour  only.  This  is  the  state  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  labouring  poor  in  all 
countries. 

But  when  he  possesses  stock  sufficient  to 
maintain  him  for  months  or  years,  he  natural¬ 
ly  endeavours  to  derive  a  revenue  from  the 
greater  part  of  it;  reserving  only  so  much  for 
his  immediate  consumption  as  may  maintain 
him  till  this  revenue  begins  to  come  in.  His 
whole  stock,  therefore,  is  distinguished  into 
two  parts.  That  part  which,  he  expects,  is  to 
afford  him  this  revenue,  is  called  his  capital. 
The  other  is  that  which  supplies  his  imme¬ 
diate  consumption;  and  which  consists  either, 
first,  in  that  portion  of  his  whole  stock  which 
was  originally  reserved  for  this  purpose;  or, 
secondly,  in  his  revenue,  from  whatever  source 
derived,  as  it  gradually  comes  in;  or,  thirdly, 
in  such  things  as  had  been  purchased  by 
either  of  these  in  former  years,  and  which  are 
not  yet  entirely  consumed;  such  as  a  stock  of 
clothes,  household  furniture,  and  the  like.  In 
one,  or  other,  or  all  of  these  three  articles, 
consists  the  stock  which  men  commonly  re¬ 
serve  for  their  own  immediate  consumption. 

There  are  two  different  ways  in  which  a 
capital  may  be  employed  so  as  to  yield  a 
revenue  or  profit  to  its  employer. 

First,  it  may  be  employed  in  raising,  manu¬ 
facturing,  or  purchasing  goods,  and  selling 
them  again  with  a  profit.  The  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  this  manner  yields  no  revenue  or 
profit  to  its  employer,  while  it  either  remains 
in  his  possession,  or  continues  in  the  same 
shape.  The  goods  of  the  merchant  yield  him 
no  revenue  or  profit  till  he  sells  them  for  mon¬ 


of  Nations 

ey,  and  the  money  yields  him  as  little  till  it  is 
again  exchanged  for  goods.  His  capital  is  con¬ 
tinually  going  from  him  in  one  shape,  and  re¬ 
turning  to  him  in  another,  and  it  is  only  by 
means  of  such  circulation,  or  successive  ex¬ 
changes,  that  it  can  yield  him  any  profit.  Such 
capitals,  therefore,  may  very  properly  be 
called  circulating  capitals. 

Secondly,  it  may  be  employed  in  the  im¬ 
provement  of  land,  in  the  purchase  of  useful 
machines  and  instruments  of  trade,  or  in  such¬ 
like  things  as  yield  a  revenue  or  profit  with¬ 
out  changing  masters,  or  circulating  any  fur¬ 
ther.  Such  capitals,  therefore,  may  very  prop¬ 
erly  be  called  fixed  capitals. 

Different  occupations  require  very  differ¬ 
ent  proportions  between  the  fixed  and  circu¬ 
lating  capitals  employed  in  them. 

The  capital  of  a  merchant,  for  example,  is 
altogether  a  circulating  capital.  He  has  occa¬ 
sion  for  no  machines  or  instruments  of  trade, 
unless  his  shop,  or  warehouse,  be  considered 
as  such. 

Some  part  of  the  capital  of  every  master 
artificer  or  manufacturer  must  be  fixed  in  the 
instruments  of  his  trade.  This  part,  however, 
is  very  small  in  some,  and  very  great  in  others. 
A  master  tailor  requires  no  other  instruments 
of  trade  but  a  parcel  of  needles.  Those  of  the 
master  shoemaker  are  a  little,  though  but  a 
very  little,  more  expensive.  Those  of  the  weav¬ 
er  rise  a  good  deal  above  those  of  the  shoe¬ 
maker.  The  far  greater  part  of  the  capital  of 
all  such  master  artificers,  however,  is  circu¬ 
lated,  either  in  the  wages  of  their  workmen,  or 
in  the  price  of  their  materials,  and  repaid 
with  a  profit  by  the  price  of  the  work. 

In  other  works  a  much  greater  fixed  cap¬ 
ital  is  required.  In  a  great  iron-work,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  furnace  for  melting  the  ore,  the 
forge,  the  slitt-mill,  are  instruments  of  trade 
which  cannot  be  erected  without  a  very  great 
expense.  In  coal-works  and  mines  of  every 
kind,  the  machinery  necessary  both  for  draw¬ 
ing  out  the  water  and  for  other  purposes  is 
frequently  still  more  expensive. 

That  part  of  the  capital  of  the  farmer  which 
is  employed  in  the  instruments  of  agriculture 
is  a  fixed,  that  which  is  employed  in  the  wages 
and  maintenance  of  his  labouring  servants,  is 
a  circulating  capital.  He  makes  a  profit  of  the 
one  by  keeping  it  in  his  own  possession,  and 
of  the  other  by  parting  with  it.  The  price  or 
value  of  his  labouring  cattle  is  a  fixed  capital 
in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  instruments 
of  husbandry.  Their  maintenance  is  a  circu¬ 
lating  capital  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of 
the  labouring  servants.  The  farmer  makes  his 
profit  by  keeping  the  labouring  cattle,  and  by 
parting  with  their  maintenance.  Both  the 
price  and  the  maintenance  of  the  cattle  which 
are  brought  in  and  fattened,  not  for  labour, 


110 


The  Division  of  Stock 


but  for  sale,  are  a  circulating  capital.  The 
farmer  makes  his  profit  by  parting  with  them. 
A  flock  of  sheep  or  a  herd  of  cattle  that,  in  a 
breeding  country,  is  bought  in,  neither  for  la¬ 
bour,  nor  for  sale,  but  in  order  to  make  a 
profit  by  their  wool,  by  their  milk,  and  by 
their  increase,  is  a  fixed  capital.  The  profit  is 
made  by  keeping  them.  Their  maintenance  is 
a  circulating  capital.  The  profit  is  made  by 
parting  with  it;  and  it  comes  back  with  both 
its  own  profit  and  the  profit  upon  the  whole 
price  of  the  cattle,  in  the  price  of  the  wool,  the 
milk,  and  the  increase.  The  whole  value  of  the 
seed,  too,  is  properly  a  fixed  capital.  Though 
it  goes  backwards  and  forwards  between  the 
ground  and  the  granary,  it  never  changes 
masters,  and  therefore  does  not  properly  cir¬ 
culate.  The  farmer  makes  his  profit,  not  by 
its  sale,  but  by  its  increase. 

The  general  stock  of  any  country  or  society 
is  the  same  with  that  of  all  its  inhabitants  or 
members,  and  therefore  naturally  divides  itself 
into  the  same  three  portions,  each  of  which 
has  a  distinct  function  or  office. 

The  first  is  that  portion  which  is  reserved 
for  immediate  consumption,  and  of  which  the 
characteristic  is,  that  it  affords  no  revenue  or 
profit.  It  consists  in  the  stock  of  food,  clothes, 
household  furniture,  etc.,  which  have  been 
purchased  by  their  proper  consumers,  but 
which  are  not  yet  entirely  consumed.  The 
whole  stock  of  mere  dwelling-houses  too,  sub¬ 
sisting  at  any  one  time  in  the  country,  make 
a  part  of  this  first  portion.  The  stock  that  is 
laid  out  in  a  house,  if  it  is  to  be  the  dwelling- 
house  of  the  proprietor,  ceases  from  that  mo¬ 
ment  to  serve  in  the  function  of  a  capital,  or 
to  afford  any  revenue  to  its  owner.  A  dwelling- 
house,  as  such,  contributes  nothing  to  the 
revenue  of  its  inhabitant;  and  though  it  is,  no 
doubt,  extremely  useful  to  him,  it  is  as  his 
clothes  and  household  furniture  are  useful  to 
him,  which,  however,  makes  a  part  of  his  ex¬ 
pense,  and  not  of  his  revenue.  If  it  is  to  be  let 
to  a  tenant  for  rent,  as  the  house  itself  can 
produce  nothing,  the  tenant  must  always  pay 
the  rent  out  of  some  other  revenue  which  he 
derives  either  from  labour,  or  stock,  or  land. 
Though  a  house,  therefore,  may  yield  a  rev¬ 
enue  to  its  proprietor,  and  thereby  serve  in 
the  function  of  a  capital  to  him,  it  cannot 
yield  any  to  the  public,  nor  serve  in  the  func¬ 
tion  of  a  capital  to  it,  and  the  revenue  of  the 
whole  body  of  the  people  can  never  be  in  the 
smallest  degree  increased  by  it.  Clothes,  and 
household  furniture,  in  the  same  manner, 
sometimes  yield  a  revenue,  and  thereby  serve 
in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  particular  per¬ 
sons.  In  countries  where  masquerades  are 
common,  it  is  a  trade  to  let  out  masquerade 
dresses  for  a  night.  Upholsterers  frequently 
let  furniture  by  the  month  or  by  the  year. 


Undertakers  let  the  furniture  of  funerals  by 
the  day  and  by  the  week.  Many  people  let 
furnished  houses,  and  get  a  rent,  not  only  for 
the  use  of  the  house,  but  for  that  of  the  furni¬ 
ture.  The  revenue,  however,  which  is  derived 
from  such  things  must  always  be  ultimately 
drawn  from  some  other  source  of  revenue. 
Of  all  parts  of  the  stock,  either  of  an  individ¬ 
ual,  or  of  a  society,  reserved  for  immediate 
consumption,  what  is  laid  out  in  houses  is 
most  slowly  consumed.  A  stock  of  clothes  may 
last  several  years:  a  stock  of  furniture  half  a 
century  or  a  century:  but  a  stock  of  houses, 
well  built  and  properly  taken  care  of,  may  last 
many  centuries.  Though  the  period  of  their 
total  consumption,  however,  is  more  distant, 
they  are  still  as  really  a  stock  reserved  for 
immediate  consumption  as  either  clothes  or 
household  furniture. 

The  second  of  the  three  portions  into  which 
the  general  stock  of  the  society  divides  itself, 
is  the  fixed  capital,  of  which  the  character¬ 
istic  is,  that  it  affords  a  revenue  or  profit 
without  circulating  or  changing  masters.  It 
consists  chiefly  of  the  four  following  articles: 

First,  of  all  useful  machines  and  instru¬ 
ments  of  trade  which  facilitate  and  abridge 
labour: 

Secondly,  of  all  those  profitable  buildings 
which  are  the  means  of  procuring  a  revenue, 
not  only  to  their  proprietor  who  lets  them  for 
a  rent,  but  to  the  person  who  possesses  them 
and  pays  that  rent  for  them;  such  as  shops, 
warehouses,  workhouses,  farmhouses,  with  all 
their  necessary  buildings;  stables,  granaries, 
etc.  These  are  very  different  from  mere  dwell¬ 
ing  houses.  They  are  a  sort  of  instruments  of 
trade,  and  may  be  considered  in  the  same 
light: 

Thirdly,  of  the  improvements  of  land,  of 
what  has  been  profitably  laid  out  in  clearing, 
draining,  enclosing,  manuring,  and  reducing  it 
into  the  condition  most  proper  for  tillage  and 
culture.  An  improved  farm  may  very  justly 
be  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  those  useful 
machines  which  facilitate  and  abridge  labour, 
and  by  means  of  which  an  equal  circulating 
capital  can  afford  a  much  greater  revenue  to 
its  employer.  An  improved  farm  is  equally 
advantageous  and  more  durable  than  any  of 
those  machines,  frequently  requiring  no  other 
repairs  than  the  most  profitable  application 
of  the  farmer’s  capital  employed  in  culti¬ 
vating  it: 

Fourthly,  of  the  acquired  and  useful  abili¬ 
ties  of  all  the  inhabitants  or  members  of  the 
society.  The  acquisition  of  such  talents,  by 
the  maintenance  of  the  acquirer  during  his 
education,  study,  or  apprenticeship,  always 
costs  a  real  expense,  which  is  a  capital  fixed 
and  realized,  as  it  were,  in  his  person.  Those 
talents,  as  they  make  a  part  of  his  fortune,  so 


120 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


do  they  likewise  of  that  of  the  society  to 
which  he  belongs.  The  improved  dexterity  of 
a  workman  may  be  considered  in  the  same 
light  as  a  machine  or  instrument  of  trade 
which  facilitates  and  abridges  labour,  and 
which,  though  it  costs  a  certain  expense,  re¬ 
pays  that  expense  with  a  profit. 

The  third  and  last  of  the  three  portions  into 
which  the  general  stock  of  the  society  natu¬ 
rally  divides  itself,  is  the  circulating  capital; 
of  which  the  characteristic  is,  that  it  affords 
a  revenue  only  by  circulating  or  changing 
masters.  It  is  composed  likewise  of  four  parts: 

First,  of  the  money  by  means  of  which  all 
the  other  three  are  circulated  and  distributed 
to  their  proper  consumers: 

Secondly,  of  the  stock  of  provisions  which 
are  in  the  possession  of  the  butcher,  the 
grazier,  the  farmer,  the  corn -merchant,  the 
brewer,  etc.,  and  from  the  sale  of  which  they 
expect  to  derive  a  profit: 

Thirdly,  of  the  materials,  whether  alto¬ 
gether  rude,  or  more  or  less  manufactured, 
of  clothes,  furniture,  and  building,  which  are 
not  yet  made  up  into  any  of  those  three 
shapes,  but  which  remain  in  the  hands  of 
the  growers,  the  manufacturers,  the  mercers 
and  drapers,  the  timber  merchants,  the  car¬ 
penters  and  joiners,  the  brickmakers,  etc. 

Fourthly,  and  lastly,  of  the  work  which  is 
made  up  and  completed,  but  which  is  still 
in  the  hands  of  the  merchant  or  manufac¬ 
turer,  and  not  yet  disposed  of  or  distributed 
to  the  proper  consumers;  such  as  the  finished 
work  which  we  frequently  find  ready-made 
in  the  shops  of  the  smith,  the  cabinet-maker, 
the  goldsmith,  the  jeweller,  the  china-mer¬ 
chant,  etc.  The  circulating  capital  consists  in 
this  manner,  of  the  provisions,  materials,  and 
finished  work  of  all  kinds  that  are  in  the 
hands  of  their  respective  dealers,  and  of  the 
money  that  is  necessary  for  circulating  and 
distributing  them  to  those  who  are  finally  to 
use  or  to  consume  them. 

Of  these  four  parts,  three — provisions,  ma¬ 
terials,  and  finished  work — are,  either  annu¬ 
ally,  or  in  a  longer  or  shorter  period,  regularly 
withdrawn  from  it,  and  placed  either  in  the 
fixed  capital  or  in  the  stock  reserved  for  im¬ 
mediate  consumption. 

Every  fixed  capital  is  both  originally  de¬ 
rived  from,  and  requires  to  be  continually 
supported  by  a  circulating  capital.  All  useful 
machines  and  instruments  of  trade  are  origi¬ 
nally  derived  from  a  circulating  capital,  which 
furnishes  the  materials  of  which  they  are 
made,  and  the  maintenance  of  the  workmen 
who  make  them.  They  require,  too,  a  capital 
of  the  same  kind  to  keep  them  in  constant 
repair. 

No  fixed  capital  can  yield  any  revenue  but 
by  means  of  a  circulating  capital.  The  most 


useful  machines  and  instruments  of  trade  will 
produce  nothing  without  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal  which  affords  the  materials  they  are  em¬ 
ployed  upon,  and  the  maintenance  of  the 
workmen  who  employ  them.  Land,  however 
improved,  will  yield  no  revenue  without  a 
circulating  capital,  which  maintains  the  la¬ 
bourers  who  cultivate  and  collect  its  produce. 

To  maintain  and  augment  the  stock  which 
may  be  reserved  for  immediate  consumption 
is  the  sole  end  and  purpose  both  of  the  fixed 
and  circulating  capitals.  It  is  this  stock  which 
feeds,  clothes,  and  lodges  the  people.  Their 
riches  or  poverty  depends  upon  the  abundant 
or  sparing  supplies  which  those  two  capitals 
can  afford  to  the  stock  reserved  for  immedi¬ 
ate  consumption. 

So  great  a  part  of  the  circulating  capital 
being  continually  withdrawn  from  it,  in  order 
to  be  placed  in  the  other  two  branches  of  the 
general  stock  of  the  society;  it  must  in  its 
turn  require  continual  supplies,  without  which 
it  would  soon  cease  to  exist.  These  supplies 
are  principally  drawn  from  three  sources,  the 
produce  of  land,  of  mines,  and  of  fisheries. 
These  afford  continual  supplies  of  provisions 
and  materials,  of  which  part  is  afterwards 
wrought  up  into  finished  work,  and  by  which 
are  replaced  the  provisions,  materials,  and 
finished  work  continually  withdrawn  from  the 
circulating  capital.  From  mines,  too,  is  drawn 
what  is  necessary  for  maintaining  and  aug¬ 
menting  that  part  of  it  which  consists  in 
money.  For  though,  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  business,  this  part  is  not,  like  the  other 
three,  necessarily  withdrawn  from  it,  in  order 
to  be  placed  in  the  other  two  branches  of  the 
general  stock  of  the  society,  it  must,  however, 
like  all  other  things,  be  wasted  and  worn  out 
at  last,  and  sometimes,  too,  be  either  lost 
or  sent  abroad,  and  must,  therefore,  require 
continual,  though,  no  doubt,  much  smaller 
supplies. 

Land,  mines,  and  fisheries,  require  all  both 
a  fixed  and  a  circulating  capital  to  cultivate 
them;  and  their  produce  replaces  with  a  profit, 
not  only  those  capitals,  but  all  the  others  in 
the  society.  Thus  the  farmer  annually  replaces 
to  the  manufacturer  the  provisions  which  he 
had  consumed  and  the  materials  which  he 
had  wrought  up  the  year  before;  and  the 
manufacturer  replaces  to  the  farmer  the  fin¬ 
ished  work  which  he  had  wasted  and  worn 
out  in  the  *ame  time.  This  is  the  real  ex¬ 
change  that  is  annually  made  between  those 
two  orders  of  people,  though  it  seldom  hap¬ 
pens  that  the  rude  produce  of  the  one  and  the 
manufactured  produce  of  the  other,  are  di¬ 
rectly  bartered  for  one  another;  because  it 
seldom  happens  that  the  farmer  sells  his  corn 
and  his  cattle,  his  flax  and  his  wool,  to  the 
very  same  person  of  whom  he  chooses  to  pur- 


121 


The  Division  of  Stock 


chase  the  clothes,  furniture,  and  instruments 
of  trade  which  he  wants.  He  sells,  therefore, 
his  rude  produce  for  money,  with  which  he 
can  purchase,  wherever  it  is  to  be  had,  the 
manufactured  produce  he  has  occasion  for. 
Land  even  replaces,  in  part  at  least,  the  capi¬ 
tals  with  which  fisheries  and  mines  are  culti¬ 
vated.  It  is  the  produce  of  land  which  draws 
the  fish  from  the  waters;  and  it  is  the  produce 
of  the  surface  of  the  earth  which  extracts  the 
minerals  from  its  bowels. 

The  produce  of  land,  mines,  and  fisheries, 
when  their  natural  fertility  is  equal,  is  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  extent  and  proper  application 
of  the  capitals  employed  about  them.  When 
the  capitals  are  equal  and  equally  well  ap¬ 
plied,  it  is  in  proportion  to  their  natural 
fertility. 

In  all  countries  where  there  is  tolerable  se¬ 
curity,  every  man  of  common  understanding 
will  endeavour  to  employ  whatever  stock  he 
can  command  in  procuring  either  present  en¬ 
joyment  or  future  profit.  If  it  is  employed  in 
procuring  present  enjoyment,  it  is  a  stock 
reserved  for  immediate  consumption.  If  it  is 
employed  in  procuring  future  profit,  it  must 
procure  this  profit  either  by  staying  with  him, 
or  by  going  from  him.  In  the  one  case  it  is 
fixed,  in  the  other  it  is  a  circulating  capital. 
A  man  must  be  perfectly  crazy  who,  where 
there  is  tolerable  security,  does  not  employ 
all  the  stock  which  he  commands,  whether  it 
be  his  own  or  borrowed  of  other  people,  in 
some  one  or  other  of  those  three  ways. 

In  those  unfortunate  countries,  indeed, 
where  men  are  continually  afraid  of  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  their  superiors,  they  frequently  bury 
and  conceal  a  great  part  of  their  stock,  in 
order  to  have  it  always  at  hand  to  carry 
with  them  to  some  place  of  safety,  in  case  of 
their  being  threatened  with  any  of  those  dis¬ 
asters  to  which  they  consider  themselves  as 
at  all  times  exposed.  This  is  said  to  be  a  com¬ 
mon  practice  in  Turkey,  in  Indostan,  and,  I 
believe,  in  most  other  governments  of  Asia. 
It  seems  to  have  been  a  common  practice 
among  our  ancestors  during  the  violence  of 
the  feudal  government.  Treasure-trove  was  in 
those  times  considered  as  no  contemptible 
part  of  the  revenue  of  the  greatest  sovereigns 
in  Europe.  It  consisted  in  such  treasure  as  was 
found  concealed  in  the  earth,  and  to  which  no 
particular  person  could  prove  any  right.  This 
was  regarded  in  those  times  as  so  important 
an  object,  that  it  was  always  considered  as 
belonging  to  the  sovereign,  and  neither  to  the 
finder  nor  to  the  proprietor  of  the  land,  unless 
the  right  to  it  had  been  conveyed  to  the  latter 
by  an  express  clause  in  his  charter.  It  was  put 
upon  the  same  footing  with  gold  and  silver 
mines,  which,  without  a  special  clause  in  the 
charter,  were  never  supposed  to  be  compre¬ 


hended  in  the  general  grant  of  the  lands, 
though  mines  of  lead,  copper,  tin,  and  coal 
were  as  things  of  smaller  consequence. 

CHAPTER  II 

Of  Money  considered  as  a  particular  Branch 
of  the  general  Stock  of  the  Society ,  or  of  the 
Expense  of  maintaining  the  National  Capital 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  first  book,  that  the 
price  of  the  greater  part  of  commodities  re¬ 
solves  itself  into  three  parts,  of  which  one 
pays  the  wages  of  the  labour,  another  the 
profits  of  the  stock,  and  a  third  the  rent  of 
the  land  which  had  been  employed  in  pro¬ 
ducing  and  bringing  them  to  market:  that 
there  are,  indeed,  some  commodities  of  which 
the  price  is  made  up  of  two  of  those  parts 
only,  the  wages  of  labour,  and  the  profits  of 
stock:  and  a  very  few  in  which  it  consists 
altogether  in  one,  the  wages  of  labour:  but 
that  the  price  of  every  commodity  necessarily 
resolves  itself  into  some  one,  or  other,  or  all 
of  these  three  parts;  every  part  of  it  which 
goes  neither  to  rent  nor  to  wages,  being  neces¬ 
sarily  profit  to  somebody. 

Since  this  is  the  case,  it  has  been  observed, 
with  regard  to  every  particular  commodity, 
taken  separately,  it  must  be  so  with  regard  to 
all  the  commodities  which  compose  the  whole 
annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
every  country,  taken  complexly.  The  whole 
price  or  exchangeable  value  of  that  annual 
produce  must  resolve  itself  into  the  same 
three  parts,  and  be  parcelled  out  among  the 
different  inhabitants  of  the  country,  either  as 
the  wages  of  their  labour,  the  profits  of  their 
stock,  or  the  rent  of  their  land. 

But  though  the  whole  value  of  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  every  coun¬ 
try  is  thus  divided  among  and  constitutes  a 
revenue  to  its  different  inhabitants,  yet  as  in 
the  rent  of  a  private  estate  we  distinguish 
between  the  gross  rent  and  the  net  rent,  so 
may  we  likewise  in  the  revenue  of  all  the 
inhabitants  of  a  great  country. 

The  gross  rent  of  a  private  estate  compre¬ 
hends  whatever  is  paid  by  the  farmer;  the 
net  rent,  what  remains  free  to  the  landlord, 
after  deducting  the  expense  of  management, 
of  repairs,  and  all  other  necessary  charges;  or 
what,  without  hurting  his  estate,  he  can  af¬ 
ford  to  place  in  his  stock  reserved  for  immedi¬ 
ate  consumption,  or  to  spend  upon  his  table, 
equipage,  the  ornaments  of  his  house  and 
furniture,  his  private  enjoyments  and  amuse¬ 
ments.  His  real  wealth  is  in  proportion,  not 
to  his  gross,  but  to  his  net  rent. 

The  gross  revenue  of  all  the  inhabitants  of 
a  great  country  comprehends  the  whole  an¬ 
nual  produce  of  their  land  and  labour;  the 
net  revenue,  what  remains  free  to  them  after 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


122 

deducting  the  expense  of  maintaining — first, 
their  fixed,  and,  secondly,  their  circulating 
capital;  or  what,  without  encroaching  upon 
their  capital,  they  can  place  in  their  stock 
reserved  for  immediate  consumption,  or  spend 
upon  their  subsistence,  conveniencies,  and 
amusements.  Their  real  wealth,  too,  is  in  pro¬ 
portion,  not  to  their  gross,  but  to  their  net 
revenue. 

The  whole  expense  of  maintaining  the  fixed 
capital  must  evidently  be  excluded  from  the 
net  revenue  of  the  society.  Neither  the  ma¬ 
terials  necessary  for  supporting  their  useful 
machines  and  instruments  of  trade,  their 
profitable  buildings,  etc.,  nor  the  produce  of 
the  labour  necessary  for  fashioning  those  ma¬ 
terials  into  the  proper  form,  can  ever  make 
any  part  of  it.  The  price  of  that  labour  may 
indeed  make  a  part  of  it;  as  the  workmen 
so  employed  may  place  the  whole  value  of 
their  wages  in  their  stock  reserved  for  im¬ 
mediate  consumption.  But  in  other  sorts  of 
labour,  both  the  price  and  the  produce  go  to 
this  stock,  the  price  to  that  of  the  workmen, 
the  produce  to  that  of  other  people,  whose 
subsistence,  conveniences,  and  amusements, 
are  augmented  by  the  labour  of  those  work¬ 
men. 

The  intention  of  the  fixed  capital  is  to  in¬ 
crease  the  productive  powers  of  labour,  or  to 
enable  the  same  number  of  labourers  to  per¬ 
form  a  much  greater  quantity  of  work.  In  a 
farm  where  all  the  necessary  buildings,  fences, 
drains,  communications,  etc.,  are  in  the  most 
perfect  good  order,  the  same  number  of  la¬ 
bourers  and  labouring  cattle  will  raise  a  much 
greater  produce  than  in  one  of  equal  extent 
and  equally  good  ground,  but  not  furnished 
with  equal  conveniencies.  In  manufactures 
the  same  number  of  hands,  assisted  with  the 
best  machinery,  will  work  up  a  much  greater 
quantity  of  goods  than  with  more  imperfect 
instruments  of  trade.  The  expense  which  is 
properly  laid  out  upon  a  fixed  capital  of  any 
kind,  is  always  repaid  with  great  profit,  and 
increases  the  annual  produce  by  a  much 
greater  value  than  that  of  the  support  which 
such  improvements  require.  This  support, 
however,  still  requires  a  certain  portion  of 
that  produce.  A  certain  quantity  of  materials, 
and  the  labour  of  a  certain  number  of  work¬ 
men,  both  of  which  might  have  been  im¬ 
mediately  employed  to  augment  the  food, 
clothing  and  lodging,  the  subsistence  and  con¬ 
veniencies  of  the  society,  are  thus  diverted  to 
another  employment,  highly  advantageous  in¬ 
deed,  but  still  different  from  this  one.  It  is 
upon  this  account  that  all  such  improvements 
in  mechanics,  as  enable  the  same  number  of 
workmen  to  perform  an  equal  quantity  of 
work,  with  cheaper  and  simpler  machinery 
than  had  been  usual  before,  are  always  re¬ 


garded  as  advantageous  to  every  society.  A 
certain  quantity  of  materials,  and  the  labour 
of  a  certain  number  of  workmen,  which  had 
before  been  employed  in  supporting  a  more 
complex  and  expensive  machinery,  can  after¬ 
wards  be  applied  to  augment  the  quantity  of 
work  which  that  or  any  other  machinery  is 
useful  only  for  performing.  The  undertaker 
of  some  great  manufactory  who  employs  a 
thousand  a  year  in  the  maintenance  of  his 
machinery,  if  he  can  reduce  this  expense  to 
five  hundred  will  naturally  employ  the  other 
five  hundred  in  purchasing  an  additional 
quantity  of  materials  to  be  wrought  up  by 
an  additional  number  of  workmen.  The  quan¬ 
tity  of  that  work,  therefore,  which  his  ma¬ 
chinery  was  useful  only  for  performing,  will 
naturally  be  augmented,  and  with  it  all  the 
advantage  and  conveniency  which  the  society 
can  derive  from  that  work. 

The  expense  of  maintaining  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal  in  a  great  country  may  very  properly  be 
compared  to  that  of  repairs  in  a  private  es¬ 
tate.  The  expense  of  repairs  may  frequently 
be  necessary  for  supporting  the  produce  of 
the  estate,  and  consequently  both  the  gross 
and  the  net  rent  of  the  landlord.  When  by  a 
more  proper  direction,  however,  it  can  be 
diminished  without  occasioning  any  diminu¬ 
tion  of  produce,  the  gross  rent  remains  at 
least  the  same  as  before,  and  the  net  rent  is 
necessarily  augmented. 

But  though  the  whole  expense  of  maintain¬ 
ing  the  fixed  capital  is  thus  necessarily  ex¬ 
cluded  from  the  net  revenue  of  the  society, 
it  is  not  the  same  case  with  that  of  maintain¬ 
ing  the  circulating  capital.  Of  the  four  parts 
of  which  this  latter  capital  is  composed — 
money,  provisions,  materials,  and  finished 
work — the  three  last,  it  has  already  been  ob¬ 
served,  are  regularly  withdrawn  from  it,  and 
placed  either  in  the  fixed  capital  of  the  so¬ 
ciety,  or  in  their  stock  reserved  for  immediate 
consumption.  Whatever  portion  of  those  con¬ 
sumable  goods  is  not  employed  in  maintaining 
the  former,  goes  all  to  the  latter,  and  makes 
a  part  of  the  net  revenue  of  the  society.  The 
maintenance  of  those  three  parts  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  capital,  therefore,  withdraws  no  por¬ 
tion  of  the  annual  produce  from  the  net 
revenue  of  the  society,  besides  what  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  maintaining  the  fixed  capital. 

The  circulating  capital  of  a  society  is  in 
this  respect  different  from  that  of  an  indivi¬ 
dual.  That  of  an  individual  is  totally  ex¬ 
cluded  from  making  any  part  of  his  net 
revenue,  which  must  consist  altogether  in  his 
profits.  But  though  the  circulating  capital  of 
every  individual  makes  a  part  of  that  of  the 
society  to  which  he  belongs,  it  is  not  upon 
that  account  totally  excluded  from  making 
a  part  likewise  of  their  net  revenue.  Though 


123 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


the  whole  goods  in  a  merchant’s  shop  must 
by  no  means  be  placed  in  his  own  stock  re¬ 
served  for  immediate  consumption,  they  may 
in  that  of  other  people,  who,  from  a  revenue 
derived  from  other  funds,  may  regularly  re¬ 
place  their  value  to  him,  together  with  its 
profits,  without  occasioning  any  diminution 
either  of  his  capital  or  of  theirs. 

Money,  therefore,  is  the  only  part  of  the 
circulating  capital  of  a  society,  of  which  the 
maintenance  can  occasion  any  diminution  in 
their  net  revenue. 

The  fixed  capital,  and  that  part  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  capital  which  consists  in  money,  so 
far  as  they  affect  the  revenue  of  the  society, 
bear  a  very  great  resemblance  to  one  another. 

First,  as  those  machines  and  instruments 
of  trade,  etc.,  require  a  certain  expense,  first 
to  erect  them,  and  afterwards  to  support 
them,  both  which  expenses,  though  they  make 
a  part  of  the  gross,  are  deductions  from  the 
net  revenue  of  the  society;  so  the  stock  of 
money  which  circulates  in  any  country  must 
require  a  certain  expense,  first  to  collect  it, 
and  afterwards  to  support  it,  both  which  ex¬ 
penses,  though  they  make  a  part  of  the  gross, 
are,  in  the  same  manner,  deductions  from  the 
net  revenue  of  the  society.  A  certain  quantity 
of  very  valuable  materials,  gold  and  silver, 
and  of  very  curious  labour,  instead  of  aug¬ 
menting  the  stock  reserved  for  immediate 
consumption,  the  subsistence,  conveniencies, 
and  amusements  of  individuals,  is  employed 
in  supporting  that  great  but  expensive  instru¬ 
ment  of  commerce,  by  means  of  which  every 
individual  in  the  society  has  his  subsistence, 
conveniencies,  and  amusements  regularly  dis¬ 
tributed  to  him  in  their  proper  proportions. 

Secondly,  as  the  machines  and  instruments 
of  a  trade,  etc.,  which  compose  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal  either  of  an  individual  or  of  a  society, 
make  no  part  either  of  the  gross  or  of  the  net 
revenue  of  either;  so  money,  by  means  of 
which  the  whole  revenue  of  the  society  is 
regularly  distributed  among  all  its  different 
members,  makes  itself  no  part  of  that  reve¬ 
nue.  The  great  wheel  of  circulation  is  al¬ 
together  different  from  the  goods  which  are 
circulated  by  means  of  it.  The  revenue  of  the 
society  consists  altogether  in  those  goods,  and 
not  in  the  wheel  which  circulates  them.  In 
computing  either  the  gross  or  the  net  revenue 
of  any  society,  we  must  always,  from  their 
whole  annual  circulation  of  money  and  goods, 
deduct  the  whole  value  of  the  money,  of  which 
not  a  single  farthing  can  ever  make  any  part 
of  either. 

It  is  the  ambiguity  of  language  only  which 
can  make  this  proposition  appear  either  doubt¬ 
ful  or  paradoxical.  When  properly  explained 
and  understood,  it  is  almost  self-evident. 

When  we  talk  of  any  particular  sum  of 


money,  we  sometimes  mean  nothing  but  the 
metal  pieces  of  which  it  is  composed;  and 
sometimes  we  include  in  our  meaning  some 
obscure  reference  to  the  goods  which  can  be 
had  in  exchange  for  it,  or  to  the  power  of 
purchasing  which  the  possession  of  it  conveys. 
Thus  when  we  say  that  the  circulating  money 
of  England  has  been  computed  at  eighteen 
millions,  we  mean  only  to  express  the  amount 
of  the  metal  pieces,  which  some  writers  have 
computed,  or  rather  have  supposed  to  cir¬ 
culate  in  that  country.  But  when  we  say  that 
a  man  is  worth  fifty  or  a  hundred  pounds  a 
year,  we  mean  commonly  to  express  not  only 
the  amount  of  the  metal  pieces  which  are  an¬ 
nually  paid  to  him,  but  the  value  of  the  goods 
which  he  can  annually  purchase  or  consume. 
We  mean  commonly  to  ascertain  what  is  or 
ought  to  be  his  way  of  living,  or  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  the  necessaries  and  conven¬ 
iencies  of  life  in  which  he  can  with  propriety 
indulge  himself. 

When,  by  any  particular  sum  of  money,  we 
mean  not  only  to  express  the  amount  of  the 
metal  pieces  of  which  it  is  composed,  but  to 
include  in  its  signification  some  obscure  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  goods  which  can  be  had  in  ex¬ 
change  for  them,  the  wealth  or  revenue  which 
it  in  this  case  denotes,  is  equal  only  to  one  of 
the  two  values  which  are  thus  intimated 
somewhat  ambiguously  by  the  same  word, 
and  to  the  latter  more  properly  than  to  the 
former,  to  the  money’s  worth  more  properly 
than  to  the  money. 

Thus  if  a  guinea  be  the  weekly  pension  of 
a  particular  person,  he  can  in  the  course  of 
the  week  purchase  with  it  a  certain  quantity 
of  subsistence,  conveniencies,  and  amuse¬ 
ments.  In  proportion  as  this  quantity  is  great 
or  small,  so  are  his  real  riches,  his  real  weekly 
revenue.  His  weekly  revenue  is  certainly  not 
equal  both  to  the  guinea,  and  to  what  can  be 
purchased  with  it,  but  only  to  one  or  other 
of  those  two  equal  values;  and  to  the  latter 
more  properly  than  to  the  former,  to  the 
guinea’s  worth  rather  than  to  the  guinea. 

If  the  pension  of  such  a  person  was  paid 
to  him,  not  in  gold,  but  in  a  weekly  bill  for  a 
guinea,  his  revenue  surely  would  not  so  prop¬ 
erly  consist  in  the  piece  of  paper,  as  in  what 
he  could  get  for  it.  A  guinea  may  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  bill  for  a  certain  quantity  of  neces¬ 
saries  and  conveniencies  upon  all  the  trades¬ 
men  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  revenue  of 
the  person  to  whom  it  is  paid,  does  not  so 
properly  consist  in  the  piece  of  gold,  as  in 
what  he  can  get  for  it,  or  in  what  he  can  ex¬ 
change  it  for.  If  it  could  be  exchanged  for 
nothing,  it  would,  like  a  bill  upon  a  bankrupt, 
be  of  no  more  value  than  the  most  useless 
piece  of  paper. 

Though  the  weekly  or  yearly  revenue  of  all 


124? 


The  Wealth 

the  different  inhabitants  of  any  country,  in 
the  same  manner,  may  be,  and  in  reality  fre¬ 
quently  is  paid  to  them  in  money,  their  real 
riches,  however,  the  real  weekly  or  yearly 
revenue  of  all  of  them  taken  together,  must 
always  be  great  or  small  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  consumable  goods  which  they  can 
all  of  them  purchase  with  this  money.  The 
whole  revenue  of  all  of  them  taken  together 
is  evidently  not  equal  to  both  the  money  and 
the  consumable  goods;  but  only  to  one  or 
other  of  those  two  values,  and  to  the  latter 
more  properly  than  to  the  former. 

Though  we  frequently,  therefore,  express  a 
person’s  revenue  by  the  metal  pieces  which 
are  annually  paid  to  him,  it  is  because  the 
amount  of  those  pieces  regulates  the  extent  of 
his  power  of  purchasing,  or  the  value  of  the 
goods  which  he  can  annually  afford  to  con¬ 
sume.  We  still  consider  his  revenue  as  consist¬ 
ing  in  this  power  of  purchasing  or  consuming, 
and  not  in  the  pieces  which  convey  it. 

But  if  this  is  sufficiently  evident  even  with 
regard  to  an  individual,  it  is  still  more  so 
with  regard  to  a  society.  The  amount  of  the 
metal  pieces  which  are  annually  paid  to  an 
individual,  is  often  precisely  equal  to  his  reve¬ 
nue,  and  is  upon  that  account  the  shortest 
and  best  expression  of  its  value.  But  the 
amount  of  the  metal  pieces  which  circulate  in 
a  society  can  never  be  equal  to  the  revenue 
of  all  its  members.  As  the  same  guinea  which 
pays  the  weekly  pension  of  one  man  to-day, 
may  pay  that  of  another  to-morrow,  and  that 
of  a  third  the  day  thereafter,  the  amount  of 
the  metal  pieces  which  annually  circulate  in 
any  country  must  always  be  of  much  less 
value  than  the  whole  money  pensions  annu¬ 
ally  paid  with  them.  But  the  power  of  pur¬ 
chasing,  or  the  goods  which  can  successively 
be  bought  with  the  whole  of  those  money 
pensions  as  they  are  successively  paid,  must 
always  be  precisely  of  the  same  value  with 
those  pensions;  as  must  likewise  be  the  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  different  persons  to  whom  they  are 
paid.  That  revenue,  therefore,  cannot  consist 
in  those  metal  pieces,  of  which  the  amount 
is  so  much  inferior  to  its  value,  but  in  the 
power  of  purchasing,  in  the  goods  which  can 
successively  be  bought  with  them  as  they  cir¬ 
culate  from  hand  to  hand. 

Money,  therefore,  the  great  wheel  of  cir¬ 
culation,  the  great  instrument  of  commerce, 
like  all  other  instruments  of  trade,  though  it 
makes  a  part  and  a  very  valuable  part  of  the 
capital,  makes  no  part  of  the  revenue  of  the 
society  to  which  it  belongs;  and  though  the 
metal  pieces  of  which  it  is  composed,  in  the 
course  of  their  annual  circulation,  distribute 
to  every  man  the  revenue  which  properly  be¬ 
longs  to  him,  they  make  themselves  no  part 
of  that  revenue. 


of  Nations 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  the  machines  and  in¬ 
struments  of  trade,  etc.,  which  compose  the 
fixed  capital,  bear  this  further  resemblance 
to  that  part  of  the  circulating  capital  which 
consists  in  money;  that  as  every  saving  in  the 
expense  of  erecting  and  supporting  those  ma¬ 
chines,  which  does  not  diminish  the  produc¬ 
tive  powers  of  labour,  is  an  improvement  of 
the  net  revenue  of  the  society,  so  every  sav¬ 
ing  in  the  expense  of  collecting  and  supporting 
that  part  of  the  circulating  capital  which  con¬ 
sists  in  money,  is  an  improvement  of  exactly 
the  same  kind. 

It  is  sufficiently  obvious,  and  it  has  partly, 
too,  been  explained  already,  in  what  manner 
every  saving  in  the  expense  of  supporting  the 
fixed  capital  is  an  improvement  of  the  net 
revenue  of  the  society.  The  whole  capital  of 
the  undertaker  of  every  work  is  necessarily 
divided  between  his  fixed  and  his  circulating 
capital.  While  his  whole  capital  remains  the 
same,  the  smaller  the  one  part,  the  greater 
must  necessarily  be  the  other.  It  is  the  cir¬ 
culating  capital  which  furnishes  the  materials 
and  wages  of  labour,  and  puts  industry  into 
motion.  Every  saving,  therefore,  in  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  maintaining  the  fixed  capital,  which 
does  not  diminish  the  productive  powers  of 
labour,  must  increase  the  fund  which  puts  in¬ 
dustry  into  motion,  and  consequently  the 
annual  produce  of  land  and  labour,  the  real 
revenue  of  every  society. 

The  substitution  of  paper  in  the  room  of 
gold  and  silver  money,  replaces  a  very  expen¬ 
sive  instrument  of  commerce  with  one  much 
less  costly,  and  sometimes  equally  conven¬ 
ient.  Circulation  comes  to  be  carried  on  by  a 
new  wheel,  which  it  costs  less  both  to  erect 
and  to  maintain  than  the  old  one.  But  in  what 
manner  this  operation  is  performed,  and  in 
what  manner  it  tends  to  increase  either  the 
gross  or  the  net  revenue  of  the  society,  is  not 
altogether  so  obvious,  and  may  therefore  re¬ 
quire  some  further  explication. 

There  are  several  different  sorts  of  paper 
money;  but  the  circulating  notes  of  banks 
and  bankers  are  the  species  which  is  best 
known,  and  which  seems  best  adapted  for 
this  purpose. 

When  the  people  of  any  particular  country 
have  such  confidence  in  the  fortune,  probity, 
and  prudence  of  a  particular  banker,  as  to 
believe  that  he  is  always  ready  to  pay  upon 
demand  such  of  his  promissory  notes  as  are 
likely  to  be  at  any  time  presented  to  him; 
those  notes  come  to  have  the  same  currency 
as  gold  and  silver  money,  from  the  confidence 
that  such  money  can  at  any  time  be  had 
for  them. 

A  particular  banker  lends  among  his  cus¬ 
tomers  his  own  promissory  notes,  to  the  ex¬ 
tent,  we  shall  suppose,  of  a  hundred  thousand 


125 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


pounds.  As  those  notes  serve  all  the  purposes 
of  money,  his  debtors  pay  him  the  same  in¬ 
terest  as  if  he  had  lent  them  so  much  money. 
This  interest  is  the  source  of  his  gain.  Though 
some  of  those  notes  are  continually  coming 
back  upon  him  for  payment,  part  of  them 
continue  to  circulate  for  months  and  years 
together.  Though  he  has  generally  in  circula¬ 
tion,  therefore,  notes  to  the  extent  of  a 
hundred  thousand  pounds,  twenty  thousand 
pounds  in  gold  and  silver  may  frequently  be 
a  sufficient  provision  for  answering  occasional 
demands.  By  this  operation,  therefore,  twenty 
thousand  pounds  in  gold  and  silver  perform 
all  the  functions  which  a  hundred  thousand 
could  otherwise  have  performed.  The  same 
exchanges  may  be  made,  the  same  quantity  of 
consumable  goods  may  be  circulated  and  dis¬ 
tributed  to  their  proper  consumers,  by  means 
of  his  promissory  notes,  to  the  value  of  a  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  pounds,  as  by  an  equal  value 
of  gold  and  silver  money.  Eighty  thousand 
pounds  of  gold  and  silver,  therefore,  can,  in 
this  manner,  be  spared  from  the  circulation 
of  the  country;  and  if  different  operations  of 
the  same  kind  should,  at  the  same  time,  be 
carried  on  by  many  different  banks  and  bank¬ 
ers,  the  whole  circulation  may  thus  be  con¬ 
ducted  with  a  fifth  part  only  of  the  gold 
and  silver  which  would  otherwise  have  been 
requisite. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  the  whole 
circulating  money  of  some  particular  country 
amounted,  at  a  particular  time,  to  one  mil¬ 
lion  sterling,  that  sum  being  then  sufficient 
for  circulating  the  whole  annual  produce  of 
their  land  and  labour.  Let  us  suppose,  too, 
that  some  time  thereafter,  different  banks  and 
bankers  issued  promissory  notes,  payable  to 
the  bearer,  to  the  extent  of  one  million,  re¬ 
serving  in  their  different  coffers  two  hundred 
thousand  pounds  for  answering  occasional  de¬ 
mands.  There  would  remain,  therefore,  in 
circulation,  eight  hundred  thousand  pounds 
in  gold  and  silver,  and  a  million  of  bank 
notes,  or  eighteen  hundred  thousand  pounds 
of  paper  and  money  together.  But  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country 
had  before  required  only  one  million  to  cir¬ 
culate  and  distribute  it  to  its  proper  consum¬ 
ers,  and  that  annual  produce  cannot  be 
immediately  augmented  by  those  operations 
of  banking.  One  million,  therefore,  will  be 
sufficient  to  circulate  it  after  them.  The  goods 
to  be  bought  and  sold  being  precisely  the  same 
as  before,  the  same  quantity  of  money  will  be 
sufficient  for  buying  and  selling  them.  The 
channel  of  circulation,  if  I  may  be  allowed 
such  an  expression,  will  remain  precisely  the 
same  as  before.  One  million  we  have  supposed 
sufficient  to  fill  that  channel.  Whatever,  there¬ 
fore,  is  poured  into  it  beyond  this  sum  can¬ 


not  run  in  it,  but  must  overflow.  One  million 
eight  hundred  thousand  pounds  are  poured 
into  it.  Eight  hundred  thousand  pounds,  there¬ 
fore,  must  overflow,  that  sum  being  over  and 
above  what  can  be  employed  in  the  circulation 
of  the  country.  But  though  this  sum  cannot 
be  employed  at  home,  it  is  too  valuable  to  be 
allowed  to  lie  idle.  It  will,  therefore,  be  sent 
abroad,  in  order  to  seek  that  profitable  em¬ 
ployment  which  it  cannot  find  at  home.  But 
the  paper  cannot  go  abroad;  because  at  a 
distance  from  the  banks  which  issue  it,  and 
from  the  country  in  which  payment  of  it  can 
be  exacted  by  law,  it  will  not  be  received  in 
common  payments.  Gold  and  silver,  therefore, 
to  the  amount  of  eight  hundred  thousand 
pounds  will  be  sent  abroad,  and  the  channel 
of  home  circulation  will  remain  filled  with  a 
million  of  paper,  instead  of  the  million  of 
those  metals  which  filled  it  before. 

But  though  so  great  a  quantity  of  gold  and 
silver  is  thus  sent  abroad,  we  must  not  imag¬ 
ine  that  it  is  sent  abroad  for  nothing,  or  that 
its  proprietors  make  a  present  of  it  to  foreign 
nations.  They  will  exchange  it  for  foreign 
goods  of  some  kind  or  another,  in  order  to 
supply  the  consumption  either  of  some  other 
foreign  country  or  of  their  own. 

If  they  employ  it  in  purchasing  goods  in 
one  foreign  country  in  order  to  supply  the 
consumption  of  another,  or  in  what  is  called 
the  carrying  trade,  whatever  profit  they  make 
will  be  an  addition  to  the  net  revenue  of  their 
own  country.  It  is  like  a  new  fund,  created 
for  carrying  on  a  new  trade;  domestic  busi¬ 
ness  being  now  transacted  by  paper,  and  the 
gold  and  silver  being  converted  into  a  fund  for 
this  new  trade. 

If  they  employ  it  in  purchasing  foreign  goods 
for  home  consumption,  they  may  either,  first, 
purchase  such  goods  as  are  likely  to  be  con¬ 
sumed  by  idle  people  who  produce  nothing, 
such  as  foreign  wines,  foreign  silks,  etc.;  or, 
secondly,  they  may  purchase  an  additional 
stock  of  materials,  tools,  and  provisions,  in 
order  to  maintain  and  employ  an  additional 
number  of  industrious  people,  who  reproduce, 
with  a  profit,  the  value  of  their  annual  con¬ 
sumption. 

So  far  as  it  is  employed  in  the  first  way,  it 
promotes  prodigality,  increases  expense  and 
consumption  without  increasing  production, 
or  establishing  any  permanent  fund  for  sup¬ 
porting  that  expense,  and  is  in  every  respect 
hurtful  to  the  society. 

So  far  as  it  is  employed  in  the  second  way, 
it  promotes  industry;  and  though  it  increases 
the  consumption  of  the  society,  it  provides  a 
permanent  fund  for  supporting  that  consump¬ 
tion,  the  people  who  consume  reproducing, 
with  a  profit,  the  whole  value  of  their  annual 
consumption.  The  gross  revenue  of  the  soci- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


126 

ety,  the  annual  produce  of  their  land  and 
labour,  is  increased  by  the  whole  value  which 
the  labour  of  those  workmen  adds  to  the  ma¬ 
terials  upon  which  they  are  employed;  and 
their  net  revenue  by  what  remains  of  this 
value,  after  deducting  what  is  necessary  for 
supporting  the  tools  and  instruments  of  their 
trade. 

That  the  greater  part  of  the  gold  and  silver 
which,  being  forced  abroad  by  those  opera¬ 
tions  of  banking,  is  employed  in  purchasing 
foreign  goods  for  home  consumption,  is  and 
must  be  employed  in  purchasing  those  of  this 
second  kind,  seems  not  only  probable  but 
almost  unavoidable.  Though  some  particular 
men  may  sometimes  increase  their  expense 
very  considerably  though  their  revenue  does 
not  increase  at  all,  we  may  be  assured  that 
no  class  or  order  of  men  ever  does  so;  because, 
though  the  principles  of  common  prudence  do 
not  always  govern  the  conduct  of  every  in¬ 
dividual,  they  always  influence  that  of  the 
majority  of  every  class  or  order.  But  the 
revenue  of  idle  people,  considered  as  a  class 
or  order,  cannot,  in  the  smallest  degree,  be 
increased  by  those  operations  of  banking. 
Their  expense  in  general,  therefore,  cannot 
be  much  increased  by  them,  though  that  of 
a  few  individuals  among  them  may,  and  in 
reality  sometimes  is.  The  demand  of  idle  peo¬ 
ple,  therefore,  for  foreign  goods  being  the 
same,  or  very  nearly  the  same,  as  before,  a 
very  small  part  of  the  money,  which  being 
forced  abroad  by  those  operations  of  banking, 
is  employed  in  purchasing  foreign  goods  for 
home  consumption,  is  likely  to  be  employed 
in  purchasing  those  for  their  use.  The  greater 
part  of  it  will  naturally  be  destined  for  the 
employment  of  industry,  and  not  for  the 
maintenance  of  idleness. 

When  we  compute  the  quantity  of  indus¬ 
try  which  the  circulating  capital  of  any  so¬ 
ciety  can  employ,  we  must  always  have  regard 
to  those  parts  of  it  only  which  consist  in  pro¬ 
visions,  materials,  and  finished  work:  the 
other,  which  consists  in  money,  and  which 
serves  only  to  circulate  those  three,  must 
always  be  deducted.  In  order  to  put  industry 
into  motion,  three  things  are  requisite;  ma¬ 
terials  to  work  upon,  tools  to  work  with,  and 
the  wages  or  recompense  for  the  sake  of 
which  the  work  is  done.  Money  is  neither  a 
material  to  work  upon,  nor  a  tool  to  work 
with;  and  though  the  wages  of  the  workman 
are  commonly  paid  to  him  in  money,  his  real 
revenue,  like  that  of  all  other  men,  consists, 
not  in  money,  but  in  the  money’s  worth;  not 
in  the  metal  pieces,  but  in  what  can  be  got 
for  them. 

The  quantity  of  industry  which  any  capital 
can  employ  must,  evidently,  be  equal  to  the 
number  of  workmen  whom  it  can  supply  with 


materials,  tools,  and  a  maintenance  suitable 
to  the  nature  of  the  work.  Money  may  be  req¬ 
uisite  for  purchasing  the  materials  and  tools  of 
the  work,  as  well  as  the  maintenance  of  the 
workmen.  But  the  quantity  of  industry  which 
the  whole  capital  can  employ  is  certainly  not 
equal  both  to  the  money  which  purchases, 
and  to  the  materials,  tools,  and  maintenance, 
which  are  purchased  with  it;  but  only  to  one 
or  other  of  those  two  values,  and  to  the  latter 
more  properly  than  to  the  former. 

When  paper  is  substituted  in  the  room  of 
gold  and  silver  money,  the  quantity  of  the 
materials,  tools,  and  maintenance,  which  the 
whole  circulating  capital  can  supply,  may  be 
increased  by  the  whole  value  of  gold  and 
silver  which  used  to  be  employed  in  purchas¬ 
ing  them.  The  whole  value  of  the  great  wheel 
of  circulation  and  distribution  is  added  to 
the  goods  which  are  circulated  and  distributed 
by  means  of  it.  The  operation,  in  some  meas¬ 
ure,  resembles  that  of  the  undertaker  of  some 
great  work,  who,  in  consequence  of  some  im¬ 
provement  in  mechanics,  takes  down  his  old 
machinery,  and  adds  the  difference  between 
its  price  and  that  of  the  new  to  his  circu¬ 
lating  capital,  to  the  fund  from  which  he 
furnishes  materials  and  wages  to  his  workmen. 

What  is  the  proportion  which  the  circu¬ 
lating  money  of  any  country  bears  to  the 
whole  value  of  the  annual  produce  circulated 
by  means  of  it,  it  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to 
determine.  It  has  been  computed  by  different 
authors  at  a  fifth,  at  a  tenth,  at  a  twentieth, 
and  at  a  thirtieth  part  of  that  value.  But 
how  small  soever  the  proportion  which  the 
circulating  money  may  bear  to  the  whole 
value  of  the  annual  produce,  as  but  a  part, 
and  frequently  but  a  small  part,  of  that  prod¬ 
uce,  is  ever  destined  for  the  maintenance  of 
industry,  it  must  always  bear  a  very  consid¬ 
erable  proportion  to  that  part.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  by  the  substitution  of  paper,  the  gold 
and  silver  necessary  for  circulation  is  reduced 
to,  perhaps,  a  fifth  part  of  the  former  quan¬ 
tity,  if  the  value  of  only  the  greater  part 
of  the  other  four-fifths  be  added  to  the  funds 
which  are  destined  for  the  maintenance  of 
industry,  it  must  make  a  very  considerable 
addition  to  the  quantity  of  that  industry, 
and,  consequently,  to  the  value  of  the  annual 
produce  of  land  and  labour. 

An  operation  of  this  kind  has,  within  these 
five-and-twenty  or  thirty  years,  been  per¬ 
formed  in  Scotland,  by  the  erection  of  new 
banking  companies  in  almost  every  consider¬ 
able  town,  and  even  in  some  country  villages. 
The  effects  of  it  have  been  precisely  those 
above  described.  The  business  of  the  country 
is  almost  entirely  carried  on  by  means  of 
the  paper  of  those  different  banking  com¬ 
panies,  with  which  purchases  and  payments 


127 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


of  all  kinds  are  commonly  made.  Silver  very 
seldom  appears  except  in  the  change  of  a 
twenty  shillings  bank  note,  and  gold  still 
seldomer.  But  though  the  conduct  of  all 
those  different  companies  has  not  been  un¬ 
exceptionable,  and  has  accordingly  required 
an  act  of  Parliament  to  regulate  it,  the  coun¬ 
try,  notwithstanding,  has  evidently  derived 
great  benefit  from  their  trade.  I  have  heard 
it  asserted,  that  the  trade  of  the  city  of  Glas¬ 
gow  doubled  in  about  fifteen  years  after  the 
first  erection  of  the  banks  there;  and  that 
the  trade  of  Scotland  has  more  than  quad¬ 
rupled  since  the  first  erection  of  the  two  pub¬ 
lic  banks  at  Edinburgh,  of  which  the  one, 
called  the  Bank  of  Scotland,  was  established 
by  act  of  Parliament  in  1695;  the  other, 
called  the  Royal  Bank,  by  royal  charter  in 
1727.  Whether  the  trade,  either  of  Scotland 
in  general,  or  the  city  of  Glasgow  in  particu¬ 
lar,  has  really  increased  in  so  great  a  pro¬ 
portion,  during  so  short  a  period,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  know.  If  either  of  them  has  in¬ 
creased  in  this  proportion,  it  seems  to  be  an 
effect  too  great  to  be  accounted  for  by  the 
sole  operation  of  this  cause.  That  the  trade 
and  industry  of  Scotland,  however,  have  in¬ 
creased  very  considerably  during  this  period, 
and  that  the  banks  have  contributed  a  good 
deal  to  this  increase,  cannot  be  doubted. 

The  value  of  the  silver  money  which  circu¬ 
lated  in  Scotland  before  the  union,  in  1707, 
and  which,  immediately  after  it,  was  brought 
into  the  Bank  of  Scotland  in  order  to  be  re¬ 
coined,  amounted  to  £411,117  10s.  9d.  sterling. 
No  account  has  been  got  of  the  gold  coin; 
but  it  appears  from  the  ancient  accounts  of 
the  mint  of  Scotland,  that  the  value  of  the 
gold  annually  coined  somewhat  exceeded  that 
of  the  silver.1  There  were  a  good  many  people, 
too,  upon  this  occasion,  who,  from  a  diffidence 
of  repayment,  did  not  bring  their  silver  into 
the  Bank  of  Scotland:  and  there  was,  besides, 
some  English  coin  which  was  not  called  in. 
The  whole  value  of  the  gold  and  silver,  there¬ 
fore,  which  circulated  in  Scotland  before  the 
union,  cannot  be  estimated  at  less  than  a 
million  sterling.  It  seems  to  have  constituted 
almost  the  whole  circulation  of  that  country; 
for  though  the  circulation  of  the  Bank  of 
Scotland,  which  had  then  no  rival,  was  con¬ 
siderable,  it  seems  to  have  made  but  a  very 
small  part  of  the  whole.  In  the  present  times 
the  whole  circulation  of  Scotland  cannot  be 
estimated  at  less  than  two  millions,  of  which 
that  part  which  consists  in  gold  and  silver 
most  probably  does  not  amount  to  half  a 
million.  But  though  the  circulating  gold  and 
silver  of  Scotland  have  suffered  so  great  a 
diminution  during  this  period,  its  real  riches 

1  See  Ruddiman’s  preface  to  Anderson’s  Diplo- 
mata,  etc.,  Scotice. 


and  prosperity  do  not  appear  to  have  suffered 
any.  Its  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  trade, 
on  the  contrary,  the  annual  produce  of  its 
land  and  labour,  have  evidently  been  aug¬ 
mented. 

It  is  chiefly  by  discounting  bills  of  exchange, 
that  is,  by  advancing  money  upon  them  be¬ 
fore  they  are  due,  that  the  greater  part  of 
banks  and  bankers  issue  their  promissory 
notes.  They  deduct  always,  upon  whatever 
sum  they  advance,  the  legal  interest  till  the 
bill  shall  become  due.  The  payment  of  the 
bill,  when  it  becomes  due,  replaces  to  the 
bank  the  value  of  what  had  been  advanced, 
together  with  a  clear  profit  of  the  interest. 
The  banker  who  advances  to  the  merchant 
whose  bill  he  discounts,  not  gold  and  silver, 
but  his  own  promissory  notes,  has  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  being  able  to  discount  to  a  greater 
amount,  by  the  whole  value  of  his  promissory 
notes,  which  he  finds  by  experience  are  com¬ 
monly  in  circulation.  He  is  thereby  enabled 
to  make  his  clear  gain  of  interest  on  so  much 
a  larger  sum. 

The  commerce  of  Scotland,  which  at  pres¬ 
ent  is  not  very  great,  was  still  more  incon¬ 
siderable  when  the  two  first  banking  com¬ 
panies  were  established,  and  those  companies 
would  have  had  but  little  trade  had  they 
confined  their  business  to  the  discounting  of 
bills  of  exchange.  They  invented,  therefore, 
another  method  of  issuing  their  promissory 
notes;  by  granting  what  they  called  cash  ac¬ 
counts,  that  is  by  giving  credit  to  the  extent 
of  a  certain  sum  (two  or  three  thousand 
pounds,  for  example)  to  any  individual  who 
could  procure  two  persons  of  undoubted  credit 
and  good  landed  estate  to  become  surety  for 
him,  that  whatever  money  should  be  ad¬ 
vanced  to  him,  within  the  sum  for  which  the 
credit  had  been  given,  should  be  repaid  upon 
demand,  together  with  the  legal  interest. 
Credits  of  this  kind  are,  I  believe,  commonly 
granted  by  banks  and  bankers  in  all  different 
parts  of  the  world.  But  the  easy  terms  upon 
which  the  Scotch  banking  companies  accept 
of  repayment  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  peculiar 
to  them,  and  have,  perhaps,  been  the  princi¬ 
pal  cause,  both  of  the  great  trade  of  those 
companies  and  of  the  benefit  which  the 
country  has  received  from  it. 

Whoever  has  a  credit  of  this  kind  with  one 
of  those  companies,  and  borrows  a  thousand 
pounds  upon  it,  for  example,  may  repay  this 
sum  piecemeal,  by  twenty  and  thirty  pounds 
at  a  time,  the  company  discounting  a  pro¬ 
portionable  part  of  the  interest  of  the  grea* 
sum  from  the  day  on  which  each  of  those 
small  sums  is  paid  in  till  the  whole  be  in  this 
manner  repaid.  All  merchants,  therefore,  and 
almost  all  men  of  business,  find  it  convenient 
to  keep  such  cash  accounts  with  them,  and 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


128 

are  thereby  interested  to  promote  the  trade 
of  those  companies,  by  readily  receiving  their 
notes  in  all  payments,  and  by  encouraging  all 
those  with  whom  they  have  any  influence  to 
do  the  same.  The  banks,  when  their  custom¬ 
ers  apply  to  them  for  money,  generally  ad¬ 
vance  it  to  them  in  their  own  promissory 
notes.  These  the  merchants  pay  away  to  the 
manufacturers  for  goods,  the  manufacturers  to 
the  farmers  for  materials  and  provisions,  the 
farmers  to  their  landlords  for  rent,  the  land¬ 
lords  repay  them  to  the  merchants  for  the 
conveniencies  and  luxuries  with  which  they 
supply  them,  and  the  merchants  again  re¬ 
turn  them  to  the  banks  in  order  to  balance 
their  cash  accounts,  or  to  replace  what  they 
may  have  borrowed  of  them;  and  thus  almost 
the  whole  money  business  of  the  country  is 
transacted  by  means  of  them.  Hence  the 
great  trade  of  those  companies. 

By  means  of  those  cash  accounts  every  mer¬ 
chant  can,  without  imprudence,  carry  on  a 
greater  trade  than  he  otherwise  could  do.  If 
there  are  two  merchants,  one  in  London  and 
the  other  in  Edinburgh,  who  employ  equal 
stocks  in  the  same  branch  of  trade,  the  Edin¬ 
burgh  merchant  can,  without  imprudence, 
carry  on  a  greater  trade  and  give  employment 
to  a  greater  number  of  people  than  the  Lon¬ 
don  merchant.  The  London  merchant  must 
always  keep  by  him  a  considerable  sum  of 
money,  either  in  his  own  coffers,  or  in  those 
of  his  banker,  who  gives  him  no  interest  for 
it,  in  order  to  answer  the  demands  continu¬ 
ally  coming  upon  him  for  payment  of  the 
goods  which  he  purchases  upon  credit.  Let 
the  ordinary  amount  of  this  sum  be  supposed 
five  hundred  pounds.  The  value  of  the  goods 
in  his  warehouse  must  always  be  less  by  five 
hundred  pounds  than  it  would  have  been 
had  he  not  been  obliged  to  keep  such  a  sum 
unemployed.  Let  us  suppose  that  he  generally 
disposes  of  his  whole  stock  upon  hand,  or 
of  goods  to  the  value  of  his  whole  stock  upon 
hand,  once  in  the  year.  By  being  obliged  to 
keep  so  great  a  sum  unemployed,  he  must  sell 
in  a  year  five  hundred  pounds’  worth  less 
goods  than  he  might  otherwise  have  done. 
His  annual  profits  must  be  less  by  all  that  he 
could  have  made  by  the  sale  of  five  hundred 
pounds’  worth  more  goods;  and  the  number 
of  people  employed  in  preparing  his  goods  for 
the  market  must  be  less  by  all  those  that  five 
hundred  pounds  more  stock  could  have  em¬ 
ployed.  The  merchant  in  Edinburgh,  on  the 
other  hand,  keeps  no  money  unemployed  for 
answering  such  occasional  demands.  When 
they  actually  come  upon  him,  he  satisfies 
them  from  his  cash  account  with  the  bank, 
and  gradually  replaces  the  sum  borrowed  with 
the  money  or  paper  which  comes  in  from  the 
occasional  sales  of  his  goods.  With  the  same 


stock,  therefore,  he  can,  without  imprudence, 
have  at  all  times  in  his  warehouse  a  larger 
quantity  of  goods  than  the  London  merchant; 
and  can  thereby  both  make  a  greater  profit 
himself,  and  give  constant  employment  to  a 
greater  number  of  industrious  people  who  pre¬ 
pare  those  goods  for  the  market.  Hence  the 
great  benefit  which  the  country  has  derived 
from  this  trade. 

The  facility  of  discounting  bills  of  exchange, 
it  may  be  thought  indeed,  gives  the  English 
merchants  a  conveniency  equivalent  to  the 
cash  accounts  of  the  Scotch  merchants.  But 
the  Scotch  merchants,  it  must  be  remembered, 
can  discount  their  bills  of  exchange  as  easily 
as  the  English  merchants;  and  have,  besides, 
the  additional  conveniency  of  their  cash  ac¬ 
counts. 

The  whole  paper  money  of  every  kind  which 
can  easily  circulate  in  any  country  never  can 
exceed  the  value  of  the  gold  and  silver,  of 
which  it  supplies  the  place,  or  which  (the 
commerce  being  supposed  the  same)  would 
circulate  there,  if  there  was  no  paper  money. 
If  twenty  shilling  notes,  for  example,  are  the 
lowest  paper  money  current  in  Scotland,  the 
whole  of  that  currency  which  can  easily  circu¬ 
late  there  cannot  exceed  the  sum  of  gold  and 
silver  which  would  be  necessary  for  transact¬ 
ing  the  annual  exchanges  of  twenty  shillings 
value  and  upwards  usually  transacted  within 
that  country.  Should  the  circulating  paper 
at  any  time  exceed  that  sum,  as  the  excess 
could  neither  be  sent  abroad  nor  be  employed 
in  the  circulation  of  the  country,  it  must 
immediately  return  upon  the  banks  to  be  ex¬ 
changed  for  gold  and  silver.  Many  people 
would  immediately  perceive  that  they  had 
more  of  this  paper  than  was  necessary  for 
transacting  their  business  at  home,  and  as 
they  could  not  send  it  abroad,  they  would 
immediately  demand  payment  of  it  from  the 
banks.  When  this  superfluous  paper  was  con¬ 
verted  into  gold  and  silver,  they  could  easily 
find  a  use  for  it  by  sending  it  abroad;  but 
they  could  find  none  while  it  remained  in  the 
shape  of  paper.  There  would  immediately, 
therefore,  be  a  run  upon  the  banks  to  the 
whole  extent  of  this  superfluous  paper,  and, 
if  they  showed  any  difficulty  or  backwardness 
in  payment,  to  a  much  greater  extent;  the 
alarm  which  this  would  occasion  necessarily 
increasing  the  run. 

Over  and  above  the  expenses  which  are 
common  to  every  branch  of  trade;  such  as 
the  expense  of  house-rent,  the  wages  of  ser¬ 
vants,  clerks,  accountants,  etc.;  the  expenses 
peculiar  to  a  bank  consist  chiefly  in  two  arti¬ 
cles:  first,  in  the  expense  of  keeping  at  all 
times  in  its  coffers,  for  answering  the  occa¬ 
sional  demands  of  the  holders  of  its  notes, 
a  large  sum  of  money,  of  which  it  loses  the 


129 


Money  a  Branch  of 

interest;  and,  secondly,  in  the  expense  of 
replenishing  those  coffers  as  fast  as  they  are 
emptied  by  answering  such  occasional  de¬ 
mands. 

A  banking  company,  which  issues  more  pa¬ 
per  than  can  be  employed  in  the  circulation 
of  the  country,  and  of  which  the  excess  is 
continually  returning  upon  them  for  payment, 
ought  to  increase  the  quantity  of  gold  and 
silver,  which  they  keep  at  all  times  in  their 
coffers,  not  only  in  proportion  to  this  ex¬ 
cessive  increase  of  their  circulation,  but  in  a 
much  greater  proportion;  their  notes  return¬ 
ing  upon  them  much  faster  than  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  excess  of  their  quantity.  Such  a 
company,  therefore,  ought  to  increase  the 
first  article  of  their  expense,  not  only  in 
proportion  to  this  forced  increase  of  their 
business,  but  in  a  much  greater  proportion. 

The  coffers  of  such  a  company  too,  though 
they  ought  to  be  filled  much  fuller,  yet  must 
empty  themselves  much  faster  than  if  their 
business  was  confined  within  more  reasonable 
bounds,  and  must  require,  not  only  a  more 
violent,  but  a  more  constant  and  uninter¬ 
rupted  exertion  of  expense  in  order  to  re¬ 
plenish  them.  The  coin  too,  which  is  thus 
continually  drawn  in  such  large  quantities 
from  their  coffers,  cannot  be  employed  in  the 
circulation  of  the  country.  It  comes  in  place 
of  a  paper  which  is  over  and  above  what  can 
be  employed  in  that  circulation,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  over  and  above  what  can  be  employed 
in  it  too.  But  as  that  coin  will  not  be  allowed 
to  lie  idle,  it  must,  in  one  shape  or  another, 
be  sent  abroad,  in  order  to  find  that  profit¬ 
able  employment  which  it  cannot  find  at 
home;  and  this  continual  exportation  of  gold 
and  silver,  by  enhancing  the  difficulty,  must 
necessarily  enhance  still  further  the  expense 
of  the  bank,  in  finding  new  gold  and  silver 
in  order  to  replenish  those  coffers,  which 
empty  themselves  so  very  rapidly.  Such  a 
company,  therefore,  must,  in  proportion  to 
this  forced  increase  of  their  business,  increase 
the  second  article  of  their  expense  still  more 
than  the  first. 

Let  us  suppose  that  all  the  paper  of  a  partic¬ 
ular  bank,  which  the  circulation  of  the  country 
can  easily  absorb  and  employ,  amounts  exactly 
to  forty  thousand  pounds;  and  that  for  answer¬ 
ing  occasional  demands,  this  bank  is  obliged 
to  keep  at  all  times  in  its  coffers  ten  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  in  gold  and  silver.  Should  this 
bank  attempt  to  circulate  forty-four  thousand 
pounds,  the  four  thousand  pounds  which  are 
over  and  above  what  the  circulation  can  easily 
absorb  and  employ,  will  return  upon  it  almost 
as  fast  as  they  are  issued.  For  answering  oc¬ 
casional  demands,  therefore,  this  bank  ought 
to  keep  at  all  times  in  its  coffers,  not  eleven 
thousand  pounds  only,  but  fourteen  thousand 


the  General  Stock 

pounds.  It  will  thus  gain  nothing  by  the 
interest  of  the  four  thousand  pounds’  exces¬ 
sive  circulation;  and  it  will  lose  the  whole 
expense  of  continually  collecting  four  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  in  gold  and  silver,  which  will  be 
continually  going  out  of  its  coffers  as  fast  as 
they  are  brought  into  them. 

Had  every  particular  banking  company  al¬ 
ways  understood  and  attended  to  its  own  par¬ 
ticular  interest,  the  circulation  never  could 
have  been  overstocked  with  paper  money.  But 
every  particular  banking  company  has  not  al¬ 
ways  understood  or  attended  to  its  own  par¬ 
ticular  interest,  and  the  circulation  has  fre¬ 
quently  been  overstocked  with  paper  money. 

By  issuing  too  great  a  quantity  of  paper,  of 
which  the  excess  was  continually  returning, 
in  order  to  be  exchanged  for  gold  and  silver, 
the  Bank  of  England  was  for  many  years  to¬ 
gether  obliged  to  coin  gold  to  the  extent  of 
between  eight  hundred  thousand  pounds  and 
a  million  a  year;  or  at  an  average,  about  eight 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds.  For  this 
great  coinage  the  bank  (in  consequence  of 
the  worn  and  degraded  state  into  which  the 
gold  coin  had  fallen  a  few  years  ago)  was 
frequently  obliged  to  purchase  gold  bullion  at 
the  high  price  of  four  pounds  an  ounce,  which 
it  soon  after  issued  in  coin  at  £3  17s.  lO1/^. 
an  ounce,  losing  in  this  manner  between  two 
and  a  half  and  three  per  cent  upon  the  coin¬ 
age  of  so  very  large  a  sum.  Though  the  bank 
therefore  paid  no  seignorage,  though  the  gov¬ 
ernment  was  properly  at  the  expense  of  the 
coinage,  this  liberality  of  government  did  not 
prevent  altogether  the  expense  of  the  bank. 

The  Scotch  banks,  in  consequence  of  an  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  same  kind,  were  all  obliged  to  em¬ 
ploy  constantly  agents  at  London  to  collect 
money  for  them,  at  an  expense  which  was  sel¬ 
dom  below  one  and  a  half  or  two  per  cent. 
This  money  was  sent  down  by  the  waggon, 
and  insured  by  the  carriers  at  an  additional 
expense  of  three  quarters  per  cent  or  fifteen 
shillings  on  the  hundred  pounds.  Those  agents 
were  not  always  able  to  replenish  the  coffers 
of  their  employers  so  fast  as  they  were  emp¬ 
tied.  In  this  case  the  resource  of  the  banks 
was  to  draw  upon  their  correspondents  in  Lon¬ 
don  bills  of  exchange  to  the  extent  of  the  sum 
which  they  wanted.  When  those  correspon¬ 
dents  afterwards  drew  upon  them  for  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  this  sum,  together  with  the  interest 
and  a  commission,  some  of  those  banks,  from 
the  distress  into  which  their  excessive  circu¬ 
lation  had  thrown  them,  had  sometimes  no 
other  means  of  satisfying  this  draught  but  by 
drawing  a  second  set  of  bills  either  upon  the 
same,  or  upon  some  other  correspondents  in 
London;  and  the  same  sum,  or  rather  bills  for 
the  same  sum,  would  in  this  manner  make 


130  The  Wealth 

sometimes  more  than  two  or  three  journeys, 
the  debtor,  bank,  paying  always  the  interest 
and  commission  upon  the  whole  accumulated 
sum.  Even  those  Scotch  banks  which  never 
distinguished  themselves  by  their  extreme  im¬ 
prudence,  were  sometimes  obliged  to  employ 
this  ruinous  resource. 

The  gold  coin  which  was  paid  out  either  by 
the  Bank  of  England,  or  by  the  Scotch  banks, 
in  exchange  for  that  part  of  their  paper  which 
was  over  and  above  what  could  be  employed 
in  the  circulation  of  the  country,  being  like¬ 
wise  over  and  above  what  could  be  employed 
in  that  circulation,  was  sometimes  sent 
abroad  in  the  shape  of  coin,  sometimes  melted 
down  and  sent  abroad  in  the  shape  of  bul¬ 
lion,  and  sometimes  melted  down  and  sold  to 
the  Bank  of  England  at  the  high  price  of  four 
pounds  an  ounce.  It  was  the  newest,  the  heav¬ 
iest,  and  the  best  pieces  only  which  were  care¬ 
fully  picked  out  of  the  whole  coin,  and  either 
sent  abroad  or  melted  down.  At  home,  and 
while  they  remained  in  the  shape  of  coin, 
those  heavy  pieces  were  of  no  more  value 
than  the  light.  But  they  were  of  more  value 
abroad,  or  when  melted  down  into  bullion,  at 
home.  The  Bank  of  England,  notwithstanding 
their  great  annual  coinage,  found  to  their  as¬ 
tonishment  that  there  was  every  year  the 
same  scarcity  of  coin  as  there  had  been  the 
year  before;  and  that  notwithstanding  the 
great  quantity  of  good  and  new  coin  which 
was  every  year  issued  from  the  bank,  the 
state  of  the  coin,  instead  of  growing  better 
and  better,  became  every  year  worse  and 
worse.  Every  year  they  found  themselves  un¬ 
der  the  necessity  of  coining  nearly  the  same 
quantity  of  gold  as  they  had  coined  the  year 
before,  and  from  the  continual  rise  in  the 
price  of  gold  bullion,  in  consequence  of  the 
continual  wearing  and  clipping  of  the  coin, 
the  expense  of  this  great  annual  coinage  be¬ 
came  every  year  greater  and  greater.  The 
Bank  of  England,  it  is  to  be  observed,  by 
supplying  its  own  coffers  with  coin,  is  indi¬ 
rectly  obliged  to  supply  the  whole  kingdom, 
into  which  coin  is  continually  flowing  from 
those  coffers  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  What¬ 
ever  coin  therefore  was  wanted  to  support 
this  excessive  circulation  both  of  Scotch  and 
English  paper  money,  whatever  vacuities  this 
excessive  circulation  occasioned  in  the  neces¬ 
sary  coin  of  the  kingdom,  the  Bank  of  Eng¬ 
land  was  obliged  to  supply  them.  The  Scotch 
banks,  no  doubt,  paid  all  of  them  very  dearly 
for  their  own  imprudence  and  inattention. 
But  the  Bank  of  England  paid  very  dearly, 
not  only  for  its  own  imprudence,  but  for  the 
much  greater  imprudence  of  almost  all  the 
Scotch  banks. 

The  overtrading  of  some  bold  projectors 
in  both  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom  was  the 


of  Nations 

original  cause  of  this  excessive  circulation  of 
paper  money. 

What  a  bank  can  with  propriety  advance 
to  a  merchant  or  undertaker  of  any  kind,  is 
not  either  the  whole  capital  with  which  he 
trades,  or  even  any  considerable  part  of  that 
capital;  but  that  part  of  it  only  which  he 
would  otherwise  be  obliged  to  keep  by  him 
unemployed,  and  in  ready  money  for  answer¬ 
ing  occasional  demands.  If  the  paper  money 
which  the  bank  advances  never  exceeds  this 
value,  it  can  never  exceed  the  value  of  the 
gold  and  silver  which  would  necessarily  cir¬ 
culate  in  the  country  if  there  was  no  paper 
money;  it  can  never  exceed  the  quantity 
which  the  circulation  of  the  country  can  easily 
absorb  and  employ. 

When  a  bank  discounts  to  a  merchant  a  real 
bill  of  exchange  drawn  by  a  real  creditor  upon 
a  real  debtor,  and  which,  as  soon  as  it  be¬ 
comes  due,  is  really  paid  by  that  debtor,  it 
only  advances  to  him  a  part  of  the  value 
which  he  would  otherwise  be  obliged  to  keep 
by  him  unemployed  and  in  ready  money  for 
answering  occasional  demands.  The  payment 
of  the  bill,  when  it  becomes  due,  replaces  to 
the  bank  the  value  of  what  it  had  advanced, 
together  with  the  interest.  The  coffers  of  the 
bank,  so  far  as  its  dealings  are  confined  to 
such  customers,  resemble  a  water  pond,  from 
which,  though  a  stream  is  continually  running 
out,  yet  another  is  continually  running  in, 
fully  equal  to  that  which  runs  out;  so  that, 
without  any  further  care  or  attention,  the 
pond  keeps  always  equally,  or  very  near 
equally  full.  Little  or  no  expense  can  ever  be 
necessary  for  replenishing  the  coffers  of  such 
a  bank. 

A  merchant,  without  overtrading,  may 
frequently  have  occasion  for  a  sum  of  ready 
money,  even  when  he  has  no  bills  to  discount. 
When  a  bank,  besides  discounting  his  bills, 
advances  him  likewise  upon  such  occasions 
such  sums  upon  his  cash  account,  and  accepts 
of  a  piecemeal  repayment  as  the  money  comes 
in  from  the  occasional  sale  of  his  goods,  upon 
the  easy  terms  of  the  banking  companies  of 
Scotland;  it  dispenses  him  entirely  from  the 
necessity  of  keeping  any  part  of  his  stock  by 
him  unemployed  and  in  ready  money  for  an¬ 
swering  occasional  demands.  When  such  de¬ 
mands  actually  come  upon  him,  he  can  answer 
them  sufficiently  from  his  cash  account.  The 
bank,  however,  in  dealing  with  such  custom¬ 
ers,  ought  to  observe  with  great  attention, 
whether  in  the  course  of  some  short  period 
(of  four,  five,  six,  or  eight  months  for  exam¬ 
ple)  the  sum  of  the  repayments  which  it  com¬ 
monly  receives  from  them  is,  or  is  not,  fully 
equal  to  that  of  the  advances  which  it  com¬ 
monly  makes  to  them.  If,  within  the  course 
of  such  short  periods,  the  sum  of  the  repay- 


131 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


ments  from  certain  customers  is,  upon  most 
occasions,  fully  equal  to  that  of  the  advances, 
it  may  safely  continue  to  deal  with  such  cus¬ 
tomers.  Though  the  stream  which  is  in  this 
case  continually  running  out  from  its  coffers 
may  be  very  large,  that  which  is  continually 
running  into  them  must  be  at  least  equally 
large;  so  that  without  any  further  care  or 
attention  those  coffers  are  likely  to  be  always 
equally  or  very  near  equally  full;  and  scarce 
ever  to  require  any  extraordinary  expense  to 
replenish  them.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  sum 
of  the  repayments  from  certain  other  custom¬ 
ers  falls  commonly  very  much  short  of  the 
advances  which  it  makes  to  them,  it  cannot 
with  any  safety  continue  to  deal  with  such 
customers,  at  least  if  they  continue  to  deal 
with  it  in  this  manner.  The  stream  which  is 
in  this  case  continually  running  out  from  its 
coffers  is  necessarily  much  larger  than  that 
which  is  continually  running  in;  so  that,  un¬ 
less  they  are  replenished  by  some  great  and 
continual  effort  of  expense,  those  coffers  must 
soon  be  exhausted  altogether. 

The  banking  companies  of  Scotland,  accord¬ 
ingly,  were  for  a  long  time  very  careful  to  re¬ 
quire  frequent  and  regular  repayments  from 
all  their  customers,  and  did  not  care  to  deal 
with  any  person,  whatever  might  be  his  for¬ 
tune  or  credit,  who  did  not  make,  what  they 
called,  frequent  and  regular  operations  with 
them.  By  this  attention,  besides  saving  almost 
entirely  the  extraordinary  expense  of  replen¬ 
ishing  their  coffers,  they  gained  two  other 
very  considerable  advantages. 

First,  by  this  attention  they  were  enabled 
to  make  some  tolerable  judgment  concerning 
the  thriving  or  declining  circumstances  of 
their  debtors,  without  being  obliged  to  look 
out  for  any  other  evidence  besides  what  their 
own  books  afforded  them;  men  being  for  the 
most  part  either  regular  or  irregular  in  their 
repayments,  according  as  their  circumstances 
are  either  thriving  or  declining.  A  private  man 
who  lends  out  his  money  to  perhaps  half  a 
dozen  or  a  dozen  of  debtors,  may,  either  by 
himself  or  his  agents,  observe  and  inquire  both 
constantly  and  carefully  into  the  conduct  and 
situation  of  each  of  them.  But  a  banking  com¬ 
pany,  which  lends  money  to  perhaps  five  hun¬ 
dred  different  people,  and  of  which  the  at¬ 
tention  is  continually  occupied  by  objects  of  a 
very  different  kind,  can  have  no  regular  infor¬ 
mation  concerning  the  conduct  and  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  greater  part  of  its  debtors  be¬ 
yond  what  its  own  books  afford  it.  In  re¬ 
quiring  frequent  and  regular  repayments  from 
all  their  customers,  the  banking  companies 
of  Scotland  had  probably  this  advantage  in 
view. 

Secondly,  by  this  attention  they  secured 
themselves  from  the  possibility  of  issuing  more 


paper  money  than  what  the  circulation  of 
the  country  could  easily  absorb  and  employ. 
When  they  observed  that  within  moderate 
periods  of  time  the  repayments  of  a  particular 
customer  were  upon  most  occasions  fully 
equal  to  the  advances  which  they  had  made 
to  him,  they  might  be  assured  that  the  paper 
money  which  they  had  advanced  to  him  had 
not  at  any  time  exceeded  the  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver  which  he  would  otherwise 
have  been  obliged  to  keep  by  him  for  answer¬ 
ing  occasional  demands;  and  that,  conse¬ 
quently,  the  paper  money,  which  they  had 
circulated  by  his  means,  had  not  at  any  time 
exceeded  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  which 
would  have  circulated  in  the  country  had  there 
been  no  paper  money.  The  frequency,  regu¬ 
larity,  and  amount  of  his  repayments  would 
sufficiently  demonstrate  that  the  amount  of 
their  advances  had  at  no  time  exceeded  that 
part  of  his  capital  which  he  would  otherwise 
have  been  obliged  to  keep  by  him  unemployed 
and  in  ready  money  for  answering  occasional 
demands;  that  is,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping 
the  rest  of  his  capital  in  constant  employ¬ 
ment.  It  is  this  part  of  his  capital  only 
which,  within  moderate  periods  of  time,  is 
continually  returning  to  every  dealer  in  the 
shape  of  money,  whether  paper  or  coin,  and 
continually  going  from  him  in  the  same  shape. 
If  the  advances  of  the  bank  had  commonly 
exceeded  this  part  of  his  capital,  the  ordinary 
amount  of  his  repayments  could  not,  with¬ 
in  moderate  periods  of  time,  have  equalled 
the  ordinary  amount  of  its  advances.  The 
stream  which,  by  means  of  his  dealings,  was 
continually  running  into  the  coffers  of  the 
bank,  could  not  have  been  equal  to  the  stream 
which,  by  means  of  the  same  dealings,  was 
continually  running  out.  The  advances  of  the 
bank  paper,  by  exceeding  the  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver  which,  had  there  been  no 
such  advances,  he  would  have  been  obliged 
to  keep  by  him  for  answering  occasional  de¬ 
mands,  might  soon  come  to  exceed  the  whole 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  which  (the  com¬ 
merce  being  supposed  the  same)  would  have 
circulated  in  the  country  had  there  been  no 
paper  money;  and  consequently  to  exceed  the 
quantity  which  the  circulation  of  the  country 
could  easily  absorb  and  employ;  and  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  this  paper  money  would  immediately 
have  returned  upon  the  bank  in  order  to  be 
exchanged  for  gold  and  silver.  This  second 
advantage,  though  equally  real,  was  not  per¬ 
haps  so  well  understood  by  all  the  different 
banking  companies  of  Scotland  as  the  first. 

When,  partly  by  the  conveniency  of  dis¬ 
counting  bills,  and  partly  by  that  of  cash  ac¬ 
counts,  the  creditable  traders  of  any  country 
can  be  dispensed  from  the  necessity  of  keep¬ 
ing  any  part  of  their  stock  by  them  unem- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


132 

ployed  and  in  ready  money  for  answering 
occasional  demands,  they  can  reasonably  ex¬ 
pect  no  farther  assistance  from  banks  and 
bankers,  who,  when  they  have  gone  thus  far, 
cannot,  consistently  with  their  own  interest 
and  safety,  go  farther.  A  bank  cannot,  con¬ 
sistently  with  its  own  interest,  advance  to  a 
trader  the  whole  or  even  the  greater  part  of 
the  circulating  capital  with  which  he  trades; 
because,  though  that  capital  is  continually 
returning  to  him  in  the  shape  of  money,  and 
going  from  him  in  the  same  shape,  yet  the 
whole  of  the  returns  is  too  distant  from  the 
whole  of  the  outgoings,  and  the  sum  of  his 
repayments  could  not  equal  the  sum  of  its 
advances  within  such  moderate  periods  of 
time  as  suit  the  conveniency  of  a  bank.  Still 
less  could  a  bank  afford  to  advance  him  any 
considerable  part  of  his  fixed  capital;  of  the 
capital  which  the  undertaker  of  an  iron  forge, 
for  example,  employs  in  erecting  his  forge 
and  smelting-house,  his  workhouses  and  ware¬ 
houses,  the  dwelling-houses  of  his  workmen, 
etc.;  of  the  capital  which  the  undertaker  of 
a  mine  employs  in  sinking  his  shafts,  in  erect¬ 
ing  engines  for  drawing  out  the  water,  in 
making  roads  and  waggon-ways,  etc.;  of  the 
capital  which  the  person  who  undertakes  to 
improve  land  employs  in  clearing,  draining, 
enclosing,  manuring,  and  ploughing  waste  and 
uncultivated  fields,  in  building  farm-houses, 
with  all  their  necessary  appendages  of  stables, 
granaries,  etc.  The  returns  of  the  fixed  capital 
are  in  almost  all  cases  much  slower  than  those 
of  the  circulating  capital;  and  such  expenses, 
even  when  laid  out  with  the  greatest  pru¬ 
dence  and  judgment,  very  seldom  return  to 
the  undertaker  till  after  a  period  of  many 
years,  a  period  by  far  too  distant  to  suit  the 
conveniency  of  a  bank.  Traders  and  other  un¬ 
dertakers  may,  no  doubt,  with  great  pro¬ 
priety,  carry  on  a  very  considerable  part  of 
their  projects  with  borrowed  money.  In  jus¬ 
tice  to  their  creditors,  however,  their  own 
capital  ought,  in  this  case,  to  be  sufficient  to 
ensure,  if  I  may  say  so,  the  capital  of  those 
creditors;  or  to  render  it  extremely  improb¬ 
able  that  those  creditors  should  incur  any  loss, 
even  though  the  success  of  the  project  should 
fall  very  much  short  of  the  expectation  of  the 
projectors.  Even  with  this  precaution  too,  the 
money  which  is  borrowed,  and  which  it  is 
meant  should  not  be  repaid  till  after  a  period 
of  several  years,  ought  not  to  be  borrowed  of 
a  bank,  but  ought  to  be  borrowed  upon  bond 
or  mortgage  of  such  private  people  as  pro¬ 
pose  to  live  upon  the  interest  of  their  money 
without  taking  the  trouble  themselves  to  em¬ 
ploy  the  capital,  and  who  are  upon  that  ac¬ 
count  willing  to  lend  that  capital  to  such  peo¬ 
ple  of  good  credit  as  are  likely  to  keep  it  for 
several  years.  A  bank,  indeed,  which  lends  its 


money  without  the  expense  of  stamped  paper, 
or  of  attorneys’  fees  for  drawing  bonds  and 
mortgages,  and  which  accepts  of  repayment 
upon  the  easy  terms  of  the  banking  compa¬ 
nies  of  Scotland,  would,  no  doubt,  be  a  very 
convenient  creditor  to  such  traders  and  un¬ 
dertakers.  But  such  traders  and  undertakers 
would,  surely,  be  most  inconvenient  debtors 
to  such  a  bank. 

It  is  now  more  than  five-and-twenty  years 
since  the  paper  money  issued  by  the  different 
banking  companies  of  Scotland  was  fully  equal, 
or  rather  was  somewhat  more  than  fully  equal, 
to  what  the  circulation  of  the  country  could 
easily  absorb  and  employ.  Those  companies, 
therefore,  had  so  long  ago  given  all  the  as¬ 
sistance  to  the  traders  and  other  undertakers 
of  Scotland  which  it  is  possible  for  banks 
and  bankers,  consistently  with  their  own 
interest,  to  give.  They  had  even  done  some¬ 
what  more.  They  had  overtraded  a  little, 
and  had  brought  upon  themselves  that  loss, 
or  at  least  that  diminution  of  profit,  which 
in  this  particular  business  never  fails  to  at¬ 
tend  the  smallest  degree  of  overtrading.  Those 
traders  and  other  undertakers,  having  got 
so  much  assistance  from  banks  and  bank¬ 
ers,  wished  to  get  still  more.  The  banks,  they 
seem  to  have  thought,  could  extend  their 
credits  to  whatever  sum  might  be  wanted, 
without  incurring  any  other  expense  besides 
that  of  a  few  reams  of  paper.  They  com¬ 
plained  of  the  contracted  views  and  dastardly 
spirit  of  the  directors  of  those  banks,  which 
did  not,  they  said,  extend  their  credits  in 
proportion  to  the  extension  of  the  trade  of 
the  country;  meaning,  no  doubt,  by  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  that  trade  the  extension  of  their 
own  projects  beyond  what  they  could  carry 
on,  either  with  their  own  capital,  or  with 
what  they  had  credit  to  borrow  of  private 
people  in  the  usual  way  of  bond  or  mortgage. 
The  banks,  they  seem  to  have  thought,  were 
in  honour  bound  to  supply  the  deficiency,  and 
to  provide  them  with  all  the  capital  which 
they  wanted  to  trade  with.  The  banks,  how¬ 
ever,  were  of  a  different  opinion,  and  upon 
their  refusing  to  extend  their  credits,  some  of 
those  traders  had  recourse  to  an  expedient 
which,  for  a  time,  served  their  purpose, 
though  at  a  much  greater  expense,  yet  as  ef¬ 
fectually  as  the  utmost  extension  of  bank 
credits  could  have  done.  This  expedient  was 
no  other  than  the  well-known  shift  of  draw¬ 
ing  and  redrawing;  the  shift  to  which  unfor¬ 
tunate  traders  have  sometimes  recourse  when 
they  are  upon  the  brink  of  bankruptcy.  The 
practice  of  raising  money  in  this  manner  had 
been  long  known  in  England,  and  during  the 
course  of  the  late  war,  when  the  high  profits 
of  trade  afforded  a  great  temptation  to  over¬ 
trading,  is  said  to  have  carried  on  to  a  very 


13:3 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


great  extent.  From  England  it  was  brought 
into  Scotland,  where,  in  proportion  to  the 
very  limited  commerce,  and  to  the  very  mod¬ 
erate  capital  of  the  country,  it  was  soon  car¬ 
ried  on  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  it  ever 
had  been  in  England. 

The  practice  of  drawing  and  redrawing  is 
so  well  known  to  all  men  of  business  that  it 
may  perhaps  be  thought  unnecessary  to  give 
an  account  of  it.  But  as  this  book  may  come 
into  the  hands  of  many  people  who  are  not 
men  of  business,  and  as  the  effects  of  this 
practice  upon  the  banking  trade  are  not  per¬ 
haps  generally  understood  even  by  men  of 
business  themselves,  I  shall  endeavour  to  ex¬ 
plain  it  as  distinctly  as  I  can. 

The  customs  of  merchants,  which  were  es¬ 
tablished  when  the  barbarous  laws  of  Eu¬ 
rope  did  not  enforce  the  performance  of  their 
contracts,  and  w^hich  during  the  course  of  the 
two  last  centuries  have  been  adopted  into  the 
laws  of  all  European  nations,  have  given  such 
extraordinary  privileges  to  bills  of  exchange 
that  money  is  more  readily  advanced  upon 
them  than  upon  any  other  species  of  obliga¬ 
tion,  especially  when  they  are  made  payable 
within  so  short  a  period  as  two  or  three 
months  after  their  date.  If,  when  the  bill  be¬ 
comes  due,  the  acceptor  does  not  pay  it  as 
soon  as  it  is  presented,  he  becomes  from  that 
moment  a  bankrupt.  The  bill  is  protested, 
and  returns  upon  the  drawer,  who,  if  he  does 
not  immediately  pay  it,  becomes  likewise  a 
bankrupt.  If,  before  it  came  to  the  person 
who  presents  it  to  the  acceptor  for  payment, 
it  had  passed  through  the  hands  of  several 
other  persons,  who  had  successively  advanced 
to  one  another  the  contents  of  it  either  in 
money  or  goods,  and  who  to  express  that 
each  of  them  had  in  his  turn  received  those 
contents,  had  all  of  them  in  their  order  en¬ 
dorsed,  that  is,  written  their  names  upon  the 
back  of  the  bill;  each  endorser  becomes  in  his 
turn  liable  to  the  owner  of  the  bill  for  those 
contents,  and,  if  he  fails  to  pay,  he  becomes 
too  from  that  moment  a  bankrupt.  Though 
the  drawer,  acceptor,  and  endorsers  of  the 
bill  should,  all  of  them,  be  persons  of  doubt¬ 
ful  credit;  yet  still  the  shortness  of  the  date 
gives  some  security  to  the  owner  of  the  bill. 
Though  all  of  them  may  be  very  likely  to 
become  bankrupts,  it  is  a  chance  if  they  all 
become  so  in  so  short  a  time.  The  house  is 
crazy,  says  a  weary  traveller  to  himself,  and 
will  not  stand  very  long;  but  it  is  a  chance 
if  it  falls  to-night,  and  I  will  venture,  there¬ 
fore,  to  sleep  in  it  to-night. 

The  trader  A  in  Edinburgh,  we  shall  sup¬ 
pose,  draws  a  bill  upon  B  in  London,  payable 
two  months  after  date.  In  reality  B  in  Lon¬ 
don  owes  nothing  to  A  in  Edinburgh;  but  he 
agrees  to  accept  of  A’s  bill,  upon  condition 


that  before  the  term  of  payment  he  shall 
redraw  upon  A  in  Edinburgh  for  the  same 
sum,  together  with  the  interest  and  a  com¬ 
mission,  another  bill,  payable  likewise  two 
months  after  date.  B  accordingly,  before  the 
expiration  of  the  first  two  months,  redraws 
this  bill  upon  A  in  Edinburgh;  who  again, 
before  the  expiration  of  the  second  two 
months,  draws  a  second  bill  upon  B  in  Lon¬ 
don,  payable  likewise  two  months  after  date; 
and  before  the  expiration  of  the  third  two 
months,  B  in  London  redrawn  upon  A  in 
Edinburgh  another  bill,  payable  also  tw^o 
months  after  date.  This  practice  has  some¬ 
times  gone  on,  not  only  for  several  months, 
but  for  several  years  together,  the  bill  al¬ 
ways  returning  upon  A  in  Edinburgh,  with 
the  accumulated  interest  and  commission  of 
all  the  former  bills.  The  interest  was  five  per 
cent  in  the  year,  and  the  commission  was 
never  less  than  one  half  per  cent  on  each 
draft.  This  commission  being  repeated  more 
than  six  times  in  the  year,  whatever  money 
A  might  raise  by  this  expedient  must  neces¬ 
sarily  have  cost  him  something  more  than 
eight  per  cent  in  the  year,  and  sometimes  a 
great  deal  more;  w^hen  either  the  price  of  the 
commission  happened  to  rise,  or  when  he  was 
obliged  to  pay  compound  interest  upon  the 
interest  and  commission  of  former  bills.  This 
practice  was  called  raising  money  by  circula¬ 
tion. 

In  a  country  where  the  ordinary  profits 
of  stock  in  the  greater  part  of  mercantile  proj¬ 
ects  are  supposed  to  run  between  six  and  ten 
per  cent,  it  must  have  been  a  very  fortunate 
speculation  of  which  the  returns  could  not 
only  repay  the  enormous  expense  at  wrhich 
the  money  was  thus  borrowed  for  carrying 
it  on;  but  afford,  besides,  a  good  surplus 
profit  to  the  projector.  Many  vast  and  exten¬ 
sive  projects,  however,  were  undertaken,  and 
for  several  years  carried  on  without  any  other 
fund  to  support  them  besides  what  was  raised 
at  this  enormous  expense.  The  projectors,  no 
doubt,  had  in  their  golden  dreams  the  most 
distinct  vision  of  this  great  profit.  Upon  their 
awaking,  however,  either  at  the  end  of  their 
projects,  or  when  they  were  no  longer  able 
to  carry  them  on,  they  very  seldom,  I  believe, 
had  the  good  fortune  to  find  it.1 

1  The  method  described  in  the  text  was  by  no 
means  either  the  most  common  or  the  most  ex¬ 
pensive  one  in  which  those  adventurers  sometimes 
raised  money  by  circulation.  It  frequently  hap¬ 
pened  that  A  in  Edinburgh  would  enable  B  in 
London  to  pay  the  first  bill  of  exchange  by  draw¬ 
ing,  a  few  days  before  it  became  due,  a  second  bill 
at  three  months’  date  upon  the  same  B  in  London. 
This  bill,  being  payable  to  his  own  order,  A  sold  in 
Edinburgh  at  par;  and  with  its  contents  purchased 
bills  upon  London  payable  at  sight  to  the  order  of 
B,  to  whom  he  sent  them  by  the  post.  Towards  the 


1B4 


The  Wealth 

The  bills  A  in  Edinburgh  drew  upon  B  in 
London,  he  regularly  discounted  two  months 
before  they  were  due  with  some  bank  or 
banker  in  Edinburgh;  and  the  bills  which  B 
in  London  redrew  upon  A  in  Edinburgh,  he 
as  regularly  discounted  either  with  the  Bank 
of  England,  or  with  some  other  bankers  in 
London.  Whatever  was  advanced  upon  such 
circulating  bills,  was,  in  Edinburgh,  advanced 
in  the  paper  of  the  Scotch  banks,  and  in 
London,  when  they  were  discounted  at  the 
Bank  of  England,  in  the  paper  of  that  bank. 
Though  the  bills  upon  which  this  paper  had 
been  advanced  were  all  of  them  repaid  in  their 
turn  as  soon  as  they  became  due;  yet  the  val¬ 
ue  which  had  been  really  advanced  upon  the 
first  bill,  was  never  really  returned  to  the 
banks  which  advanced  it;  because,  before  each 
bill  became  due,  another  bill  was  always 
drawn  to  somewhat  a  greater  amount  than 
the  bill  which  was  soon  to  be  paid;  and  the 
discounting  of  this  other  bill  was  essentially 
necessary  towards  the  payment  of  that  which 
was  soon  to  be  due.  This  payment,  therefore, 
was  altogether  fictitious.  The  stream,  which, 
by  means  of  those  circulating  bills  of  ex¬ 
change,  had  once  been  made  to  run  out  from 
the  coffers  of  the  banks,  was  never  replaced 


end  of  the  late  war,  the  exchange  between  Edin¬ 
burgh  and  London  was  frequently  three  per  cent 
against  Edinburgh,  and  those  bills  at  sight  must 
frequently  have  cost  A  that  premium.  This  trans¬ 
action  therefore  being  repeated  at  least  four  times 
in  the  year,  and  being  loaded  with  a  commission  of 
at  least  one  half  per  cent  upon  each  repetition, 
must  at  that  period  have  cost  A  at  least  fourteen 
per  cent  in  the  year.  At  other  times  A  would  en¬ 
able  B  to  discharge  the  first  bill  of  exchange  by 
drawing,  a  few  days  before  it  became  due,  a  sec¬ 
ond  bill  at  two  months’  date;  not  upon  B,  but 
upon  some  third  person,  C,  for  example,  in  Lon¬ 
don.  This  other  bill  was  made  payable  to  the  order 
of  B,  who,  upon  its  being  accepted  by  C,  discounted 
it  with  some  banker  in  London;  and  A  enabled  C 
to  discharge  it  by  drawing,  a  few  days  before  it  be¬ 
came  due,  a  third  bill,  likewise  at  two  months’ 
date,  sometimes  upon  his  first  correspondent  B, 
and  sometimes  upon  some  fourth  or  fifth  person, 
D  or  E,  for  example.  This  third  bill  was  made  pay¬ 
able  to  the  order  of  C;  who,  as  soon  as  it  was 
accepted,  discounted  it  in  the  same  manner  with 
some  banker  in  London.  Such  operations  being  re¬ 
peated  at  least  six  times  in  the  year,  and  being 
loaded  with  a  commission  of  at  least  one-half  per 
cent  upon  each  repetition,  together  with  the  legal 
interest  of  five  per  cent,  this  method  of  raising 
money,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  described  in 
the  text,  must  have  cost  A  something  more  than 
eight  per  cent.  By  saving,  however,  the  exchange 
between  Edinburgh  and  London,  it  was  less  ex¬ 
pensive  than  that  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  part 
of  this  note;  but  then  it  required  an  established 
credit  with  more  houses  than  one  in  London,  an 
advantage  which  many  of  these  adventurers  could 
not  always  find  it  easy  to  procure. 


of  Nations 

by  any  stream  which  really  run  into  them. 

The  paper  which  was  issued  upon  those  cir¬ 
culating  bills  of  exchange,  amounted,  upon 
many  occasions,  to  the  whole  fund  destined 
for  carrying  on  some  vast  and  extensive  proj¬ 
ect  of  agriculture,  commerce,  or  manufactures; 
and  not  merely  to  that  part  of  it  which,  had 
there  been  no  paper  money,  the  projector 
would  have  been  obliged  to  keep  by  him,  un¬ 
employed  and  in  ready  money  for  answering 
occasional  demands.  The  greater  part  of  this 
paper  was,  consequently,  over  and  above  the 
value  of  the  gold  and  silver  which  would  have 
circulated  in  the  country,  had  there  been  no 
paper  money.  It  was  over  and  above,  there¬ 
fore,  what  the  circulation  of  the  country  could 
easily  absorb  and  employ,  and  upon  that  ac¬ 
count,  immediately  returned  upon  the  banks 
in  order  to  be  exchanged  for  gold  and  silver, 
which  they  were  to  find  as  they  could.  It  was 
a  capital  which  those  projectors  had  very  art¬ 
fully  contrived  to  draw  from  those  banks,  not 
only  without  their  knowledge  or  deliberate 
consent,  but  for  some  time,  perhaps,  without 
their  having  the  most  distant  suspicion  that 
they  had  really  advanced  it. 

When  two  people,  who  are  continually 
drawing  and  redrawing  upon  one  another, 
discount  their  bills  always  with  the  same 
banker,  he  must  immediately  discover  what 
they  are  about,  and  see  clearly  that  they  are 
trading,  not  with  any  capital  of  their  own, 
but  with  the  capital  which  he  advances  to 
them.  But  this  discovery  is  not  altogether  so 
easy  when  they  discount  their  bills  some¬ 
times  with  one  banker,  and  sometimes  with 
another,  and  when  the  same  two  persons  do 
not  constantly  draw  and  redraw  upon  one 
another,  but  occasionally  run  the  round  of  a 
great  circle  of  projectors,  who  find  it  for  their 
interest  to  assist  one  another  in  this  method 
of  raising  money,  and  to  render  it,  upon  that 
account,  as  difficult  as  possible  to  distinguish 
between  a  real  and  fictitious  bill  of  exchange; 
between  a  bill  drawn  by  a  real  creditor  upon 
a  real  debtor,  and  a  bill  for  which  there  was 
properly  no  real  creditor  but  the  bank  which 
discounted  it,  nor  any  real  debtor  but  the  pro¬ 
jector  who  made  use  of  the  money.  When  a 
banker  had  even  made  this  discovery,  he 
might  sometimes  make  it  too  late,  and  might 
find  that  he  had  already  discounted  the  bills 
of  those  projectors  to  so  great  an  extent  that, 
by  refusing  to  discount  any  more,  he  would 
necessarily  make  them  all  bankrupts,  and 
thus,  by  ruining  them,  might  perhaps  ruin 
himself.  For  his  own  interest  and  safety,  there¬ 
fore,  he  might  find  it  necessary,  in  this  very 
perilous  situation,  to  go  on  for  some  time,  en¬ 
deavouring,  however,  to  withdraw  gradually, 
and  upon  that  account  making  every  day 
greater  and  greate  difficulties  about  discount- 


135 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


ing,  in  order  to  force  those  projectors  by  de¬ 
grees  to  have  recourse,  either  to  other  bank¬ 
ers,  or  to  other  methods  of  raising  money; 
so  that  he  himself  might,  as  soon  as  possible, 
get  out  of  the  circle.  The  difficulties,  accord¬ 
ingly,  which  the  Bank  of  England,  which  the 
principal  bankers  in  London,  and  which  even 
the  more  prudent  Scotch  banks  began,  after 
a  certain  time,  and  when  all  of  them  had  al¬ 
ready  gone  too  far,  to  make  about  discount¬ 
ing,  not  only  alarmed,  but  enraged  in  the 
highest  degree  those  projectors.  Their  own 
distress,  of  which  this  prudent  and  necessary 
reserve  of  the  banks  was,  no  doubt,  the  im¬ 
mediate  occasion,  they  called  the  distress  of 
the  country;  and  this  distress  of  the  country, 
they  said,  was  altogether  owing  to  the  igno¬ 
rance,  pusillanimity,  and  bad  conduct  of  the 
banks,  which  did  not  give  a  sufficiently  lib¬ 
eral  aid  to  the  spirited  undertakings  of  those 
who  exerted  themselves  in  order  to  beautify, 
improve,  and  enrich  the  country.  It  was  the 
duty  of  the  banks,  they  seemed  to  think,  to 
lend  for  as  long  a  time,  and  to  as  great  an 
extent  as  they  might  wish  to  borrow.  The 
banks,  however,  by  refusing  in  this  manner  to 
give  more  credit  to  those  to  whom  they  had 
already  given  a  great  deal  too  much,  took  the 
only  method  by  which  it  was  now  possible  to 
save  either  their  own  credit  or  the  public 
credit  of  the  country. 

In  the  midst  of  this  clamour  and  distress,  a 
new  bank  was  established  in  Scotland  for  the 
express  purpose  of  relieving  the  distress  of  the 
country.  The  design  was  generous;  but  the 
execution  was  imprudent,  and  the  nature  and 
causes  of  the  distress  which  it  meant  to  re¬ 
lieve  were  not,  perhaps,  well  understood.  This 
bank  was  more  liberal  than  any  other  had 
ever  been,  both  in  granting  cash  accounts,  and 
in  discounting  bills  of  exchange.  With  regard 
to  the  latter,  it  seems  to  have  made  scarce 
any  distinction  between  real  and  circulating 
bills,  but  to  have  discounted  all  equally.  It 
was  the  avowed  principle  of  this  bank  to  ad¬ 
vance,  upon  any  reasonable  security,  the 
whole  capital  which  was  to  be  employed  in 
those  improvements  of  which  the  returns  are 
the  most  slow  and  distant,  such  as  the  im¬ 
provements  of  land.  To  promote  such  im¬ 
provements  was  even  said  to  be  the  chief  of 
the  public-spirited  purposes  for  which  it  was 
instituted.  By  its  liberality  in  granting  cash 
accounts,  and  in  discounting  bills  of  exchange, 
it,  no  doubt,  issued  great  quantities  of  its 
bank  notes.  But  those  bank  notes  being,  the 
greater  part  of  them,  over  and  above  what 
the  circulation  of  the  country  could  easily 
absorb  and  employ,  returned  upon  it,  in  order 
to  be  exchanged  for  gold  and  silver  as  fast  as 
they  were  issued.  Its  coffers  were  never  well 
filled.  The  capital  which  had  been  subscribed 


to  this  bank  at  two  different  subscriptions, 
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  sixty  thou¬ 
sand  pounds,  of  which  eighty  per  cent  only 
was  paid  up.  This  sum  ought  to  have  been 
paid  in  at  several  different  instalments.  A 
great  part  of  the  proprietors,  when  they  paid 
in  their  first  instalment,  opened  a  cash  ac¬ 
count  with  the  bank;  and  the  directors,  think¬ 
ing  themselves  obliged  to  treat  their  own 
proprietors  with  the  same  liberality  with 
which  they  treated  all  other  men,  allowed 
many  of  them  to  borrow  upon  this  cash  ac¬ 
count  what  they  paid  in  upon  all  their  sub¬ 
sequent  instalments.  Such  payments,  there¬ 
fore,  only  put  into  one  coffer  what  had  the 
moment  before  been  taken  out  of  another. 
But  had  the  coffers  of  this  bank  been  filled 
ever  so  well,  its  excessive  circulation  must 
have  emptied  them  faster  than  they  could 
have  been  replenished  by  any  other  expedient 
but  the  ruinous  one  of  drawing  upon  London, 
and  when  the  bill  became  due,  paying  it,  to¬ 
gether  with  interest  and  commission,  by  an¬ 
other  draft  upon  the  same  place.  Its  coffers 
having  been  filled  so  very  ill,  it  is  said  to  have 
been  driven  to  this  resource  within  a  very  few 
months  after  it  began  to  do  business.  The 
estates  of  the  proprietors  of  this  bank  were 
worth  several  millions,  and  by  their  subscrip¬ 
tion  to  the  original  bond  or  contract  of  the 
bank,  were  really  pledged  for  answering  all 
its  engagements.  By  means  of  the  great  credit 
which  so  great  a  pledge  necessarily  gave  it, 
it  was,  notwithstanding  its  too  liberal  conduct, 
enabled  to  carry  on  business  for  more  than 
two  years.  When  it  was  obliged  to  stop,  it  had 
in  the  circulation  about  two  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  in  bank  notes.  In  order  to  sup¬ 
port  the  circulation  of  those  notes  which  were 
continually  returning  upon  it  as  fast  they 
were  issued,  it  had  been  constantly  in  the 
practice  of  drawing  bills  of  exchange  upon 
London,  of  which  the  number  and  value  were 
continually  increasing,  and,  when  it  stopped, 
amounted  to  upwards  of  six  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds.  This  bank,  therefore,  had,  in 
little  more  than  the  course  of  two  years,  ad¬ 
vanced  to  different  people  upwards  of  eight 
hundred  thousand  pounds  at  five  per  cent. 
Upon  the  two  hundred  thousand  pounds 
which  it  circulated  in  bank  notes,  this  five 
per  cent  might,  perhaps,  be  considered  as 
clear  gain,  without  any  other  deduction  be¬ 
sides  the  expense  of  management.  But  upon 
upwards  of  six  hundred  thousand  pounds,  for 
which  it  was  continually  drawing  bills  of  ex¬ 
change  upon  London,  it  was  paying,  in  the 
way  of  interest  and  commission,  upwards  of 
eight  per  cent,  and  was  consequently  losing 
more  than  three  per  cent  upon  more  than 
three-fourths  of  all  its  dealings. 

The  operations  of  this  bank  seem  to  have 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


136 

produced  effects  quite  opposite  to  those  which 
were  intended  by  the  particular  persons  who 
planned  and  directed  it.  They  seem  to  have 
intended  to  support  the  spirited  undertakings, 
for  as  such  they  considered  them,  which  were 
at  that  time  carrying  on  in  different  parts  of 
the  country;  and  at  the  same  time,  by  draw¬ 
ing  the  whole  banking  business  to  them¬ 
selves,  to  supplant  all  the  other  Scotch  banks, 
particularly  those  established  in  Edinburgh, 
whose  backwardness  in  discounting  bills  of 
exchange  had  given  some  offence.  This  bank, 
no  doubt,  gave  some  temporary  relief  to  those 
projectors,  and  enabled  them  to  carry  on  their 
projects  for  about  two  years  longer  than  they 
could  otherwise  have  done.  But  it  thereby 
only  enabled  them  to  get  so  much  deeper  into 
debt,  so  that,  when  ruin  came,  it  fell  so  much 
the  heavier  both  upon  them  and  upon  their 
creditors.  The  operations  of  this  bank,  there¬ 
fore,  instead  of  relieving,  in  reality  aggra¬ 
vated  in  the  long-run  the  distress  which  those 
projectors  had  brought  both  upon  themselves 
and  upon  their  country.  It  would  have  been 
much  better  for  themselves,  their  creditors, 
and  their  country,  had  the  greater  part  of 
them  been  obliged  to  stop  two  years  sooner 
than  they  actually  did.  The  temporary  relief, 
however,  which  this  bank  afforded  to  those 
projectors,  proved  a  real  and  permanent  relief 
to  the  other  Scotch  banks.  All  the  dealers  in 
circulating  bills  of  exchange,  which  those  other 
banks  had  become  so  backward  in  discount¬ 
ing,  had  recourse  to  this  new  bank,  where 
they  were  received  with  open  arms.  Those 
other  banks,  therefore,  were  enabled  to  get 
very  easily  out  of  that  fatal  circle,  from  which 
they  could  not  otherwise  have  disengaged 
themselves  without  incurring  a  considerable 
loss,  and  perhaps  too  even  some  degree  of 
discredit. 

In  the  long-run,  therefore,  the  operations 
of  this  bank  increased  the  real  distress  of  the 
country  which  it  meant  to  relieve;  and  effec¬ 
tually  relieved  from  a  very  great  distress  those 
rivals  whom  it  meant  to  supplant. 

At  the  first  setting  out  of  this  bank,  it  was 
the  opinion  of  some  people  that  how  fast  so¬ 
ever  its  coffers  might  be  emptied,  it  might 
easily  replenish  them  by  raising  money  upon 
the  securities  of  those  to  whom  it  had  ad¬ 
vanced  its  paper.  Experience,  I  believe,  soon 
convinced  them  that  this  method  of  raising 
money  was  by  much  too  slow  to  answer  their 
purpose;  and  that  coffers  which  originally 
were  so  ill  filled,  and  which  emptied  them¬ 
selves  so  very  fast,  could  be  replenished  by  no 
other  expedient  but  the  ruinous  one  of  draw¬ 
ing  bills  upon  London,  and  when  they  be¬ 
came  due,  paying  them  by  other  drafts  upon 
the  same  place  with  accumulated  interest  and 
commission.  But  though  they  had  been  able 


by  this  method  to  raise  money  as  fast  as  they 
wanted  it,  yet,  instead  of  making  a  profit, 
they  must  have  suffered  a  loss  by  every  such 
operation;  so  that  in  the  long-run  they  must 
have  ruined  themselves  as  a  mercantile  com¬ 
pany,  though,  perhaps,  not  so  soon  as  by  the 
more  expensive  practice  of  drawing  and  re¬ 
drawing.  They  could  still  have  made  nothing 
by  the  interest  of  the  paper,  which,  being 
over  and  above  what  the  circulation  of  the 
country  could  absorb  and  employ,  returned 
upon  them,  in  order  to  be  exchanged  for  gold 
and  silver,  as  fast  as  they  issued  it;  and  for 
the  payment  of  which  they  were  themselves 
continually  obliged  to  borrow  money.  On  the 
contrary,  the  whole  expense  of  this  borrowing, 
of  employing  agents  to  look  out  for  people 
who  had  money  to  lend,  of  negotiating  with 
those  people,  and  of  drawing  the  proper  bond 
or  assignment,  must  have  fallen  upon  them, 
and  have  been  so  much  clear  loss  upon  the 
balance  of  their  accounts.  The  project  of  re¬ 
plenishing  their  coffers  in  this  manner  may 
be  compared  to  that  of  a  man  who  had  a 
water-pond  from  which  a  stream  was  contin¬ 
ually  running  out,  and  into  which  no  stream 
was  continually  running,  but  who  proposed  to 
keep  it  always  equally  full  by  employing  a 
number  of  people  to  go  continually  with 
buckets  to  a  well  at  some  miles  distance  in 
order  to  bring  water  to  replenish  it. 

But  though  this  operation  had  proved  not 
only  practicable  but  profitable  to  the  bank 
as  a  mercantile  company,  yet  the  country 
could  have  derived  no  benefit  from  it;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  must  have  suffered  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  loss  by  it.  This  operation  could  not 
augment  in  the  smallest  degree  the  quantity 
of  money  to  be  lent.  It  could  only  have  erected 
this  bank  into  a  sort  of  general  loan  office 
for  the  whole  country.  Those  who  wanted  to 
borrow  must  have  applied  to  this  bank  in¬ 
stead  of  applying  to  the  private  persons  who 
had  lent  it  their  money.  But  a  bank  which 
lends  money  perhaps  to  five  hundred  different 
people,  the  greater  part  of  whom  its  directors 
can  know  very  little  about,  is  not  likely  to  be 
more  judicious  in  the  choice  of  its  debtors 
than  a  private  person  who  lends  out  his 
money  among  a  few  people  whom  he  knows, 
and  in  whose  sober  and  frugal  conduct  he 
thinks  he  has  good  reason  to  confide.  The 
debtors  of  such  a  bank  as  that  whose  conduct 
I  have  been  giving  some  account  of  were  like¬ 
ly,  the  greater  part  of  them,  to  be  chimerical 
projectors,  the  drawers  and  re-drawers  of 
circulating  bills  of  exchange,  who  would  em¬ 
ploy  the  money  in  extravagant  undertakings, 
which,  with  all  the  assistance  that  could  be 
given  them,  they  would  probably  never  be 
able  to  complete,  and  which,  if  they  should 
be  completed,  would  never  repay  the  expense 


137 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


which  they  had  really  cost,  would  never 
afford  a  fund  capable  of  maintaining  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  equal  to  that  which  had  been 
employed  about  them.  The  sober  and  frugal 
debtors  of  private  persons,  on  the  contrary, 
would  be  more  likely  to  employ  the  money 
borrowed  in  sober  undertakings  which  were 
proportioned  to  their  capitals,  and  which, 
though  they  might  have  less  of  the  grand  and 
the  marvellous,  would  have  more  of  the  solid 
and  the  profitable,  which  would  repay  with 
a  large  profit  whatever  had  been  laid  out 
upon  them,  and  which  would  thus  afford  a 
fund  capable  of  maintaining  a  much  greater 
quantity  of  labour  than  that  which  had  been 
employed  about  them.  The  success  of  this 
operation,  therefore,  without  increasing  in  the 
smallest  degree  the  capital  of  the  country, 
would  only  have  transferred  a  great  part  of  it 
from  prudent  and  profitable  to  imprudent 
and  unprofitable  undertakings. 

That  the  industry  of  Scotland  languished 
for  want  of  money  to  employ  it  was  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  famous  Mr.  Law.  By  establishing  a 
bank  of  a  particular  kind,  which  he  seems  to 
have  imagined  might  issue  paper  to  the 
amount  of  the  whole  value  of  all  the  lands  in 
the  country,  he  proposed  to  remedy  this  want 
of  money.  The  Parliament  of  Scotland,  when 
he  first  proposed  his  project,  did  not  think 
proper  to  adopt  it.  It  was  afterwards  adopted, 
with  some  variations,  by  the  Duke  of  Or¬ 
leans,  at  that  time  Regent  of  France.  The 
idea  of  the  possibility  of  multiplying  paper 
money  to  almost  any  extent  was  the  real 
foundation  of  what  is  called  the  Mississippi 
scheme,  the  most  extravagant  project  both 
of  banking  and  stock-jobbing  that,  perhaps, 
the  world  ever  saw.  The  different  operations 
of  this  scheme  are  explained  so  fully,  so  clear¬ 
ly,  and  with  so  much  order  and  distinctness, 
by  Mr.  du  Verney,  in  his  Examination  of  the 
Political  Reflections  upon  Commerce  and  Fi¬ 
nances  of  Mr.  du  Tot ,  that  I  shall  not  give 
any  account  of  them.  The  principles  upon 
which  it  was  founded  are  explained  by  Mr. 
Law  himself,  in  a  discourse  concerning  money 
and  trade,  which  he  published  in  Scotland 
when  he  first  proposed  his  project.  The  splen¬ 
did  but  visionary  ideas  which  are  set  forth  in 
that  and  some  other  works  upon  the  same 
principles  still  continue  to  make  an  impres¬ 
sion  upon  many  people,  and  have,  perhaps,  in 
part,  contributed  to  that  excess  of  banking 
which  has  of  late  been  complained  of  both  in 
Scotland  and  in  other  places. 

The  Bank  of  England  is  the  greatest  bank 
of  circulation  in  Europe.  It  was  incorporated, 
in  pursuance  of  an  act  of  Parliament,  by  a 
charter  under  the  Great  Seal,  dated  the  27th 
of  July,  1694.  It  at  that  time  advanced  to 
government  the  sum  of  one  million  two  hun¬ 


dred  thousand  pounds,  for  an  annuity  of  one 
hundred  thousand  pounds;  or  for  £96,000  a 
year  interest,  at  the  rate  of  eight  per  cent, 
and  £4000  a  year  for  the  expense  of  manage¬ 
ment.  The  credit  of  the  new  government, 
established  by  the  Revolution,  we  may  be¬ 
lieve,  must  have  been  very  low,  when  it  was 
obliged  to  borrow  at  so  high  an  interest. 

In  1697  the  bank  was  allowed  to  enlarge  its 
capital  stock  by  an  engraftment  of  £1,001,171 
10s.  Its  whole  capital  stock  therefore,  amount¬ 
ed  at  this  time  to  £2,201,171  10s.  This  en¬ 
graftment  is  said  to  have  been  for  the  support 
of  public  credit.  In  1696,  tallies  had  been  at 
forty,  and  fifty,  and  sixty  per  cent  discount, 
and  bank  notes  at  twenty  per  cent.1  During 
the  great  recoinage  of  the  silver,  which  was 
going  on  at  this  time,  the  bank  had  thought 
proper  to  discontinue  the  payment  of  its 
notes,  which  necessarily  occasioned  their  dis¬ 
credit. 

In  pursuance  of  the  7th  Anne,  c.  7,  the 
bank  advanced  and  paid  into  the  exchequer 
the  sum  of  £400,000;  making  in  all  the  sum 
of  £1,600,000  which  it  had  advanced  upon 
its  original  annuity  of  £96,000  interest  and 
£4000  for  expense  of  management.  In  1708, 
therefore,  the  credit  of  government  was  as 
good  as  that  of  private  persons,  since  it 
could  borrow  at  six  per  cent  interest  the  com¬ 
mon  legal  and  market  rate  of  those  times. 
In  pursuance  of  the  same  act,  the  bank  can¬ 
celled  exchequer  bills  to  the  amount  of 
£1,775,027  17s.  lO^d.  at  six  per  cent  interest, 
and  was  at  the  same  time  allowed  to  take  in 
subscriptions  for  doubling  its  capital.  In  1708, 
therefore,  the  capital  of  the  bank  amounted 
to  £4,402,343;  and  it  had  advanced  to  govern¬ 
ment  the  sum  of  £3,375,027  17s.  lOV^d. 

By  a  call  of  fifteen  per  cent  in  1709,  there 
was  paid  in  and  made  stock  £656,204  Is.  9d.; 
and  by  another  of  ten  per  cent  in  1710, 
£501,448  12s.  lid.  In  consequence  of  those 
two  calls,  therefore,  the  bank  capital  amount¬ 
ed  to  £5,559,995  14s.  8d. 

In  pursuance  of  the  3rd  George  I,  c.  8,  the 
bank  delivered  up  two  millions  of  exchequer 
bills  to  be  cancelled.  It  had  at  this  time, 
therefore,  advanced  to  government  £5,375,027 
17s.  lOd.  In  pursuance  of  the  8th  George  I,  c. 
21,  the  bank  purchased  of  the  South  Sea  Com¬ 
pany  stock  to  the  amount  of  £4,000,000;  and 
in  1722,  in  consequence  of  the  subscriptions 
which  it  had  taken  in  for  enabling  it  to  make 
this  purchase,  its  capital  stock  was  increased 
by  £3,400,000.  At  this  time,  therefore,  the 
bank  had  advanced  to  the  public  £9,375,027 
17s.  10%d.;  and  its  capital  stock  amounted 
only  to  £8,959,995  14s.  8d.  It  was  upon  this 
occasion  that  the  sum  which  the  bank  had 

Mames  Postlethwaite’s  History  of  the  Public 
Revenue ,  p.  301. 


138  The  Wealth 

advanced  to  the  public,  and  for  which  it  re¬ 
ceived  interest,  began  first  to  exceed  its  cap¬ 
ital  stock,  or  the  sum  for  which  it  paid  a 
dividend  to  the  proprietors  of  bank  stock;  or, 
in  other  words,  that  the  bank  began  to  have 
an  undivided  capital,  over  and  above  its  di¬ 
vided  one.  It  has  continued  to  have  an  un¬ 
divided  capital  of  the  same  kind  ever  since. 
In  1746,  the  bank  had,  upon  different  oc¬ 
casions,  advanced  to  the  public  £11,686,800 
and  its  divided  capital  had  been  raised  by  dif¬ 
ferent  calls  and  subscriptions  to  £10,780,000. 
The  state  of  those  two  sums  has  continued  to 
be  the  same  ever  since.  In  pursuance  of  the 
4th  of  George  III,  c.  25,  the  bank  agreed  to 
pay  to  government  for  the  renewal  of  its 
charter  £110,000  without  interest  or  repay¬ 
ment.  This  sum,  therefore,  did  not  increase 
either  of  those  two  other  sums. 

The  dividend  of  the  bank  has  varied  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  variations  in  the  rate  of  the 
interest  which  it  has,  at  different  times,  re¬ 
ceived  for  the  money  it  had  advanced  to  the 
public,  as  well  as  according  to  other  circum¬ 
stances.  This  rate  of  interest  has  gradually 
been  reduced  from  eight  to  three  per  cent. 
For  some  years  past  the  bank  dividend  has 
been  at  five  and  a  half  per  cent. 

The  stability  of  the  Bank  of  England  is 
equal  to  that  of  the  British  government.  All 
that  it  has  advanced  to  the  public  must  be 
lost  before  its  creditors  can  sustain  any  loss. 
No  other  banking  company  in  England  can  be 
established  by  act  of  Parliament,  or  can  con¬ 
sist  of  more  than  six  members.  It  acts,  not 
only  as  an  ordinary  bank,  but  as  a  great  en¬ 
gine  of  state.  It  receives  and  pays  the  greater 
part  of  the  annuities  which  are  due  to  the 
creditors  of  the  public,  it  circulates  exchequer 
bills,  and  it  advances  to  government  the  an¬ 
nual  amount  of  the  land  and  malt  taxes, 
which  are  frequently  not  paid  up  till  some 
years  thereafter.  In  those  different  operations, 
its  duty  to  the  public  may  sometimes  have 
obliged  it,  without  any  fault  of  its  directors, 
to  overstock  the  circulation  with  paper  mon¬ 
ey.  It  likewise  discounts  merchants’  bills,  and 
has,  upon  several  different  occasions,  sup¬ 
ported  the  credit  of  the  principal  houses,  not 
only  of  England,  but  of  Hamburgh  and  Hol¬ 
land.  Upon  one  occasion,  in  1763,  it  is  said 
to  have  advanced  for  this  purpose,  in  one 
week,  about  £1,600,000,  a  great  part  of  it  in 
bullion.  I  do  not,  however,  pretend  to  war¬ 
rant  either  the  greatness  of  the  sum,  or  the 
shortness  of  the  time.  Upon  other  occasions, 
this  great  company  has  been  reduced  to  the 
necessity  of  paying  in  sixpences. 

It  is  not  by  augmenting  the  capital  of  the 
country,  but  by  rendering  a  greater  part  of 
that  capital  active  and  productive  than 
would  otherwise  be  so,  that  the  most  judicious 


of  Nations 

operations  of  banking  can  increase  the  indus¬ 
try  of  the  country.  That  part  of  his  capital 
which  a  dealer  is  obliged  to  keep  by  him  un¬ 
employed,  and  in  ready  money,  for  answering 
occasional  demands,  is  so  much  dead  stock, 
which,  so  long  as  it  remains  in  this  situation, 
produces  nothing  either  to  him  or  to  his  coun¬ 
try.  The  judicious  operations  of  banking  en¬ 
able  him  to  convert  this  dead  stock  into  ac¬ 
tive  and  productive  stock;  into  materials  to 
work  upon,  into  tools  to  work  with,  and  into 
provisions  and  subsistence  to  work  for;  into 
stock  which  produces  something  both  to  him¬ 
self  and  to  his  country.  The  gold  and  silver 
money  which  circulates  in  any  country,  and 
by  means  of  which  the  produce  of  its  land 
and  labour  is  annually  circulated  and  distrib¬ 
uted  to  the  proper  consumers,  is,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  ready  money  of  the  deal¬ 
er,  all  dead  stock.  It  is  a  very  valuable  part 
of  the  capital  of  the  country,  which  produces 
nothing  to  the  country.  The  judicious  oper¬ 
ations  of  banking,  by  substituting  paper  in 
the  room  of  a  great  part  of  this  gold  and 
silver,  enables  the  country  to  convert  a  great 
part  of  this  dead  stock  into  active  and  pro¬ 
ductive  stock;  into  stock  which  produces 
something  to  the  country.  The  gold  and  silver 
money  which  circulates  in  any  country  may 
very  properly  be  compared  to  a  highway, 
which,  while  it  circulates  and  carries  to  mar¬ 
ket  all  the  grass  and  corn  of  the  country,  pro¬ 
duces  itself  not  a  single  pile  of  either.  The  ju¬ 
dicious  operations  of  banking,  by  providing, 
if  I  may  be  allowed  so  violent  a  metaphor,  a 
sort  of  waggon-way  through  the  air,  enable 
the  country  to  convert,  as  it  were,  a  great 
part  of  its  highways  into  good  pastures  and 
corn-fields,  and  thereby  to  increase  very  con¬ 
siderably  the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and 
labour.  The  commerce  and  industry  of  the 
country,  however,  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
though  they  may  be  somewhat  augmented, 
cannot  be  altogether  so  secure  when  they  are 
thus,  as  it  were,  suspended  upon  the  Daedalian 
wings  of  paper  money  as  when  they  travel 
about  upon  the  solid  ground  of  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver.  Over  and  above  the  accidents  to  which 
they  are  exposed  from  the  unskilfulness  of  the 
conductors  of  this  paper  money,  they  are 
liable  to  several  others,  from  which  no  pru¬ 
dence  or  skill  of  those  conductors  can  guard 
them. 

An  unsuccessful  war,  for  example,  in  which 
the  enemy  got  possession  of  the  capital,  and 
consequently  of  that  treasure  which  supported 
the  credit  of  the  paper  money,  would  occa¬ 
sion  a  much  greater  confusion  in  a  country 
where  the  whole  circulation  was  carried  on 
by  paper,  than  in  one  where  the  greater  part 
of  it  was  carried  on  by  gold  and  silver.  The 
usual  instrument  of  commerce  having  lost  its 


139 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


value,  no  exchanges  could  be  made  but  either 
by  barter  or  upon  credit.  All  taxes  having 
been  usually  paid  in  paper  money,  the  prince 
would  not  have  wherewithal  either  to  pay  his 
troops,  or  to  furnish  his  magazines;  and  the 
state  of  the  country  would  be  much  more  ir¬ 
retrievable  than  if  the  greater  part  of  its  cir¬ 
culation  had  consisted  in  gold  and  silver.  A 
prince,  anxious  to  maintain  his  dominions  at 
all  times  in  the  state  in  which  he  can  most 
easily  defend  them,  ought,  upon  this  account, 
to  guard,  not  only  against  that  excessive  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  paper  money  which  ruins  the 
very  banks  which  issue  it;  but  even  against 
that  multiplication  of  it  which  enables  them 
to  fill  the  greater  part  of  the  circulation  of  the 
country  with  it. 

The  circulation  of  every  country  may  be 
considered  as  divided  into  two  different 
branches:  the  circulation  of  the  dealers  with 
one  another,  and  the  circulation  between  the 
dealers  and  the  consumers.  Though  the  same 
pieces  of  money,  whether  paper  or  metal, 
may  be  employed  sometimes  in  the  one  cir¬ 
culation  and  sometimes  in  the  other,  yet  as 
both  are  constantly  going  on  at  the  same 
time,  each  requires  a  certain  stock  of  money 
of  one  kind  or  another  to  carry  it  on.  The 
value  of  the  goods  circulated  between  the 
different  dealers,  never  can  exceed  the  value 
of  those  circulated  between  the  dealers  and 
the  consumers;  whatever  is  bought  by  the 
dealers,  being  ultimately  destined  to  be  sold 
to  the  consumers.  The  circulation  between  the 
dealers,  as  it  is  carried  on  by  wholesale,  re¬ 
quires  generally  a  pretty  large  sum  for  every 
particular  transaction.  That  between  the  deal¬ 
ers  and  the  consumers,  on  the  contrary,  as  it 
is  generally  carried  on  by  retail,  frequently 
requires  but  very  small  ones,  a  shilling,  or 
even  a  halfpenny,  being  often  sufficient.  But 
small  sums  circulate  much  faster  than  large 
ones.  A  shilling  changes  masters  more  fre¬ 
quently  than  a  guinea,  and  a  halfpenny  more 
frequently  than  a  shilling.  Though  the  annual 
purchases  of  all  the  consumers,  therefore,  are 
at  least  equal  in  value  to  those  of  all  the 
dealers,  they  can  generally  be  transacted  with 
a  much  smaller  quantity  of  money;  the  same 
pieces,  by  a  more  rapid  circulation,  serving  as 
the  instrument  of  many  more  purchases  of  the 
one  kind  than  of  the  other. 

Paper  money  may  be  so  regulated  as  either 
to  confine  itself  very  much  to  the  circulation 
between  the  different  dealers,  or  to  extend 
itself  likewise  to  a  great  part  of  that  between 
the  dealers  and  the  consumers.  Where  no 
bank  notes  are  circulated  under  ten  pounds 
value,  as  in  London,  paper  money  confines 
itself  very  much  to  the  circulation  between 
the  dealers.  When  a  ten  pound  bank  note 
comes  into  the  hands  of  a  consumer,  he  is 


generally  obliged  to  change  it  at  the  first 
shop  where  he  has  occasion  to  purchase  five 
shillings’  worth  of  goods,  so  that  it  often  re¬ 
turns  into  the  hands  of  a  dealer  before  the 
consumer  has  spent  the  fortieth  part  of  the 
money.  Where  bank  notes  are  issued  for  so 
small  sums  as  twenty  shillings,  as  in  Scotland, 
paper  money  extends  itself  to  a  considerable 
part  of  the  circulation  between  dealers  and 
consumers.  Before  the*  Act  of  Parliament, 
which  put  a  stop  to  the  circulation  of  ten  and 
five  shilling  notes,  it  filled  a  still  greater  part 
of  that  circulation.  In  the  currencies  of  North 
America,  paper  was  commonly  issued  for  so 
small  a  sum  as  a  shilling,  and  filled  almost  the 
whole  of  that  circulation.  In  some  paper  cur¬ 
rencies  of  Yorkshire,  it  was  issued  even  for  so 
small  a  sum  as  a  sixpence. 

Where  the  issuing  of  bank  notes  for  such 
very  small  sums  is  allowed  and  commonly 
practised,  many  mean  people  are  both  en¬ 
abled  and  encouraged  to  become  bankers.  A 
person  whose  promissory  note  for  five  pounds, 
or  even  for  twenty  shillings,  would  be  rejected 
by  everybody,  will  get  it  to  be  received  with¬ 
out  scruple  when  it  is  issued  for  so  small  a 
sum  as  a  sixpence.  But  the  frequent  bank¬ 
ruptcies  to  which  such  beggarly  bankers  must 
be  liable  may  occasion  a  very  considerable  in- 
conveniency,  and  sometimes  even  a  very  great 
calamity  to  many  poor  people  who  had  re¬ 
ceived  their  notes  in  payment. 

It  were  better,  perhaps,  that  no  bank  notes 
were  issued  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom  for  a 
smaller  sum  than  five  pounds.  Paper  money 
would  then,  probably,  confine  itself,  in  every 
part  of  the  kingdom,  to  the  circulation  be¬ 
tween  the  different  dealers,  as  much  as  it 
does  at  present  in  London,  where  no  bank 
notes  are  issued  under  ten  pounds’  value;  five 
pounds  being,  in  most  parts  of  the  kingdom, 
a  sum  which,  though  it  will  purchase,  perhaps, 
little  more  than  half  the  quantity  of  goods,  is 
as  much  considered,  and  is  as  seldom  spent  all 
at  once,  as  ten  pounds  are  amidst  the  profuse 
expense  of  London. 

Where  paper  money,  it  is  to  be  observed,  is 
pretty  much  confined  to  the  circulation  be¬ 
tween  dealers  and  dealers,  as  at  London,  there 
is  always  plenty  of  gold  and  silver.  Where  it 
extends  itself  to  a  considerable  part  of  the 
circulation  between  dealers  and  consumers, 
as  in  Scotland,  and  still  more  in  North  Amer¬ 
ica,  it  banishes  gold  and  silver  almost  entirely 
from  the  country;  almost  all  the  ordinary 
transactions  of  its  interior  commerce  being 
thus  carried  on  by  paper.  The  suppression  of 
ten  and  five  shilling  bank  notes  somewhat  re¬ 
lieved  the  scarcity  of  gold  and  silver  in  Scot¬ 
land;  and  the  suppression  of  twenty  shilling 
notes  would  probably  relieve  it  still  more. 
Those  metals  are  said  to  have  become  more 


140 


The  Wealth 

abundant  in  America  since  the  suppression  of 
some  of  their  paper  currencies.  They  are  said, 
likewise,  to  have  been  more  abundant  before 
the  institution  of  those  currencies. 

Though  paper  money  should  be  pretty 
much  confined  to  the  circulation  between 
dealers  and  dealers,  yet  banks  and  bankers 
might  still  be  able  to  give  nearly  the  same 
assistance  to  the  industry  and  commerce  of 
the  country  as  they  had  done  when  paper 
money  filled  almost  the  whole  circulation.  The 
ready  money  which  a  dealer  is  obliged  to  keep 
by  him,  for  answering  occasional  demands,  is 
destined  altogether  for  the  circulation  be¬ 
tween  himself  and  other  dealers  of  whom  he 
buys  goods.  He  has  no  occasion  to  keep  any 
by  him  for  the  circulation  between  himself 
and  the  consumers,  who  are  his  customers, 
and  who  bring  ready  money  to  him,  instead 
of  taking  any  from  him.  Though  no  paper 
money,  therefore,  was  allowed  to  be  issued 
but  for  such  sums  as  would  confine  it  pretty 
much  to  the  circulation  between  dealers  and 
dealers,  yet,  partly  by  discounting  real  bills 
of  exchange,  and  partly  by  lending  upon  cash 
accounts,  banks  and  bankers  might  still  be 
able  to  relieve  the  greater  part  of  those  dealers 
from  the  necessity  of  keeping  any  consider¬ 
able  part  of  their  stock  by  them,  unemployed 
and  in  ready  money,  for  answering  occasional 
demands.  They  might  still  be  able  to  give 
the  utmost  assistance  which  banks  and  bank¬ 
ers  can,  with  propriety,  give  to  traders  of 
every  kind. 

To  restrain  private  people,  it  may  be  said, 
from  receiving  in  payment  the  promissory 
notes  of  a  banker,  for  any  sum  whether  great 
or  small,  when  they  themselves  are  willing  to 
receive  them,  or  to  restrain  a  banker  from  is¬ 
suing  such  notes,  when  all  his  neighbours  are 
willing  to  accept  of  them,  is  a  manifest  viola¬ 
tion  of  that  natural  liberty  which  it  is  the 
proper  business  of  law  not  to  infringe,  but  to 
support.  Such  regulations  may,  no  doubt,  be 
considered  as  in  some  respects  a  violation  of 
natural  liberty.  But  those  exertions  of  the 
natural  liberty  of  a  few  individuals,  which 
might  endanger  the  security  of  the  whole 
society,  are,  and  ought  to  be,  restrained  by 
the  laws  of  all  governments,  of  the  most  free 
as  well  as  of  the  most  despotical.  The  obli¬ 
gation  of  building  party  walls,  in  order  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  communication  of  fire,  is  a  violation 
of  natural  liberty  exactly  of  the  same  kind 
with  the  regulations  of  the  banking  trade 
which  are  here  proposed. 

A  paper  money  consisting  in  bank  notes, 
issued  by  people  of  undoubted  credit,  payable 
upon  demand  without  any  condition,  and  in 
fact  always  readily  paid  as  soon  as  presented, 
is,  in  every  respect,  equal  in  value  to  gold  and 
silver  money;  since  gold  and  silver  money  can 


of  Nations 

at  any  time  be  had  for  it.  Whatever  is  either 
bought  or  sold  for  such  paper  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  bought  or  sold  as  cheap  as  it  could 
have  been  for  gold  and  silver. 

The  increase  of  paper  money,  it  has  been 
said,  by  augmenting  the  quantity,  and  conse¬ 
quently  diminishing  the  value  of  the  whole 
currency,  necessarily  augments  the  money 
price  of  commodities.  But  as  the  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver,  which  is  taken  from  the  cur¬ 
rency,  is  always  equal  to  the  quantity  of  pa¬ 
per  which  is  added  to  it,  paper  money  does 
not  necessarily  increase  the  quantity  of  the 
whole  currency.  From  the  beginning  of  the 
last  century  to  the  present  time,  provisions 
never  were  cheaper  in  Scotland  than  in  1759, 
though,  from  the  circulation  of  ten  and  five 
shilling  bank  notes,  there  was  then  more  pa¬ 
per  money  in  the  country  than  at  present. 
The  proportion  between  the  price  of  provi¬ 
sions  in  Scotland  and  that  in  England  is  the 
same  now  as  before  the  great  multiplication 
of  banking  companies  in  Scotland.  Corn  is, 
upon  most  occasions,  fully  as  cheap  in  Eng¬ 
land  as  in  France;  though  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  paper  money  in  England,  and  scarce 
any  in  France.  In  1751  and  in  1752,  when  Mr. 
Hume  published  his  Political  Discourses ,  and 
soon  after  the  great  multiplication  of  paper 
money  in  Scotland,  there  was  a  very  sensible 
rise  in  the  price  of  provisions,  owing,  prob¬ 
ably,  to  the  badness  of  the  seasons,  and  not 
to  the  multiplication  of  paper  money. 

It  would  be  otherwise,  indeed,  with  a  paper 
money  consisting  in  promissory  notes,  of 
which  the  immediate  payment  depended,  in 
any  respect,  either  upon  the  good  will  of  those 
who  issued  them,  or  upon  a  condition  which 
the  holder  of  the  notes  might  not  always 
have  it  in  his  power  to  fulfil;  or  of  which  the 
payment  was  not  exigible  till  after  a  certain 
number  of  years,  and  which  in  the  meantime 
bore  no  interest.  Such  a  paper  money  would, 
no  doubt,  fall  more  or  less  below  the  value  of 
gold  and  silver,  according  as  the  difficulty  or 
uncertainty  of  obtaining  immediate  payment 
was  supposed  to  be  greater  or  less;  or  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  greater  or  less  distance  of  time  at 
which  payment  was  exigible. 

Some  years  ago  the  different  banking  com¬ 
panies  of  Scotland  were  in  the  practice  of  in¬ 
serting  into  their  bank  notes,  what  they  called 
an  Optional  Clause,  by  which  they  promised 
payment  to  the  bearer,  either  as  soon  as  the 
note  should  be  presented,  or,  in  the  option  of 
the  directors,  six  months  after  such  present¬ 
ment,  together  with  the  legal  interest  for  the 
said  six  months.  The  directors  of  some  of 
those  banks  sometimes  took  advantage  of 
this  optional  clause,  and  sometimes  threatened 
those  who  demanded  gold  and  silver  in  ex¬ 
change  for  a  considerable  number  of  their 


141 


Money  a  Branch  of  the  General  Stock 


notes  that  they  would  take  advantage  of  it, 
unless  such  demanders  would  content  them¬ 
selves  with  a  part  of  what  they  demanded. 
The  promissory  notes  of  those  banking  com¬ 
panies  constituted  at  that  time  the  far  greater 
part  of  the  currency  of  Scotland,  which  this 
uncertainty  of  payment  necessarily  degraded 
below  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  money. 
During  the  continuance  of  this  abuse  (which 
prevailed  chiefly  in  1762,  1763,  and  1764), 
while  the  exchange  between  London  and  Car¬ 
lisle  was  at  par,  that  between  London  and 
Dumfries  would  sometimes  be  four  per  cent 
against  Dumfries,  though  this  town  is  not 
thirty  miles  distant  from  Carlisle.  But  at 
Carlisle,  bills  were  paid  in  gold  and  silver; 
whereas  at  Dumfries  they  were  paid  in  Scotch 
bank  notes,  and  the  uncertainty  of  getting 
those  bank  notes  exchanged  for  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver  coin  had  thus  degraded  them  four  per 
cent  below  the  value  of  that  coin.  The  same 
Act  of  Parliament  which  suppressed  ten  and 
five  shilling  bank  notes  suppressed  likewise 
this  optional  clause,  and  thereby  restored  the 
exchange  between  England  and  Scotland  to 
its  natural  rate,  or  to  what  the  course  of  trade 
and  remittances  might  happen  to  make  it. 

In  the  paper  currencies  of  Yorkshire,  the 
payment  of  so  small  a  sum  as  a  sixpence 
sometimes  depended  upon  the  condition  that 
the  holder  of  the  note  should  bring  the  change 
of  a  guinea  to  the  person  who  issued  it;  a 
condition  which  the  holders  of  such  notes 
might  frequently  find  it  very  difficult  to  fulfil, 
and  which  must  have  degraded  this  currency 
below  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  money. 
An  Act  of  Parliament  accordingly  declared 
all  such  clauses  unlawful,  and  suppressed,  in 
the  same  manner  as  in  Scotland,  all  promis¬ 
sory  notes,  payable  to  the  bearer,  under  twen¬ 
ty  shillings  value. 

The  paper  currencies  of  North  America 
consisted,  not  in  bank  notes  payable  to  the 
bearer  on  demand,  but  in  government  paper, 
of  which  the  payment  was  not  exigible  till 
several  years  after  it  was  issued;  and  though 
the  colony  governments  paid  no  interest  to 
the  holders  of  this  paper,  they  declared  it  to 
be,  and  in  fact  rendered  it,  a  legal  tender  of 
payment  for  the  full  value  for  which  it  was 
issued.  But  allowing  the  colony  security  to  be 
perfectly  good,  a  hundred  pounds  payable 
fifteen  years  hence,  for  example,  in  a  country 
where  interest  at  six  per  cent,  is  worth  little 
more  than  forty  pounds  ready  money.  To 
oblige  a  creditor,  therefore,  to  accept  of  this 
as  full  payment  for  a  debt  of  a  hundred 
pounds  actually  paid  down  in  ready  money 
was  an  act  of  such  violent  injustice  as  has 
scarce,  perhaps,  been  attempted  by  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  any  other  country  which  pre¬ 
tended  to  be  free.  It  bears  the  evident  marks 


of  having  originally  been,  what  the  honest 
and  downright  Doctor  Douglas  assures  us  it 
was,  a  scheme  of  fraudulent  debtors  to  cheat 
their  creditors.  The  government  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania,  indeed,  pretended,  upon  their  first  emis¬ 
sion  of  paper  money,  in  1722,  to  render  their 
paper  of  equal  value  with  gold  and  silver  by 
enacting  penalties  against  all  those  who  made 
any  difference  in  the  price  of  their  goods  when 
they  sold  them  for  a  colony  paper,  and  when 
they  sold  them  for  gold  and  silver;  a  regu¬ 
lation  equally  tyrannical,  but  much  less  effec¬ 
tual  than  that  which  it  was  meant  to  support. 
A  positive  law  may  render  a  shilling  a  legal 
tender  for  guinea,  because  it  may  direct  the 
courts  of  justice  to  discharge  the  debtor  who 
has  made  that  tender.  But  no  positive  law 
can  oblige  a  person  who  sells  goods,  and  who 
is  at  liberty  to  sell  or  not  to  sell  as  he  pleases, 
to  accept  of  a  shilling  as  equivalent  to  a 
guinea  in  the  price  of  them.  Notwithstanding 
any  regulation  of  this  kind,  it  appeared  by  the 
course  of  exchange  with  Great  Britain,  that 
a  hundred  pounds  sterling  was  occasionally 
considered  as  equivalent,  in  some  of  the  col¬ 
onies,  to  a  hundred  and  thirty  pounds,  and  in 
others  to  so  great  a  sum  as  eleven  hundred 
pounds  currency;  this  difference  in  the  value 
arising  from  the  difference  in  the  quantity  of 
paper  emitted  in  the  different  colonies,  and 
in  the  distance  and  probability  of  the  term 
of  its  final  discharge  and  redemption. 

No  law,  therefore,  could  be  more  equitable 
than  the  Act  of  Parliament,  so  unjustly  com¬ 
plained  of  in  the  colonies,  which  declared  that 
no  paper  currency  to  be  emitted  there  in  time 
coming  should  be  a  legal  tender  of  payment. 

Pennsylvania  was  always  more  moderate 
in  its  emissions  of  paper  money  than  any 
other  of  our  colonies.  Its  paper  currency,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  is  said  never  to  have  sunk  below 
the  value  of  the  gold  and  silver  which  was 
current  in  the  colony  before  the  first  emission 
of  its  paper  money  Before  that  emission,  the 
colony  had  raised  the  denomination  of  its 
coin,  and  had,  by  act  of  assembly,  ordered 
five  shillings  sterling  to  pass  in  the  colony  for 
six  and  threepence,  and  afterwards  for  six  and 
eightpence.  A  pound  colony  currency,  there¬ 
fore,  even  when  that  currency  was  gold  and 
silver,  was  more  than  thirty  per  cent  below 
the  value  of  a  pound  sterling,  and  when  that 
currency  was  turned  into  paper  it  was  seldom 
much  more  than  thirty  per  cent  below  that 
value.  The  pretence  for  raising  the  denomina¬ 
tion  of  the  coin,  was  to  prevent  the  expor¬ 
tation  of  gold  and  silver,  by  making  equal 
quantities  of  those  metals  pass  for  greater 
sums  in  the  colony  than  they  did  in  the 
mother  country.  It  was  found,  however,  that 
the  price  of  all  goods  from  the  mother  coun¬ 
try  rose  exactly  in  proportion  as  they  raised 


142  The  Wealth 

the  denomination  of  their  coin,  so  that  their 
gold  and  silver  were  exported  as  fast  as  ever. 

The  paper  of  each  colony  being  received  in 
the  payment  of  the  provincial  taxes,  for  the 
full  value  for  which  it  had  been  issued,  it 
necessarily  derived  from  this  use  some  addi¬ 
tional  value  over  and  above  what  it  would 
have  had  from  the  real  or  supposed  distance 
of  the  term  of  its  final  discharge  and  redemp¬ 
tion.  This  additional  value  was  greater  or  less, 
according  as  the  quantity  of  paper  issued  was 
more  or  less  above  what  could  be  employed 
in  the  payment  of  the  taxes  of  the  particular 
colony  which  issued  it.  It  was  in  all  the  col¬ 
onies  very  much  above  what  could  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  this  manner. 

A  prince  who  should  enact  that  a  certain 
proportion  of  his  taxes  should  be  paid  in  a 
paper  money  of  a  certain  kind  might  thereby 
give  a  certain  value  to  this  paper  money, 
even  though  the  term  of  its  final  discharge 
and  redemption  should  depend  altogether 
upon  the  will  of  the  prince.  If  the  bank  which 
issued  this  paper  was  careful  to  keep  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  it  always  somewhat  below  what  could 
easily  be  employed  in  this  manner,  the  de¬ 
mand  for  it  might  be  such  as  to  make  it  even 
bear  a  premium,  or  sell  for  somewhat  more 
in  the  market  than  the  quantity  of  gold  or 
silver  currency  for  which  it  was  issued.  Some 
people  account  in  this  manner  for  what  is 
called  the  Agio  of  the  bank  of  Amsterdam,  or 
for  the  superiority  of  bank  money  over  cur¬ 
rent  money;  though  this  bank  money,  as  they 
pretend,  cannot  be  taken  out  of  the  bank  at 
the  will  of  the  owner.  The  greater  part  of 
foreign  bills  of  exchange  must  be  paid  in  bank 
money,  that  is,  by  a  transfer  in  the  books  of 
the  bank;  and  the  directors  of  the  bank,  they 
allege,  are  careful  to  keep  the  whole  quantity 
of  bank  money  always  below  what  this  use 
occasions  a  demand  for.  It  is  upon  this  ac¬ 
count,  they  say,  that  bank  money  sells  for  a 
premium,  or  bears  an  agio  of  four  or  five  per 
cent  above  the  same  nominal  sum  of  the 
gold  and  silver  currency  of  the  country.  This 
account  of  the  bank  of  Amsterdam,  however, 
it  will  appear  hereafter,  is  in  a  great  measure 
chimerical. 

A  paper  currency  which  falls  below  the  val¬ 
ue  of  gold  and  silver  coin  does  not  thereby 
sink  the  value  of  those  metals,  or  occasion 
equal  quantities  of  them  to  exchange  for  a 
smaller  quantity  of  goods  of  any  other  kind. 
The  proportion  between  the  value  of  gold  and 
silver  and  that  of  goods  of  any  other  kind  de¬ 
pends  in  all  cases  not  upon  the  nature  or 
quantity  of  any  particular  paper  money, 
which  may  be  current  in  any  particular  coun¬ 
try,  but  upon  the  richness  or  poverty  of  the 
mines,  which  happen  at  any  particular  time 
to  supply  the  great  market  of  the  commercial 


of  Nations 

world  with  those  metals.  It  depends  upon  the 
proportion  between  the  quantity  of  labour 
which  is  necessary  in  order  to  bring  a  certain 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  to  market,  and 
that  which  is  necessary  in  order  to  bring 
thither  a  certain  quantity  of  any  other  sort 
of  goods. 

If  bankers  are  restrained  from  issuing  any 
circulating  bank  notes,  or  notes  payable  to 
the  bearer,  for  less  than  a  certain  sum,  and  if 
they  are  subjected  to  the  obligation  of  an  im¬ 
mediate  and  unconditional  payment  of  such 
bank  notes  as  soon  as  presented,  their  trade 
may,  with  safety  to  the  public,  be  rendered 
in  all  other  respects  perfectly  free.  The  late 
multiplication  of  banking  companies  in  both 
parts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  an  event  by 
which  many  people  have  been  much  alarmed, 
instead  of  diminishing,  increases  the  security 
of  the  public.  It  obliges  all  of  them  to  be  more 
circumspect  in  their  conduct,  and,  by  not  ex¬ 
tending  their  currency  beyond  its  due  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  cash,  to  guard  themselves  against 
those  malicious  runs  which  the  rivalship  of  so 
many  competitors  is  always  ready  to  bring 
upon  them.  It  restrains  the  circulation  of  each 
particular  company  within  a  narrower  circle, 
and  reduces  their  circulating  notes  to  a  smaller 
number.  By  dividing  the  whole  circulation 
into  a  greater  number  of  parts,  the  failure  of 
any  one  company,  an  accident  which,  in  the 
course  of  things,  must  sometimes  happen,  be¬ 
comes  of  less  consequence  to  the  public.  This 
free  competition,  too,  obliges  all  bankers  to  be 
more  liberal  in  their  dealings  with  their  cus¬ 
tomers,  lest  their  rivals  should  carry  them 
away.  In  general,  if  any  branch  of  trade,  or 
any  division  of  labour,  be  advantageous  to 
the  public,  the  freer  and  more  general  the 
competition,  it  will  always  be  the  more  so. 

CHAPTER  III 

Of  the  Accumulation  of  Capital ,  or  of  Pro¬ 
ductive  and  Unproductive  Labour 

There  is  one  sort  of  labour  which  adds  to 
the  value  of  the  subject  upon  which  it  is  be¬ 
stowed:  there  is  another  which  has  no  such 
effect.  The  former,  as  it  produces  a  value,  may 
be  called  productive;  the  latter,  unproductive1 
labour.  Thus  the  labour  of  a  manufacturer 
adds,  generally,  to  the  value  of  the  materials 
which  he  works  upon,  that  of  his  own  main¬ 
tenance,  and  of  his  master’s  profit.  The  labour 
of  a  menial  servant,  on  the  contrary,  adds  to 
the  value  of  nothing.  Though  the  manufac¬ 
turer  has  his  wages  advanced  to  him  by  his 
master,  he,  in  reality,  costs  him  no  expense, 

1  Some  French  authors  of  great  learning  and  in¬ 
genuity  have  used  those  words  in  a  different 
sense.  In  the  last  chapter  of  the  fourth  book  I 
shall  endeavour  to  show  that  their  sense  is  an  im¬ 
proper  one. 


Accumulation  of  Capital 


the  value  of  those  wages  being  generally  re¬ 
stored,  together  with  a  profit,  in  the  improved 
value  of  the  subject  upon  which  his  labour 
is  bestowed.  But  the  maintenance  of  a  menial 
servant  never  is  restored.  A  man  grows  rich 
by  employing  a  multitude  of  manufacturers: 
he  grows  poor  by  maintaining  a  multitude  of 
menial  servants.  The  labour  of  the  latter,  how¬ 
ever,  has  its  value,  and  deserves  its  reward  as 
well  as  that  of  the  former.  But  the  labour 
of  the  manufacturer  fixes  and  realizes  itself  in 
some  particular  subject  or  vendible  commod¬ 
ity,  which  lasts  for  some  time  at  least  after 
that  labour  is  past.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  certain 
quantity  of  labour  stocked  and  stored  up  to 
be  employed,  if  necessary,  upon  some  other 
occasion.  That  subject,  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  the  price  of  that  subject,  can  after¬ 
wards,  if  necessary,  put  into  motion  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  equal  to  that  which  had  orig¬ 
inally  produced  it.  The  labour  of  the  menial 
servant,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  fix  or  realize 
itself  in  any  particular  subject  or  vendible 
commodity.  His  services  generally  perish  in 
the  very  instant  of  their  performance,  and 
seldom  leave  any  trace  or  value  behind  them 
for  which  an  equal  quantity  of  service  could 
afterwards  be  procured. 

The  labour  of  some  of  the  most  respectable 
orders  in  the  society  is,  like  that  of  menial 
servants,  unproductive  of  any  value,  and  does 
not  fix  or  realize  itself  in  any  permanent  sub¬ 
ject;  or  vendible  commodity,  which  endures 
after  that  labour  is  past,  and  for  which  an 
equal  quantity  of  labour  could  afterwards  be 
procured.  The  sovereign,  for  example,  with  all 
the  officers  both  of  justice  and  war  who  serve 
under  him,  the  whole  army  and  navy,  are  un¬ 
productive  labourers.  They  are  the  servants 
of  the  public,  and  are  maintained  by  a  part  of 
the  annual  produce  of  the  industry  of  other 
people.  Their  service,  how  honourable,  how 
useful,  or  how  necessary  soever,  produces 
nothing  for  which  an  equal  quantity  of  service 
can  afterwards  be  procured.  The  protection, 
security,  and  defence  of  the  commonwealth, 
the  effect  of  their  labour  this  year  will  not  pur¬ 
chase  its  protection,  security,  and  defence  for 
the  year  to  come.  In  the  same  class  must  be 
ranked,  some  both  of  the  gravest  and  most 
important,  and  some  of  the  most  frivolous 
professions:  churchmen,  lawyers,  physicians, 
men  of  letters  of  all  kinds;  players,  buffoons, 
musicians,  opera-singers,  opera-dancers,  etc. 
The  labour  of  the  meanest  of  these  has  a  cer¬ 
tain  value,  regulated  by  the  very  same  prin¬ 
ciples  which  regulate  that  of  every  other  sort 
of  labour;  and  that  of  the  noblest  and  most 
useful,  produces  nothing  which  could  after¬ 
wards  purchase  or  procure  an  equal  quantity 
of  labour.  Like  the  declamation  of  the  actor, 
the  harangue  of  the  orator,  or  the  tune  of  the 


14:3 

musician,  the  work  of  all  of  them  perishes  in 
the  very  instant  of  its  production. 

Both  productive  and  unproductive  labour¬ 
ers,  and  those  who  do  not  labour  at  all,  are  all 
equally  maintained  by  the  annual  produce  of 
the  land  and  labour  of  the  country.  This  prod¬ 
uce,  how  great  soever,  can  never  be  infinite, 
but  must  have  certain  limits.  According,  there¬ 
fore,  as  a  smaller  or  greater  proportion  of  it 
is  in  any  one  year  employed  in  maintaining 
unproductive  hands,  the  more  in  the  one  case 
and  the  less  in  the  other  will  remain  for  the 
productive,  and  the  next  year’s  produce  will 
be  greater  or  smaller  accordingly;  the  whole 
annual  produce,  if  we  except  the  spontaneous 
productions  of  the  earth,  being  the  effect  of 
productive  labour. 

Though  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  every  country  is,  no  doubt, 
ultimately  destined  for  supplying  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  its  inhabitants,  and  for  procuring 
a  revenue  to  them,  yet  when  it  first  comes 
either  from  the  ground,  or  from  the  hands  of 
the  productive  labourers,  it  naturally  divides 
itself  into  two  parts.  One  of  them,  and  fre¬ 
quently  the  largest,  is,  in  the  first  place,  des¬ 
tined  for  replacing  a  capital,  or  for  renewing 
the  provisions,  materials,  and  finished  work, 
which  had  been  withdrawn  from  a  capital; 
the  other  for  constituting  a  revenue  either  to 
the  owner  of  this  capital,  as  the  profit  of  his 
stock,  or  to  some  other  person,  as  the  rent  of 
his  land.  Thus,  of  the  produce  of  land,  one 
part  replaces  the  capital  of  the  farmer:  the 
other  pays  his  profit  and  the  rent  of  the  land¬ 
lord;  and  thus  constitutes  a  revenue  both  to 
the  owner  of  this  capital,  as  the  profits  of  his 
stock;  and  to  some  other  person,  as  the  rent 
of  his  land.  Of  the  produce  of  a  great  manu¬ 
factory,  in  the  same  manner,  one  part,  and 
that  always  the  largest,  replaces  the  capital 
of  the  undertaker  of  the  work;  the  other  pays 
his  profit,  and  thus  constitutes  a  revenue  to 
the  owner  of  this  capital. 

That  part  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  any  country  which  re¬ 
places  a  capital  never  is  immediately  em¬ 
ployed  to  maintain  any  but  productive  hands. 
It  pays  the  wages  of  productive  labour  only. 
That  which  is  immediately  destined  for  con¬ 
stituting  a  revenue,  either  as  profit  or  as 
rent,  may  maintain  indifferently  either  pro¬ 
ductive  or  unproductive  hands. 

Whatever  part  of  his  stock  a  man  employs 
as  a  capital,  he  always  expects  is  to  be  re¬ 
placed  to  him  with  a  profit.  He  employs  it, 
therefore,  in  maintaining  productive  hands 
only;  and  after  having  served  in  the  function 
of  a  capital  to  him,  it  constitutes  a  revenue 
to  them.  Whenever  he  employs  any  part  of  it 
in  maintaining  unproductive  hands  of  any 
kind,  that  part  is,  from  that  moment,  with- 


144 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


drawn  from  his  capital,  and  placed  in  his 
stock  reserved  for  immediate  consumption. 

Unproductive  labourers,  and  those  who  do 
not  labour  at  all,  are  all  maintained  by  reve¬ 
nue;  either,  first,  by  that  part  of  the  annual 
produce  which  is  originally  destined  for  con¬ 
stituting  a  revenue  to  some  particular  per¬ 
sons,  either  as  the  rent  of  land  or  as  the 
profits  of  stock;  or,  secondly,  by  that  part 
which,  though  originally  destined  for  re¬ 
placing  a  capital  and  for  maintaining  produc¬ 
tive  labourers  only,  yet  when  it  comes  into 
their  hands  whatever  part  of  it  is  over  and 
above  their  necessary  subsistence  may  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  maintaining  indifferently  either  pro¬ 
ductive  or  unproductive  hands.  Thus,  not  only 
the  great  landlord  or  the  rich  merchant,  but 
even  the  common  workman,  if  his  wages  are 
considerable,  may  maintain  a  menial  servant; 
or  he  may  sometimes  go  to  a  play  or  a  puppet- 
show,  and  so  contribute  his  share  towards 
maintaining  one  set  of  unproductive  labour¬ 
ers;  or  he  may  pay  some  taxes,  and  thus  help 
to  maintain  another  set,  more  honourable 
and  useful,  indeed,  but  equally  unproductive. 
No  part  of  the  annual  produce,  however, 
which  had  been  originally  destined  to  replace 
a  capital,  is  ever  directed  towards  maintain¬ 
ing  unproductive  hands  till  after  it  has  put 
into  motion  its  full  complement  of  productive 
labour,  or  all  that  it  could  put  into  motion  in 
the  way  in  which  it  was  employed.  The  work¬ 
man  must  have  earned  his  wages  by  work 
done  before  he  can  employ  any  part  of  them 
in  this  manner.  That  part,  too,  is  generally 
but  a  small  one.  It  is  his  spare  revenue  only, 
of  which  productive  labourers  have  seldom 
a  great  deal.  They  generally  have  some,  how¬ 
ever;  and  in  the  payment  of  taxes  the  great¬ 
ness  of  their  number  may  compensate,  in  some 
measure,  the  smallness  of  their  contribution. 
The  rent  of  land  and  the  profits  of  stock 
are  everywhere,  therefore,  the  principal  sources 
from  which  unproductive  hands  derive  their 
subsistence.  These  are  the  two  sorts  of  rev¬ 
enue  of  which  the  owners  have  generally  most 
to  spare.  They  might  both  maintain  indiffer¬ 
ently  either  productive  or  unproductive  hands. 
They  seem,  however,  to  have  some  predilec¬ 
tion  for  the  latter.  The  expense  of  a  great 
lord  feeds  generally  more  idle  than  industrious 
people.  The  rich  merchant,  though  with  his 
capital  he  maintains  industrious  people  only, 
yet  by  his  expense,  that  is,  by  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  his  revenue,  he  feeds  commonly  the 
very  same  sort  as  the  great  lord. 

The  proportion,  therefore,  between  the  pro¬ 
ductive  and  unproductive  hands,  depends  very 
much  in  every  country  upon  the  proportion 
between  that  part  of  the  annual  produce, 
which,  as  soon  as  it  comes  either  from  the 
ground  or  from  the  hands  of  the  productive 


labourers,  is  destined  for  replacing  a  capital, 
and  that  which  is  destined  for  constituting  a 
revenue,  either  as  rent  or  as  profit.  This  pro¬ 
portion  is  very  different  in  rich  from  what  it 
is  in  poor  countries. 

Thus,  at  present,  in  the  opulent  countries 
of  Europe,  a  very  large,  frequently  the  largest 
portion  of  the  produce  of  the  land  is  destined 
for  replacing  the  capital  of  the  rich  and 
independent  farmer;  the  other  for  paying  his 
profits  and  the  rent  of  the  landlord.  But 
anciently,  during  the  prevalency  of  the  feudal 
government,  a  very  small  portion  of  the  prod¬ 
uce  was  sufficient  to  replace  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  cultivation.  It  consisted  commonly 
in  a  few  wretched  cattle,  maintained  alto¬ 
gether  by  the  spontaneous  produce  of  uncul¬ 
tivated  land,  and  which  might,  therefore,  be 
considered  as  a  part  of  that  spontaneous 
produce.  It  generally,  too,  belonged  to  the 
landlord,  and  was  by  him  advanced  to  the 
occupiers  of  the  land.  All  the  rest  of  the  prod¬ 
uce  properly  belonged  to  him  too,  either  as 
rent  for  his  land,  or  as  profit  upon  this  paltry 
capital.  The  occupiers  of  land  were  generally 
bondmen,  whose  persons  and  effects  were 
equally  his  property.  Those  who  were  not 
bondmen  were  tenants  at  will,  and  though  the 
rent  which  they  paid  was  often  nominally 
little  more  than  a  quit-rent,  it  really  amount¬ 
ed  to  the  whole  produce  of  the  land.  Their 
lord  could  at  all  times  command  their  la¬ 
bour  in  peace  and  their  service  in  war.  Though 
they  lived  at  a  distance  from  his  house,  they 
were  equally  dependent  upon  him  as  his  re¬ 
tainers  who  lived  in  it.  But  the  whole  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land  undoubtedly  belongs  to  him 
who  can  dispose  of  the  labour  and  service 
of  all  those  whom  it  maintains.  In  the  present 
state  of  Europe,  the  share  of  the  landlord 
seldom  exceeds  a  third,  sometimes  not  a 
fourth  part  of  the  whole  produce  of  the  land. 
The  rent  of  land,  however,  in  all  the  improved 
parts  of  the  country,  has  been  tripled  and 
quadrupled  since  those  ancient  times;  and 
this  third  or  fourth  part  of  the  annual  pro¬ 
duce  is,  it  seems,  three  or  four  times  greater 
than  the  whole  had  been  before.  In  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  improvement,  rent,  though  it  increases 
in  proportion  to  the  extent,  diminishes  in 
proportion  to  the  produce  of  the  land. 

In  the  opulent  countries  of  Europe,  great 
capitals  are  at  present  employed  in  trade  and 
manufactures.  In  the  ancient  state,  the  little 
trade  that  was  stirring,  and  the  few  homely 
and  coarse  manufactures  that  were  carried  on, 
required  but  very  small  capitals.  These,  how¬ 
ever,  must  have  yielded  very  large  profits. 
The  rate  of  interest  was  nowhere  less  than 
ten  per  cent,  and  their  profits  must  have  been 
sufficient  to  afford  this  great  interest.  At  pres¬ 
ent  the  rate  of  interest,  in  the  improved  parts 


Accumulation  of  Capital 


of  Europe,  is  nowhere  higher  than  six  per 
cent,  and  in  some  of  the  most  improved  it  is 
so  low  as  four,  three,  and  two  per  cent. 
Though  that  part  of  the  revenue  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  which  is  derived  from  the  profits 
of  stock  is  always  much  greater  in  rich  than 
in  poor  countries,  it  is  because  the  stock  is 
much  greater:  in  proportion  to  the  stock  the 
profits  are  generally  much  less. 

That  part  of  the  annual  produce,  there¬ 
fore,  which,  as  soon  as  it  comes  either  from 
the  ground  or  from  the  hands  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  labourers,  is  destined  for  replacing 
a  capital,  is  not  only  much  greater  in  rich 
than  in  poor  countries,  but  bears  a  much 
greater  proportion  to  that  which  is  imme¬ 
diately  destined  for  constituting  a  revenue 
either  as  rent  or  as  profit.  The  funds  destined 
for  the  maintenance  of  productive  labour  are 
not  only  much  greater  in  the  former  than  in 
the  latter,  but  bear  a  much  greater  proportion 
to  those  which,  though  they  may  be  employed 
to  maintain  either  productive  or  unproductive 
hands,  have  generally  a  predilection  for  the 
latter. 

The  proportion  between  those  different 
funds  necessarily  determines  in  every  coun¬ 
try  the  general  character  of  the  inhabitants 
as  to  industry  or  idleness.  We  are  more  in¬ 
dustrious  than  our  forefathers;  because  in  the 
present  times  the  funds  destined  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  industry  are  much  greater  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  those  which  are  likely  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  maintenance  of  idleness  than 
they  were  two  or  three  centuries  ago.  Our 
ancestors  were  idle  for  want  of  a  sufficient 
encouragement  to  industry.  It  is  better,  says 
the  proverb,  to  play  for  nothing  than  to  work 
for  nothing.  In  mercantile  and  manufacturing 
towns,  where  the  inferior  ranks  of  people  are 
chiefly  maintained  by  the  employment  of 
capital,  they  are  in  general  industrious,  sober, 
and  thriving;  as  in  many  English,  and  in 
most  Dutch  towns.  In  those  towns  which  are 
principally  supported  by  the  constant  or  occa¬ 
sional  residence  of  a  court,  and  in  which  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people  are  chiefly  maintained 
by  the  spending  of  revenue,  they  are  in  gen¬ 
eral  idle,  dissolute,  and  poor;  as  at  Rome, 
Versailles,  Compiegne,  and  Fontainebleu.  If 
you  except  Rouen  and  Bordeaux,  there  is  little 
trade  or  industry  in  any  of  the  parliament 
towns  of  France;  and  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people,  being  chiefly  maintained  by  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  members  of  the  courts  of  jus¬ 
tice,  and  of  those  who  come  to  plead  before 
them,  are  in  general  idle  and  poor.  The  great 
trade  of  Rouen  and  Bordeaux  seems  to  be 
altogether  the  effect  of  their  situation.  Rouen 
is  necessarily  the  entrepot  of  almost  all  the 
goods  which  are  brought  either  from  foreign 
countries,  or  from  the  maritime  provinces  of 


145 

France,  for  the  consumption  of  the  great  city 
of  Paris.  Bordeaux  is  in  the  same  manner  the 
entrepot  of  the  wines  which  grow  upon  the 
banks  of  the  Garonne,  and  of  the  rivers  which 
run  into  it,  one  of  the  richest  wine  countries 
in  the  world,  and  which  seems  to  produce 
the  wine  fittest  for  exportation,  or  best  suited 
to  the  taste  of  foreign  nations.  Such  ad¬ 
vantageous  situations  necessarily  attract  a 
great  capital  by  the  great  employment  which 
they  afford  it;  and  the  employment  of  this 
capital  is  the  cause  of  the  industry  of  those 
two  cities.  In  the  other  parliament  towns  of 
France,  very  little  more  capital  seems  to  be 
employed  than  what  is  necessary  for  supply¬ 
ing  their  own  consumption;  that  is,  little 
more  than  the  smallest  capital  which  can  be 
employed  in  them.  The  same  thing  may  be 
said  of  Paris,  Madrid,  and  Vienna.  Of  those 
three  cities,  Paris  is  by  far  the  most  indus¬ 
trious;  but  Paris  itself  is  the  principal  market 
of  all  the  manufactures  established  at  Paris, 
and  its  own  consumption  is  the  principal  ob¬ 
ject  of  all  the  trade  which  it  carries  on.  Lon¬ 
don,  Lisbon,  and  Copenhagen,  are,  perhaps, 
the  only  three  cities  in  Europe  which  are  both 
the  constant  residence  of  a  court,  and  can  at 
the  same  time  be  considered  as  trading  cities, 
or  as  cities  which  trade  not  only  for  their  own 
consumption,  but  for  that  of  other  cities  and 
countries.  The  situation  of  all  the  three  is 
extremely  advantageous,  and  naturally  fits 
them  to  be  the  entrepots  of  a  great  part  of 
the  goods  destined  for  the  consumption  of 
distant  places.  In  a  city  where  a  great  reve¬ 
nue  is  spent,  to  employ  with  advantage  a 
capital  for  any  other  purpose  than  for  sup¬ 
plying  the  consumption  of  that  city  is  prob¬ 
ably  more  difficult  than  in  one  in  which  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people  have  no  other  main¬ 
tenance  but  what  they  derive  from  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  such  a  capital.  The  idleness  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  people  who  are  main¬ 
tained  by  the  expense  of  revenue  corrupts,  it 
is  probable,  the  industry  of  those  who  ought 
to  be  maintained  by  the  employment  of  capi¬ 
tal,  and  renders  it  less  advantageous  to  em¬ 
ploy  a  capital  there  than  in  other  places. 
There  was  little  trade  or  industry  in  Edin¬ 
burgh  before  the  union.  When  the  Scotch 
Parliament  was  no  longer  to  be  assembled  in 
it,  when  it  ceased  to  be  the  necessary  resi¬ 
dence  of  the  principal  nobility  and  gentry  of 
Scotland,  it  became  a  city  of  some  trade  and 
industry.  It  still  continues,  however,  to  be 
the  residence  of  the  principal  courts  of  jus¬ 
tice  in  Scotland,  of  the  Boards  of  Customs 
and  Excise,  etc.  A  considerable  revenue, 
therefore,  still  continues  to  be  spent  in  it. 
In  trade  and  industry  it  is  much  inferior  to 
Glasgow,  of  which  the  inhabitants  are  chiefly 
maintained  by  the  employment  of  capital. 


146 


The  Wealth 

The  inhabitants  of  a  large  village,  it  has 
sometimes  been  observed,  after  having  made 
considerable  progress  in  manufactures,  have 
become  idle  and  poor  in  consequence  of  a 
great  lord  having  taken  up  his  residence  in 
their  neighbourhood. 

The  proportion  between  capital  and  reve¬ 
nue,  therefore,  seems  everywhere  to  regulate 
the  proportion  between  industry  and  idle¬ 
ness.  Wherever  capital  predominates,  industry 
prevails:  wherever  revenue,  idleness.  Every 
increase  or  diminution  of  capital,  therefore, 
naturally  tends  to  increase  or  diminish  the 
real  quantity  of  industry,  the  number  of 
productive  hands,  and  consequently  the  ex¬ 
changeable  value  of  the  annual  produce  of 
the  land  and  labour  of  the  country,  the  real 
wealth  and  revenue  of  all  its  inhabitants. 

Capitals  are  increased  by  parsimony,  and 
diminished  by  prodigality  and  misconduct. 

Whatever  a  person  saves  from  his  reve¬ 
nue  he  adds  to  his  capital,  and  either  em¬ 
ploys  it  himself  in  maintaining  an  additional 
number  of  productive  hands,  or  enables  some 
other  person  to  do  so,  by  lending  it  to  him 
for  an  interest,  that  is,  for  a  share  of  the 
profits.  As  the  capital  of  an  individual  can 
be  increased  only  by  what  he  saves  from  his 
annual  revenue  or  his  annual  gains,  so  the 
capital  of  a  society,  which  is  the  same  with 
that  of  all  the  individuals  who  compose  it, 
can  be  increased  only  in  the  same  manner. 

Parsimony,  and  not  industry,  is  the  im¬ 
mediate  cause  of  the  increase  of  capital.  In¬ 
dustry,  indeed,  provides  the  subject  which 
parsimony  accumulates.  But  whatever  indus¬ 
try  might  acquire,  if  parsimony  did  not  save 
and  store  up,  the  capital  would  never  be  the 
greater. 

Parsimony,  by  increasing  the  fund  which  is 
destined  for  the  maintenance  of  productive 
hands,  tends  to  increase  the  number  of  those 
hands  whose  labour  adds  to  the  value  of  the 
subject  upon  which  it  is  bestowed.  It  tends, 
therefore,  to  increase  the  exchangeable  value 
of  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  country.  It  puts  into  motion  an  addi¬ 
tional  quantity  of  industry,  which  gives  an 
additional  value  to  the  annual  produce. 

What  is  annually  saved  is  as  regularly  con¬ 
sumed  as  what  is  annually  spent,  and  nearly 
in  the  same  time  too;  but  it  is  consumed  by 
a  different  set  of  people.  That  portion  of  his 
revenue  which  a  rich  man  annually  spends 
is  in  most  cases  consumed  by  idle  guests  and 
menial  servants,  who  leave  nothing  behind 
them  in  return  for  their  consumption.  That 
portion  which  he  annually  saves,  as  for  the 
sake  of  the  profit  it  is  immediately  employed 
as  a  capital,  is  consumed  in  the  same  manner, 
and  nearly  in  the  same  time  too,  but  by  a 


of  Nations 

different  set  of  people,  by  labourers,  manufac¬ 
turers,  and  artificers,  who  reproduce  with  a 
profit  the  value  of  their  annual  consumption. 
His  revenue,  we  shall  suppose,  is  paid  him  in 
money.  Had  he  spent  the  whole,  the  food, 
clothing,  and  lodging,  which  the  whole  could 
have  purchased,  would  have  been  distributed 
among  the  former  set  of  people.  By  saving  a 
part  of  it,  as  that  part  is  for  the  sake  of  the 
profit  immediately  employed  as  a  capital 
either  by  himself  or  by  some  other  person, 
the  food,  clothing,  and  lodging,  which  may 
be  purchased  with  it,  are  necessarily  reserved 
for  the  latter.  The  consumption  is  the  same, 
but  the  consumers  are  different. 

By  what  a  frugal  man  annually  saves,  he 
not  only  affords  maintenance  to  an  additional 
number  of  productive  hands,  for  that  or  the 
ensuing  year,  but,  like  the  founder  of  a  public 
workhouse,  he  establishes  as  it  were  a  per¬ 
petual  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  an  equal 
number  in  all  times  to  come.  The  perpetual 
allotment  and  destination  of  this  fund,  in¬ 
deed,  is  not  always  guarded  by  any  positive 
law,  by  any  trust-right  or  deed  of  mortmain. 
It  is  always  guarded,  however,  by  a  very  pow¬ 
erful  principle,  the  plain  and  evident  interest 
of  every  individual  to  whom  any  share  of  it 
shall  ever  belong.  No  part  of  it  can  ever  after¬ 
wards  be  employed  to  maintain  any  but  pro¬ 
ductive  hands  without  an  evident  loss  to  the 
person  who  thus  perverts  it  from  its  proper 
destination. 

The  prodigal  perverts  it  in  this  manner.  By 
not  confining  his  expense  within  his  income, 
he  encroaches  upon  his  capital.  Like  him  who 
perverts  the  revenues  of  some  pious  founda¬ 
tion  to  profane  purposes,  he  pays  the  wages 
of  idleness  with  those  funds  which  the  fru¬ 
gality  of  his  forefathers  had,  as  it  were,  con¬ 
secrated  to  the  maintenance  of  industry.  By 
diminishing  the  funds  destined  for  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  productive  labour,  he  necessarily 
diminishes,  so  far  as  it  depends  upon  him, 
the  quantity  of  that  labour  which  adds  a 
value  to  the  subject  upon  which  it  is  be¬ 
stowed,  and,  consequently,  the  value  of  the 
annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the 
whole  country,  the  real  wealth  and  revenue 
of  its  inhabitants.  If  the  prodigality  of  some 
was  not  compensated  by  the  frugality  of 
others,  the  conduct  of  every  prodigal,  by 
feeding  the  idle  with  the  bread  of  the  indus¬ 
trious,  tends  not  only  to  beggar  himself,  but 
to  impoverish  his  country. 

Though  the  expense  of  the  prodigal  should 
be  altogether  in  home-made,  and  no  part  of 
it  in  foreign  commodities,  its  effect  upon  the 
productive  funds  of  the  society  would  still  be 
the  same.  Every  year  there  would  still  be  a 
certain  quantity  of  food  and  clothing,  which 
ought  to  have  maintained  productive,  em- 


Accumulation  of  Capital 


ployed  in  maintaining  unproductive  hands. 
Every  year,  therefore,  there  would  still  be 
some  diminution  in  what  would  otherwise 
have  been  the  value  of  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country. 

This  expense,  it  may  be  said  indeed,  not 
being  in  foreign  goods,  and  not  occasioning 
any  exportation  of  gold  and  silver,  the  same 
quantity  of  money  would  remain  in  the  coun¬ 
try  as  before.  But  if  the  quantity  of  food  and 
clothing,  which  were  thus  consumed  by  un¬ 
productive,  had  been  distributed  among  pro¬ 
ductive  hands,  they  would  have  reproduced, 
together  with  a  profit,  the  full  value  of  their 
consumption.  The  same  quantity  of  money 
would  in  this  case  equally  have  remained  in 
the  country,  and  there  would  besides  have 
been  a  reproduction  of  an  equal  value  of 
consumable  goods.  There  would  have  been 
two  values  instead  of  one. 

The  same  quantity  of  money,  besides,  can¬ 
not  long  remain  in  any  country  in  which  the 
value  of  the  annual  produce  diminishes.  The 
sole  use  of  money  is  to  circulate  consumable 
goods.  By  means  of  it,  provisions,  materials, 
and  finished  work,  are  bought  and  sold,  and 
distributed  to  their  proper  consumers.  The 
quantity  of  money,  therefore,  which  can  be 
annually  employed  in  any  country  must  be 
determined  by  the  value  of  the  consumable 
goods  annually  circulated  within  it.  These 
must  consist  either  in  the  immediate  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country  itself, 
or  in  something  which  had  been  purchased 
with  some  part  of  that  produce.  Their  value, 
therefore,  must  diminish  as  the  value  of  that 
produce  diminishes,  and  along  with  it  the 
quantity  of  money  which  can  be  employed 
in  circulating  them.  But  the  money  which  by 
this  annual  diminution  of  produce  is  annually 
thrown  out  of  domestic  circulation  will  not 
be  allowed  to  lie  idle.  The  interest  of  who¬ 
ever  possesses  it  requires  that  it  should  be 
employed.  But  having  no  employment  at 
home,  it  will,  in  spite  of  all  laws  and  prohi¬ 
bitions,  be  sent  abroad,  and  employed  in  pur¬ 
chasing  consumable  goods  which  may  be  of 
some  use  at  home.  Its  annual  exportation  will 
in  this  manner  continue  for  some  time  to  add 
something  to  the  annual  consumption  of  the 
country  beyond  the  value  of  its  own  annual 
produce.  What  in  the  days  of  its  prosperity 
had  been  saved  from  that  annual  produce, 
and  employed  in  purchasing  gold  and  silver, 
will  contribute  for  some  little  time  to  sup¬ 
port  its  consumption  in  adversity.  The  ex¬ 
portation  of  gold  and  silver  is,  in  this  case, 
not  the  cause,  but  the  effect  of  its  declension, 
and  may  even,  for  some  little  time,  alleviate 
the  misery  of  that  declension. 

The  quantity  of  money,  on  the  contrary, 
must  in  every  country  naturally  increase  as 


147 

the  value  of  the  annual  produce  increases. 
The  value  of  the  consumable  goods  annually 
circulated  within  the  society  being  greater 
will  require  a  greater  quantity,  of  money  to 
circulate  them.  A  part  of  the  increased  prod¬ 
uce,  therefore,  will  naturally  be  employed  in 
purchasing,  wherever  it  is  to  be  had,  the  addi¬ 
tional  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  necessary 
for  circulating  the  rest.  The  increase  of  those 
metals  will  in  this  case  be  the  effect,  not  the 
cause,  of  the  public  prosperity.  Gold  and  sil¬ 
ver  are  purchased  everywhere  in  the  same 
manner.  The  food,  clothing,  and  lodging,  the 
revenue  and  maintenance  of  all  those  whose 
labour  or  stock  is  employed  in  bringing  them 
from  the  mine  to  the  market,  is  the  price 
paid  for  them  in  Peru  as  well  as  in  England. 
The  country  which  has  this  price  to  pay  will 
never  be  long  without  the  quantity  of  those 
metals  which  it  has  occasion  for;  and  no  coun¬ 
try  will  ever  long  retain  a  quantity  which  it 
has  no  occasion  for. 

Whatever,  therefore,  we  may  imagine  the 
real  wealth  and  revenue  of  a  country  to  con¬ 
sist  in,  whether  in  the  value  of  the  annual 
produce  of  its  land  and  labour,  as  plain  reason 
seems  to  dictate;  or  in  the  quantity  of  the 
precious  metals  which  circulate  within  it,  as 
vulgar  prejudices  suppose;  in  either  view  of 
the  matter,  every  prodigal  appears  to  be  a 
public  enemy,  and  every  frugal  man  a  public 
benefactor. 

The  effects  of  misconduct  are  often  the 
same  as  those  of  prodigality.  Every  injudi¬ 
cious  and  unsuccessful  project  in  agriculture, 
mines,  fisheries,  trade,  or  manufactures,  tends 
in  the  same  manner  to  diminish  the  funds 
destined  for  the  maintenance  of  productive 
labour.  In  every  such  project,  though  the 
capital  is  consumed  by  productive  hands  only, 
yet,  as  by  the  injudicious  manner  in  which 
they  are  employed  they  do  not  reproduce  the 
full  value  of  their  consumption,  there  must 
always  be  some  diminution  in  what  would 
otherwise  have  been  the  productive  funds  of 
the  society. 

It  can  seldom  happen,  indeed,  that  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  a  great  nation  can  be  much 
affected  either  by  the  prodigality  or  miscon¬ 
duct  of  individuals;  the  profusion  or  impru¬ 
dence  of  some  being  always  more  than  com¬ 
pensated  by  the  frugality  and  good  conduct 
of  others. 

With  regard  to  profusion,  the  principle  which 
prompts  to  expense  is  the  passion  for  present 
enjoyment;  which,  though  sometimes  violent 
and  very  difficult  to  be  restrained,  is  in  general 
only  momentary  and  occasional.  But  the  prin¬ 
ciple  which  prompts  to  save  is  the  desire  of 
bettering  our  condition,  a  desire  which,  though 
generally  calm  and  dispassionate,  comes  with 
us  from  the  womb,  and  never  leaves  us  till  we 


148 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


go  into  the  grave.  In  the  whole  interval  which 
separates  those  two  moments,  there  is  scarce 
perhaps  a  single  instant  in  which  any  man  is 
so  perfectly  and  completely  satisfied  with  his 
situation  as  to  be  without  any  wish  of  altera¬ 
tion  or  improvement  of  any  kind.  An  augmen¬ 
tation  of  fortune  is  the  means  by  which  the 
greater  part  of  men  propose  and  wish  to  better 
their  condition.  It  is  the  means  the  most  vulgar 
and  the  most  obvious;  and  the  most  likely 
way  of  augmenting  their  fortune  is  to  save 
and  accumulate  some  part  of  what  they  ac¬ 
quire,  either  regularly  and  annually,  or  upon 
some  extraordinary  occasions.  Though  the 
principle  of  expense,  therefore,  prevails  in  al¬ 
most  all  men  upon  some  occasions,  and  in 
some  men  upon  almost  all  occasions,  yet  in 
the  greater  part  of  men,  taking  the  whole 
course  of  their  life  at  an  average,  the  principle 
of  frugality  seems  not  only  to  predominate, 
but  to  predominate  very  greatly. 

With  regard  to  misconduct,  the  number  of 
prudent  and  successful  undertakings  is  every¬ 
where  much  greater  than  that  of  injudicious 
and  unsuccessful  ones.  After  all  our  com¬ 
plaints  of  the  frequency  of  bankruptcies,  the 
unhappy  men  who  fall  into  this  misfortune 
make  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  whole 
number  engaged  in  trade,  and  all  other  sorts 
of  business;  not  much  more  perhaps  than  one 
in  a  thousand.  Bankruptcy  is  perhaps  the 
greatest  and  most  humiliating  calamity  which 
can  befall  an  innocent  man.  The  greater  part 
of  men,  therefore,  are  sufficiently  careful  to 
avoid  it.  Some,  indeed,  do  not  avoid  it;  as 
some  do  not  avoid  the  gallows. 

Great  nations  are  never  impoverished  by 
private,  though  they  sometimes  are  by  public 
prodigality  and  misconduct.  The  whole,  or 
almost  the  whole  public  revenue,  is  in  most 
countries  employed  in  maintaining  unproduc¬ 
tive  hands.  Such  are  the  people  who  compose 
a  numerous  and  splendid  court,  a  great  eccle¬ 
siastical  establishment,  great  fleets  and  armies, 
who  in  time  of  peace  produce  nothing,  and 
in  time  of  war  acquire  nothing  which  can 
compensate  the  expense  of  maintaining  them, 
even  while  the  war  lasts.  Such  people,  as  they 
themselves  produce  nothing,  are  all  main¬ 
tained  by  the  produce  of  other  men’s  labour. 
When  multiplied,  therefore,  to  an  unnecessary 
number,  they  may  in  a  particular  year  con¬ 
sume  so  great  a  share  of  this  produce,  as  not 
to  leave  a  sufficiency  for  maintaining  the 
productive  labourers,  who  should  reproduce 
it  next  year.  The  next  year’s  produce,  there¬ 
fore,  will  be  less  than  that  of  the  foregoing, 
and  if  the  same  disorder  should  continue,  that 
of  the  third  year  will  be  still  less  than  that 
of  the  second.  Those  unproductive  hands,  who 
should  be  maintained  by  a  part  only  of  the 


spare  revenue  of  the  people,  may  consume  so 
great  a  share  of  their  whole  revenue,  and 
thereby  oblige  so  great  a  number  to  encroach 
upon  their  capitals,  upon  the  funds  destined 
for  the  maintenance  of  productive  labour, 
that  all  the  frugality  and  good  conduct  of  in¬ 
dividuals  may  not  be  able  to  compensate  the 
waste  and  degradation  of  produce  occasioned 
by  this  violent  and  forced  encroachment. 

This  frugality  and  good  conduct,  however, 
is  upon  most  occasions,  it  appears  from  ex¬ 
perience,  sufficient  to  compensate,  not  only 
the  private  prodigality  and  misconduct  of 
individuals,  but  the  public  extravagance  of 
government.  The  uniform,  constant,  and  un¬ 
interrupted  effort  of  every  man  to  better  his 
condition,  the  principle  from  which  public 
and  national,  as  well  as  private  opulence  is 
originally  derived,  is  frequently  powerful 
enough  to  maintain  the  natural  progress  of 
things  towards  improvement,  in  spite  both  of 
the  extravagance  of  government  and  of  the 
greatest  errors  of  administration.  Like  the 
unknown  principle  of  animal  life,  it  frequently 
restores  health  and  vigour  to  the  constitution, 
in  spite,  not  only  of  the  disease,  but  of  the 
absurd  prescriptions  of  the  doctor. 

The  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  any  nation  can  be  increased  in  its  value 
by  no  other  means  but  by  increasing  either 
the  number  of  its  productive  labourers,  or 
the  productive  powers  of  those  labourers  who 
had  before  been  employed.  The  number  of 
its  productive  labourers,  it  is  evident,  can 
never  be  much  increased,  but  in  consequence 
of  an  increase  of  capital,  or  of  the  funds 
destined  for  maintaining  them.  The  produc¬ 
tive  powers  of  the  same  number  of  labourers 
cannot  be  increased,  but  in  consequence  ei¬ 
ther  of  some  addition  and  improvement  to 
those  machines  and  instruments  which  facili¬ 
tate  and  abridge  labour;  or  of  a  more  proper 
division  and  distribution  of  employment.  In 
either  case  an  additional  capital  is  almost 
always  required.  It  is  by  means  of  an  addi¬ 
tional  capital  only  that  the  undertaker  of  any 
work  can  either  provide  his  workmen  with 
better  machinery  or  make  a  more  proper  dis¬ 
tribution  of  employment  among  them.  When 
the  work  to  be  done  consists  of  a  number  of 
parts,  to  keep  every  man  constantly  employed 
in  one  way  requires  a  much  greater  capital 
than  where  every  man  is  occasionally  em¬ 
ployed  in  every  different  part  of  the  work. 
When  we  compare,  therefore,  the  state  of  a 
nation  at  two  different  periods,  and  find,  that 
the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and  labour  is 
evidently  greater  at  the  latter  than  at  the 
former,  that  its  lands  are  better  cultivated, 
its  manufactures  more  numerous  and  more 
flourishing,  and  its  trade  more  extensive,  we 
may  be  assured  that  its  capital  must  have 


Accumulation  of  Capital 


increased  during  the  interval  between  those 
two  periods,  and  that  more  must  have  been 
added  to  it  by  the  good  conduct  of  some 
than  had  been  taken  from  it  either  by  the 
private  misconduct  of  others  or  by  the  public 
extravagance  of  government.  But  we  shall 
find  this  to  have  been  the  case  of  almost  all 
nations,  in  all  tolerably  quiet  and  peaceable 
times,  even  of  those  who  have  not  enjoyed 
the  most  prudent  and  parsimonious  govern¬ 
ments.  To  form  a  right  judgment  of  it,  in¬ 
deed,  we  must  compare  the  state  of  the  coun¬ 
try  at  periods  somewhat  distant  from  one 
another.  The  progress  is  frequently  so  gradual 
that,  at  near  periods,  the  improvement  is  not 
only  not  sensible,  but  from  the  declension  ei¬ 
ther  of  certain  branches  of  industry,  or  of 
certain  districts  of  the  country,  things  which 
sometimes  happen  though  the  country  in  gen¬ 
eral  be  in  great  prosperity,  there  frequently 
arises  a  suspicion  that  the  riches  and  indus¬ 
try  of  the  whole  are  decaying. 

The  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  England,  for  example,  is  certainly  much 
greater  than  it  was,  a  little  more  than  a  cen¬ 
tury  ago,  at  the  restoration  of  Charles  IT. 
Though,  at  present,  few  people,  I  believe, 
doubt  of  this,  yet  during  this  period,  five 
years  have  seldom  passed  away  in  which 
some  book  or  pamphlet  has  not  been  pub¬ 
lished,  written,  too,  with  such  abilities  as  to 
gain  some  authority  with  the  public,  and  pre¬ 
tending  to  demonstrate  that  the  wealth  of 
the  nation  was  fast  declining,  that  the  coun¬ 
try  was  depopulated,  agriculture  neglected, 
manufactures  decaying,  and  trade  undone. 
Nor  have  these  publications  been  all  party 
pamphlets,  the  wretched  offspring  of  false¬ 
hood  and  venality.  Many  of  them  have  been 
written  by  very  candid  and  very  intelligent 
people,  who  wrote  nothing  but  what  they  be¬ 
lieved,  and  for  no  other  reason  but  because 
they  believed  it. 

The  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  England,  again,  was  certainly  much  greater 
at  the  Restoration,  than  we  can  suppose  it 
to  have  been  about  an  hundred  years  before, 
at  the  accession  of  Elizabeth.  At  this  period, 
too,  we  have  all  reason  to  believe,  the  country 
was  much  more  advanced  in  improvement 
than  it  had  been  about  a  century  before,  to¬ 
wards  the  close  of  the  dissensions  between  the 
houses  of  York  and  Lancaster.  Even  then  it 
was,  probably,  in  a  better  condition  than  it 
had  been  at  the  Norman  Conquest,  and  at 
the  Norman  Conquest  than  during  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  the  Saxon  Heptarchy.  Even  at  this 
early  period,  it  was  certainly  a  more  im¬ 
proved  country  than  at  the  invasion  of  Julius 
Caesar,  when  its  inhabitants  were  nearly  in 
the  same  state  with  the  savages  in  North 
America. 


149 

In  each  of  those  periods,  however,  there 
was  not  only  much  private  and  public  pro¬ 
fusion,  many  expensive  and  unnecessary 
wars,  great  perversion  of  the  annual  produce 
from  maintaining  productive  to  maintain  un¬ 
productive  hands;  but  sometimes,  in  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  civil  discord,  such  absolute  waste 
and  destruction  of  stock,  as  might  be  sup¬ 
posed,  not  only  to  retard,  as  it  certainly  did, 
the  natural  accumulation  of  riches,  but  to 
have  left  the  country,  at  the  end  of  the  period, 
poorer  than  at  the  beginning.  Thus,  in  the 
happiest  and  most  fortunate  period  of  them 
all,  that  which  has  passed  since  the  Restora¬ 
tion,  how  many  disorders  and  misfortunes 
have  occurred,  which,  could  they  have  been 
foreseen,  not  only  the  impoverishment,  but 
the  total  ruin  of  the  country  would  have 
been  expected  from  them?  The  fire  and  the 
plague  of  London,  the  two  Dutch  wars,  the 
disorders  of  the  Revolution,  the  war  in  Ire¬ 
land,  the  four  expensive  French  wars  of  1688, 
1702,  1742,  and  1756,  together  with  the  two 
rebellions  of  1715  and  1745.  In  the  course  of 
the  four  French  wars,  the  nation  has  con¬ 
tracted  more  than  a  hundred  and  forty-five 
millions  of  debt,  over  and  above  all  the  other 
extraordinary  annual  expense  which  they  oc¬ 
casioned,  so  that  the  whole  cannot  be  com¬ 
puted  at  less  than  two  hundred  millions.  So 
great  a  share  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  country  has,  since  the 
Revolution,  been  employed  upon  different  oc¬ 
casions  in  maintaining  an  extraordinary  num¬ 
ber  of  unproductive  hands.  But  had  not  those 
wars  given  this  particular  direction  to  so  large 
a  capital,  the  greater  part  of  it  would  nat¬ 
urally  have  been  employed  in  maintaining 
productive  hands,  whose  labour  would  have 
replaced,  with  a  profit,  the  whole  value  of 
their  consumption.  The  value  of  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country 
would  have  been  considerably  increased  by  it 
every  year,  and  every  year’s  increase  would 
have  augumented  still  more  that  of  the  fol¬ 
lowing  year.  More  houses  would  have  been 
built,  more  lands  would  have  been  improved, 
and  those  which  had  been  improved  before 
would  have  been  better  cultivated,  more  man¬ 
ufactures  would  have  been  established,  and 
those  which  had  been  established  before  would 
have  been  more  extended;  and  to  what  height 
the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  the  country 
might,  by  this  time,  have  been  raised,  it  is 
not  perhaps  very  easy  even  to  imagine. 

But  though  the  profusion  of  government 
must,  undoubtedly,  have  retarded  the  natural 
progress  of  England  towards  wealth  and  im¬ 
provement,  it  has  not  been  able  to  stop  it. 
The  annual  produce  of  its  land  and  labour 
is,  undoubtedly,  much  greater  at  present  than 
it  was  either  at  the  Restoration  or  at  the 


150  The  Wealth 

Revolution.  The  capital,  therefore,  annually 
employed  in  cultivating  this  land,  and  in 
maintaining  this  labour,  must  likewise  be 
much  greater.  In  the  midst  of  all  the  exac¬ 
tions  of  government,  this  capital  has  been  si¬ 
lently  and  gradually  accumulated  by  the  pri¬ 
vate  frugality  and  good  conduct  of  individ¬ 
uals,  by  their  universal,  continual,  and  unin¬ 
terrupted  effort  to  better  their  own  condition. 
It  is  this  effort,  protected  by  law  and  al¬ 
lowed  by  liberty  to  exert  itself  in  the  manner 
that  is  most  advantageous,  which  has  main¬ 
tained  the  progress  of  England  towards  opu¬ 
lence  and  improvement  in  almost  all  former 
times,  and  which,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  do 
so  in  all  future  times.  England,  however,  as 
it  has  never  been  blessed  with  a  very  parsi¬ 
monious  government,  so  parsimony  has  at  no 
time  been  the  characteristical  virtue  of  its  in¬ 
habitants.  It  is  the  highest  impertinence  and 
presumption,  therefore,  in  kings  and  ministers, 
to  pretend  to  watch  over  the  economy  of  pri¬ 
vate  people,  and  to  restrain  their  expense, 
either  by  sumptuary  laws,  or  by  prohibiting 
the  importation  of  foreign  luxuries.  They  are 
themselves  always,  and  without  any  excep¬ 
tion,  the  greatest  spendthrifts  in  the  society. 
Let  them  look  well  after  their  own  expense, 
and  they  may  safely  trust  private  people 
with  theirs.  If  their  own  extravagance  does 
not  ruin  the  state,  that  of  their  subjects 
never  will. 

As  frugality  increases  and  prodigality  di¬ 
minishes  the  public  capital,  so  the  conduct  of 
those  whose  expense  just  equals  their  revenue, 
without  either  accumulating  or  encroaching, 
neither  increases  nor  diminishes  it.  Some 
modes  of  expense,  however,  seem  to  contribute 
more  to  the  growth  of  public  opulence  than 
others. 

The  revenue  of  an  individual  may  be  spent 
either  in  things  which  are  consumed  imme¬ 
diately,  and  in  which  one  day's  expense  can 
neither  alleviate  nor  support  that  of  another, 
or  it  may  be  spent  in  things  more  durable, 
which  can  therefore  be  accumulated,  and  in 
which  every  day’s  expense  may,  as  he  chooses, 
either  alleviate  or  support  and  heighten  the 
effect  of  that  of  the  following  day.  A  man  of 
fortune,  for  example,  may  either  spend  his 
revenue  in  a  profuse  and  sumptuous  table, 
and  in  maintaining  a  great  number  of  menial 
servants,  and  a  multitude  of  dogs  and  horses; 
or  contenting  himself  with  a  frugal  table  and 
few  attendants,  he  may  lay  out  the  greater 
part  of  it  in  adorning  his  house  or  his  country 
villa,  in  useful  or  ornamental  buildings,  in 
useful  or  ornamental  furniture,  in  collecting 
books,  statues,  pictures;  or  in  things  more 
frivolous,  jewels,  baubles,  ingenious  trinkets 
of  different  kinds;  or,  what  is  most  trifling 
of  all,  in  amassing  a  great  wardrobe  of  fine 


of  Nations 

clothes,  like  the  favourite  and  minister  of  a 
great  prince  who  died  a  few  years  ago.  Were 
two  men  of  equal  fortune  to  spend  their  reve¬ 
nue,  the  one  chiefly  in  the  one  way,  the  other 
in  the  other,  the  magnificence  of  the  person 
whose  expense  had  been  chiefly  in  durable 
commodities,  would  be  continually  increasing, 
every  day’s  expense  contributing  something 
to  support  and  heighten  the  effect  of  that  of 
the  following  day:  that  of  the  other,  on  the 
contrary,  would  be  no  greater  at  the  end  of 
the  period  than  at  the  beginning.  The  former, 
too,  would,  at  the  end  of  the  period,  be  the 
richer  man  of  the  two.  He  would  have  a  stock 
of  goods  of  some  kind  or  other,  which,  though 
it  might  not  be  worth  all  that  it  cost,  would 
always  be  worth  something.  No  trace  or  ves¬ 
tige  of  the  expense  of  the  latter  would  re¬ 
main,  and  the  effects  of  ten  or  twenty  years 
profusion  would  be  as  completely  annihilated 
as  if  they  had  never  existed. 

As  the  one  mode  of  expense  is  more  favour¬ 
able  than  the  other  to  the  opulence  of  an  in¬ 
dividual,  so  is  it  likewise  to  that  of  a  nation. 
The  houses,  the  furniture,  the  clothing  of  the 
rich,  in  a  little  time,  become  useful  to  the 
inferior  and  middling  ranks  of  people.  They 
are  able  to  purchase  them  when  their  su¬ 
periors  grow  weary  of  them,  and  the  general 
accommodation  of  the  whole  people  is  thus 
gradually  improved,  when  this  mode  of  ex¬ 
pense  becomes  universal  among  men  of  for¬ 
tune.  In  countries  which  have  long  been  rich, 
you  will  frequently  find  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people  in  possession  both  of  houses  and  fur¬ 
niture  perfectly  good  and  entire,  but  of  which 
neither  the  one  could  have  been  built,  nor 
the  other  have  been  made  for  their  use.  What 
was  formerly  a  seat  of  the  family  of  Seymour 
is  now  an  inn  upon  the  Bath  road.  The  mar¬ 
riage-bed  of  James  the  First  of  Great  Britain, 
which  his  queen  brought  with  her  from  Den¬ 
mark  as  a  present  fit  for  a  sovereign  to  make 
to  a  sovereign,  was,  a  few  years  ago,  the  orna¬ 
ment  of  an  alehouse  at  Dunfermline.  In  some 
ancient  cities,  which  either  have  been  long 
stationary,  or  have  gone  somewhat  to  decay, 
you  will  sometimes  scarce  find  a  single  house 
which  could  have  been  built  for  its  present 
inhabitants.  If  you  go  into  those  houses 
too,  you  will  frequently  find  many  excellent, 
though  antiquated  pieces  of  furniture,  which 
are  still  very  fit  for  use,  and  which  could  as 
little  have  been  made  for  them.  Noble  palaces, 
magnificent  villas,  great  collections  of  books, 
statues,  pictures  and  other  curiosities,  are 
frequently  both  an  ornament  and  an  honour, 
not  only  to  the  neighbourhood,  but  to  the 
whole  country  to  which  they  belong.  Ver¬ 
sailles  is  an  ornament  and  an  honour  to 
France,  Stowe  and  Wilton  to  England.  Italy 
still  continues  to  command  some  sort  of  ven- 


151 


Stock  Lent  at  Interest 


eration  by  the  number  of  monuments  of  this 
kind  which  it  possesses,  though  the  wealth 
which  produced  them  has  decayed,  and  though 
the  genius  which  planned  them  seems  to  be 
extinguished,  perhaps  from  not  having  the 
same  employment. 

The  expense  too,  which  is  laid  out  in  du¬ 
rable  commodities,  is  favourable,  not  only  to 
accumulation,  but  to  frugality.  If  a  person 
should  at  any  time  exceed  in  it,  he  can  easily 
reform  without  exposing  himself  to  the  cen¬ 
sure  of  the  public.  To  reduce  very  much  the 
number  of  his  servants,  to  reform  his  table 
from  great  profusion  to  great  frugality,  to  lay 
down  his  equipage  after  he  has  once  set  it  up, 
are  changes  which  cannot  escape  the  observa¬ 
tion  of  his  neighbours,  and  which  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  imply  some  acknowledgment  of  pre¬ 
ceding  bad  conduct.  Few,  therefore,  of  those 
who  have  once  been  so  unfortunate  as  to 
launch  out  too  far  into  this  sort  of  expense, 
have  afterwards  the  courage  to  reform,  till 
ruin  and  bankruptcy  oblige  them.  But  if  a 
person  has,  at  any  time,  been  at  too  great 
an  expense  in  building,  in  furniture,  in  books 
or  pictures,  no  imprudence  can  be  inferred 
from  his  changing  his  conduct.  These  are 
things  in  which  further  expense  is  frequently 
rendered  unnecessary  by  former  expense;  and 
when  a  person  stops  short,  he  appears  to  do 
so,  not  because  he  has  exceeded  his  fortune, 
but  because  he  has  satisfied  his  fancy. 

The  expense,  besides,  that  is  laid  out  in 
durable  commodities  gives  maintenance,  com¬ 
monly,  to  a  greater  number  of  people  than 
that  which  is  employed  in  the  most  profuse 
hospitality.  Of  two  or  three  hundredweight  of 
provisions,  which  may  sometimes  be  served 
up  at  a  great  festival,  one  half,  perhaps,  is 
thrown  to  the  dunghill,  and  there  is  always 
a  great  deal  wasted  and  abused.  But  if  the 
expense  of  this  entertainment  had  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  setting  to  work  masons,  carpenters, 
upholsterers,  mechanics,  etc.,  a  quantity  of 
provisions,  of  equal  value,  would  have  been 
distributed  among  a  still  greater  number  of 
people  who  would  have  bought  them  in  pen¬ 
nyworths  and  pound  weights,  and  not  have 
lost  or  thrown  away  a  single  ounce  of  them. 
In  the  one  way,  besides,  this  expense  main¬ 
tains  productive,  in  the  other  unproductive 
hands.  In  the  one  way,  therefore,  it  increases, 
in  the  other,  it  does  not  increase,  the  ex¬ 
changeable  value  of  the  annual  produce  of 
the  land  and  labour  of  the  country. 

I  would  not,  however,  by  all  this  be  under¬ 
stood  to  mean  that  the  one  species  of  ex¬ 
pense  always  betokens  a  more  liberal  or  gen¬ 
erous  spirit  than  the  other.  When  a  man  of 
fortune  spends  his  revenue  chiefly  in  hospital¬ 
ity,  he  shares  the  greater  part  of  it  with  his 
friends  and  companions;  but  when  he  em¬ 


ploys  it  in  purchasing  such  durable  commodi¬ 
ties,  he  often  spends  the  whole  upon  his  own 
person,  and  gives  nothing  to  anybody  with¬ 
out  an  equivalent.  The  latter  species  of  ex¬ 
pense,  therefore,  especially  wThen  directed  to¬ 
wards  frivolous  objects,  the  little  ornaments 
of  dress  and  furniture,  jewels,  trinkets,  gew¬ 
gaws,  frequently  indicates,  not  only  a  trifl¬ 
ing,  but  a  base  and  selfish  disposition.  All 
that  I  mean  is,  that  the  one  sort  of  expense, 
as  it  always  occasions  some  accumulation  of 
valuable  commodities,  as  it  is  more  favour¬ 
able  to  private  frugality,  and;  consequently, 
to  the  increase  of  the  public  capital,  and  as 
it  maintains  productive,  rather  than  unpro¬ 
ductive  hands,  conduces  more  than  the  other 
to  the  growth  of  public  opulence. 

CHAPTER  IV 

Of  Stock  Lent  at  Interest 

The  stock  which  is  lent  at  interest  is  al¬ 
ways  considered  as  a  capital  by  the  lender 
He  expects  that  in  due  time  it  is  to  be  restored 
to  him,  and  that  in  the  meantime  the  bor¬ 
rower  is  to  pay  him  a  certain  annual  rent  for 
the  use  of  it.  The  borrower  may  use  it  either 
as  a  capital,  or  as  a  stock  reserved  for  imme¬ 
diate  consumption.  If  he  uses  it  as  a  capital, 
he  employs  it  in  the  maintenance  of  produc¬ 
tive  labourers,  who  reproduce  the  value  with 
a  profit.  He  can,  in  this  case,  both  restore 
the  capital  and  pay  the  interest  without  alien¬ 
ating  or  encroaching  upon  any  other  source  of 
revenue.  If  he  uses  it  as  a  stock  reserved  for 
immediate  consumption,  he  acts  the  part  of  a 
prodigal,  and  dissipates  in  the  maintenance  of 
the  idle  what  was  destined  for  the  support  of 
the  industrious.  He  can,  in  this  case,  neither 
restore  the  capital  nor  pay  the  interest  with¬ 
out  either  alienating  or  encroaching  upon 
some  other  source  of  revenue,  such  as  the 
property  or  the  rent  of  land. 

The  stock  which  is  lent  at  interest  is,  no 
doubt,  occasionally  employed  in  both  these 
ways,  but  in  the  former  much  more  frequent¬ 
ly  than  in  the  latter.  The  man  who  borrows 
in  order  to  spend  will  soon  be  ruined,  and  he 
who  lends  to  him  will  generally  have  occasion 
to  repent  of  his  folly.  To  borrow  or  to  lend 
for  such  a  purpose,  therefore,  is  in  all  cases, 
where  gross  usury  is  out  of  the  question,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  interest  of  both  parties;  and 
though  it  no  doubt  happens  sometimes  that 
people  do  both  the  one  and  the  other;  yet, 
from  the  regard  that  all  men  have  for  their 
own  interest,  we  may  be  assured  that  it  can¬ 
not  happen  so  very  frequently  as  we  are 
sometimes  apt  to  imagine.  Ask  any  rich  man 
of  common  prudence  to  which  of  the  two  sorts 
of  people  he  has  lent  the  greater  part  of  his 
stock,  to  those  who,  he  thinks,  will  employ  it 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


152 

profitably,  or  to  those  who  will  spend  it  idly, 
and  he  will  laugh  at  you  for  proposing  the 
question.  Even  among  borrowers,  therefore, 
not  the  people  in  the  world  most  famous  for 
frugality,  the  number  of  the  frugal  and  indus¬ 
trious  surpasses  considerably  that  of  the  prodi¬ 
gal  and  idle. 

The  only  people  to  whom  stock  is  common¬ 
ly  lent,  without  their  being  expected  to  make 
any  very  profitable  use  of  it,  are  country  gen¬ 
tlemen  who  borrow  upon  mortgage.  Even  they 
scarce  ever  borrow  merely  to  spend.  What 
they  borrow,  one  may  say,  is  commonly  spent 
before  they  borrow  it.  They  have  generally 
consumed  so  great  a  quantity  of  goods,  ad¬ 
vanced  to  them  upon  credit  by  shopkeepers 
and  tradesmen,  that  they  find  it  necessary 
to  borrow  at  interest  in  order  to  pay  the  debt. 
The  capital  borrowed  replaces  the  capitals  of 
those  shopkeepers  and  tradesmen,  which  the 
country  gentlemen  could  not  have  replaced 
from  the  rents  of  their  estates.  It  is  not  prop¬ 
erly  borrowed  in  order  to  be  spent,  but  in  order 
to  replace  a  capital  which  had  been  spent 
before. 

Almost  all  loans  at  interest  are  made  in 
money,  either  of  paper,  or  of  gold  and  silver. 
But  what  the  borrower  really  wants,  and  what 
the  lender  really  supplies  him  with,  is  not  the 
money,  but  the  money’s  worth,  or  the  goods 
which  it  can  purchase.  If  he  wants  it  as  a 
stock  for  immediate  consumption,  it  is  those 
goods  only  which  he  can  place  in  that  stock. 
If  he  wants  it  as  a  capital  for  employing  in¬ 
dustry,  it  is  from  those  goods  only  that  the 
industrious  can  be  furnished  with  the  tools, 
materials,  and  maintenance  necessary  for  car¬ 
rying  on  their  work.  By  means  of  the  loan, 
the  lender,  as  it  were,  assigns  to  the  bor¬ 
rower  his  right  to  a  certain  portion  of  the 
annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
the  country  to  be  employed  as  the  borrower 
pleases. 

The  quantity  of  stock,  therefore,  or,  as  it 
is  commonly  expressed,  of  money  which  can 
be  lent  at  interest  in  any  country,  is  not 
regulated  by  the  value  of  the  money,  whether 
paper  or  coin,  which  serves  as  the  instrument 
of  the  different  loans  made  in  that  country, 
but  by  the  value  of  that  part  of  the  annual 
produce  which,  as  soon  as  it  comes  either 
from  the  ground,  or  from  the  hands  of  the 
productive  labourers,  is  destined  not  only  for 
replacing  a  capital,  but  such  a  capital  as  the 
owner  does  not  care  to  be  at  the  trouble  of 
employing  himself.  As  such  capitals  are  com¬ 
monly  lent  out  and  paid  back  in  money,  they 
constitute  what  is  called  the  monied  inter¬ 
est.  It  is  distinct,  not  only  from  the  landed, 
but  from  the  trading  and  manufacturing  in¬ 
terests,  as  in  these  last  the  owners  themselves 
employ  their  own  capitals.  Even  in  the  monied 


interest,  however,  the  money  is,  as  it  were, 
but  the  deed  of  assignment,  which  conveys 
from  one  hand  to  another  those  capitals  which 
the  owners  do  not  care  to  employ  themselves. 
Those  capitals  may  be  greater  in  almost  any 
proportion  than  the  amount  of  the  money 
which  serves  as  the  instrument  of  their  con¬ 
veyance;  the  same  pieces  of  money  successively 
serving  for  many  different  loans,  as  well  as 
for  many  different  purchases.  A,  for  example, 
lends  to  W  a  thousand  pounds,  with  which 
W  immediately  purchases  of  B  a  thousand 
pounds’  worth  of  goods.  B  having  no  occa¬ 
sion  for  the  money  himself,  lends  the  identical 
pieces  to  X,  with  which  X  immediately  pur¬ 
chases  of  C  another  thousand  pounds’  worth 
of  goods.  C  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
the  same  reason,  lends  them  to  Y,  who  again 
purchases  goods  with  them  of  D.  In  this  man¬ 
ner  the  same  pieces,  either  of  coin  or  paper, 
may  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  serve  as 
the  instrument  of  three  different  loans,  and 
of  three  different  purchases,  each  of  which  is, 
in  value,  equal  to  the  whole  amount  of  those 
pieces.  What  the  three  monied  men  A,  B,  and 
C  assign  to  the  three  borrowers,  W,  X,  Y,  is 
the  power  of  making  those  purchases.  In  this 
power  consist  both  the  value  and  the  use  of  the 
loans.  The  stock  lent  by  the  three  monied  men 
is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  goods  which  can  be 
purchased  with  it,  and  is  three  times  greater 
than  that  of  the  money  with  which  the  pur¬ 
chases  are  made.  Those  loans  however,  may 
be  all  perfectly  well  secured,  the  goods  pur¬ 
chased  by  the  different  debtors  being  so  em¬ 
ployed  as,  in  due  time,  to  bring  back,  with  a 
profit,  an  equal  value  either  of  coin  or  of 
paper.  And  as  the  same  pieces  of  money  can 
thus  serve  as  the  instrument  of  different  loans 
to  three,  or  for  the  same  reason,  to  thirty 
times  their  value,  so  they  may  likewise  succes¬ 
sively  serve  as  the  instrument  of  repayment. 

A  capital  lent  at  interest  may,  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  be  considered  as  an  assignment  from  the 
lender  to  the  borrowers  of  a  certain  consider¬ 
able  portion  of  the  annual  produce;  upon  con¬ 
dition  that  the  borrower  in  return  shall,  dur¬ 
ing  the  continuance  of  the  loan,  annually 
assign  to  the  lender  a  smaller  portion,  called 
the  interest;  and  at  the  end  of  it  a  portion 
equally  considerable  with  that  which  had  orig¬ 
inally  been  assigned  to  him,  called  the  re¬ 
payment.  Though  money,  either  coin  or  paper, 
serves  generally  as  the  deed  of  assignment 
both  to  the  smaller  and  to  the  more  consider¬ 
able  portion,  it  is  itself  altogether  different 
from  what  is  assigned  by  it. 

In  proportion  as  that  share  of  the  annual 
produce  which,  as  soon  as  it  comes  either 
from  the  ground,  or  from  the  hands  of  the 
productive  labourers,  is  destined  for  replacing 


153 


Stock  Lent 

a  capital,  increases  in  any  country,  what  is 
called  the  monied  interest  naturally  increases 
with  it.  The  increase  of  those  particular  cap¬ 
itals  from  which  the  owners  wish  to  derive  a 
revenue,  without  being  at  the  trouble  of  em¬ 
ploying  them  themselves,  naturally  accom¬ 
panies  the  general  increase  of  capitals;  or,  in 
other  words,  as  stock  increases,  the  quantity 
of  stock  to  be  lent  at  interest  grows  gradually 
greater  and  greater. 

As  the  quantity  of  stock  to  be  lent  at  in¬ 
terest  increases,  the  interest,  or  the  price 
which  must  be  paid  for  the  use  of  that  stock, 
necessarily  diminishes,  not  only  from  those 
general  causes  which  make  the  market  price 
of  things  commonly  diminish  as  their  quantity 
increases,  but  from  other  causes  which  are  pe¬ 
culiar  to  this  particular  case.  As  capitals  in¬ 
crease  in  any  country,  the  profits  which  can  be 
made  by  employing  them  necessarily  diminish. 
It  becomes  gradually  more  and  more  difficult 
to  find  within  the  country  a  profitable  method 
of  employing  any  new  capital.  There  arises  in 
consequence  a  competition  between  different 
capitals,  the  owner  of  one  endeavouring  to 
get  possession  of  that  employment  which  is 
occupied  by  another.  But  upon  most  occa¬ 
sions  he  can  hope  to  jostle  that  other  out  of 
this  employment  by  no  other  means  but  by 
dealing  upon  more  reasonable  terms.  He  must 
not  only  sell  what  he  deals  in  somewhat  cheap¬ 
er,  but  in  order  to  get  it  to  sell,  he  must  some¬ 
times,  too,  buy  it  dearer.  The  demand  for  pro¬ 
ductive  labour,  by  the  increase  of  the  funds 
which  are  destined  for  maintaining  it,  grows 
every  day  greater  and  greater.  Labourers 
easily  find  employment,  but  the  owners  of 
capitals  find  it  difficult  to  get  labourers  to  em¬ 
ploy.  Their  competition  raises  the  wages  of 
labour  and  sinks  the  profits  of  stock.  But 
when  the  profits  which  can  be  made  by  the 
use  of  a  capital  are  in  this  manner  diminished, 
as  it  were,  at  both  ends,  the  price  which  can  be 
paid  for  the  use  of  it,  that  is,  the  rate  of  in¬ 
terest,  must  necessarily  be  diminished  with 
them. 

Mr.  Locke,  Mr.  Law,  and  Mr.  Montesquieu, 
as  well  as  many  other  writers,  seem  to  have 
imagined  that  the  increase  of  the  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver,  in  consequence  of  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies,  was  the  real 
cause  of  the  lowering  of  the  rate  of  interest 
through  the  greater  part  of  Europe.  Those 
metals,  they  say,  having  become  of  less  value 
themselves,  the  use  of  any  particular  portion 
of  them  necessarily  became  of  less  value  too, 
and  consequently  the  price  which  could  be 
paid  for  it.  This  notion,  which  at  first  sight 
seems  plausible,  has  been  so  fully  exposed  by 
Mr.  Hume  that  it  is,  perhaps,  unnecessary  to 
say  anything  more  about  it.  The  following 
very  short  and  plain  argument,  however,  may 


at  Interest 

serve  to  explain  more  distinctly  the  fallacy 
which  seems  to  have  misled  those  gentlemen. 

Before  the  discovery  of  the  Spanish  West 
Indies,  ten  per  cent  seems  to  have  been  the 
common  rate  of  interest  through  the  greater 
part  of  Europe.  It  has  since  that  time  in  dif¬ 
ferent  countries  sunk  to  six,  five,  four,  and 
three  per  cent.  Let  us  suppose  that  in  every 
particular  country  the  value  of  silver  has  sunk 
precisely  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  rate  of 
interest;  and  that  in  those  countries,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  where  interest  has  been  reduced  from 
ten  to  five  per  cent,  the  same  quantity  of  sil¬ 
ver  can  novv  purchase  just  half  the  quantity 
of  goods  which  it  could  have  purchased  before. 
This  supposition  will  not,  I  believe,  be  found 
anywhere  agreeable  to  the  truth,  but  it  is  the 
most  favourable  to  the  opinion  which  we  are 
going  to  examine;  and  even  upon  this  suppo¬ 
sition  it  is  utterly  impossible  that  the  lower¬ 
ing  of  the  value  of  silver  could  have  the  small¬ 
est  tendency  to  lower  the  rate  of  interest.  If  a 
hundred  pounds  are  in  those  countries  now  of 
no  more  value  than  fifty  pounds  were  then, 
ten  pounds  must  now  be  of  no  more  value 
than  five  pounds  were  then.  Whatever  were 
the  causes  which  lowered  the  value  of  the 
capital,  the  same  must  necessarily  have  low¬ 
ered  that  of  the  interest,  and  exactly  in  the 
same  proportion.  The  proportion  between  the 
value  of  the  capital  and  that  of  the  interest 
must  have  remained  the  same,  though  the 
rate  had  been  altered.  By  altering  the  rate,  on 
the  contrary,  the  proportion  between  those 
two  values  is  necessarily  altered.  If  a  hundred 
pounds  now  are  worth  no  more  than  fifty 
were  then,  five  pounds  now  can  be  worth  no 
more  than  two  pounds  ten  shillings  were  then. 
By  reducing  the  rate  of  interest,  therefore, 
from  ten  to  five  per  cent,  we  give  for  the  use 
of  a  capital,  which  is  supposed  to  be  equal 
to  one  half  of  its  former  value,  an  interest 
which  is  equal  to  one  fourth  only  of  the  value 
of  the  former  interest. 

Any  increase  in  the  quantity  of  silver,  while 
that  of  the  commodities  circulated  by  means 
of  it  remained  the  same,  could  have  no  other 
effect  than  to  diminish  the  value  of  that  metal. 
The  nominal  value  of  all  sorts  of  goods  would 
be  greater,  but  their  real  value  would  be  pre¬ 
cisely  the  same  as  before.  They  would  be  ex¬ 
changed  for  a  greater  number  of  pieces  of 
silver;  but  the  quantity  of  labour  which  they 
could  command,  the  number  of  people  whom 
they  could  maintain  and  employ,  would  be 
precisely  the  same.  The  capital  of  the  country 
would  be  the  same,  though  a  greater  number 
of  pieces  might  be  requisite  for  conveying  any 
equal  portion  of  it  from  one  hand  to  another. 
The  deeds  of  assignment,  like  the  convey¬ 
ances  of  a  verbose  attorney,  would  be  more 
cumbersome,  but  the  thing  assigned  would 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


154 

be  precisely  the  same  as  before,  and  could 
produce  only  the  same  effects.  The  funds 
for  maintaining  productive  labour  being  the 
same,  the  demand  for  it  would  be  the  same. 
Its  price  or  wages,  therefore,  though  nom¬ 
inally  greater,  would  really  be  the  same. 
They  would  be  paid  in  a  greater  number  of 
pieces  of  silver;  but  they  would  purchase  only 
the  same  quantity  of  goods.  The  profits  of 
stock  would  be  the  same  both  nominally  and 
really.  The  wages  of  labour  are  commonly 
computed  by  the  quantity  of  silver  which  is 
paid  to  the  labourer.  When  that  is  increased, 
therefore,  his  wages  appear  to  be  increased, 
though  they  may  sometimes  be  no  greater 
than  before.  But  the  profits  of  stock  are  not 
computed  by  the  number  of  pieces  of  silver 
with  which  they  are  paid,  but  by  the  propor¬ 
tion  which  those  pieces  bear  to  the  whole  capi¬ 
tal  employed.  Thus  in  a  particular  country 
five  shillings  a  week  are  said  to  be  the  com¬ 
mon  wages  of  labour,  and  ten  per  cent  the 
common  profits  of  stock.  But  the  whole  capital 
of  the  country  being  the  same  as  before,  the 
competition  between  the  different  capitals  of 
individuals  into  which  it  was  divided  would 
likewise  be  the  same.  They  would  all  trade 
with  the  same  advantages  and  disadvantages. 
The  common  proportion  between  capital  and 
profit,  therefore,  would  be  the  same,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  common  interest  of  money; 
what  can  commonly  be  given  for  the  use  of 
money  being  necessarily  regulated  by  what 
can  commonly  be  made  by  the  use  of  it. 

Any  increase  in  the  quantity  of  commodi¬ 
ties  annually  circulated  within  the  country, 
while  that  of  the  money  which  circulated 
them  remained  the  same,  would,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  produce  many  other  important  effects, 
besides  that  of  raising  the  value  of  the  money. 
The  capital  of  the  country,  though  it  might 
nominally  be  the  same,  would  really  be  aug¬ 
mented.  It  might  continue  to  be  expressed  by 
the  same  quantity  of  money,  but  it  would 
command  a  greater  quantity  of  labour.  The 
quantity  of  productive  labour  which  it  could 
maintain  and  employ  would  be  increased,  and 
consequently  the  demand  for  that  labour.  Its 
wages  would  naturally  rise  with  the  demand, 
and  yet  might  appear  to  sink.  They  might  be 
paid  with  a  smaller  quantity  of  money,  but 
that  smaller  quantity  might  purchase  a  great¬ 
er  quantity  of  goods  than  a  greater  had  done 
before.  The  profits  of  stock  would  be  dimin¬ 
ished  both  really  and  in  appearance.  The 
whole  capital  of  the  country  being  augmented, 
the  competition  between  the  different  capi¬ 
tals  of  which  it  was  composed  would  naturally 
be  augmented  along  with  it.  The  owners  of 
those  particular  capitals  would  be  obliged  to 
content  themselves  with  a  smaller  proportion 
of  the  produce  of  that  labour  which  their 


respective  capitals  employed.  The  interest  of 
money,  keeping  pace  always  with  the  profits 
of  stock,  might,  in  this  manner,  be  greatly 
diminished,  though  the  value  of  money,  or  the 
quantity  of  goods  which  any  particular  sum 
could  purchase,  was  greatly  augmented. 

In  some  countries  the  interest  of  money  has 
been  prohibited  by  law.  But  as  something  can 
everywhere  be  made  by  the  use  of  money, 
something  ought  everywhere  to  be  paid  for 
the  use  of  it.  This  regulation,  instead  of  pre¬ 
venting,  has  been  found  from  experience  to 
increase  the  evil  of  usury;  the  debtor  being 
obliged  to  pay,  not  only  for  the  use  of  the 
money,  but  for  the  risk  which  his  creditor 
runs  by  accepting  a  compensation  for  that 
use.  He  is  obliged,  if  one  may  say  so,  to  insure 
his  creditor  from  the  penalties  of  usury. 

In  countries  where  interest  is  permitted,  the 
law,  in  order  to  prevent  the  extortion  of  usury, 
generally  fixes  the  highest  rate  which  can  be 
taken  without  incurring  a  penalty.  This  rate 
ought  always  to  be  somewhat  above  the  low¬ 
est  market  price,  or  the  price  which  is  com¬ 
monly  paid  for  the  use  of  money  by  those 
who  can  give  the  most  undoubted  security.  If 
this  legal  rate  should  be  fixed  below  the  lowest 
market  rate,  the  effects  of  this  fixation  must 
be  nearly  the  same  as  those  of  a  total  pro¬ 
hibition  of  interest.  The  creditor  will  not  lend 
his  money  for  less  than  the  use  of  it  is  worth, 
and  the  debtor  must  pay  him  for  the  risk 
which  he  runs  by  accepting  the  full  value  of 
that  use.  If  it  is  fixed  precisely  at  the  lowest 
market  price,  it  ruins  with  honest  people,  who 
respect  the  laws  of  their  country,  the  credit 
of  all  those  who  cannot  give  the  very  best 
security,  and  obliges  them  to  have  recourse 
to  exorbitant  usurers.  In  a  country,  such  as 
Great  Britain,  where  money  is  lent  to  govern¬ 
ment  at  three  per  cent  and  to  private  people 
upon  a  good  security  at  four  and  four  and  a 
half,  the  present  legal  rate,  five  per  cent,  is 
perhaps  as  proper  as  any. 

The  legal  rate,  it  is  to  be  observed,  though 
it  ought  to  be  somewhat  above,  ought  not  to 
be  much  above  the  lowest  market  rate.  If  the 
legal  rate  of  interest  in  Great  Britain,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  was  fixed  so  high  as  eight  or  ten  per 
cent,  the  greater  part  of  the  money  which  was 
to  be  lent  would  be  lent  to  prodigals  and  pro¬ 
jectors,  who  alone  would  be  willing  to  give 
this  high  interest.  Sober  people,  who  will  give 
for  the  use  of  money  no  more  than  a  part  of 
what  they  are  likely  to  make  by  the  use  of  it, 
would  not  venture  into  the  competition.  A 
great  part  of  the  capital  of  the  country  would 
thus  be  kept  out  of  the  hands  which  were 
most  likely  to  make  a  profitable  and  advanta¬ 
geous  use  of  it,  and  thrown  into  those  which 
were  most  likely  to  waste  and  destroy  it. 
Where  the  legal  rate  of  interest,  on  the  con- 


Different  Employment  of  Capitals 


trary,  is  fixed  but  a  very  little  above  the  low¬ 
est  market  rate,  sober  people  are  universally 
preferred,  as  borrowers,  to  prodigals  and  pro¬ 
jectors.  The  person  who  lends  money  gets 
nearly  as  much  interest  from  the  former  as  he 
dares  to  take  from  the  latter,  and  his  money 
is  much  safer  in  the  hands  of  the  one  set  of 
people  than  in  those  of  the  other.  A  great 
part  of  the  capital  of  the  country  is  thus 
thrown  into  the  hands  in  which  it  is  most 
likely  to  be  employed  with  advantage. 

No  law  can  reduce  the  common  rate  of  in¬ 
terest  below  the  lowest  ordinary  market  rate 
at  the  time  when  that  law  is  made.  Notwith¬ 
standing  the  edict  of  1766,  by  which  the 
French  king  attempted  to  reduce  the  rate  of 
interest  from  five  to  four  per  cent,  money  con¬ 
tinued  to  be  lent  in  France  at  five  per  cent, 
the  law  being  evaded  in  several  different  ways. 

The  ordinary  market  price  of  land,  it  is  to 
be  observed,  depends  everywhere  upon  the 
ordinary  market  rate  of  interest.  The  person 
who  has  a  capital  from  which  he  wishes  to  de¬ 
rive  a  revenue,  without  taking  the  trouble  to 
employ  it  himself,  deliberates  whether  he 
should  buy  land  with  it  or  lend  it  out  at  in¬ 
terest.  The  superior  security  of  land,  together 
with  some  other  advantages  which  almost 
everywhere  attend  upon  this  species  of  prop¬ 
erty,  will  generally  dispose  him  to  content 
himself  with  a  smaller  revenue  from  land  than 
what  he  might  have  by  lending  out  his  money 
at  interest.  These  advantages  are  sufficient  to 
compensate  a  certain  difference  of  revenue; 
but  they  will  compensate  a  certain  difference 
only;  and  if  the  rent  of  land  should  fall  short 
of  the  interest  of  money  by  a  greater  differ¬ 
ence,  nobody  would  buy  land,  which  would 
soon  reduce  its  ordinary  price.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  if  the  advantages  should  much  more 
than  compensate  the  difference,  everybody 
would  buy  land,  which  again  would  soon  raise 
its  ordinary  price.  When  interest  was  at  ten 
per  cent,  land  was  commonly  sold  for  ten  and 
twelve  years’  purchase.  As  interest  sunk  to 
six,  five,  and  four  per  cent,  the  price  of  land 
rose  to  twenty,  five-and-twenty,  and  thirty 
years’  purchase.  The  market  rate  of  interest 
is  higher  in  France  than  in  England;  and  the 
common  price  of  land  is  lower.  In  England  it 
commonly  sells  at  thirty,  in  France  at  twenty 
years’  purchase. 

CHAPTER  V 

Of  the  Different  Employment  of  Capitals 

Though  all  capitals  are  destined  for  the 
maintenance  of  productive  labour  only,  yet 
the  quantity  of  that  labour  which  equal  cap¬ 
itals  are  capable  of  putting  into  motion  varies 
extremely  according  to  the  diversity  of  their 
employment;  as  does  likewise  the  value  which 


155 

that  employment  adds  to  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country. 

A  capital  may  be  employed  in  four  different 
ways:  either,  first,  in  procuring  the  rude  prod¬ 
uce  annually  required  for  the  use  and  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  society;  or,  secondly,  in  manu¬ 
facturing  and  preparing  that  rude  produce 
for  immediate  use  and  consumption;  or,  third¬ 
ly,  in  transporting  either  the  rude  or  manu¬ 
factured  produce  from  the  places  where  they 
abound  to  those  where  they  are  wanted;  or, 
lastly,  in  dividing  particular  portions  of  either 
into  such  small  parcels  as  suit  the  occasional 
demands  of  those  who  want  them.  In  the  first 
way  are  employed  the  capitals  of  all  those  who 
undertake  the  improvement  or  cultivation  of 
lands,  mines,  or  fisheries;  in  the  second,  those 
of  all  master  manufacturers;  in  the  third, 
those  of  all  wholesale  merchants;  and  in  the 
fourth,  those  of  all  retailers.  It  is  difficult  to 
conceive  that  a  capital  should  be  employed  in 
any  way  which  may  not  be  classed  under 
some  one  or  other  of  those  four. 

Each  of  these  four  methods  of  employing  a 
capital  is  essentially  necessary  either  to  the 
existence  or  extension  of  the  other  three,  or  to 
the  general  conveniency  of  the  society. 

Unless  a  capital  was  employed  in  furnishing 
rude  produce  to  a  certain  degree  of  abun¬ 
dance,  neither  manufactures  nor  trade  of  any 
kind  could  exist. 

Unless  a  capital  was  employed  in  manu¬ 
facturing  that  part  of  the  rude  produce  which 
requires  a  good  deal  of  preparation  before  it 
can  be  fit  for  use  and  consumption,  it  either 
would  never  be  produced,  because  there  could 
be  no  demand  for  it;  or  if  it  was  produced 
spontaneously,  it  would  be  of  no  value  in 
exchange,  and  could  add  nothing  to  the  wealth 
of  the  society. 

Unless  a  capital  was  employed  in  transport¬ 
ing  either  the  rude  or  manufactured  produce 
from  the  places  where  it  abounds  to  those 
where  it  is  wanted,  no  more  of  either  could  be 
produced  than  was  necessary  for  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  capital  of  the 
merchant  exchanges  the  surplus  produce  of 
one  place  for  that  of  another,  and  thus  en¬ 
courages  the  industry  and  increases  the  en¬ 
joyments  of  both. 

Unless  a  capital  was  employed  in  breaking 
and  dividing  certain  portions  either  of  the 
rude  or  manufactured  produce  into  such  small 
parcels  as  suit  the  occasional  demands  of  those 
who  want  them,  every  man  would  be  obliged 
to  purchase  a  greater  quantity  of  the  goods  he 
wanted  than  his  immediate  occasions  required. 
If  there  was  no  such  trade  as  a  butcher,  for 
example,  every  man  would  be  obliged  to  pur¬ 
chase  a  whole  ox  or  a  whole  sheep  at  a  time. 
This  would  generally  be  inconvenient  to  the 
rich,  and  much  more  so  to  the  poor.  If  a  poor 


156 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


workman  was  obliged  to  purchase  a  month’s 
or  six  months’  provisions  at  a  time,  a  great 
part  of  the  stock  which  he  employs  as  a  cap¬ 
ital  in  the  instruments  of  his  trade,  or  in  the 
furniture  of  his  shop,  and  which  yields  him  a 
revenue,  he  would  be  forced  to  place  in  that 
part  of  his  stock  which  is  reserved  for  im¬ 
mediate  consumption,  and  which  yields  him 
no  revenue.  Nothing  can  be  more  convenient 
for  such  a  person  than  to  be  able  to  purchase 
his  subsistence  from  day  to  day,  or  even  from 
hour  to  hour,  as  he  wants  it.  He  is  thereby 
enabled  to  employ  almost  his  whole  stock  as 
a  capital.  He  is  thus  enabled  to  furnish  work 
to  a  greater  value,  and  the  profit,  which  he 
makes  by  it  in  this  way,  much  more  than  com¬ 
pensates  the  additional  price  which  the  profit 
of  the  retailer  imposes  upon  the  goods.  The 
prejudices  of  some  political  writers  against 
shopkeepers  and  tradesmen  are  altogether 
without  foundation.  So  far  is  it  from  being 
necessary  either  to  tax  them  or  to  restrict  their 
numbers  that  they  can  never  be  multiplied  so 
as  to  hurt  the  public,  though  they  may  so  as 
to  hurt  one  another.  The  quantity  of  grocery 
goods,  for  example,  which  can  be  sold  in  a 
particular  town  is  limited  by  the  demand 
of  that  town  and  its  neighbourhood.  The  cap¬ 
ital,  therefore,  which  can  be  employed  in  the 
grocery  trade  cannot  exceed  what  is  sufficient 
to  purchase  that  quantity.  If  this  capital  is 
divided  between  two  different  grocers,  their 
competition  will  tend  to  make  both  of  them 
sell  cheaper  than  if  it  were  in  the  hands  of 
one  only;  and  if  it  were  divided  among  twenty, 
their  competition  would  be  just  so  much  the 
greater,  and  the  chance  of  their  combining  to¬ 
gether,  in  order  to  raise  the  price,  just  so  much 
the  less.  Their  competition  might  perhaps 
ruin  some  of  themselves;  but  to  take  care  of 
this  is  the  business  of  the  parties  concerned, 
and  it  may  safely  be  trusted  to  their  discre¬ 
tion.  It  can  never  hurt  either  the  consumer  or 
the  producer;  on  the  contrary,  it  must  tend 
to  make  the  retailers  both  sell  cheaper  and  buy 
dearer  than  if  the  whole  trade  was  monopo¬ 
lized  by  one  or  two  persons.  Some  of  them, 
perhaps,  may  sometimes  decoy  a  weak  cus¬ 
tomer  to  buy  what  he  has  no  occasion  for. 
This  evil,  however,  is  of  too  little  importance 
to  deserve  the  public  attention,  nor  would  it 
necessarily  be  prevented  by  restricting  their 
numbers.  It  is  not  the  multitude  of  ale-houses, 
to  give  the  most  suspicious  example,  that  oc¬ 
casions  a  general  disposition  to  drunkenness 
among  the  common  people;  but  that  disposi¬ 
tion  arising  from  other  causes  necessarily  gives 
employment  to  a  multitude  of  ale-houses. 

The  persons  whose  capitals  are  employed  in 
any  of  those  four  ways  are  themselves  pro¬ 
ductive  labourers.  Their  labour,  when  properly 
directed,  fixes  and  realizes  itself  in  the  subject 


or  vendible  commodity  upon  which  it  is  be¬ 
stowed,  and  generally  adds  to  its  price  the  val¬ 
ue  at  least  of  their  own  maintenance  and  con¬ 
sumption.  The  profits  of  the  farmer,  of  the 
manufacturer,  of  the  merchant,  and  retailer, 
are  all  drawn  from  the  price  of  the  goods 
which  the  two  first  produce,  and  the  two  last 
buy  and  sell.  Equal  capitals,  however,  em¬ 
ployed  in  each  of  those  four  different  ways, 
will  immediately  put  into  motion  very  dif¬ 
ferent  quantities  of  productive  labour,  and 
augment,  too,  in  very  different  proportions 
the  value  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  land 
and  labour  of  the  society  to  which  they  belong. 

The  capital  of  the  retailer  replaces,  together 
with  its  profits,  that  of  the  merchant  of  whom 
he  purchases  goods,  and  thereby  enables  him 
to  continue  his  business.  The  retailer  himself 
is  the  only  productive  labourer  whom  it  im¬ 
mediately  employs.  In  his  profits  consists  the 
whole  value  which  its  employment  adds  to 
the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  society. 

The  capital  of  the  wholesale  merchant  re¬ 
places,  together  with  their  profits,  the  capitals 
of  the  farmers  and  manufacturers  of  whom  he 
purchases  the  rude  and  manufactured  produce 
which  he  deals  in,  and  thereby  enables  them 
to  continue  their  respective  trades.  It  is  by 
this  service  chiefly  that  he  contributes  indi¬ 
rectly  to  support  the  productive  labour  of  the 
society,  and  to  increase  the  value  of  its  an¬ 
nual  produce.  His  capital  employs,  too,  the 
sailors  and  carriers  who  transport  his  goods 
from  one  place  to  another,  and  it  augments 
the  price  of  those  goods  by  the  value,  not 
only  of  his  profits,  but  of  their  wages.  This  is 
all  the  productive  labour  which  it  immediately 
puts  into  motion,  and  all  the  value  which  it 
immediately  adds  to  the  annual  produce.  Its 
operation  in  both  these  respects  is  a  good  deal 
superior  to  that  of  the  capital  of  the  retailer. 

Part  of  the  capital  of  the  master  manufac¬ 
turer  is  employed  as  a  fixed  capital  in  the  in¬ 
struments  of  his  trade,  and  replaces,  together 
with  its  profits,  that  of  some  other  artificer  of 
whom  he  purchases  them.  Part  of  his  circula¬ 
ting  capital  is  employed  in  purchasing  ma¬ 
terials,  and  replaces,  with  their  profits,  the 
capitals  of  the  farmers  and  miners  of  whom 
he  purchases  them.  But  a  great  part  of  it  is 
always,  either  annually,  or  in  a  much  shorter 
period,  distributed  among  the  different  work¬ 
men  whom  he  employs.  It  augments  the  value 
of  those  materials  by  their  wages,  and  by  their 
masters’  profits  upon  the  whole  stock  of 
wages,  materials,  and  instruments  of  trade 
employed  in  the  business.  It  puts  immediately 
into  motion,  therefore,  a  much  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  labour,  and  adds  a  much 
greater  value  to  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  society  than  an  equal 


157 


Different  Employment  of  Capitals 


capita]  in  the  hands  of  any  wholesale  mer¬ 
chant. 

No  equal  capital  puts  into  motion  a  greater 
quantity  of  productive  labour  than  that  of  the 
farmer.  Not  only  his  labouring  servants,  but 
his  labouring  cattle,  are  productive  labourers. 
In  agriculture,  too,  nature  labours  along  with 
man;  and  though  her  labour  costs  no  expense, 
its  produce  has  its  value,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
most  expensive  workmen.  The  most  important 
operations  of  agriculture  seem  intended  not  so 
much  to  increase,  though  they  do  that  too,  as 
to  direct  the  fertility  of  nature  towards  the 
production  of  the  plants  most  profitable  to 
man.  A  field  overgrown  with  briars  and  bram¬ 
bles  may  frequently  produce  as  great  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  vegetables  as  the  best  cultivated  vine¬ 
yard  or  corn  field.  Planting  and  tillage  fre¬ 
quently  regulate  more  than  they  animate  the 
active  fertility  of  nature;  and  after  all  their 
labour,  a  great  part  of  the  work  always  re¬ 
mains  to  be  done  by  her.  The  labourers  and 
labouring  cattle,  therefore,  employed  in  agri¬ 
culture,  not  only  occasion,  like  the  workmen 
in  manufactures,  the  reproduction  of  a  value 
equal  to  their  own  consumption,  or  to  the 
capital  which  employs  them,  together  with 
its  owners’  profits;  but  of  a  much  greater 
value.  Over  and  above  the  capital  of  the  farm¬ 
er  and  all  its  profits,  they  regularly  occasion 
the  reproduction  of  the  rent  of  the  landlord. 
This  rent  may  be  considered  as  the  produce  of 
those  powers  of  nature,  the  use  of  which  the 
landlord  lends  to  the  farmer.  It  is  greater  or 
smaller  according  to  the  supposed  extent  of 
those  powers,  or  in  other  words,  according  to 
the  supposed  natural  or  improved  fertility  of 
the  land.  It  is  the  work  of  nature  which  re¬ 
mains  after  deducting  or  compensating  every¬ 
thing  which  can  be  regarded  as  the  work  of 
man.  It  is  seldom  less  than  a  fourth,  and  fre¬ 
quently  more  than  a  third  of  the  whole  prod¬ 
uce.  No  equal  quantity  of  productive  labour 
employed  in  manufactures  can  ever  occasion 
so  great  a  reproduction.  In  them  nature  does 
nothing;  man  does  all;  and  the  reproduction 
must  always  be  in  proportion  to  the  strength 
of  the  agents  that  occasion  it.  The  capital 
employed  in  agriculture,  therefore,  not  only 
puts  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of  pro¬ 
ductive  labour  than  any  equal  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  manufactures,  but  in  proportion, 
too,  to  the  quantity  of  productive  labour 
which  it  employs,  it  adds  a  much  greater  val¬ 
ue  to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  la¬ 
bour  of  the  country,  to  the  real  wealth  and 
revenue  of  its  inhabitants.  Of  all  the  ways  in 
which  a  capital  can  be  employed,  it  is  by  far 
the  most  advantageous  to  the  society. 

The  capitals  employed  in  the  agriculture 
and  in  the  retail  trade  of  any  society  must  al¬ 
ways  reside  within  that  society.  Their  em¬ 


ployment  is  confined  almost  to  a  precise  spot, 
to  the  farm  and  to  the  shop  of  the  retailer. 
They  must  generally,  too,  though  there  are 
some  exceptions  to  this,  belong  to  resident 
members  of  the  society. 

The  capital  of  a  wholesale  merchant,  on  the 
contrary,  seems  to  have  no  fixed  or  necessary 
residence  anywhere,  but  may  wander  about 
from  place  to  place,  according  as  it  can  either 
buy  cheap  or  sell  dear. 

The  capital  of  the  manufacturer  must  no 
doubt  reside  where  the  manufacture  is  car¬ 
ried  on;  but  where  this  shall  be  is  not  always 
necessarily  determined.  It  may  frequently  be 
at  a  great  distance  both  from  the  place  where 
the  materials  grow,  and  from  that  where  the 
complete  manufacture  is  consumed.  Lyons  is 
very  distant  both  from  the  places  which  afford 
the  materials  of  its  manufactures,  and  from 
those  which  consume  them.  The  people  of 
fashion  in  Sicily  are  clothed  in  silks  made  in 
other  countries,  from  the  materials  which  their 
own  produces.  Part  of  the  wool  of  Spain  is 
manufactured  in  Great  Britain,  and  some  part 
of  that  cloth  is  afterwards  sent  back  to  Spain. 

W  hether  the  merchant  whose  capital  ex¬ 
ports  the  surplus  produce  of  any  society  be  a 
native  or  a  foreigner  is  of  very  little  impor¬ 
tance.  If  he  is  a  foreigner,  the  number  of  their 
productive  labourers  is  necessarily  less  than 
if  he  had  been  a  native  by  one  man  only,  and 
the  value  of  their  annual  produce  by  the  prof¬ 
its  of  that  one  man.  The  sailors  or  carriers 
whom  he  employs  may  still  belong  indiffer¬ 
ently  either  to  his  country  or  to  their  coun¬ 
try,  or  to  some  third  country,  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  he  had  been  a  native.  The  capital 
of  a  foreigner  gives  a  value  to  their  surplus 
produce  equally  with  that  of  a  native  by  ex¬ 
changing  it  for  something  for  which  there  is  a 
demand  at  home.  It  as  effectually  replaces  the 
capital  of  the  person  who  produces  that  sur¬ 
plus,  and  as  effectually  enables  him  to  con¬ 
tinue  his  business;  the  service  by  which  the 
capital  of  a  wholesale  merchant  chiefly  con¬ 
tributes  to  support  the  productive  labour,  and 
to  augment  the  value  of  the  annual  produce 
of  the  society  to  which  he  belongs. 

It  is  of  more  consequence  that  the  capital 
of  the  manufacturer  should  reside  within  the 
country.  It  necessarily  puts  into  motion  a 
greater  quantity  of  productive  labour,  and 
adds  a  greater  value  to  the  annual  produce  of 
the  land  and  labour  of  the  society.  It  may, 
however,  be  very  useful  to  the  country,  though 
it  should  not  reside  within  it.  The  capitals 
of  the  British  manufacturers  who  work  up  the 
flax  and  hemp  annually  imported  from  the 
coasts  of  the  Baltic  are  surely  very  useful  to 
the  countries  which  produce  them.  Those  ma¬ 
terials  are  a  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of 
those  countries  which,  unless  it  was  annually 


158  The  Wealth 

exchanged  for  something  which  is  in  demand 
there,  would  be  of  no  value,  and  would  soon 
cease  to  be  produced.  The  merchants  who  ex¬ 
port  it  replace  the  capitals  of  the  people  who 
produce  it,  and  thereby  encourage  them  to 
continue  the  production;  and  the  British  man¬ 
ufacturers  replace  the  capitals  of  those  mer¬ 
chants. 

A  particular  country,  in  the  same  manner 
as  a  particular  person,  may  frequently  not 
have  capital  sufficient  both  to  improve  and 
cultivate  all  its  lands,  to  manufacture  and 
prepare  their  whole  rude  produce  for  imme¬ 
diate  use  and  consumption,  and  to  transport 
the  surplus  part  either  of  the  rude  or  manu¬ 
factured  produce  to  those  distant  markets 
where  it  can  be  exchanged  for  something  for 
which  there  is  a  demand  at  home.  The  in¬ 
habitants  of  many  different  parts  of  Great 
Britain  have  not  capital  sufficient  to  improve 
and  cultivate  all  their  lands.  The  wool  of 
the  southern  counties  of  Scotland  is,  a  great 
part  of  it,  after  a  long  land  carriage  through 
very  bad  roads,  manufactured  in  Yorkshire, 
for  want  of  capital  to  manufacture  it  at  home. 
There  are  many  little  manufacturing  towns  in 
Great  Britain,  of  which  the  inhabitants  have 
not  capital  sufficient  to  transport  the  produce 
of  their  own  industry  to  those  distant  mar¬ 
kets  where  there  is  demand  and  consumption 
for  it.  If  there  are  any  merchants  among 
them,  they  are  properly  only  the  agents  of 
wealthier  merchants  who  reside  in  some  of  the 
greater  commercial  cities. 

When  the  capital  of  any  country  is  not 
sufficient  for  all  those  three  purposes,  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  a  greater  share  of  it  is  employed 
in  agriculture,  the  greater  will  be  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  labour  which  it  puts  into 
motion  within  the  country;  as  will  likewise 
be  the  value  which  its  employment  adds  to 
the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
the  society.  After  agriculture,  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  manufactures  puts  into  motion  the 
greatest  quantity  of  productive  labour,  and 
adds  the  greatest  value  to  the  annual  produce. 
That  which  is  employed  in  the  trade  of  expor¬ 
tation  has  the  least  effect  of  any  of  the  three. 

The  country,  indeed,  which  has  not  capital 
sufficient  for  all  those  three  purposes  has  not 
arrived  at  that  degree  of  opulence  for  which 
it  seems  naturally  destined.  To  attempt,  how¬ 
ever,  prematurely  and  with  an  insufficient  cap¬ 
ital  to  do  all  the  three  is  certainly  not  the 
shortest  way  for  a  society,  no  more  than  it 
would  be  for  an  individual,  to  acquire  a  suffi¬ 
cient  one.  The  capital  of  all  the  individuals  of 
a  nation  has  its  limits  in  the  same  manner  as 
that  of  a  single  individual,  and  is  capable  of 
executing  only  certain  purposes.  The  capital 
of  all  the  individuals  of  a  nation  is  increased 
in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  a  single  in¬ 


of  Nations 

dividual  by  their  continually  accumulating 
and  adding  to  it  whatever  they  save  out  of 
their  revenue.  It  is  likely  to  increase  the  fast¬ 
est,  therefore,  when  it  is  employed  in  the  way 
that  affords  the  greatest  revenue  to  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country,  as  they  will  thus 
be  enabled  to  make  the  greatest  savings.  But 
the  revenue  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  coun¬ 
try  is  necessarily  in  proportion  to  the  value 
of  the  annual  produce  of  their  land  and  labour. 

It  has  been  the  principal  cause  of  the  rapid 
progress  of  our  American  colonies  towards 
wealth  and  greatness  that  almost  their  whole 
capitals  have  hitherto  been  employed  in  agri¬ 
culture.  They  have  no  manufactures,  those 
household  and  coarser  manufactures  excepted 
which  necessarily  accompany  the  progress  of 
agriculture,  and  which  are  the  work  of  the 
women  and  children  in  every  private  family. 
The  greater  part  both  of  the  exportation  and 
coasting  trade  of  America  is  carried  on  by 
the  capitals  of  merchants  who  reside  in  Great 
Britain.  Even  the  stores  and  warehouses  from 
which  goods  are  retailed  in  some  provinces, 
particularly  in  Virginia  and  Maryland,  belong 
many  of  them  to  merchants  who  reside  in  the 
mother  country,  and  afford  one  of  the  few 
instances  of  the  retail  trade  of  a  society  being 
carried  on  by  the  capitals  of  those  who  are 
not  resident  members  of  it.  Were  the  Ameri¬ 
cans,  either  by  combination  or  by  any  other 
sort  of  violence,  to  stop  the  importation  of 
European  manufactures,  and,  by  thus  giving 
a  monopoly  to  such  of  their  own  countrymen 
as  could  manufacture  the  like  goods,  divert 
any  considerable  part  of  their  capital  into  this 
employment,  they  would  retard  instead  of  ac¬ 
celerating  the  further  increase  in  the  value  of 
their  annual  produce,  and  would  obstruct  in¬ 
stead  of  promoting  the  progress  of  their  coun¬ 
try  towards  real  wealth  and  greatness.  This 
would  be  still  more  the  case  were  they  to  at¬ 
tempt,  in  the  same  manner,  to  monopolize  to 
themselves  their  whole  exportation  trade. 

The  course  of  human  prosperity,  indeed, 
seems  scarce  ever  to  have  been  of  so  long  con¬ 
tinuance  as  to  enable  any  great  country  to 
acquire  capital  sufficient  for  all  those  three 
purposes;  unless  perhaps,  we  give  credit  to  the 
wonderful  accounts  of  the  wealth  and  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  China,  of  those  of  ancient  Egypt,  and 
of  the  ancient  state  of  Indostan.  Even  those 
three  countries,  the  wealthiest,  according  to 
all  accounts,  that  ever  were  in  the  world,  are 
chiefly  renowned  for  their  superiority  in  agri¬ 
culture  and  manufactures.  They  do  not  appear 
to  have  been  eminent  for  foreign  trade.  The 
ancient  Egyptians  had  a  superstitious  antip¬ 
athy  to  the  sea;  a  superstition  nearly  of  the 
same  kind  prevails  among  the  Indians;  and 
the  Chinese  have  never  excelled  in  foreign 
commerce.  The  greater  part  of  the  surplus 


159 


Different  Employment  of  Capitals 


produce  of  all  those  three  countries  seems  to 
have  been  always  exported  by  foreigners,  who 
gave  in  exchange  for  it  something  else  for 
which  they  found  a  demand  there,  frequently 
gold  and  silver. 

It  is  thus  that  the  same  capital  will  in  any 
country  put  into  motion  a  greater  or  smaller 
quantity  of  productive  labour,  and  add  a 
greater  or  smaller  value  to  the  annual  produce 
of  its  land  and  labour,  according  to  the  differ¬ 
ent  proportions  in  which  it  is  employed  in  agri¬ 
culture,  manufactures,  and  wholesale  trade. 
The  difference,  too,  is  very  great,  according 
to  the  different  sorts  of  wholesale  trade  in 
which  any  part  of  it  is  employed. 

All  wholesale  trade,  all  buying  in  order  to 
sell  again  by  wholesale,  may  be  reduced  to 
three  different  sorts.  The  home  trade,  the 
foreign  trade  of  consumption,  and  the  carry¬ 
ing  trade.  The  home  trade  is  employed  in  pur¬ 
chasing  in  one  part  of  the  same  country,  and 
selling  in  another,  the  produce  of  the  industry 
of  that  country.  It  comprehends  both  the  in¬ 
land  and  the  coasting  trade.  The  foreign  trade 
of  consumption  is  employed  in  purchasing  for¬ 
eign  goods  for  home  consumption.  The  carry¬ 
ing  trade  is  employed  in  transacting  the  com¬ 
merce  of  foreign  countries,  or  in  carrying  the 
surplus  produce  of  one  to  another. 

The  capital  which  is  employed  in  purchas¬ 
ing  in  one  part  of  the  country  in  order  to  sell 
in  another  the  produce  of  the  industry  of  that 
country,  generally  replaces  by  every  such  op¬ 
eration  two  distinct  capitals  that  had  both 
been  employed  in  the  agriculture  or  manu¬ 
factures  of  that  country,  and  thereby  en¬ 
ables  them  to  continue  that  employment. 
When  it  sends  out  from  the  residence  of  the 
merchant  a  certain  value  of  commodities,  it 
generally  brings  back  in  return  at  least  an 
equal  value  of  other  commodities.  When  both 
are  the  produce  of  domestic  industry,  it  nec¬ 
essarily  replaces  by  every  such  operation  two 
distinct  capitals  which  had  both  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  supporting  productive  labour,  and 
thereby  enables  them  to  continue  that  sup¬ 
port.  The  capital  which  sends  Scotch  manu¬ 
factures  to  London,  and  brings  back  English 
corn  and  manufactures  to  Edinburgh,  neces¬ 
sarily  replaces  by  every  such  operation,  two 
British  capitals  which  had  both  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  agriculture  or  manufactures  of 
Great  Britain. 

The  capital  employed  in  purchasing  foreign 
goods  for  home  consumption,  when  this  pur¬ 
chase  is  made  with  the  produce  of  domestic 
industry,  replaces  too,  by  every  such  opera¬ 
tion,  two  distinct  capitals;  but  one  of  them 
only  is  employed  in  supporting  domestic  in¬ 
dustry.  The  capital  which  sends  British  goods 
to  Portugal,  and  brings  back  Portuguese  goods 
to  Great  Britain,  replaces  by  every  such  op¬ 


eration  only  one  British  capital.  The  other  is 
a  Portuguese  one.  Though  the  returns,  there¬ 
fore,  of  the  foreign  trade  of  consumption 
should  be  as  quick  as  those  of  the  home  trade, 
the  capital  employed  in  it  will  give  but  one 
half  the  encouragement  to  the  industry  or 
productive  labour  of  the  country. 

But  the  returns  of  the  foreign  trade  of  con¬ 
sumption  are  very  seldom  so  quick  as  those 
of  the  home  trade.  The  returns  of  the  home 
trade  generally  come  in  before  the  end  of  the 
year,  and  sometimes  three  or  four  times  in 
the  year.  The  returns  of  the  foreign  trade  of 
consumption  seldom  come  in  before  the  end 
of  the  year,  and  sometimes  not  till  after  two 
or  three  years.  A  capital,  therefore,  employed 
in  the  home  trade  will  sometimes  make  twelve 
operations,  or  be  sent  out  and  returned  twelve 
times,  before  a  capital  employed  in  the  for¬ 
eign  trade  of  consumption  has  made  one.  If 
the  capitals  are  equal,  therefore,  the  one  will 
give  four-and-twenty  times  more  encourage¬ 
ment  and  support  to  the  industry  of  the  coun¬ 
try  than  the  other. 

The  foreign  goods  for  home  consumption 
may  sometimes  be  purchased,  not  with  the 
produce  of  domestic  industry,  but  with  some 
other  foreign  goods.  These  last,  however,  must 
have 'been  purchased  either  immediately  with 
the  produce  of  domestic  industry,  or  with 
something  else  that  had  been  purchased  with 
it;  for,  the  case  of  war  and  conquest  excepted, 
foreign  goods  can  ever  be  acquired  but  in  ex¬ 
change  for  something  that  had  been  produced 
at  home,  either  immediately,  or  after  two  or 
more  different  exchanges.  The  effects,  there¬ 
fore,  of  a  capital  employed  in  such  a  round¬ 
about  foreign  trade  of  consumption,  are,  in 
every  respect,  the  same  as  those  of  one  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  most  direct  trade  of  the  same 
kind,  except  that  the  final  returns  are  likely 
to  be  still  more  distant,  as  they  must  depend 
upon  the  returns  of  two  or  three  distinct  for¬ 
eign  trades.  If  the  flax  and  hemp  of  Riga  are 
purchased  with  the  tobacco  of  Virginia,  which 
had  been  purchased  with  British  manufac¬ 
tures,  the  merchant  must  wait  for  the  returns 
of  two  distinct  foreign  trades  before  he  can 
employ  the  same  capital  in  re-purchasing  a 
like  quantity  of  British  manufactures.  If  the 
tobacco  of  Virginia  had  been  purchased,  not 
with  British  manufactures,  but  with  the  sugar 
and  rum  of  Jamaica  which  had  been  pur¬ 
chased  with  those  manufactures,  he  must  wrait 
for  the  returns  of  three.  If  those  two  or  three 
distinct  foreign  trades  should  happen  to  be 
carried  on  by  two  or  three  distinct  merchants, 
of  whom  the  second  buys  the  goods  imported 
by  the  first,  and  the  third  buys  those  im¬ 
ported  by  the  second,  in  order  to  export  them 
again,  each  merchant  indeed  will  in  this  case 
receive  the  returns  of  his  own  capital  more 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


160 

quickly;  but  the  final  returns  of  the  whole 
capital  employed  in  the  trade  will  be  just  as 
slow  as  ever.  Whether  the  whole  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  such  a  round-about  trade  belong  to 
one  merchant  or  to  three  can  make  no  differ¬ 
ence  with  regard  to  the  country,  though  it 
may  with  regard  to  the  particular  merchants. 
Three  times  a  greater  capital  must  in  both 
cases  be  employed  in  order  to  exchange  a  cer¬ 
tain  value  of  British  manufactures  for  a  cer¬ 
tain  quantity  of  flax  and  hemp  than  would 
have  been  necessary  had  the  manufactures 
and  the  flax  and  hemp  been  directly  ex¬ 
changed  for  one  another.  The  whole  capital 
employed,  therefore,  in  such  a  round-about 
foreign  trade  of  consumption  will  generally 
give  less  encouragement  and  support  to  the 
productive  labour  of  the  country  than  an 
equal  capital  employed  in  a  more  direct  trade 
of  the  same  kind. 

Whatever  be  the  foreign  commodity  with 
which  the  foreign  goods  for  home  consump¬ 
tion  are  purchased,  it  can  occasion  no  essential 
difference  either  in  the  nature  of  the  trade,  or 
in  the  encouragement  and  support  which  it 
can  give  to  the  productive  labour  of  the  coun¬ 
try  from  which  it  is  carried  on.  If  they  are 
purchased  with  the  gold  of  Brazil,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  or  with  the  silver  of  Peru,  this  gold 
and  silver,  like  the  tobacco  of  Virginia,  must 
have  been  purchased  with  something  that 
either  was  the  produce  of  the  industry  of  the 
country,  or  that  had  been  purchased  with 
something  else  that  was  so.  So  far,  therefore, 
as  the  productive  labour  of  the  country  is  con¬ 
cerned,  the  foreign  trade  of  consumption 
which  is  carried  on  by  means  of  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver  has  all  the  advantages  and  all  the  incon¬ 
veniences  of  any  other  equally  round-about 
foreign  trade  of  consumption,  and  will  re¬ 
place  just  as  fast  or  just  as  slow  the  capital 
which  is  immediately  employed  in  supporting 
that  productive  labour.  It  seems  even  to  have 
one  advantage  over  any  other  equally  round¬ 
about  foreign  trade.  The  transportation  of 
those  metals  from  one  place  to  another,  on 
account  of  their  small  bulk  and  great  value,  is 
less  expensive  than  that  of  almost  any  other 
foreign  goods  of  equal  value.  Their  freight  is 
much  less,  and  their  insurance  not  greater; 
and  no  goods,  besides,  are  less  liable  to  suffer 
by  the  carriage.  An  equal  quantity  of  foreign 
goods,  therefore,  may  frequently  be  pur¬ 
chased  with  a  smaller  quantity  of  the  produce 
of  domestic  industry,  by  the  intervention  of 
gold  and  silver,  than  by  that  of  any  other  for¬ 
eign  goods.  The  demand  of  the  country  may 
frequently,  in  this  manner,  be  supplied  more 
completely  and  at  a  smaller  expense  than  in 
any  other.  Whether,  by  the  continual  expor¬ 
tation  of  those  metals,  a  trade  of  this  kind  is 
likely  to  impoverish  the  country  from  which  it 


is  carried  on,  in  any  other  way,  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  examine  at  great  length  hereafter. 

That  part  of  the  capital  of  any  country 
which  is  employed  in  the  carrying  trade  is 
altogether  withdrawn  from  supporting  the 
productive  labour  of  that  particular  country, 
to  support  that  of  some  foreign  countries. 
Though  it  may  replace  by  every  operation 
two  distinct  capitals,  yet  neither  of  them  be¬ 
longs  to  that  particular  country.  The  capital 
of  the  Dutch  merchant,  which  carries  the  corn 
of  Poland  to  Portugal,  and  brings  back  the 
fruits  and  wines  of  Portugal  to  Poland,  re¬ 
places  by  every  such  operation  two  capitals, 
neither  of  which  had  been  employed  in  sup¬ 
porting  the  productive  labour  of  Holland;  but 
one  of  them  in  supporting  that  of  Poland,  and 
the  other  that  of  Portugal.  The  profits  only  re¬ 
turn  regularly  to  Holland,  and  constitute  the 
whole  addition  which  this  trade  necessarily 
makes  to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and 
labour  of  that  country.  When,  indeed,  the 
carrying  trade  of  any  particular  country  is 
carried  on  with  the  ships  and  sailors  of  that 
country,  that  part  of  the  capital  employed  in 
it  which  pays  the  freight  is  distributed  among, 
and  puts  into  motion,  a  certain  number  of 
productive  labourers  of  that  country.  Almost 
all  nations  that  have  had  any  considerable 
share  of  the  carrying  trade  have,  in  fact,  car¬ 
ried  it  on  in  this  manner.  The  trade  itself  has 
probably  derived  its  name  from  it,  the  people 
of  such  countries  being  the  carriers  to  other 
countries.  It  does  not,  however,  seem  essential 
to  the  nature  of  the  trade  that  it  should  be  so. 
A  Dutch  merchant  may,  for  example,  employ 
his  capital  in  transacting  the  commerce  of 
Poland  and  Portugal,  by  carrying  part  of  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  one  to  the  other,  not  in 
Dutch,  but  in  British  bottoms.  It  may  be  pre¬ 
sumed  that  he  actually  does  so  upon  some 
particular  occasions.  It  is  upon  this  account, 
however,  that  the  carrying  trade  has  been 
supposed  peculiarly  advantageous  to  such  a 
country  as  Great  Britain,  of  which  the  defence 
and  security  depend  upon  the  number  of  its 
sailors  and  shipping.  But  the  same  capital 
may  employ  as  many  sailors  and  shipping, 
either  in  the  foreign  trade  of  consumption, 
or  even  in  the  home  trade,  when  carried  on 
by  coasting  vessels,  as  it  could  in  the  carry¬ 
ing  trade.  The  number  of  sailors  and  shipping 
which  any  particular  capital  can  employ  does 
not  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  trade,  but 
partly  upon  the  bulk  of  the  goods  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  value,  and  partly  upon  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  ports  between  which  they  are 
to  be  carried;  chiefly  upon  the  former  of  those 
two  circumstances.  The  coal  trade  from  New¬ 
castle  to  London,  for  example,  employs  more 
shipping  than  all  the  carrying  trade  of  Eng¬ 
land,  though  the  ports  are  at  no  great  dis* 


161 


Different  Employment  of  Capitals 


tance.  To  force,  therefore,  by  extraordinary 
encouragements,  a  larger  share  of  the  capital 
of  any  country  into  the  carrying  trade  than 
what  would  naturally  go  to  it  will  not  always 
necessarily  increase  the  shipping  of  that  coun¬ 
try. 

The  capital,  therefore,  employed  in  the 
home  trade  of  any  country  will  generally  give 
encouragement  and  support  to  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  labour  in  that  country,  and 
increase  the  value  of  its  annual  produce  more 
than  an  equal  capital  employed  in  the  foreign 
trade  of  consumption:  and  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  this  latter  trade  has  in  both  these  re¬ 
spects  a  still  greater  advantage  over  an  equal 
capital  employed  in  the  carrying  trade.  The 
riches,  and  so  far  as  power  depends  upon 
riches,  the  power  of  every  country  must  al¬ 
ways  be  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  its  an¬ 
nual  produce,  the  fund  from  which  all  taxes 
must  ultimately  be  paid.  But  the  great  object 
of  the  political  economy  of  every  country  is  to 
increase  the  riches  and  power  of  that  country. 
It  ought,  therefore,  to  give  no  preference  nor 
superior  encouragement  to  the  foreign  trade 
of  consumption  above  the  home  trade,  nor  to 
the  carrying  trade  above  either  of  the  other 
two.  It  ought  neither  to  force  nor  to  allure 
into  either  of  those  two  channels  a  greater 
share  of  the  capital  of  the  country  than  what 
would  naturally  flow  into  them  of  its  own 
accord. 

When  the  produce  of  any  particular  branch 
of  industry  exceeds  what  the  demand  of  the 
country  requires,  the  surplus  must  be  sent 
abroad  and  exchanged  for  something  for 
which  there  is  a  demand  at  home.  Without 
such  exportation  a  part  of  the  productive  la¬ 
bour  of  the  country  must  cease,  and  the  value 
of  its  annual  produce  diminish.  The  land  and 
labour  of  Great  Britain  produce  generally 
more  corn,  woollens,  and  hardware  than  the 
demand  of  the  home  market  requires.  The 
surplus  part  of  them,  therefore,  must  be  sent 
abroad,  and  exchanged  for  something  for 
which  there  is  a  demand  at  home.  It  is  only 
by  means  of  such  exportation  that  this  sur¬ 
plus  can  acquire  a  value  sufficient  to  compen¬ 
sate  the  labour  and  expense  of  producing  it. 
The  neighbourhood  of  the  sea-coast,  and  the 
banks  of  all  navigable  rivers,  are  advanta¬ 
geous  situations  for  industry,  only  because 
they  facilitate  the  exportation  and  exchange 
of  such  surplus  produce  for  something  else 
which  is  more  in  demand  there  . 

When  the  foreign  goods  which  are  thus  pur¬ 
chased  with  the  surplus  produce  of  domestic 
industry  exceed  the  demand  of  the  home 
market,  the  surplus  part  of  them  must  be 
sent  abroad  again  and  exchanged  for  some¬ 
thing  more  in  demand  at  home.  About  ninety- 
six  thousand  hogsheads  of  tobacco  are  annu¬ 


ally  purchased  in  Virginia  and  Maryland  with 
a  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of  British  in¬ 
dustry.  But  the  demand  of  Great  Britain  does 
not  require,  perhaps,  more  than  fourteen  thou¬ 
sand.  If  the  remaining  eighty-two  thousand, 
therefore,  could  not  be  sent  abroad  and  ex¬ 
changed  for  something  more  in  demand  at 
home,  the  importation  of  them  must  cease 
immediately,  and  with  it  the  productive  la¬ 
bour  of  all  those  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain, 
who  are  at  present  employed  in  preparing  the 
goods  with  which  these  eighty-two  thousand 
hogsheads  are  annually  purchased.  Those 
goods,  which  are  part  of  the  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  Great  Britain,  having  no 
market  at  home,  and  being  deprived  of  that 
which  they  had  abroad,  must  cease  to  be  pro¬ 
duced.  The  most  round-about  foreign  trade  of 
consumption,  therefore  may,  upon  some  oc¬ 
casions,  be  as  necessary  for  supporting  the 
productive  labour  of  the  country,  and  the  val¬ 
ue  of  its  annual  produce,  as  the  most  direct. 

When  the  capital  stock  of  any  country  is  in¬ 
creased  to  such  a  degree  that  it  cannot  be  all 
employed  in  supplying  the  consumption  and 
supporting  the  productive  labour  of  that  par¬ 
ticular  country,  the  surplus  part  of  it  natural¬ 
ly  disgorges  itself  into  the  carrying  trade,  and 
is  employed  in  performing  the  same  offices  to 
other  countries.  The  carrying  trade  is  the 
natural  effect  and  symptom  of  great  national 
wealth;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  the  natural 
cause  of  it.  Those  statesmen  who  have  been 
disposed  to  favour  it  with  particular  en¬ 
couragements  seem  to  have  mistaken  the  ef¬ 
fect  and  symptom  for  the  cause.  Holland,  in 
proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  land  and  the 
number  of  its  inhabitants,  by  far  the  richest 
country  in  Europe,  has,  accordingly,  the  great¬ 
est  share  of  the  carrying  trade  of  Europe. 
England,  perhaps  the  second  richest  country 
of  Europe,  is  likewise  supposed  to  have  a  con¬ 
siderable  share  of  it;  though  what  commonly 
passes  for  the  carrying  trade  of  England  will 
frequently,  perhaps,  be  found  to  be  no  more 
than  a  round-about  foreign  trade  of  consump¬ 
tion.  Such  are,  in  a  great  measure,  the  trades 
which  carry  the  goods  of  the  East  and  West 
Indies,  and  of  America,  to  different  European 
markets.  Those  goods  are  generally  purchased 
either  immediately  with  the  produce  of  British 
industry,  or  with  something  else  which  had 
been  purchased  with  that  produce,  and  the 
final  returns  of  those  trades  are  generally  used 
or  consumed  in  Great  Britain.  The  trade 
which  is  carried  on  in  British  bottoms  between 
the  different  ports  of  the  Mediterranean,  and 
some  trade  of  the  same  kind  carried  on  by 
British  merchants  between  the  different  ports 
of  India,  make,  perhaps,  the  principal  branches 
of  what  is  properly  the  carrying  trade  of  Great 
Britain. 


162 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


The  extent  of  the  home  trade  and  of  the 
capital  which  can  be  employed  in  it,  is  nec¬ 
essarily  limited  by  the  value  of  the  surplus 
produce  of  all  those  distant  places  within  the 
country  which  have  occasion  to  exchange  their 
respective  productions  with  another:  that  of 
the  foreign  trade  of  consumption,  by  the  value 
of  the  surplus  produce  of  the  whole  country 
and  of  what  can  be  purchased  with  it:  that  of 
the  carrying  trade  by  the  value  of  the  surplus 
produce  of  all  the  different  countries  in  the 
world.  Its  possible  extent,  therefore,  is  in  a 
manner  infinite  in  comparison  of  that  of  the 
other  two,  and  is  capable  of  absorbing  the 
greatest  capitals. 

The  consideration  of  his  own  private  profit 
is  the  sole  motive  which  determines  the  owner 
of  any  capital  to  employ  it  either  in  agricul¬ 
ture,  in  manufactures,  or  in  some  particular 
branch  of  the  wholesale  or  retail  trade.  The 
different  quantities  of  productive  labour  which 
it  may  put  into  motion,  and  the  different 
values  which  it  may  add  to  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  society,  ac¬ 
cording  as  it  is  employed  in  one  or  other  of 
those  different  ways,  never  enter  into  his 
thoughts.  In  countries,  therefore,  where  agri¬ 
culture  is  the  most  profitable  of  all  employ¬ 
ments,  and  farming  and  improving  the  most 
direct  roads  to  a  splendid  fortune,  the  capi¬ 
tals  of  individuals  will  naturally  be  employed 
in  the  manner  most  advantageous  to  the 
whole  society.  The  profits  of  agriculture,  how¬ 
ever,  seem  to  have  no  superiority  over  those 
of  other  employments  in  any  part  of  Europe. 


Projectors,  indeed,  in  every  corner  of  it,  have 
within  these  few  years  amused  the  public 
with  most  magnificent  accounts  of  the  profits 
to  be  made  by  the  cultivation  and  improve¬ 
ment  of  land.  Without  entering  into  any  par¬ 
ticular  discussion  of  their  calculations,  a  very 
simple  observation  may  satisfy  us  that  the 
result  of  them  must  be  false.  We  see  every  day 
the  most  splendid  fortunes  that  have  been  ac¬ 
quired  in  the  course  of  a  single  life  by  trade 
and  manufacturers,  frequently  from  a  very 
small  capital,  sometimes  from  no  capital.  A 
single  instance  of  such  a  fortune  acquired 
by  agriculture  in  the  same  time,  and  from 
such  a  capital,  has  not,  perhaps,  occurred 
in  Europe  during  the  course  of  the  present 
century.  In  all  the  great  countries  of  Europe, 
however,  much  good  land  still  remains  un¬ 
cultivated,  and  the  greater  part  of  what  is 
cultivated  is  far  from  being  improved  to  the 
degree  of  which  it  is  capable.  Agriculture, 
therefore,  is  almost  everywhere  capable  of 
absorbing  a  much  greater  capital  than  has 
ever  yet  been  employed  in  it.  What  circum¬ 
stances  in  the  policy  of  Europe  have  given 
the  trades  which  are  carried  on  in  towns  so 
great  an  advantage  over  that  which  is  car¬ 
ried  on  in  the  country  that  private  persons 
frequently  find  it  more  for  their  advantage 
to  employ  their  capitals  in  the  most  distant 
carrying  trades  of  Asia  and  America  than  in 
the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  the  most 
fertile  fields  in  their  own  neighbourhood,  I 
shall  endeavour  to  explain  at  full  length  in 
the  two  following  books. 


Book  Three 


OF  THE  DIFFERENT  PROGRESS  OF  OPULENCE  IN  DIFFERENT  NATIONS 


CHAPTER  I 

Of  the  Natural  Progress  of  Opulence 

The  great  commerce  of  every  civilised  so¬ 
ciety  is  that  carried  on  between  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  town  and  those  of  the  country. 
It  consists  in  the  exchange  of  rude  for  manu¬ 
factured  produce,  either  immediately,  or  by 
the  intervention  of  money,  or  of  some  sort 
of  paper  which  represents  money.  The  country 
supplies  the  town  with  the  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  and  the  materials  of  manufacture.  The 
town  repays  this  supply  by  sending  back  a 
part  of  the  manufactured  produce  to  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  country.  The  town,  in  which 
there  neither  is  nor  can  be  any  reproduction 
of  substances,  may  very  properly  be  said  to 
gain  its  whole  wealth  and  subsistence  from  the 
country.  We  must  not,  however,  upon  this 
account,  imagine  that  the  gain  of  the  town  is 
the  loss  of  the  country.  The  gains  of  both  are 
mutual  and  reciprocal,  and  the  division  of 
labour  is  in  this,  as  in  all  other  cases,  advan¬ 
tageous  to  all  the  different  persons  employed 
in  the  various  occupations  into  which  it  is 
subdivided.  The  inhabitants  of  the  country 
purchase  of  the  town  a  greater  quantity  of 
manufactured  goods,  with  the  produce  of  a 
much  smaller  quantity  of  their  own  labour, 
than  they  must  have  employed  had  they  at¬ 
tempted  to  prepare  them  themselves.  The 
town  affords  a  market  for  the  surplus  produce 
of  the  country,  or  what  is  over  and  above  the 
maintenance  of  the  cultivators,  and  it  is  there 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  exchange 
it  for  something  else  which  is  in  demand 
among  them.  The  greater  the  number  and 
revenue  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town,  the 
more  extensive  is  the  market  which  it  affords 
to  those  of  the  country;  and  the  more  ex¬ 
tensive  that  market,  it  is  always  the  more 
advantageous  to  a  great  number.  The  corn 
which  grows  within  a  mile  of  the  town  sells 
there  for  the  same  price  with  that  which 
comes  from  twenty  miles  distance.  But  the 
price  of  the  latter  must  generally  not  only 
pay  the  expense  of  raising  and  bringing  it  to 
market,  but  afford,  too,  the  ordinary  profits 
of  agriculture  to  the  farmer.  The  proprie¬ 
tors  and  cultivators  of  the  country,  therefore, 


which  lies  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  town, 
over  and  above  the  ordinary  profits  of  agri¬ 
culture,  gain,  in  the  price  of  what  they  sell, 
the  whole  value  of  the  carriage  of  the  like 
produce  that  is  brought  from  more  distant 
parts,  and  they  have,  besides,  the  whole  value 
of  this  carriage  in  the  price  of  what  they  buy. 
Compare  the  cultivation  of  the  lands  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  any  considerable  town  with 
that  of  those  which  lie  at  some  distance  from 
it,  and  you  will  easily  satisfy  yourself  how 
much  the  country  is  benefited  by  the  com¬ 
merce  of  the  town.  Among  all  the  absurd 
speculations  that  have  been  propagated  con¬ 
cerning  the  balance  of  trade,  it  has  never 
been  pretended  that  either  the  country  loses 
by  its  commerce  with  the  town,  or  the  town 
by  that  with  the  country  which  maintains  it. 

As  subsistence  is,  in  the  nature  of  things, 
prior  to  conveniency  and  luxury,  so  the  indus¬ 
try  which  procures  the  former  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  prior  to  that  which  ministers  to  the 
latter.  The  cultivation  and  improvement  of 
the  country,  therefore,  which  affords  subsist¬ 
ence,  must,  necessarily,  be  prior  to  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  town,  which  furnishes  only  the 
means  of  conveniency  and  luxury.  It  is  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  country  only,  or  what 
is  over  and  above  the  maintenance  of  the  cul¬ 
tivators,  that  constitutes  the  subsistence  of 
the  town,  which  can  therefore  increase  only 
with  the  increase  of  this  surplus  produce.  The 
town,  indeed,  may  not  always  derive  its  whole 
subsistence  from  the  country  in  its  neighbour¬ 
hood,  or  even  from  the  territory  to  which  it 
belongs,  but  from  very  distant  countries;  and 
this,  though  it  forms  no  exception  from  the 
general  rule,  has  occasioned  considerable  vari¬ 
ations  in  the  progress  of  opulence  in  different 
ages  and  nations. 

That  order  of  things  which  necessity  im¬ 
poses  in  general,  though  not  in  every  particu¬ 
lar  country,  is,  in  every  particular  country, 
promoted  by  the  natural  inclinations  of  man. 
If  human  institutions  had  never  thwarted 
those  natural  inclinations,  the  towns  could 
nowhere  have  increased  beyond  what  the 
improvement  and  cultivation  of  the  territory 
in  which  they  were  situated  could  support;  till 
such  time,  at  least,  as  the  whole  of  that  terri- 


163 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


164 

tory  was  completely  cultivated  and  improved. 
Upon  equal,  or  nearly  equal  profits,  most  men 
will  choose  to  employ  their  capitals  rather  in 
the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  land  than 
either  in  manufactures  or  in  foreign  trade. 
The  man  who  employs  his  capital  in  land  has 
it  more  under  his  view  and  command,  and  his 
fortune  is  much  less  liable  to  accidents  than 
that  of  the  trader,  who  is  obliged  frequently 
to  commit  it,  not  only  to  the  winds  and  the 
waves,  but  to  the  more  uncertain  elements  of 
human  folly  and  injustice,  by  giving  great 
credits  in  distant  countries  to  men  with  whose 
character  and  situation  he  can  seldom  be  thor¬ 
oughly  acquainted.  The  capital  of  the  land¬ 
lord,  on  the  contrary,  which  is  fixed  in  the 
improvement  of  his  land,  seems  to  be  as  well 
secured  as  the  nature  of  human  affairs  can 
admit  of.  The  beauty  of  the  country  besides, 
the  pleasures  of  a  country  life,  the  tranquillity 
of  mind  which  it  promises,  and  wherever  the 
injustice  of  human  laws  does  not  disturb  it, 
the  independency  which  it  really  affords,  have 
charms  that  more  or  less  attract  everybody; 
and  as  to  cultivate  the  ground  was  the  original 
destination  of  man,  so  in  every  stage  of  his 
existence  he  seems  to  retain  a  predilection  for 
this  primitive  employment. 

Without  the  assistance  of  some  artificers, 
indeed,  the  cultivation  of  land  cannot  be  car¬ 
ried  on  but  with  great  inconveniency  and 
continual  interruption.  Smiths,  carpenters, 
wheelwrights,  and  ploughwrights,  masons,  and 
bricklayers,  tanners,  shoemakers,  and  tailors 
are  people  whose  service  the  farmer  has  fre¬ 
quent  occasion  for.  Such  artificers,  too,  stand 
occasionally  in  need  of  the  assistance  of  one 
another;  and  as  their  residence  is  not,  like 
that  of  the  farmer,  necessarily  tied  down  to 
a  precise  spot,  they  naturally  settle  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  one  another,  and  thus  form 
a  small  town  or  village.  The  butcher,  the 
brewer,  and  the  baker  soon  join  them,  to¬ 
gether  with  many  other  artificers  and  retailers, 
necessary  or  useful  for  supplying  their  occa¬ 
sional  wants,  and  who  contribute  still  further 
to  augment  the  town.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
town  and  those  of  the  country  are  mutually 
the  servants  of  one  another.  The  town  is  a 
continual  fair  or  market,  to  which  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  country  resort  in  order  to 
exchange  their  rude  for  manufactured  prod¬ 
uce.  It  is  this  commerce  which  supplies  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town  both  with  the  materi¬ 
als  of  their  work,  and  the  means  of  their  sub¬ 
sistence.  The  quantity  of  the  finished  work 
which  they  sell  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country  necessarily  regulates  the  quantity  of 
the  materials  and  provisions  which  they  buy. 
Neither  their  employment  nor  subsistence, 
therefore,  can  augment  but  in  proportion  to 
the  augmentation  of  the  demand  from  the 


country  for  finished  work;  and  this  demand 
can  augment  only  in  proportion  to  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  improvement  and  cultivation.  Had  hu¬ 
man  institutions,  therefore,  never  disturbed 
the  natural  course  of  things,  the  progressive 
wealth  and  increase  of  the  towns  would,  in 
every  political  society,  be  consequential,  and 
in  proportion  to  the  improvement  and  culti¬ 
vation  of  the  territory  or  country. 

In  our  North  American  colonies,  where  un¬ 
cultivated  land  is  still  to  be  had  upon  easy 
terms,  no  manufactures  for  distant  sale  have 
ever  yet  been  established  in  any  of  their 
towns.  When  an  artificer  has  acquired  a  little 
more  stock  than  is  necessary  for  carrying  on 
his  own  business  in  supplying  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  country,  he  does  not,  in  North  America, 
attempt  to  establish  with  it  a  manufacture  for 
more  distant  sale,  but  employs  it  in  the  pur¬ 
chase  and  improvement  of  uncultivated  land. 
From  artificer  he  becomes  planter,  and  neither 
the  large  wages  nor  the  easy  subsistence  which 
that  country  affords  to  artificers  can  bribe  him 
rather  to  work  for  other  people  than  for  him¬ 
self.  He  feels  that  an  artificer  is  the  servant 
of  his  customers,  from  whom  he  derives  his 
subsistence:  but  that  a  planter  who  cultivates 
his  own  land,  and  derives  his  necessary  sub¬ 
sistence  from  the  labour  of  his  own  family,  is 
really  a  master,  and  independent  of  all  the 
world. 

In  countries,  on  the  contrary,  where  there 
is  either  no  uncultivated  land,  or  none  that 
can  be  had  upon  easy  terms,  every  artificer 
who  has  acquired  more  stock  than  he  can 
employ  in  the  occasional  jobs  of  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  endeavours  to  prepare  work  for  more 
distant  sale.  The  smith  erects  some  sort  of  iron, 
the  weaver  some  sort  of  linen  or  woollen  manu¬ 
factory.  Those  different  manufactures  come, 
in  process  of  time,  to  be  gradually  subdivided, 
and  thereby  improved  and  refined  in  a  great 
variety  of  ways,  which  may  easily  be  con¬ 
ceived,  and  which  it  is  therefore  unnecessary 
to  explain  any  further. 

In  seeking  for  employment  to  a  capital,  man¬ 
ufactures  are,  upon  equal  or  nearly  equal 
profits,  naturally  preferred  to  foreign  com¬ 
merce,  for  the  same  reason  that  agriculture 
is  naturally  preferred  to  manufactures.  As  the 
capital  of  the  landlord  or  farmer  is  more 
secure  than  that  of  the  manufacturer,  so 
the  capital  of  the  manufacturer,  being  at  all 
times  more  within  his  view  and  command, 
is  more  secure  than  that  of  the  foreign  mer¬ 
chant.  In  every  period,  indeed,  of  every  so¬ 
ciety,  the  surplus  part  both  of  the  rude  and 
manufactured  produce,  or  that  for  which  there 
is  no  demand  at  home,  must  be  sent  abroad  in 
order  to  be  exchanged  for  something  for  which 
there  is  some  demand  at  home.  But  whether 
the  capital,  which  carries  this  surplus  produce 


165 


The  Discouragement  of  Agriculture 


abroad,  be  a  foreign  or  a  domestic  one  is  of 
very  little  importance.  If  the  society  has  not 
acquired  sufficient  capital  both  to  cultivate  all 
its  lands,  and  to  manufacture  in  the  complet- 
est  manner  the  whole  of  its  rude  produce, 
there  is  even  a  considerable  advantage  that 
that  rude  produce  should  be  exported  by  a 
foreign  capital,  in  order  that  the  whole  stock 
of  the  society  may  be  employed  in  more  use¬ 
ful  purposes.  The  wealth  of  ancient  Egypt, 
that  of  China  and  Indostan,  sufficiently  dem¬ 
onstrate  that  a  nation  may  attain  a  very  high 
degree  of  opulence  though  the  greater  part 
of  its  exportation  trade  be  carried  on  by  for¬ 
eigners.  The  progress  of  our  North  American 
and  West  Indian  colonies  would  have  been 
much  less  rapid  had  no  capital  but  what  be¬ 
longed  to  themselves  been  employed  in  ex¬ 
porting  their  surplus  produce. 

According  to  the  natural  course  of  things, 
therefore,  the  greater  part  of  the  capital  of 
every  growing  society  is,  first,  directed  to 
agriculture,  afterwards  to  manufactures,  and 
last  of  all  to  foreign  commerce.  This  order  of 
things  is  so  very  natural  that  in  every  society 
that  had  any  territory  it  has  always,  I  believe, 
been  in  some  degree  observed.  Some  of  their 
lands  must  have  been  cultivated  before  any 
considerable  towns  could  be  established,  and 
some  sort  of  coarse  industry  of  the  manufac¬ 
turing  kind  must  have  been  carried  on  in 
those  towns,  before  they  could  well  think  of 
employing  themselves  in  foreign  commerce. 

But  though  this  natural  order  of  things 
must  have  taken  place  in  some  degree  in 
every  such  society,  it  has,  in  all  the  modern 
states  of  Europe,  been,  in  many  respects,  en¬ 
tirely  inverted.  The  foreign  commerce  of  some 
of  their  cities  has  introduced  all  their  finer 
manufactures,  or  such  as  were  fit  for  distant 
sale;  and  manufactures  and  foreign  commerce 
together  have  given  birth  to  the  principal 
improvements  of  agriculture.  The  manners 
and  customs  which  the  nature  of  their  orig¬ 
inal  government  introduced,  and  which  re¬ 
mained  after  that  government  was  greatly 
altered,  necessarily  forced  them  into  this  un¬ 
natural  and  retrograde  order. 

CHAPTER  II 

Of  the  Discouragement  of  Agriculture  in  the 
ancient  State  of  Europe  after  the  Fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire. 

When  the  German  and  Scythian  nations 
overran  the  western  provinces  of  the  Roman 
empire,  the  confusions  which  followed  so 
great  a  revolution  lasted  for  several  centuries. 
The  rapine  and  violence  which  the  barbarians 
exercised  against  the  ancient  inhabitants  in¬ 
terrupted  the  commerce  between  the  towns 


and  the  country.  The  towns  were  deserted, 
and  the  country  was  left  uncultivated,  and 
the  western  provinces  of  Europe,  which  had 
enjoyed  a  considerable  degree  of  opulence 
under  the  Roman  empire,  sunk  into  the  lowest 
state  of  poverty  and  barbarism.  During  the 
continuance  of  those  confusions,  the  chiefs 
and  principal  leaders  of  those  nations  acquired 
or  usurped  to  themselves  the  greater  part 
of  the  lands  of  those  countries.  A  great  part 
of  them  was  uncultivated;  but  no  part  of 
them,  whether  cultivated  or  uncultivated,  was 
left  without  a  proprietor.  All  of  them  were 
engrossed,  and  the  greater  part  by  a  few  great 
proprietors. 

This  original  engrossing  of  uncultivated  lands, 
though  a  great,  might  have  been  but  a  transi¬ 
tory  evil.  They  might  soon  have  been  di¬ 
vided  again,  and  broke  into  small  parcels 
either  by  succession  or  by  alienation.  The  law 
of  primogeniture  hindered  them  from  being 
divided  by  succession:  the  introduction  of 
entails  prevented  their  being  broke  into  small 
parcels  by  alienation. 

When  land,  like  movables,  is  considered  as 
the  means  only  of  subsistence  and  enjoyment, 
the  natural  law  of  succession  divides  it,  like 
them,  among  all  the  children  of  the  family; 
of  all  of  whom  the  subsistence  and  enjoyment 
may  be  supposed  equally  dear  to  the  father. 
This  natural  law  of  succession  accordingly 
took  place  among  the  Romans,  who  made  no 
more  distinction  between  elder  and  younger, 
between  male  and  female,  in  the  inheritance 
of  lands  than  we  do  in  the  distribution  of 
movables.  But  when  land  was  considered  as 
the  means,  not  of  subsistence  merely,  but  of 
power  and  protection,  it  was  thought  better 
that  it  should  descend  undivided  to  one.  In 
those  disorderly  times  every  great  landlord 
was  a  sort  of  petty  prince.  His  tenants  were 
his  subjects.  He  was  their  judge,  and  in  some 
respects  their  legislator  in  peace,  and  their 
leader  in  war.  He  made  war  according  to  his 
own  discretion,  frequently  against  his  neigh¬ 
bours,  and  sometimes  against  his  sovereign. 
The  security  of  a  landed  estate,  therefore, 
the  protection  which  its  owner  could  afford 
to  those  who  dwelt  on  it,  depended  upon  its 
greatness.  To  divide  it  was  to  ruin  it,  and 
to  expose  every  part  of  it  to  be  oppressed  and 
swallowed  up  by  the  incursions  of  its  neigh¬ 
bours.  The  law  of  primogeniture,  therefore, 
came  to  take  place,  not  immediately,  indeed, 
but  in  process  of  time,  in  the  succession  of 
landed  estates,  for  the  same  reason  that  it  has 
generally  taken  place  in  that  of  monarchies, 
though  not  always  at  their  first  institution. 
That  the  power,  and  consequently  the  secu¬ 
rity  of  the  monarchy,  may  not  be  weakened 
by  division,  it  must  descend  entire  to  one  of 
the  children.  To  which  of  them  so  important 


166 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


a  preference  shall  be  given  must  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  some  general  rule,  founded  not  upon 
the  doubtful  distinctions  of  personal  merit, 
but  upon  some  plain  and  evident  difference 
which  can  admit  of  no  dispute.  Among  the 
children  of  the  same  family,  there  can  be  no 
indisputable  difference  but  that  of  sex,  and 
that  of  age.  The  male  sex  is  universally  pre¬ 
ferred  to  the  female;  and  when  all  other  things 
are  equal,  the  elder  everywhere  takes  place 
of  the  younger.  Hence  the  origin  of  the  right 
of  primogeniture,  and  of  what  is  called  lineal 
succession. 

Laws  frequently  continue  in  force  long  after 
the  circumstances  which  first  gave  occasion  to 
them,  and  which  could  alone  render  them  rea¬ 
sonable,  are  no  more.  In  the  present  state  of 
Europe,  the  proprietor  of  a  single  acre  of  land 
is  as  perfectly  secure  of  his  possession  as  the 
proprietor  of  a  hundred  thousand.  The  right 
of  primogeniture,  however,  still  continues  to 
be  respected,  and  as  of  all  institutions  it  is  the 
fittest  to  support  the  pride  of  family  distinc¬ 
tions,  it  is  still  likely  to  endure  for  many  cen¬ 
turies.  In  every  other  respect,  nothing  can  be 
more  contrary  to  the  real  interest  of  a  nu¬ 
merous  family  than  a  right  which,  in  order  to 
enrich  one,  beggars  all  the  rest  of  the  children. 

Entails  are  the  natural  consequences  of  the 
law  of  primogeniture.  They  were  introduced 
to  preserve  a  certain  lineal  succession,  of  which 
the  law  of  primogeniture  first  gave  the  idea, 
and  to  hinder  any  part  of  the  original  es¬ 
tate  from  being  carried  out  of  the  proposed 
line  either  by  gift,  or  devise,  or  alienation; 
either  by  the  folly,  or  by  the  misfortune  of 
any  of  its  successive  owners.  They  were  al¬ 
together  unknown  to  the  Romans.  Neither 
their  substitutions  nor  fideicommisses  bear 
any  resemblance  to  entails,  though  some 
French  lawyers  have  thought  proper  to  dress 
the  modern  institution  in  the  language  and 
garb  of  those  ancient  ones. 

When  great  landed  estates  were  a  sort  of 
principalities,  entails  might  not  be  unreason¬ 
able.  Like  what  are  called  the  fundamental 
laws  of  some  monarchies,  they  might  frequent¬ 
ly  hinder  the  security  of  thousands  from  be¬ 
ing  endangered  by  the  caprice  or  extravagance 
of  one  man.  But  in  the  present  state  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  when  small  as  well  as  great  estates  de¬ 
rive  their  security  from  the  laws  of  their 
country,  nothing  can  be  more  completely  ab¬ 
surd.  They  are  founded  upon  the  most  absurd 
of  all  suppositions,  the  supposition  that  every 
successive  generation  of  men  have  not  an 
equal  right  to  the  earth,  and  to  all  that  it 
possesses;  but  that  the  property  of  the  present 
generation  should  be  restrained  and  regulated 
according  to  the  fancy  of  those  who  died  per¬ 
haps  five  hundred  years  ago.  Entails,  however, 
are  still  respected  through  the  greater  part 


of  Europe,  in  those  countries  particularly  in 
which  noble  birth  is  a  necessary  qualification 
for  the  enjoyment  either  of  civil  or  military 
honours.  Entails  are  thought  necessary  for 
maintaining  this  exclusive  privilege  of  the  no¬ 
bility  to  the  great  offices  and  honours  of  their 
country;  and  that  order  having  usurped  one 
unjust  advantage  over  the  rest  of  their  fellow- 
citizens,  lest  their  poverty  should  render  it 
ridiculous,  it  is  thought  reasonable  that  they 
should  have  another.  The  common  law  of 
England,  indeed,  is  said  to  abhor  perpetui¬ 
ties,  and  they  are  accordingly  more  restricted 
there  than  in  any  other  European  monarchy; 
though  even  England  is  not  altogether  with¬ 
out  them.  In  Scotland  more  than  one-fifth, 
perhaps  more  than  one-third,  part  of  the 
whole  lands  of  the  country  are  at  present 
supposed  to  be  under  strict  entail. 

Great  tracts  of  uncultivated  land  were,  in 
this  manner,  not  only  engrossed  by  particular 
families,  but  the  possibility  of  their  being 
divided  again  was  as  much  as  possible  pre¬ 
cluded  for  ever.  It  seldom  happens,  however, 
that  a  great  proprietor  is  a  great  improver.  In 
the  disorderly  times  which  gave  birth  to  those 
barbarous  institutions,  the  great  proprietor 
was  sufficiently  employed  in  defending  his 
own  territories,  or  in  extending  his  jurisdic¬ 
tion  and  authority  over  those  of  his  neigh¬ 
bours.  He  had  no  leisure  to  attend  to  the 
cultivation  and  improvement  of  land.  When 
the  establishment  of  law  and  order  afforded 
him  this  leisure,  he  often  wanted  the  inclina¬ 
tion,  and  almost  always  the  requisite  abilities. 
If  the  expense  of  his  house  and  person  either 
equalled  or  exceeded  his  revenue,  as  it  did 
very  frequently,  he  had  no  stock  to  employ  in 
this  manner.  If  he  was  an  economist,  he 
generally  found  it  more  profitable  to  employ 
his  annual  savings  in  new  purchases  than  in 
the  improvement  of  his  old  estate.  To  im¬ 
prove  land  with  profit,  like  all  other  com¬ 
mercial  projects,  requires  an  exact  attention 
to  small  savings  and  small  gains,  of  which  a 
man  born  to  a  great  fortune,  even  though 
naturally  frugal,  is  very  seldom  capable.  The 
situation  of  such  a  person  naturally  disposes 
him  to  attend  rather  to  ornament  which  pleases 
his  fancy  than  to  profit  for  which  he  has  so 
little  occasion.  The  elegance  of  his  dress,  of 
his  equipage,  of  his  house,  and  household 
furniture,  are  objects  which  from  his  infan¬ 
cy  he  has  been  accustomed  to  have  some 
anxiety  about.  The  turn  of  mind  which  this 
habit  naturally  forms  follows  him  when  he 
comes  to  think  of  the  improvement  of  land. 
He  embellishes  perhaps  four  or  five  hundred 
acres  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  house,  at 
ten  times  the  expense  which  the  land  is  worth 
after  all  his  improvements;  and  finds  that  if 
he  was  to  improve  his  whole  estate  in  the 


The  Discouragement  of  Agriculture 


same  manner,  and  he  has  little  taste  for  any 
other,  he  would  be  a  bankrupt  before  he  had 
finished  the  tenth  part  of  it.  There  still  re¬ 
main  in  both  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom 
some  great  estates  which  have  continued  with¬ 
out  interruption  in  the  hands  of  the  same 
family  since  the  times  of  feudal  anarchy. 
Compare  the  present  condition  of  those  es¬ 
tates  with  the  possessions  of  the  small  propri¬ 
etors  in  their  neighbourhood,  and  you  will 
require  no  other  argument  to  convince  you 
how  unfavourable  such  extensive  property  is 
to  improvement. 

If  little  improvement  was  to  be  expected 
from  such  great  proprietors,  still  less  was  to 
be  hoped  for  from  those  who  occupied  the 
land  under  them.  In  the  ancient  state  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  the  occupiers  of  land  were  all  tenants 
at  will.  They  were  all  or  almost  all  slaves; 
but  their  slavery  was  of  a  milder  kind  than 
that  known  among  the  ancient  Greeks  and 
Romans,  or  even  in  our  West  Indian  colonies. 
They  were  supposed  to  belong  more  directly 
to  the  land  than  to  their  master.  They  could, 
therefore,  be  sold  with  it,  but  not  separately. 
They  could  marry,  provided  it  was  with  the 
consent  of  their  master;  and  he  could  not 
afterwards  dissolve  the  marriage  by  selling 
the  man  and  wife  to  different  persons.  If  he 
maimed  or  murdered  any  of  them,  he  was 
liable  to  some  penalty,  though  generally  but 
to  a  small  one.  They  were  not,  however, 
capable  of  acquiring  property.  Whatever  they 
acquired  was  acquired  to  their  master,  and  he 
could  take  it  from  them  at  pleasure.  What¬ 
ever  cultivation  and  improvement  could  be 
carried  on  by  means  of  such  slaves  was  prop¬ 
erly  carried  on  by  their  master.  It  was  at  his 
expense.  The  seed,  the  cattle,  and  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  husbandry  were  all  his.  It  was  for 
his  benefit.  Such  slaves  could  acquire  nothing 
but  their  daily  maintenance.  It  was  properly 
the  proprietor  himself,  therefore,  that,  in  this 
case,  occupied  his  own  lands,  and  cultivated 
them  by  his  own  bondmen.  This  species  of 
slavery  still  subsists  in  Russia,  Poland,  Hun¬ 
gary,  Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  other  parts  of 
Germany.  It  is  only  in  the  western  and  south¬ 
western  provinces  of  Europe  that  it  has  gradu¬ 
ally  been  abolished  altogether. 

But  if  great  improvements  are  seldom  to 
be  expected  from  great  proprietors,  they  are 
least  of  all  to  be  expected  when  they  employ 
slaves  for  their  workmen.  The  experience  of 
all  ages  and  nations,  I  believe,  demonstrates 
that  the  work  done  by  slaves,  though  it  ap¬ 
pears  to  cost  only  their  maintenance,  is  in 
the  end  the  dearest  of  any.  A  person  who  can 
acquire  no  property,  can  have  no  other  in¬ 
terest  but  to  eat  as  much,  and  to  labour  as 
little  as  possible.  Whatever  work  he  does  be¬ 
yond  what  is  sufficient  to  purchase  his  own 


167 

maintenance  can  be  squeezed  out  of  him  by 
violence  only,  and  not  by  any  interest  of  his 
own.  In  ancient  Italy,  how  much  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  corn  degenerated,  how  unprofitable  it 
became  to  the  master  when  it  fell  under  the 
management  of  slaves,  is  remarked  by  both 
Pliny  and  Columella.  In  the  time  of  Aristotle 
it  had  not  been  much  better  in  ancient  Greece. 
Speaking  of  the  ideal  republic  described  in 
the  laws  of  Plato,  to  maintain  five  thousand 
idle  men  (the  number  of  warriors  supposed 
necessary  for  its  defence)  together  with  their 
women  and  servants,  would  require,  he  says, 
a  territory  of  boundless  extent  and  fertility, 
like  the  plains  of  Babylon. 

The  pride  of  man  makes  him  love  to  dom¬ 
ineer,  and  nothing  mortifies  him  so  much  as 
to  be  obliged  to  condescend  to  persuade  his 
inferiors.  Wherever  the  law  allows  it,  and 
the  nature  of  the  work  can  afford  it,  there¬ 
fore,  he  will  generally  prefer  the  service  of 
slaves  to  that  of  freemen.  The  planting  of 
sugar  and  tobacco  can  afford  the  expense  of 
slave-cultivation.  The  raising  of  corn,  it 
seems,  in  the  present  times,  cannot.  In  the 
English  colonies,  of  which  the  principal  prod¬ 
uce  is  corn,  the  far  greater  part  of  the  work 
is  done  by  freemen.  The  late  resolution  of  the 
Quakers  in  Pennsylvania  to  set  at  liberty  all 
their  negro  slaves  may  satisfy  us  that  their 
number  cannot  be  very  great.  Had  they  made 
any  considerable  part  of  their  property,  such 
a  resolution  could  never  have  been  agreed 
to.  In  our  sugar  colonies,  on  the  contrary,  the 
whole  work  is  done  by  slaves,  and  in  our 
tobacco  colonies  a  very  great  part  of  it.  The 
profits  of  a  sugar-plantation  in  any  of  our 
West  Indian  colonies  are  generally  much 
greater  than  those  of  any  other  cultivation 
that  is  known  either  in  Europe  or  America; 
and  the  profits  of  a  tobacco  plantation, 
though  inferior  to  those  of  sugar,  are  superior 
to  those  of  corn,  as  has  already  been  observed. 
Both  can  afford  the  expense  of  slave-cultiva¬ 
tion,  but  sugar  can  afford  it  still  better  than 
tobacco.  The  number  of  negroes  accordingly 
is  much  greater,  in  proportion  to  that  of  whites, 
in  our  sugar  than  in  our  tobacco  colonies. 

To  the  slave  cultivators  of  ancient  times 
gradually  succeeded  a  species  of  farmers  known 
at  present  in  France  by  the  name  of  metay¬ 
ers.  They  are  called  in  Latin,  Coloni  par- 
tiarii.  They  have  been  so  long  in  disuse  in 
England  that  at  present  I  know  no  English 
name  for  them.  The  proprietor  furnished  them 
with  the  seed,  cattle,  and  instruments  of  hus¬ 
bandry,  the  whole  stock,  in  short,  necessary 
for  cultivating  the  farm.  The  produce  was 
divided  equally  between  the  proprietor  and 
the  farmer,  after  setting  aside  what  was 
judged  necessary  for  keeping  up  the  stock, 


168  The  Wealth 

which  was  restored  to  the  proprietor  when  the 
farmer  either  quitted,  or  was  turned  out  of  the 
farm. 

Land  occupied  by  such  tenants  is  properly 
cultivated  at  the  expense  of  the  proprietor 
as  much  as  that  occupied  by  slaves.  There 
is,  however,  one  very  essential  difference  be¬ 
tween  them.  Such  tenants,  being  freemen,  are 
capable  of  acquiring  property,  and  having  a 
certain  proportion  of  the  produce  of  the  land, 
they  have  a  plain  interest  that  the  whole  prod¬ 
uce  should  be  as  great  as  possible,  in  order 
that  their  own  proportion  may  be  so.  A  slave, 
on  the  contrary,  who  can  acquire  nothing 
but  his  maintenance,  consults  his  own  ease 
by  making  the  land  produce  as  little  as  pos¬ 
sible  over  and  above  that  maintenance.  It 
is  probable  that  it  was  partly  upon  account  of 
this  advantage,  and  partly  upon  account  of 
the  encroachments  which  the  sovereign,  al¬ 
ways  jealous  of  the  great  lords,  gradually  en¬ 
couraged  their  villains  to  make  upon  their 
authority,  and  which  seem  at  last  to  have 
been  such  as  rendered  this  species  of  servitude 
altogether  inconvenient,  that  tenure  in  villan- 
age  gradually  wore  out  through  the  greater 
part  of  Europe.  The  time  and  manner,  how¬ 
ever,  in  which  so  important  a  revolution  was 
brought  about  is  one  of  the  most  obscure 
points  in  modern  history.  The  Church  of 
Rome  claims  great  merit  in  it;  and  it  is  cer¬ 
tain  that  so  early  as  the  twelfth  century, 
Alexander  III  published  a  bull  for  the  general 
emancipation  of  slaves.  It  seems,  however,  to 
have  been  rather  a  pious  exhortation  than  a 
law  to  which  exact  obedience  was  required 
from  the  faithful.  Slavery  continued  to  take 
place  almost  universally  for  several  centuries 
afterwards,  till  it  was  gradually  abolished  by 
the  joint  operation  of  the  two  interests  above 
mentioned,  that  of  the  proprietor  on  the  one 
hand,  and  that  of  the  sovereign  on  the  other. 
A  villain  enfranchised,  and  at  the  same  time 
allowed  to  continue  in  possession  of  the  land, 
having  no  stock  of  his  own,  could  cultivate 
it  only  by  means  of  what  the  landlord  ad¬ 
vanced  to  him,  and  must,  therefore,  have  been 
what  the  French  called  a  metayer. 

It  could  never,  however,  be  the  interest 
even  of  this  last  species  of  cultivators  to  lay 
out,  in  the  further  improvement  of  the  land, 
any  part  of  the  little  stock  which  they  might 
save  from  their  own  share  of  the  produce,  be¬ 
cause  the  lord,  who  laid  out  nothing,  was  to 
get  one  half  of  whatever  it  produced.  The 
tithe,  which  is  but  a  tenth  of  the  produce,  is 
found  to  be  a  very  great  hindrance  to  im¬ 
provement.  A  tax,  therefore,  which  amounted 
to  one  half  must  have  been  an  effectual  bar 
to  it.  It  might  be  the  interest  of  a  metayer  to 
make  the  land  produce  as  much  as  could  be 
brought  out  of  it  by  means  of  the  stock  fur¬ 


of  Nations 

nished  by  the  proprietor;  but  it  could  never  be 
his  interest  to  mix  any  part  of  his  own  with 
it.  In  France,  where  five  parts  out  of  six  of 
the  whole  kingdom  are  said  to  be  still  occu¬ 
pied  by  this  species  of  cultivators,  the  propri¬ 
etors  complain  that  their  metayers  take  every 
opportunity  of  employing  the  master’s  cattle 
rather  in  carriage  than  in  cultivation;  because 
in  the  one  case  they  get  the  whole  profits  to 
themselves,  in  the  other  they  share  them  with 
their  landlord.  This  species  of  tenants  still 
subsists  in  some  parts  of  Scotland.  They  are 
called  steel-bow  tenants.  Those  ancient  Eng¬ 
lish  tenants,  who  are  said  by  Chief  Baron 
Gilbert  and  Doctor  Blackstone  to  have  been 
rather  bailiffs  of  the  landlord  than  farmers 
properly  so  called,  were  probably  of  the  same 
kind. 

To  this  species  of  tenancy  succeeded,  though 
by  very  slow  degrees,  farmers  properly  so 
called,  who  cultivated  the  land  with  their 
own  stock,  paying  a  rent  certain  to  the  land¬ 
lord.  When  such  farmers  have  a  lease  for  a 
term  of  years,  they  may  sometimes  find  it  for 
their  interest  to  lay  out  part  of  their  capital 
in  the  further  improvement  of  the  farm;  be¬ 
cause  they  may  sometimes  expect  to  recover 
it,  with  a  large  profit,  before  the  expiration 
of  the  lease.  The  possession  even  of  such 
farmers,  however,  was  long  extremely  pre¬ 
carious,  and  still  is  so  in  many  parts  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  They  could  before  the  expiration  of 
their  term  be  legally  outed  of  their  lease  by  a 
new  purchaser;  in  England,  even  by  the  ficti¬ 
tious  action  of  a  common  recovery.  If  they 
were  turned  out  illegally  by  the  violence  of 
their  master,  the  action  by  which  they  ob¬ 
tained  redress  was  extremely  imperfect.  It  did 
not  always  reinstate  them  in  the  possession  of 
the  land,  but  gave  them  damages  which  never 
amounted  to  the  real  loss.  Even  in  England, 
the  country  perhaps  of  Europe  where  the 
yeomanry  has  always  been  most  respected, 
it  was  not  till  about  the  14th  of  Henry  VII 
that  the  action  of  ejectment  was  invented,  by 
which  the  tenant  recovers,  not  damages  only 
but  possession,  and  in  which  his  claim  is  not 
necessarily  concluded  by  the  uncertain  deci¬ 
sion  of  a  single  assize.  This  action  has  been 
found  so  effectual  a  remedy  that,  in  the  mod¬ 
ern  practice,  when  the  landlord  has  occasion 
to  sue  for  the  possession  of  the  land,  he  sel¬ 
dom  makes  use  of  the  actions  which  properly 
belong  to  him  as  landlord,  the  Writ  of  Right 
or  the  Writ  of  Entry,  but  sues  in  the  name  of 
his  tenant  by  the  Writ  of  Ejectment.  In  Eng¬ 
land,  therefore,  the  security  of  the  tenant  is 
equal  to  that  of  the  proprietor.  In  England, 
besides,  a  lease  for  life  of  forty  shillings  a 
year  value  is  a  freehold,  and  entitles  the  les¬ 
see  to  vote  for  a  Member  of  Parliament;  and 
as  a  great  part  of  the  yeomanry  have  free- 


169 


The  Discouragement  of  Agriculture 


holds  of  this  kind,  the  whole  order  becomes 
respectable  to  their  landlords  on  account  of 
the  political  consideration  which  this  gives 
them.  There  is,  I  believe,  nowhere  in  Europe, 
except  in  England,  any  instance  of  the  tenant 
building  upon  the  land  of  which  he  had  no 
lease,  and  trusting  that  the  honour  of  his 
landlord  would  take  no  advantage  of  so  im¬ 
portant  an  improvement.  Those  laws  and  cus¬ 
toms  so  favourable  to  the  yeomanry  have  per¬ 
haps  contributed  more  to  the  present  grandeur 
of  England  than  all  their  boasted  regulations 
of  commerce  taken  together. 

The  law  which  secures  the  longest  leases 
against  successors  of  every  kind  is,  so  far  as 
I  know,  peculiar  to  Great  Britain.  It  was 
introduced  into  Scotland  so  early  as  1449,  by 
a  law  of  James  II.  Its  beneficial  influence, 
however,  has  been  much  obstructed  by  entails; 
the  heirs  of  entail  being  generally  restrained 
from  letting  leases  for  any  long  term  of  years, 
frequently  for  more  than  one  year.  A  late  Act 
of  Parliament  has,  in  this  respect,  somewhat 
slackened  their  fetters,  though  they  are  still 
by  much  too  strait.  In  Scotland,  besides,  as 
no  leasehold  gives  a  vote  for  a  Member  of 
Parliament,  the  yeomanry  are  upon  this  ac¬ 
count  less  respectable  to  their  landlords  than 
in  England. 

In  other  parts  of  Europe,  after  it  was  found 
convenient  to  secure  tenants  both  against 
heirs  and  purchasers,  the  term  of  their  secu¬ 
rity  was  still  limited  to  a  very  short  period; 
in  France,  for  example,  to  nine  years  from 
the  commencement  of  the  lease.  It  has  in  that 
country,  indeed,  been  lately  extended  to  twen¬ 
ty-seven,  a  period  still  too  short  to  encourage 
the  tenant  to  make  the  most  important  im¬ 
provements.  The  proprietors  of  land  were 
anciently  the  legislators  of  every  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  The  laws  relating  to  land,  therefore, 
were  all  calculated  for  what  they  supposed 
the  interest  of  the  proprietor.  It  was  for  his 
interest,  they  had  imagined,  that  no  lease 
granted  by  any  of  his  predecessors  should 
hinder  him  from  enjoying,  during  a  long  term 
of  years,  the  full  value  of  his  land.  Avarice 
and  injustice  are  always  short-sighted,  and 
they  did  not  foresee  how  much  this  regula¬ 
tion  must  obstruct  improvement,  and  thereby 
hurt  in  the  long-run  the  real  interest  of  the 
landlord. 

The  farmers  too,  besides  paying  the  rent, 
were  anciently,  it  was  supposed,  bound  to  per¬ 
form  a  great  number  of  services  to  the  land¬ 
lord,  which  were  seldom  either  specified  in 
the  lease,  or  regulated  by  any  precise  rule, 
but  by  the  use  and  wont  of  the  manor  or 
barony.  These  services,  therefore,  being  al¬ 
most  entirely  arbitrary,  subjected  the  tenant 
to  many  vexations.  In  Scotland  the  abolition 
of  all  services  not  precisely  stipulated  in  the 


lease  has  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  very 
much  altered  for  the  better  the  condition  of 
the  yeomanry  of  that  country. 

The  public  services  to  which  the  yeomanry 
were  bound  were  not  less  arbitrary  than  the 
private  ones.  To  make  and  maintain  the  high 
roads,  a  servitude  which  still  subsists,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  everywhere,  though  with  different  de¬ 
grees  of  oppression  in  different  countries,  was 
not  the  only  one.  When  the  king’s  troops, 
when  his  household  or  his  officers  of  any  kind 
passed  through  any  part  of  the  country,  the 
yeomanry  were  bound  to  provide  them  with 
horses,  carriages,  and  provisions,  at  a  price 
regulated  by  the  purveyor.  Great  Britain  is, 
I  believe,  the  only  monarchy  in  Europe  where 
the  oppression  of  purveyance  has  been  entire¬ 
ly  abolished.  It  still  subsists  in  France  and 
Germany. 

The  public  taxes  to  which  they  were  sub¬ 
ject  were  as  irregular  and  oppressive  as  the 
services.  The  ancient  lords,  though  extremely 
unwilling  to  grant  themselves  any  pecuniary 
aid  to  their  sovereign,  easily  allowed  him  to 
tallage,  as  they  called  it  their  tenants,  and 
had  not  knowledge  enough  to  foresee  how 
much  this  must  in  the  end  affect  their  own 
revenue.  The  taille,  as  it  still  subsists  in 
France,  may  serve  as  an  example  of  those 
ancient  tallages.  It  is  a  tax  upon  the  supposed 
profits  of  the  farmer,  which  they  estimate  by 
the  stock  that  he  has  upon  the  farm.  It  is  his 
interest,  therefore,  to  appear  to  have  as  little 
as  possible,  and  consequently  to  employ  as 
little  as  possible  in  its  cultivation,  and  none 
in  its  improvement.  Should  any  stock  happen 
to  accumulate  in  the  hands  of  a  French 
farmer,  the  taille  is  almost  equal  to  a  pro¬ 
hibition  of  its  ever  being  employed  upon  the 
land.  This  tax,  besides,  is  supposed  to  dis¬ 
honour  whoever  is  subject  to  it,  and  to  de¬ 
grade  him  below,  not  only  the  rank  of  a 
gentleman,  but  that  of  a  burgher,  and  who¬ 
ever  rents  the  lands  of  another  becomes  sub¬ 
ject  to  it.  No  gentleman,  nor  even  any  burgher 
who  has  stock,  will  submit  to  this  degradation. 
This  tax,  therefore,  not  only  hinders  the  stock 
which  accumulates  upon  the  land  from  be¬ 
ing  employed  in  its  improvement,  but  drives 
away  all  other  stock  from  it.  The  ancient 
tenths  and  fifteenths,  so  usual  in  England  in 
former  times,  seem,  so  far  as  they  affected  the 
land,  to  have  been  taxes  of  the  same  nature 
with  the  taille. 

Under  all  these  discouragements,  little  im¬ 
provement  could  be  expected  from  the  occu¬ 
piers  of  land.  That  order  of  people,  with  all 
the  liberty  and  security  which  law  can  give, 
must  always  improve  under  great  disadvan¬ 
tages.  The  farmer,  compared  with  the  propri¬ 
etor,  is  as  a  merchant  who  trades  with  bor¬ 
rowed  money  compared  with  one  who  trades 


170 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


with  his  own.  The  stock  of  both  may  improve, 
but  that  of  the  one,  with  only  equal  good  con¬ 
duct,  must  always  improve  more  slowly  than 
that  of  the  other,  on  account  of  the  large  share 
of  the  profits  which  is  consumed  by  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  loan.  The  lands  cultivated  by  the 
farmer  must,  in  the  same  manner,  with  only 
equal  good  conduct,  be  improved  more  slowly 
than  those  cultivated  by  the  proprietor,  on 
account  of  the  large  share  of  the  produce 
which  is  consumed  in  the  rent,  and  which,  had 
the  farmer  been  proprietor,  he  might  have 
employed  in  the  further  improvement  of  the 
land.  The  station  of  a  farmer  besides  is,  from 
the  nature  of  things,  inferior  to  that  of  a 
proprietor.  Through  the  greater  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope  the  yeomanry  are  regarded  as  an  inferior 
rank  of  people,  even  to  the  better  sort  of 
tradesmen  and  mechanics,  and  in  all  parts  of 
Europe  to  the  great  merchants  and  master 
manufacturers.  It  can  seldom  happen,  there¬ 
fore,  that  a  man  of  any  considerable  stock 
should  quit  the  superior  in  order  to  place 
himself  in  an  inferior  station.  Even  in  the 
present  state  of  Europe,  therefore,  little  stock 
is  likely  to  go  from  any  other  profession  to 
the  improvement  of  land  in  the  way  of  farm¬ 
ing.  More  does  perhaps  in  Great  Britain  than 
in  any  other  country,  though  even  there  the 
great  stocks  which  are,  in  some  places,  em¬ 
ployed  in  farming  have  generally  been  ac¬ 
quired  by  farming,  the  trade,  perhaps,  in 
which  of  all  others  stock  is  commonly  acquired 
most  slowly.  After  small  proprietors,  however, 
rich  and  great  farmers  are,  in  every  country, 
the  principal  improvers.  There  are  more  such 
perhaps  in  England  than  in  any  other  Eu¬ 
ropean  monarchy.  In  the  republican  govern¬ 
ments  of  Holland  and  of  Berne  in  Switzerland, 
the  farmers  are  said  to  be  not  inferior  to 
those  of  England. 

The  ancient  policy  of  Europe  was,  over  and 
above  all  this,  unfavourable  to  the  improve¬ 
ment  and  cultivation  of  land,  whether  carried 
on  by  the  proprietor  or  by  the  farmer;  first, 
by  the  general  prohibition  of  the  exportation 
of  corn  without  a  special  licence,  which  seems 
to  have  been  a  very  universal  regulation;  and 
secondly,  by  the  restraints  which  were  laid 
upon  the  inland  commerce,  not  only  of  corn, 
but  of  almost  every  other  part  of  the  produce 
of  the  farm  by  the  absurd  laws  against  en¬ 
grossers,  regrators,  and  forestalled,  and  by  the 
privileges  of  fairs  and  markets.  It  has  already 
been  observed  in  what  manner  the  prohibi¬ 
tion  of  the  exportation  of  corn,  together  with 
some  encouragement  given  to  the  importation 
of  foreign  corn,  obstructed  the  cultivation  of 
ancient  Italy,  naturally  the  most  fertile  coun¬ 
try  in  Europe,  and  at  that  time  the  seat  of 
the  greatest  empire  in  the  world.  To  what 
degree  such  restraints  upon  the  inland  com¬ 


merce  of  this  commodity,  joined  to  the  gen¬ 
eral  prohibition  of  exportation,  must  have  dis¬ 
couraged  the  cultivation  of  countries  less  fertile 
and  less  favourably  circumstanced,  it  is  not 
perhaps  very  easy  to  imagine. 

CHAPTER  III 

Of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Cities  and  Towns 
after  the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire 

The  inhabitants  of  cities  and  towns  were, 
after  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,  not  more 
favoured  than  those  of  the  country.  They 
consisted,  indeed,  of  a  very  different  order 
of  people  from  the  first  inhabitants  of  the 
ancient  republics  of  Greece  and  Italy.  These 
last  were  composed  chiefly  of  the  proprietors 
of  lands,  among  whom  the  public  territory 
was  originally  divided,  and  who  found  it 
convenient  to  build  their  houses  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  one  another,  and  to  surround 
them  with  a  wall,  for  the  sake  of  common 
defence.  After  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire, 
on  the  contrary,  the  proprietors  of  land  seem 
generally  to  have  lived  in  fortified  castles  on 
their  own  estates,  and  in  the  midst  of  their 
own  tenants  and  dependants.  The  towns  were 
chiefly  inhabited  by  tradesmen  and  mechan¬ 
ics,  who  seem  in  those  days  to  have  been  of 
servile,  or  very  nearly  of  servile  condition.  The 
privileges  which  we  find  granted  by  ancient 
charters  to  the  inhabitants  of  some  of  the 
principal  towns  in  Europe  sufficiently  show 
what  they  were  before  those  grants.  The  peo¬ 
ple  to  whom  it  is  granted  as  a  privilege  that 
they  might  give  away  their  own  daughters 
in  marriage  without  the  consent  of  their  lord, 
that  upon  their  death  their  own  children,  and 
not  their  lord,  should  succeed  to  their  goods, 
and  that  they  might  dispose  of  their  own 
effects  by  will,  must,  before  those  grants, 
have  been  either  altogether  or  very  nearly  in 
the  same  state  of  villanage  with  the  occupiers 
of  land  in  the  country. 

They  seem,  indeed,  to  have  been  a  very 
poor,  mean  set  of  people,  who  used  to  travel 
about  with  their  goods  from  place  to  place, 
and  from  fair  to  fair,  like  the  hawkers  and 
pedlars  of  the  present  times.  In  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  countries  of  Europe  then,  in  the  same 
manner  as  in  several  of  the  Tartar  govern¬ 
ments  of  Asia  at  present,  taxes  used  to  be 
levied  upon  the  persons  and  goods  of  travel¬ 
lers  when  they  passed  through  certain  manors, 
when  they  went  over  certain  bridges,  when 
they  carried  about  their  goods  from  place  to 
place  in  a  fair,  when  they  erected  in  it  a 
booth  or  stall  to  sell  them  in.  These  different 
taxes  were  known  in  England  by  the  names 
of  passage,  pontage,  lastage,  and  stallage. 
Sometimes  the  king,  sometimes  a  great  lord, 


171 


Progress  of  Cities  and  Towns 


who  had,  it  seems,  upon  some  occasions,  au¬ 
thority  to  do  this,  would  grant  to  particular 
traders,  to  such  particularly  as  lived  in  their 
own  demesnes,  a  general  exemption  from  such 
taxes.  Such  traders,  though  in  other  respects 
of  servile,  or  very  nearly  of  servile  condition, 
were  upon  this  account  called  free-traders. 
They  in  return  usually  paid  to  their  protector 
a  sort  of  annual  poll-tax.  In  those  days  pro¬ 
tection  was  seldom  granted  without  a  valuable 
consideration,  and  this  tax  might,  perhaps, 
be  considered  as  compensation  for  wrhat  their 
patrons  might  lose  by  their  exemption  from 
other  taxes.  At  first,  both  those  poll-taxes  and 
those  exemptions  seem  to  have  been  altogether 
personal,  and  to  have  affected  only  particular 
individuals  during  either  their  lives  or  the 
pleasure  of  their  protectors.  In  the  very  im¬ 
perfect  accounts  which  have  been  published 
from  Domesday  Book  of  several  of  the  towns 
of  England,  mention  is  frequently  made  some¬ 
times  of  the  tax  which  particular  burghers 
paid,  each  of  them,  either  to  the  king  or  to 
some  other  great  lord  for  this  sort  of  protec¬ 
tion;  and  sometimes  of  the  general  amount 
only  of  all  those  taxes.1 

But  how  servile  soever  may  have  been  orig¬ 
inally  the  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
towns,  it  appears  evidently  that  they  arrived 
at  liberty  and  independency  much  earlier  than 
the  occupiers  of  land  in  the  country.  That 
part  of  the  king’s  revenue  which  arose  from 
such  poll-taxes  in  any  particular  town  used 
commonly  to  be  let  in  farm  during  a  term  of 
years  for  a  rent  certain,  sometimes  to  the 
sheriff  of  the  county,  and  sometimes  to  other 
persons.  The  burghers  themselves  frequently 
got  credit  enough  to  be  admitted  to  farm  the 
revenues  of  this  sort  which  arose  out  of  their 
own  town,  they  becoming  jointly  and  sever¬ 
ally  answerable  for  the  whole  rent.2 *  To  let  a 
farm  in  this  manner  was  quite  agreeable  to  the 
usual  economy  of,  I  believe,  the  sovereigns  of 
all  the  different  countries  of  Europe,  who  used 
frequently  to  let  whole  manors  to  all  the  ten¬ 
ants  of  those  manors,  they  becoming  jointly 
and  severally  answerable  for  the  whole  rent; 
but  in  return  being  allowed  to  collect  it  in  their 
own  way,  and  to  pay  it  into  the  king's  ex¬ 
chequer  by  the  hands  of  their  own  bailiff,  and 
being  thus  altogether  freed  from  the  insolence 
of  the  king’s  officers — a  circumstance  in  those 
days  regarded  as  of  the  greatest  importance. 

At  first  the  farm  of  the  town  was  probably 
let  to  the  burghers,  in  the  same  manner  as  it 
had  been  to  other  farmers,  for  a  term  of  years 
only.  In  process  of  time,  however,  it  seems 
to  have  become  the  general  practice  to  grant 

1  See  Brady’s  Historical  Treatise  of  Cities  and 
Burroughs,  p.  3,  etc. 

2  See  Madox,  Firma  Burgi,  p.  18,  also  History  of 

the  Exchequer,  ch.  10,  sect,  v.,  p.  223,  first  edition. 


it  to  them  in  fee,  that  is  for  ever,  reserving 
a  rent  certain  never  afterwards  to  be  aug¬ 
mented.  The  payment  having  thus  become 
perpetual,  the  exemptions,  in  return  for  which 
it  was  made,  naturally  became  perpetual  too. 
Those  exemptions,  therefore,  ceased  to  be 
personal,  and  could  not  afterwards  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  belonging  to  individuals  as  individ¬ 
uals,  but  as  burghers  of  a  particular  burgh, 
which,  upon  this  account,  was  called  a  free 
burgh,  for  the  same  reason  that  they  had 
been  called  free  burghers  or  free  traders. 

Along  with  this  grant,  the  important  privi¬ 
leges  above  mentioned,  that  they  might  give 
away  their  own  daughters  in  marriage,  that 
their  children  should  succeed  to  them,  and 
that  they  might  dispose  of  their  own  effects 
by  will,  were  generally  bestowed  upon  the 
burghers  of  the  town  to  whom  it  was  given. 
Whether  such  privileges  had  before  been  usu¬ 
ally  granted  along  with  the  freedom  of  trade 
to  particular  burghers,  as  individuals,  I  know 
not.  I  reckon  it  not  improbable  that  they 
were,  though  I  cannot  produce  any  direct  evi¬ 
dence  of  it.  But  however  this  may  have  been, 
the  principal  attributes  of  villanage  and  slav¬ 
ery  being  thus  taken  away  from  them,  they 
now,  at  least,  became  really  free  in  our  pres¬ 
ent  sense  of  the  word  Freedom. 

Nor  was  this  all.  They  were  generally  at 
the  same  time  erected  into  a  commonalty  or 
corporation,  with  the  privilege  of  having  mag¬ 
istrates  and  a  town  council  of  their  own,  of 
making  bye-laws  for  their  own  government, 
of  building  walls  for  their  own  defence,  and  of 
reducing  all  their  inhabitants  under  a  sort 
of  military  discipline  by  obliging  them  to 
watch  and  ward,  that  is,  as  anciently  under¬ 
stood,  to  guard  and  defend  those  walls  against 
all  attacks  and  surprises  by  night  as  well  as 
by  day.  In  England  they  were  generally  ex¬ 
empted  from  suit  to  the  hundred  and  county 
courts;  and  all  such  pleas  as  should  arise 
among  them,  the  pleas  of  the  crown  excepted, 
were  left  to  the  decision  of  their  own  magis¬ 
trates.  In  other  countries  much  greater  and 
more  extensive  jurisdictions  were  frequently 
granted  to  them.8 

It  might,  probably,  be  necessary  to  grant 
to  such  towns  as  were  admitted  to  farm  their 
own  revenues  some  sort  of  compulsive  juris¬ 
diction  to  oblige  their  own  citizens  to  make 
payment.  In  those  disorderly  times  it  might 
have  been  extremely  inconvenient  to  have 
left  them  to  seek  this  sort  of  justice  from 
any  other  tribunal.  But  it  must  seem  extraor¬ 
dinary  that  the  sovereigns  of  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  countries  of  Europe  should  have  ex¬ 
changed  in  this  manner  for  a  rent  certain, 

3  See  Madox,  Firma  Burgi:  See  also  Pfeffel  in  the 
remarkable  events  under  Frederic  II  and  his  suc¬ 
cessors  of  the  house  of  Suabia. 


172 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


never  more  to  be  augmented,  that  branch  of 
their  revenue  which  was,  perhaps,  of  all  others 
the  most  likely  to  be  improved  by  the  natural 
course  of  things,  without  either  expense  or  at¬ 
tention  of  their  own:  and  that  they  should, 
besides,  have  in  this  manner  voluntarily  erected 
a  sort  of  independent  republics  in  the  heart  of 
their  own  dominions. 

In  order  to  understand  this,  it  must  be  re¬ 
membered  that  in  those  days  the  sovereign 
of  perhaps  no  country  in  Europe  was  able 
to  protect,  through  the  whole  extent  of  his 
dominions,  the  weaker  part  of  his  subjects 
from  the  oppression  of  the  great  lords.  Those 
whom  the  law  could  not  protect,  and  who 
were  not  strong  enough  to  defend  themselves, 
were  obliged  either  to  have  recourse  to  the 
protection  of  some  great  lord,  and  in  order 
to  obtain  it  to  become  either  his  slaves  or 
vassals;  or  to  enter  into  a  league  of  mutual 
defence  for  the  common  protection  of  one 
another.  The  inhabitants  of  cities  and  burghs, 
considered  as  single  individuals,  had  no  power 
to  defend  themselves;  but  by  entering  into  a 
league  of  mutual  defence  with  their  neigh¬ 
bours,  they  wTere  capable  of  making  no  con¬ 
temptible  resistance.  The  lords  despised  the 
burghers,  whom  they  considered  not  only  as 
of  a  different  order,  but  as  a  parcel  of  eman¬ 
cipated  slaves,  almost  of  a  different  species 
from  themselves.  The  wealth  of  the  burghers 
never  failed  to  provoke  their  envy  and  indig¬ 
nation,  and  they  plundered  them  upon  every 
occasion  without  mercy  or  remorse.  The 
burghers  naturally  hated  and  feared  the  lords. 
The  king  hated  and  feared  them  too;  but 
though  perhaps  he  might  despise,  he  had  no 
reason  either  to  hate  or  fear  the  burghers. 
Mutual  interest,  therefore,  disposed  them  to 
support  the  king,  and  the  king  to  support 
them  against  the  lords.  They  were  the  enemies 
of  his  enemies,  and  it  was  his  interest  to  ren¬ 
der  them  as  secure  and  independent  of  those 
enemies  as  he  could.  By  granting  them  magis¬ 
trates  of  their  own,  the  privilege  of  making 
bye-laws  for  their  own  government,  that  of 
building  walls  for  their  own  defence,  and  that 
of  reducing  all  their  inhabitants  under  a  sort 
of  military  discipline,  he  gave  them  all  the 
means  of  security  and  independency  of  the 
barons  which  it  was  in  his  power  to  bestow. 
Without  the  establishment  of  some  regular 
government  of  this  kind,  without  some  au¬ 
thority  to  compel  their  inhabitants  to  act  ac¬ 
cording  to  some  certain  plan  or  system,  no 
voluntary  league  of  mutual  defence  could 
either  have  afforded  them  any  permanent  se¬ 
curity,  or  have  enabled  them  to  give  the  king 
any  considerable  support.  By  granting  them 
the  farm  of  their  town  in  fee,  he  took  away 
from  those  whom  he  wished  to  have  for  his 
friends,  and,  if  one  may  say  so,  for  his  allies, 


all  ground  of  jealousy  and  suspicion  that  he 
was  ever  afterwards  to  oppress  them,  either 
by  raising  the  farm  rent  of  their  town  or  by 
granting  it  to  some  other  farmer. 

The  princes  who  lived  upon  the  worst 
terms  with  their  barons  seem  accordingly  to 
have  been  the  most  liberal  in  grants  of  this 
kind  to  their  burghs.  King  John  of  England, 
for  example,  appears  to  have  been  a  most 
munificent  benefactor  to  his  towns.1  Philip  the 
First  of  France  lost  all  authority  over  his 
barons.  Towards  the  end  of  his  reign,  his  son 
Lewis,  known  afterwards  by  the  name  of 
Lewis  the  Fat,  consulted,  according  to  Father 
Daniel,  with  the  bishops  of  the  royal  demesnes 
concerning  the  most  proper  means  of  restrain¬ 
ing  the  violence  of  the  great  lords.  Their  ad¬ 
vice  consisted  of  two  different  proposals.  One 
was  to  erect  a  new  order  of  jurisdiction,  by 
establishing  magistrates  and  a  town  council  in 
every  considerable  town  of  his  demesnes.  The 
other  was  to  form  a  new  militia,  by  making 
the  inhabitants  of  those  towns,  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  their  own  magistrates,  march  out 
upon  proper  occasions  to  the  assistance  of  the 
king.  It  is  from  this  period,  according  to 
the  French  antiquarians,  that  we  are  to  date 
the  institution  of  the  magistrates  and  councils 
of  cities  in  France.  It  was  during  the  un- 
prosperous  reigns  of  the  princes  of  the  house 
of  Suabia  that  the  greater  part  of  the  free 
towns  of  Germany  received  the  first  grants  of 
their  privileges,  and  that  the  famous  Hanseatic 
league  first  became  formidable.2 

The  militia  of  the  cities  seems,  in  those 
times,  not  to  have  been  inferior  to  that  of  the 
country,  and  as  they  could  be  more  readily 
assembled  upon  any  sudden  occasion,  they 
frequently  had  the  advantage  in  their  dis¬ 
putes  with  the  neighbouring  lords.  In  coun¬ 
tries,  such  as  Italy  and  Switzerland,  in  which, 
on  account  either  of  their  distance  from  the 
principal  seat  of  government,  of  the  natural 
strength  of  the  country  itself,  or  of  some  other 
reason,  the  sovereign  came  to  lose  the  whole 
of  his  authority,  the  cities  generally  became 
independent  republics,  and  conquered  all 
the  nobility  in  their  neighbourhood,  oblig¬ 
ing  them  to  pull  down  their  castles  in  the 
country  and  to  live,  like  other  peaceable  in¬ 
habitants,  in  the  city.  This  is  the  short  his¬ 
tory  of  the  republic  of  Berne  as  well  as  of 
several  other  cities  in  Switzerland.  If  you  ex¬ 
cept  Venice,  for  of  that  city  the  history  is 
somewhat  different,  it  is  the  history  of  all  the 
considerable  Italian  republics,  of  which  so  great 
a  number  arose  and  perished  between  the  end 
of  the  twelfth  and  the  beginning  of  the  six¬ 
teenth  century. 

In  countries  such  as  France  or  England, 
where  the  authority  of  the  sovereign,  though 

*See  Madox.  2  See  Pfeffel. 


173 


Progress  of  Cities  and  Towns 


frequently  very  low,  never  was  destroyed 
altogether,  the  cities  had  no  opportunity  of 
becoming  entirely  independent.  They  became, 
however,  so  considerable  that  the  sovereign 
could  impose  no  tax  upon  them,  besides  the 
stated  farm-rent  of  the  town,  without  their 
own  consent.  They  were,  therefore,  called 
upon  to  send  deputies  to  the  general  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  states  of  the  kingdom,  where 
they  might  join  with  the  clergy  and  the  bar¬ 
ons  in  granting,  upon  urgent  occasions,  some 
extraordinary  aid  to  the  king.  Being  gen¬ 
erally,  too,  more  favourable  to  his  power, 
their  deputies  seem,  sometimes,  to  have  been 
employed  by  him  as  a  counterbalance  in 
those  assemblies  to  the  authority  of  the 
great  lords.  Hence  the  origin  of  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  burghs  in  the  states-general  of  all 
the  great  monarchies  in  Europe. 

Order  and  good  government,  and  along 
with  them  the  liberty  and  security  of  indi¬ 
viduals,  were,  in  this  manner,  established  in 
cities  at  a  time  when  the  occupiers  of  land 
in  the  country  were  exposed  to  every  sort  of 
violence.  But  men  in  this  defenceless  state 
naturally  content  themselves  with  their  neces¬ 
sary  subsistence,  because  to  acquire  more 
might  only  tempt  the  injustice  of  their  op¬ 
pressors.  On  the  contrary,  when  they  are  se¬ 
cure  of  enjoying  the  fruits  of  their  industry, 
they  naturally  exert  it  to  better  their  con¬ 
dition,  and  to  acquire  not  only  the  neces¬ 
saries,  but  the  conveniences  and  elegancies 
of  life.  That  industry,  therefore,  which  aims  at 
something  more  than  necessary  subsistence, 
was  established  in  cities  long  before  it  was 
commonly  practised  by  the  occupiers  of  land 
in  the  country.  If  in  the  hands  of  a  poor  cul¬ 
tivator,  oppressed  with  the  servitude  of  vil- 
lanage,  some  little  stock  should  accumulate, 
he  would  naturally  conceal  it  with  great  care 
from  his  master,  to  whom  it  would  other¬ 
wise  have  belonged,  and  take  the  first  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  running  away  to  a  town.  The  law 
was  at  that  time  so  indulgent  to  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  towns,  and  so  desirous  of  diminish¬ 
ing  the  authority  of  the  lords  over  those  of 
the  country,  that  if  he  could  conceal  him¬ 
self  there  from  the  pursuit  of  his  lord  for  a 
year,  he  was  free  for  ever.  Whatever  stock, 
therefore,  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  the 
industrious  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country  naturally  took  refuge  in  cities  as  the 
only  sanctuaries  in  which  it  could  be  secure 
to  the  person  that  acquired  it. 

The  inhabitants  of  a  city,  it  is  true,  must 
always  ultimately  derive  their  subsistence, 
and  the  whole  materials  and  means  of  their 
industry,  from  the  country.  But  those  of  a 
city,  situated  near  either  the  sea  coast  or  the 
banks  of  a  navigable  river,  are  not  necessar¬ 
ily  confined  to  derive  them  from  the  country 


in  their  neighbourhood.  They  have  a  much 
wider  range,  and  may  draw  them  from  the 
most  remote  corners  of  the  world,  either  in 
exchange  for  the  manufactured  produce  of 
their  own  industry,  or  by  performing  the  of¬ 
fice  of  carriers  between  distant  countries  and 
exchanging  the  produce  of  one  for  that  of 
another.  A  city  might  in  this  manner  grow 
up  to  great  wealth  and  splendour,  while  not 
only  the  country  in  its  neighbourhood,  but  all 
those  to  which  it  traded,  were  in  poverty  and 
wretchedness.  Each  of  those  countries,  per¬ 
haps,  taken  singly,  could  afford  it  but  a  small 
part  either  of  its  subsistence  or  of  its  em¬ 
ployment,  but  all  of  them  taken  together 
could  afford  it  both  a  great  subsistence  and 
a  great  employment.  There  were,  however, 
within  the  narrow  circle  of  the  commerce  of 
those  times,  some  countries  that  were  opu¬ 
lent  and  industrious.  Such  was  the  Greek 
empire  as  long  as  it  subsisted,  and  that  of 
the  Saracens  during  the  reigns  of  the  Abass«- 
des.  Such  too  was  Egypt  till  it  was  conquered 
by  the  Turks,  some  part  of  the  coast  of  Bar¬ 
bary,  and  all  those  provinces  of  Spain  which 
were  under  the  government  of  the  Moors. 

The  cities  of  Italy  seem  to  have  been  the 
first  in  Europe  which  were  raised  by  com¬ 
merce  to  any  considerable  degree  of  opulence. 
Italy  lay  in  the  centre  of  what  was  at  that 
time  the  improved  and  civilised  part  of  the 
world.  The  Crusades  too,  though  by  the  great 
waste  of  stock  and  destruction  of  inhabitants 
which  they  occasioned  they  must  necessarily 
have  retarded  the  progress  of  the  greater  part 
of  Europe,  were  extremely  favourable  to  that 
of  some  Italian  cities.  The  great  armies  which 
marched  from  all  parts  to  the  conquest  of  the 
Holy  Land  gave  extraordinary  encouragement 
to  the  shipping  of  Venice,  Genoa,  and  Pisa, 
sometimes  in  transporting  them  thither,  and 
always  in  supplying  them  with  provisions. 
They  were  the  commissaries,  if  one  may  say 
so,  of  those  armies;  and  the  most  destructive 
frenzy  that  ever  befell  the  European  nations 
was  a  source  of  opulence  to  those  republics. 

The  inhabitants  of  trading  cities,  by  im¬ 
porting  the  improved  manufactures  and  ex¬ 
pensive  luxuries  of  richer  countries,  afforded 
some  food  to  the  vanity  of  the  great  proprie¬ 
tors,  who  eagerly  purchased  them  with  great 
quantities  of  the  rude  produce  of  their  own 
lands.  The  commerce  of  a  great  part  of  Eu¬ 
rope  in  those  times, accordingly,  consisted  chief¬ 
ly  in  the  exchange  of  their  own  rude  for  the 
manufactured  produce  of  more  civilised  na¬ 
tions.  Thus  the  wool  of  England  used  to  be  ex¬ 
changed  for  the  wines  of  France  and  the  fine 
cloths  of  Flanders,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  corn  in  Poland  is  at  this  day  exchanged 
for  the  wines  and  brandies  of  France  and  for 
the  silks  and  velvets  of  France  and  Italy. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


174 

A  taste  for  the  finer  and  more  improved 
manufactures  was  in  this  manner  introduced 
by  foreign  commerce  into  countries  where  no 
such  works  were  carried  on.  But  when  this 
taste  became  so  general  as  to  occasion  a  con¬ 
siderable  demand,  the  merchants,  in  order  to 
save  the  expense  of  carriage,  naturally  en¬ 
deavoured  to  establish  some  manufactures  of 
the  same  kind  in  their  own  country.  Hence 
the  origin  of  the  first  manufactures  for  dis¬ 
tant  sale  that  seem  to  have  been  established 
in  the  western  provinces  of  Europe  after  the 
fall  of  the  Roman  empire.  No  large  country, 
it  must  be  observed,  ever  did  or  could  sub¬ 
sist  without  some  sort  of  manufactures  be¬ 
ing  carried  on  in  it;  and  when  it  is  said  of 
any  such  country  that  it  has  no  manufactures, 
it  must  always  be  understood  of  the  finer  and 
more  improved  or  of  such  as  are  fit  for  dis¬ 
tant  sale.  In  every  large  country  both  the 
clothing  and  household  furniture  of  the  far 
greater  part  of  the  people  are  the  produce  of 
their  own  industry.  This  is  even  more  uni¬ 
versally  the  case  in  those  poor  countries  which 
are  commonly  said  to  have  no  manufactures 
than  in  those  rich  ones  that  are  said  to  abound 
in  them.  In  the  latter,  you  will  generally  find, 
both  in  the  clothes  and  household  furniture 
of  the  lowest  rank  of  people,  a  much  greater 
proportion  of  foreign  productions  than  in  the 
former. 

Those  manufactures  which  are  fit  for  dis¬ 
tant  sale  seem  to  have  been  introduced  into 
different  countries  in  two  different  ways. 

Sometimes  they  have  been  introduced,  in 
the  manner  above  mentioned,  by  the  violent 
operation,  if  one  may  say  so,  of  the  stocks 
of  particular  merchants  and  undertakers,  who 
established  them  in  imitation  of  some  foreign 
manufactures  of  the  same  kind.  Such  manu¬ 
factures,  therefore,  are  the  offspring  of  for¬ 
eign  commerce,  and  such  seem  to  have  been 
the  ancient  manufactures  of  silks,  velvets, 
and  brocades,  which  flourished  in  Lucca  dur¬ 
ing  the  thirteenth  century.  They  were  ban¬ 
ished  from  thence  by  the  tyranny  of  one  of 
Machiavel’s  heroes,  Castruccio  Castracani.  In 
1310,  nine  hundred  families  were  driven  out 
of  Lucca,  of  whom  thirty-one  retired  to  Ven¬ 
ice  and  offered  to  introduce  there  the  silk 
manufacture.1  Their  offer  was  accepted;  many 
privileges  were  conferred  upon  them,  and  they 
began  the  manufacture  with  three  hundred 
workmen.  Such,  too,  seem  to  have  been  the 
manufactures  of  fine  cloths  that  anciently 
flourished  in  Flanders,  and  which  were  intro¬ 
duced  into  England  in  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth;  and  such  are  the  present 
silk  manufactures  of  Lyons  and  Spitalfields. 
Manufactures  introduced  in  this  manner  are 

1  See  Sandi,  lsortia  Civile  de  Vinezia,  part  ii., 
vol.  i.,  pp.  247  and  256. 


generally  employed  upon  foreign  materials,  be¬ 
ing  imitations  of  foreign  manufactures.  When 
the  Venetian  manufacture  was  first  estab¬ 
lished,  the  materials  were  all  brought  from 
Sicily  and  the  Levant.  The  more  ancient  manu¬ 
facture  of  Lucca  was  likewise  carried  on 
with  foreign  materials.  The  cultivation  of  mul¬ 
berry  trees  and  the  breeding  of  silk-worms 
seem  not  to  have  been  common  in  the  north¬ 
ern  parts  of  Italy  before  the  sixteenth  cen¬ 
tury.  Those  arts  were  not  introduced  into 
France  till  the  reign  of  Charles  IX.  The 
manufactures  of  Flanders  were  carried  on 
chiefly  with  Spanish  and  English  wool.  Span¬ 
ish  wool  was  the  material,  not  of  the  first  , 
woollen  manufacture  of  England,  but  of  the 
first  that  was  fit  for  distant  sale.  More  than 
one  half  the  materials  of  the  Lyons  manu¬ 
facture  is  at  this  day  foreign  silk;  when  it 
was  first  established,  the  whole  or  very  near¬ 
ly  the  whole  was  so.  No  part  of  the  materials 
of  the  Spitalfields  manufacture  is  ever  likely 
to  be  the  produce  of  England.  The  seat  of 
such  manufactures,  as  they  are  generally  in¬ 
troduced  by  the  scheme  and  project  of  a  few 
individuals,  is  sometimes  established  in  a 
maritime  city,  and  sometimes  in  an  inland 
town,  according  as  their  interest,  judgment, 
or  caprice  happen  to  determine. 

At  other  times,  manufactures  for  distant  sale 
group  up  naturally,  and  as  it  were  of  their 
own  accord,  by  the  gradual  refinement  of 
those  household  and  coarser  manufactures 
which  must  at  all  times  be  carried  on  even 
in  the  poorest  and  rudest  countries.  Such 
manufactures  are  generally  employed  upon 
the  materials  which  the  country  produces, 
and  they  seem  frequently  to  have  been  first  | 
refined  and  improved  in  such  inland  coun¬ 
tries  as  were,  not  indeed  at  a  very  great,  but  1 

at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  sea  coast,  1 

and  sometimes  even  from  all  water  car-  ! 

riage.  An  inland  country,  naturally  fertile  ' 
and  easily  cultivated,  produces  a  great  sur-  I 

plus  of  provisions  beyond  what  is  necessary  f 

for  maintaining  the  cultivators,  and  on  ac-  2 
count  of  the  expense  of  land  carriage,  and  f 
inconveniency  of  river  navigation,  it  may  f 
frequently  be  difficult  to  send  this  surplus  F 
abroad.  Abundance,  therefore,  renders  provi-  h 
sions  cheap,  and  encourages  a  great  number  p 

of  workmen  to  settle  in  the  neighbourhood,  e 

who  find  that  their  industry  can  there  pro-  J 
cure  them  more  of  the  necessaries  and  con-  a 
veniencies  of  life  than  in  other  places.  They 
work  up  the  materials  of  manufacture  which 
the  land  produces,  and  exchange  their  fin¬ 
ished  work,  or  what  is  the  same  thing  the 
price  of  it,  for  more  materials  and  provisions. 
They  give  a  new  value  to  the  surplus  part  of 
the  rude  produce  by  saving  the  expense  of 
carrying  it  to  the  water  side  or  to  some  dis- 


Dl 


175 


How  the  Towns  Improve  the  Country 


tant  market;  and  they  furnish  the  cultivators 
with  something  in  exchange  for  it  that  is 
either  useful  or  agreeable  to  them  upon  easier 
terms  than  they  could  have  obtained  it  be¬ 
fore.  The  cultivators  get  a  better  price  for 
their  surplus  produce,  and  can  purchase 
cheaper  other  conveniences  which  they  have 
occasion  for.  They  are  thus  both  encouraged 
and  enabled  to  increase  this  surplus  produce 
by  a  further  improvement  and  better  cul¬ 
tivation  of  the  land;  and  as  the  fertility  of 
the  land  had  given  birth  to  the  manufacture, 
so  the  progress  of  the  manufacture  reacts 
upon  the  land  and  increases  still  further  its 
fertility.  The  manufacturers  first  supply  the 
neighbourhood,  and  afterwards,  as  their  work 
improves  and  refines,  more  distant  markets. 
For  though  neither  the  rude  produce  nor  even 
the  coarse  manufacture  could,  without  the 
greatest  difficulty,  support  the  expense  of  a 
considerable  land  carriage,  the  refined  and  im¬ 
proved  manufacture  easily  may.  In  a  small 
bulk  it  frequently  contains  the  price  of  a 
great  quantity  of  rude  produce.  A  piece  of 
fine  cloth,  for  example,  which  weighs  only 
eighty  pounds,  contains  in  it,  the  price,  not 
only  of  eighty  pounds’  weight  of  wool,  but 
sometimes  of  several  thousand  weight  of  corn, 
the  maintenance  of  the  different  working 
people  and  of  their  immediate  employers.  The 
com,  which  could  with  difficulty  have  been 
carried  abroad  in  its  own  shape,  is  in  this 
manner  virtually  exported  in  that  of  the  com¬ 
plete  manufacture,  and  may  easily  be  sent 
to  the  remotest  corners  of  the  world.  In  this 
manner  have  grown  up  naturally,  and  as  it 
were  of  their  own  accord,  the  manufactures 
of  Leeds,  Halifax,  Sheffield,  Birmingham,  and 
Wolverhampton.  Such  manufactures  are  the 
offspring  of  agriculture.  In  the  modern  his¬ 
tory  of  Europe,  their  extension  and  improve¬ 
ment  have  generally  been  posterior  to  those 
which  were  the  offspring  of  foreign  commerce. 
England  was  noted  for  the  manufacture  of 
fine  cloths  made  of  Spanish  wool  more  than 
a  century  before  any  of  those  which  now 
flourish  in  the  places  above  mentioned  were 
fit  for  foreign  sale.  The  extension  and  im¬ 
provement  of  these  last  could  not  take  place 
but  in  consequence  of  the  extension  and  im¬ 
provement  of  agriculture  the  last  and  great¬ 
est  effect  of  foreign  commerce,  and  of  the 
manufactures  immediately  introduced  by  it, 
and  which  I  shall  now  proceed  to  explain. 

CHAPTER  IV 

How  the  Commerce  of  the  Towns  Contributed 
to  the  Improvement  of  the  Country 

The  increase  and  riches  of  commercial  and 
manufacturing  towns  contributed  to  the  im¬ 


provement  and  cultivation  of  the  countries 
to  which  they  belonged  in  three  different 
ways. 

First,  by  affording  a  great  and  ready  mar¬ 
ket  for  the  rude  produce  of  the  country,  they 
gave  encouragement  to  its  cultivation  and 
further  improvement.  This  benefit  was  not 
even  confined  to  the  countries  in  which  they 
were  situated,  but  extended  more  or  less 
to  all  those  with  which  they  had  any  deal¬ 
ings.  To  all  of  them  they  afforded  a  market 
for  some  part  either  of  their  rude  or  manu¬ 
factured  produce,  and  consequently  gave  some 
encouragement  to  the  industry  and  improve¬ 
ment  of  all.  Their  own  country,  however,  on 
account  of  its  neighbourhood,  necessarily  de¬ 
rived  the  greatest  benefit  from  this  market. 
Its  rude  produce  being  charged  with  less  car¬ 
riage,  the  traders  could  pay  the  growers  a 
better  price  for  it,  and  yet  afford  it  as  cheap 
to  the  consumers  as  that  of  more  distant 
countries. 

Secondly,  the  wealth  acquired  by  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  cities  was  frequently  employed 
in  purchasing  such  lands  as  were  to  be  sold, 
of  which  a  great  part  would  frequently  be 
uncultivated.  Merchants  are  commonly  am¬ 
bitious  of  becoming  country  gentlemen,  and 
when  they  do,  they  are  generally  the  best  of 
all  improvers.  A  merchant  is  accustomed  to 
employ  his  money  chiefly  in  profitable  proj¬ 
ects,  whereas  a  mere  country  gentleman  is 
accustomed  to  employ  it  chiefly  in  expense. 
The  one  often  sees  his  money  go  from  him 
and  return  to  him  again  with  a  profit;  the 
other,  when  once  he  parts  with  it,  very  sel¬ 
dom  expects  to  see  any  more  of  it.  Those 
different  habits  naturally  affect  their  temper 
and  disposition*  in  every  sort  of  business.  A 
merchant  is  commonly  a  bold,  a  country  gen¬ 
tleman  a  timid  undertaker.  The  one  is  not 
afraid  to  lay  out  at  once  a  large  capital  upon 
the  improvement  of  his  land  when  he  has  a 
probable  prospect  of  raising  the  value  of  it 
in  proportion  to  the  expense.  The  other,  if 
he  has  any  capital,  which  is  not  always  the 
case,  seldom  ventures  to  employ  it  in  this 
manner.  If  he  improves  at  all,  it  is  commonly 
not  with  a  capital,  but  with  what  he  can  save 
out  of  his  annual  revenue.  Whoever  has  had 
the  fortune  to  live  in  a  mercantile  town  sit¬ 
uated  in  an  unimproved  country  must  have 
frequently  observed  how  much  more  spirited 
the  operations  of  merchants  were  in  this  way 
than  those  of  mere  country  gentlemen.  The 
habits,  besides,  of  order,  economy,  and  at¬ 
tention,  to  which  mercantile  business  natu¬ 
rally  forms  a  merchant,  render  him  much  fit¬ 
ter  to  execute,  with  profit  and  success,  any 
project  of  improvement. 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  commerce  and  manu¬ 
factures  gradually  introduced  order  and  good 


176  The  Wealth 

government,  and  with  them,  the  liberty  and 
security  of  individuals,  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  country,  who  had  before  lived  almost 
in  a  continual  state  of  war  with  their  neigh¬ 
bours  and  of  servile  dependency  upon  their 
superiors.  This,  though  it  has  been  the  least 
observed,  is  by  far  the  most  important  of  all 
their  effects.  Mr.  Hume  is  the  only  writer 
who,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  hitherto  taken  no¬ 
tice  of  it. 

In  a  country  which  has  neither  foreign  com¬ 
merce,  nor  any  of  the  finer  manufactures, 
a  great  proprietor,  having  nothing  for  which 
he  can  exchange  the  greater  part  of  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  his  lands  which  is  over  and  above 
the  maintenance  of  the  cultivators,  consumes 
the  whole  in  rustic  hospitality  at  home.  If 
this  surplus  produce  is  sufficient  to  maintain 
a  hundred  or  a  thousand  men,  he  can  make 
use  of  it  in  no  other  way  than  by  maintain¬ 
ing  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  men.  He  is  at 
all  times,  therefore,  surrounded  with  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  retainers  and  dependants,  who,  hav¬ 
ing  no  equivalent  to  give  in  return  for  their 
maintenance,  but  being  fed  entirely  by  his 
bounty,  must  obey  him,  for  the  same  reason 
that  soldiers  must  obey  the  prince  who  pays 
them.  Before  the  extension  of  commerce  and 
manufacture  in  Europe,  the  hospitality  of  the 
rich,  and  the  great,  from  the  sovereign  down 
to  the  smallest  baron,  exceeded  everything 
which  in  the  present  times  we  can  easily 
form  a  notion  of.  Westminster  Hall  was  the 
dining-room  of  William  Rufus,  and  might  fre¬ 
quently,  perhaps,  not  be  too  large  for  his 
company.  It  was  reckoned  a  piece  of  magnifi¬ 
cence  in  Thomas  Becket  that  he  strewed  the 
floor  of  his  hall  with  clean  hay  or  rushes  in 
the  season,  in  order  that  the  knights  and 
squires  who  could  not  get  seats  might  not 
spoil  their  fine  clothes  when  they  sat  down 
on  the  floor  to  eat  their  dinner.  The  great 
Earl  of  Warwick  is  said  to  have  entertained 
every  day  at  his  different  manors  thirty  thou¬ 
sand  people,  and  though  the  number  here 
may  have  been  exaggerated,  it  must,  how¬ 
ever,  have  been  very  great  to  admit  of  such 
exaggeration.  A  hospitality  nearly  of  the  same 
kind  was  exercised  not  many  years  ago  in 
many  different  parts  of  the  highlands  of  Scot¬ 
land.  It  seems  to  be  common  in  all  nations 
to  whom  commerce  and  manufactures  are 
little  known.  “I  have  seen,”  says  Doctor  Po- 
cock,  “an  Arabian  chief  dine  in  the  streets 
of  a  town  where  he  had  come  to  sell  his  cat¬ 
tle,  and  invite  all  passengers,  even  common 
beggars,  to  sit  down  with  him  and  partake  of 
his  banquet.” 

The  occupiers  of  land  were  in  every  respect 
as  dependent  upon  the  great  proprietor  as  his 
retainers.  Even  such  of  them  as  were  not  in 
a  state  of  villanage  were  tenants  at  will,  who 


of  Nations 

paid  a  rent  in  no  respect  equivalent  to  the 
subsistence  which  the  land  afforded  them.  A 
crown,  half  a  crown,  a  sheep,  a  lamb,  was 
some  years  ago  in  the  highlands  of  Scotland 
a  common  rent  for  lands  which  maintained  a 
family.  In  some  places  it  is  so  at  this  day; 
nor  will  money  at  present  purchase  a  greater 
quantity  of  commodities  there  than  in  other 
places.  In  a  country  where  the  surplus  prod¬ 
uce  of  a  large  estate  must  be  consumed  upon 
the  estate  itself,  it  will  frequently  be  more 
convenient  for  the  proprietor  that  part  of  it 
be  consumed  at  a  distance  from  his  own 
house  provided  they  who  consume  it  are  as 
dependent  upon  him  as  either  his  retainers 
or  his  menial  servants.  He  is  thereby  saved 
from  the  embarrassment  of  either  too  large 
a  company  or  too  large  a  family.  A  tenant  at 
will,  who  possesses  land  sufficient  to  maintain 
his  family  for  little  more  than  a  quit-rent, 
is  as  dependent  upon  the  proprietor  as  any 
servant  or  retainer  whatever  and  must  obey 
him  with  as  little  reserve.  Such  a  proprietor, 
as  he  feeds  his  servants  and  retainers  at  his 
own  house,  so  he  feeds  his  tenants  at  their 
houses.  The  subsistence  of  both  is  derived 
from  his  bounty,  and  its  continuance  depends 
upon  his  good  pleasure. 

Upon  the  authority  which  the  great  pro¬ 
prietor  necessarily  had  in  such  a  state  of 
things  over  their  tenants  and  retainers  was 
founded  the  power  of  the  ancient  barons. 
They  necessarily  became  the  judges  in  peace, 
and  the  leaders  in  war,  of  all  who  dwelt  upon 
their  estates.  They  could  maintain  order  and 
execute  the  law  within  their  respective  de¬ 
mesnes,  because  each  of  them  could  there  turn 
the  whole  force  of  all  the  inhabitants  against 
the  injustice  of  any  one.  No  other  persons 
had  sufficient  authority  to  do  this.  The  king 
in  particular  had  not.  In  those  ancient  times 
he  was  little  more  than  the  greatest  proprie¬ 
tor  in  his  dominions,  to  whom,  for  the  sake 
of  common  defence  against  their  common  ene¬ 
mies,  the  other  great  proprietors  paid  certain 
respects.  To  have  enforced  payment  of  a  small 
debt  within  the  lands  of  a  great  proprietor, 
where  all  the  inhabitants  were  armed  and  ac¬ 
customed  to  stand  by  one  another,  would 
have  cost  the  king,  had  he  attempted  it  by 
his  own  authority,  almost  the  same  effort  as 
to  extinguish  a  civil  war.  He  was,  therefore, 
obliged  to  abandon  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice  through  the  greater  part  of  the  country 
to  those  who  were  capable  of  administering 
it;  and  for  the  same  reason  to  leave  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  country  militia  to  those  whom 
that  militia  would  obey. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  imagine  that  those  terri¬ 
torial  jurisdictions  took  their  origin  from  the 
feudal  law.  Not  only  the  highest  jurisdictions 
both  civil  and  criminal,  but  the  power  of  levy- 


177 


How  the  Towns  Improve  the  Country 


ing  troops,  of  coining  money,  and  even  that 
of  making  bye-laws  for  the  government  of 
their  own  people,  were  all  rights  possessed 
allodially  by  the  great  proprietors  of  land  sev¬ 
eral  centuries  before  even  the  name  of  the 
feudal  law  was  known  in  Europe.  The  author¬ 
ity  and  jurisdiction  of  the  Saxon  lords  in 
England  appear  to  have  been  as  great  before 
the  Conquest  as  that  of  any  of  the  Norman 
lords  after  it.  But  the  feudal  law  is  not  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  become  the  common  law  of 
England  till  after  the  Conquest.  That  the 
most  extensive  authority  and  jurisdictions  were 
possessed  by  the  great  lords  in  France  allodi¬ 
ally  long  before  the  feudal  law  was  intro¬ 
duced  into  that  country  is  a  matter  of 
fact  that  admits  of  no  doubt.  That  authority 
and  those  jurisdictions  all  necessarily  flowed 
from  the  state  of  property  and  manners  just 
now  described.  Without  remounting  to  the 
remote  antiquities  of  either  the  French  or 
English  monarchies,  we  may  find  in  much 
later  times  many  proofs  that  such  effects  must 
always  flow  from  such  causes.  It  is  not  thirty 
years  ago  since  Mr.  Cameron  of  Lochiel,  a 
gentleman  of  Lochabar  in  Scotland,  without 
any  legal  warrant  whatever,  not  being  what 
was  then  called  a  lord  of  regality,  nor  even 
a  tenant  in  chief,  but  a  vassal  of  the  Duke 
of  Argyle,  and  without  being  so  much  as  a 
justice  of  peace,  used,  notwithstanding,  to 
exercise  the  highest  criminal  jurisdiction  over 
his  own  people.  He  is  said  to  have  done  so 
with  great  equity,  though  without  any  of  the 
formalities  of  justice;  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  the  state  of  that  part  of  the  country  at 
that  time  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  as¬ 
sume  this  authority  in  order  to  maintain  the 
public  peace.  That  gentleman,  whose  rent 
never  exceeded  five  hundred  pounds  a  year, 
carried,  in  1745,  eight  hundred  of  his  own 
people  into  the  rebellion  with  him. 

The  introduction  of  the  feudal  law,  so  far 
from  extending,  may  be  regarded  as  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  moderate  the  authority  of  the  great 
allodial  lords.  It  established  a  regular  subordi¬ 
nation,  accompanied  with  a  long  train  of  ser¬ 
vices  and  duties,  from  the  king  down  to  the 
smallest  proprietor.  During  the  minority  of 
the  proprietor,  the  rent,  together  with  the 
management  of  his  lands,  fell  into  the  hands 
of  his  immediate  superior,  and,  consequently, 
those  of  all  great  proprietors  into  the  hands 
of  the  king,  who  was  charged  with  the  main¬ 
tenance  and  education  of  the  pupil,  and  who, 
from  his  authority  as  guardian,  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  a  right  of  disposing  of  him  in 
marriage,  provided  it  was  in  a  manner  not 
unsuitable  to  his  rank.  But  though  this  in¬ 
stitution  necessarily  tended  to  strengthen  the 
authority  of  the  king,  and  to  weaken  that  of 
the  great  proprietors,  it  could  not  do  either 


sufficiently  for  establishing  order  and  good 
government  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country,  because  it  could  not  alter  sufficient¬ 
ly  that  state  of  property  and  manners  from 
which  the  disorders  arose.  The  authority  of 
government  still  continued  to  be,  as  before, 
too  weak  in  the  head  and  too  strong  in  the  in¬ 
ferior  members,  and  the  excessive  strength  of 
the  inferior  members  was  the  cause  of  the 
weakness  of  the  head.  After  the  institution 
of  feudal  subordination,  the  king  was  as  in¬ 
capable  of  restraining  the  violence  of  the 
great  lords  as  before.  They  still  continued  to 
make  war  according  to  their  own  discretion, 
almost  continually  upon  one  another,  and 
very  frequently  upon  the  king;  and  the  open 
country  still  continued  to  be  a  scene  of  vio¬ 
lence,  rapine,  and  disorder. 

But  what  all  the  violence  of  the  feudal 
institutions  could  never  have  effected,  the  si¬ 
lent  and  insensible  operation  of  foreign  com¬ 
merce  and  manufactures  gradually  brought 
about.  These  gradually  furnished  the  great 
proprietors  with  something  for  which  they 
could  exchange  the  whole  surplus  produce  of 
their  lands,  and  which  they  could  consume 
themselves  without  sharing  it  either  with 
tenants  or  retainers.  All  for  ourselves  and 
nothing  for  other  people,  seems,  in  every  age 
of  the  world,  to  have  been  the  vile  maxim  of 
the  masters  of  mankind.  As  soon,  therefore, 
as  they  could  find  a  method  of  consuming  the 
whole  value  of  their  rents  themselves,  they 
had  no  disposition  to  share  them  with  any 
other  persons.  For  a  pair  of  diamond  buckles, 
perhaps,  or  for  something  as  frivolous  and 
useless,  they  exchanged  the  maintenance,  or 
what  is  the  same  thing,  the  price  of  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  a  thousand  men  for  a  year,  and 
with  it  the  whole  weight  and  authority  which 
it  could  give  them.  The  buckles,  however, 
were  to  be  all  their  own,  and  no  other  human 
creature  was  to  have  any  share  of  them; 
whereas  in  the  more  ancient  method  of  ex¬ 
pense  they  must  have  shared  with  at  least 
a  thousand  people.  With  the  judges  that  were 
to  determine  the  preference  this  difference 
was  perfectly  decisive;  and  thus,  for  the  grati¬ 
fication  of  the  most  childish,  the  meanest,  and 
the  most  sordid  of  all  vanities,  they  gradually 
bartered  their  whole  power  and  authority. 

In  a  country  where  there  is  no  foreign  com¬ 
merce,  nor  any  of  the  finer  manufactures,  a 
man  of  ten  thousand  a  year  cannot  well  em¬ 
ploy  his  revenue  in  any  other  way  than  in 
maintaining,  perhaps,  a  thousand  families, 
who  are  all  of  them  necessarily  at  his  com¬ 
mand.  In  the  present  state  of  Europe,  a  man 
of  ten  thousand  a  year  can  spend  his  whole 
revenue,  and  he  generally  does  so,  without  di¬ 
rectly  maintaining  twenty  people,  or  being 
able  to  command  more  than  ten  footmen  not 


178 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


worth  the  commanding.  Indirectly,  perhaps, 
he  maintains  as  great  or  even  a  greater  num¬ 
ber  of  people  than  he  could  have  done  by  the 
ancient  method  of  expense.  For  though  the 
quantity  of  precious  productions  for  which  he 
exchanges  his  whole  revenue  be  very  small, 
the  number  of  workmen  employed  in  collect¬ 
ing  and  preparing  it  must  necessarily  have 
been  very  great.  Its  great  price  generally 
arises  from  the  wages  of  their  labour,  and  the 
profits  of  all  their  immediate  employers.  By 
paying  that  price  he  indirectly  pays  all  those 
wages  and  profits  and  thus  indirectly  con¬ 
tributes  to  the  maintenance  of  all  the  work¬ 
men  and  their  employers.  He  generally  con¬ 
tributes,  however,  but  a  very  small  propor¬ 
tion  to  that  of  each,  to  very  few  perhaps  a 
tenth,  to  many  not  a  hundredth,  and  to  some 
not  a  thousandth,  nor  even  a  ten-thousandth 
part  of  their  whole  annual  maintenance. 
Though  he  contributes,  therefore,  to  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  them  all,  they  are  all  more  or  less 
independent  of  him,  because  generally  they 
can  all  be  maintained  without  him. 

When  the  great  proprietors  of  land  spend 
their  rents  in  maintaining  their  tenants  and 
retainers,  each  of  them  maintains  entirely  all 
his  own  tenants  and  all  his  own  retainers. 
But  when  they  spend  them  in  maintaining 
tradesmen  and  artificers,  they  may,  all  of 
them  taken  together,  perhaps,  maintain  as 
great,  or,  on  account  of  the  waste  which  at¬ 
tends  rustic  hospitality,  a  greater  number  of 
people  than  before.  Each  of  them,  however, 
taken  singly,  contributes  often  but  a  very 
small  share  to  the  maintenance  of  any  individ¬ 
ual  of  this  greater  number.  Each  tradesman 
or  artificer  derives  his  subsistence  from  the 
employment,  not  of  one,  but  of  a  hundred  or 
a  thousand  different  customers.  Though  in 
some  measure  obliged  to  them  all,  therefore, 
he  is  not  absolutely  dependent  upon  any  one 
of  them. 

The  personal  expense  of  the  great  proprie¬ 
tors  having  in  this  manner  gradually  in¬ 
creased,  it  was  impossible  that  the  number 
of  their  retainers  should  not  as  gradually  di¬ 
minish  till  they  were  at  last  dismissed  alto¬ 
gether.  The  same  cause  gradually  led  them  to 
dismiss  the  unnecessary  part  of  their  tenants. 
Farms  were  enlarged,  and  the  occupiers  of 
land,  notwithstanding  the  complaints  of  de¬ 
population,  reduced  to  the  number  necessary 
for  cultivating  it,  according  to  the  imperfect 
state  of  cultivation  and  improvement  in  those 
times.  By  the  removal  of  the  unnecessary 
mouths,  and  by  exacting  from  the  farmer  the 
full  value  of  the  farm,  a  greater  surplus,  or 
what  is  the  same  thing,  the  price  of  a  greater 
surplus,  was  obtained  for  the  proprietor, 
which  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  soon 
furnished  him  with  a  method  of  spending 


upon  his  own  person  in  the  same  manner  as 
he  had  done  the  rest.  The  same  cause  con¬ 
tinuing  to  operate,  he  was  desirous  to  raise 
his  rents  above  what  his  lands,  in  the  actual 
state  of  their  improvement,  could  afford.  His 
tenants  could  agree  to  this  upon  one  condi¬ 
tion  only,  that  they  should  be  secured  in  their 
possession  for  such  a  term  of  years  as  might 
give  them  time  to  recover  with  profit  what¬ 
ever  they  should  lay  out  in  the  further  im¬ 
provement  of  the  land.  The  expensive  vanity 
of  the  landlord  made  him  willing  to  accept 
of  this  condition;  and  hence  the  origin  of 
long  leases. 

Even  a  tenant  at  will,  who  pays  the  full 
value  of  the  land,  is  not  altogether  dependent 
upon  the  landlord.  The  pecuniary  advantages 
which  they  receive  from  one  another  are  mu¬ 
tual  and  equal,  and  such  a  tenant  will  expose 
neither  his  life  nor  his  fortune  in  the  service 
of  the  proprietor.  But  if  he  has  a  lease  for  a 
long  term  of  years,  he  is  altogether  independ¬ 
ent;  and  his  landlord  must  not  expect  from 
him  the  most  trifling  service  beyond  what  is 
either  expressly  stipulated  in  the  lease  or  im¬ 
posed  upon  him  by  the  common  and  known 
law  of  the  country. 

The  tenants  having  in  this  manner  be¬ 
come  independent,  and  the  retainers  being 
dismissed,  the  great  proprietors  were  no  long¬ 
er  capable  of  interrupting  the  regular  execu¬ 
tion  of  justice  or  of  disturbing  the  peace  of 
the  country.  Having  sold  their  birthright,  not 
like  Esau  for  a  mess  of  pottage  in  time  of 
hunger  and  necessity,  but  in  the  wantonness 
of  plenty,  for  trinkets  and  baubles,  fitter  to 
be  the  playthings  of  children  than  the  seri¬ 
ous  pursuits  of  men,  they  became  as  insig¬ 
nificant  as  any  substantial  burgher  or  trades¬ 
man  in  a  city.  A  regular  government  was  es¬ 
tablished  in  the  country  as  well  as  in  the 
city,  nobody  having  sufficient  power  to  dis¬ 
turb  its  operations  in  the  one  any  more  than 
in  the  other. 

It  does  not,  perhaps,  relate  to  the  present 
subject,  but  I  cannot  help  remarking  it,  that 
very  old  families,  such  as  have  possessed  some 
considerable  estate  from  father  to  son  for 
many  successive  generations  are  very  rare  in 
commercial  countries.  In  countries  which  have 
little  commerce,  on  the  contrary,  such  as 
Wales  or  the  highlands  of  Scotland,  they  are 
very  common.  The  Arabian  histories  seem  to 
be  all  full  of  genealogies,  and  there  is  a  his¬ 
tory  written  by  a  Tartar  Khan,  which  has 
been  translated  into  several  European  lan¬ 
guages,  and  which  contains  scarce  anything 
else;  a  proof  that  ancient  families  are  very 
common  among  those  nations.  In  countries 
where  a  rich  man  can  spend  his  revenue  in 
no  other  way  than  by  maintaining  as  many 
people  as  it  can  maintain,  he  is  not  apt  to 


How  the  Towns  Improve  the  Country  179 


run  out,  and  his  benevolence  it  seems  is  sel¬ 
dom  so  violent  as  to  attempt  to  maintain 
more  than  he  can  afford.  But  where  he  can 
spend  the  greatest  revenue  upon  his  own  per¬ 
son,  he  frequently  has  no  bounds  to  his  ex¬ 
pense,  because  he  frequently  has  no  bounds 
to  his  vanity  or  to  his  affection  for  his  own 
person.  In  commercial  countries,  therefore, 
riches,  in  spite  of  the  most  violent  regula¬ 
tions  of  law  to  prevent  their  dissipation, 
very  seldom  remain  long  in  the  same  family. 
Among  simple  nations,  on  the  contrary,  they 
frequently  do  without  any  regulations  of  law, 
for  among  nations  of  shepherds,  such  as  the 
Tartars  and  Arabs,  the  consumable  nature 
of  their  property  necessarily  renders  all 
such  regulations  impossible. 

A  revolution  of  the  greatest  importance  to 
the  public  happiness  was  in  this  manner 
brought  about  by  two  different  orders  of 
people  who  had  not  the  least  intention  to 
serve  the  public.  To  gratify  the  most  childish 
vanity  was  the  sole  motive  of  the  great  pro¬ 
prietors.  The  merchants  and  artificers,  much 
less  ridiculous,  acted  merely  from  a  view  to 
their  own  interest,  and  in  pursuit  of  their 
own  pedlar  principle  of  turning  a  penny 
wherever  a  penny  was  to  be  got.  Neither  of 
them  had  either  knowledge  or  foresight  of 
that  great  revolution  which  the  folly  of  the 
one,  and  the  industry  of  the  other,  was  grad¬ 
ually  bringing  about. 

It  is  thus  that  through  the  greater  part  of 
Europe  the  commerce  and  manufactures  of 
cities,  instead  of  being  the  effect,  have  been 
the  cause  and  occasion  of  the  improvement 
and  cultivation  of  the  country. 

This  order,  however,  being  contrary  to  the 
natural  course  of  things,  is  necessarily  both 
slow  and  uncertain.  Compare  the  slow  prog¬ 
ress  of  those  European  countries  of  which 
the  wealth  depends  very  much  upon  their 
commerce  and  manufactures  with  the  rapid 
advances  of  our  North  American  colonies,  of 
which  the  wealth  is  founded  altogether  in  ag¬ 
riculture.  Through  the  greater  part  of  Europe 
the  number  of  inhabitants  is  not  supposed  to 
double  in  less  than  five  hundred  years.  In 
several  of  our  North  American  colonies,  it  is 
found  to  double  in  twenty  or  five-and-twenty 
years.  In  Europe,  the  law  of  primogeniture 
and  perpetuities  of  different  kinds  prevent  the 
division  of  great  estates,  and  thereby  hinder 
the  multiplication  of  small  proprietors.  A 
small  proprietor,  however,  who  knows  every 
part  of  his  little  territory,  who  views  it  with 
all  the  affection  which  property,  especially 
small  property,  naturally  inspires,  and  who 
upon  that  account  takes  pleasure  not  only  in 
cultivating  but  in  adorning  it,  is  generally  of 
all  improvers  the  most  industrious,  the  most 
intelligent,  and  the  most  successful.  The  same 


regulations,  besides,  keep  so  much  land  out 
of  the  market  that  there  are  always  more 
capitals  to  buy  than  there  is  land  to  sell,  so 
that  what  is  sold  always  sells  at  a  monopoly 
price.  The  rent  never  pays  the  interest  of  the 
purchase-money,  and  is,  besides,  burdened 
with  repairs  and  other  occasional  charges  to 
which  the  interest  of  money  is  not  liable.  To 
purchase  land  is  everywhere  in  Europe  a  most 
unprofitable  employment  of  a  small  capital. 
For  the  sake  of  the  superior  security,  indeed, 
a  man  of  moderate  circumstances,  when  he 
retires  from  business,  will  sometimes  choose 
to  lay  out  his  little  capital  in  land.  A  man 
of  profession  too,  whose  revenue  is  derived 
from  another  source,  often  loves  to  secure 
his  savings  in  the  same  way.  But  a  young 
man,  who,  instead  of  applying  to  trade  or 
to  some  profession,  should  employ  a  capital 
of  two  or  three  thousand  pounds  in  the  pur¬ 
chase  and  cultivation  of  a  small  piece  of  land, 
might  indeed  expect  to  live  very  happily,  and 
very  independently,  but  must  bid  adieu  for¬ 
ever  to  all  hope  of  either  great  fortune  or 
great  illustration,  which  by  a  different  em¬ 
ployment  of  his  stock  he  might  have  had  the 
same  chance  of  acquiring  with  other  people. 
Such  a  person  too,  though  he  cannot  aspire 
at  being  a  proprietor,  will  often  disdain  to  be 
a  farmer.  The  small  quantity  of  land,  there¬ 
fore,  which  is  brought  to  market,  and  the 
high  price  of  what  is  brought  thither,  pre¬ 
vents  a  great  number  of  capitals  from  being 
employed  in  its  cultivation  and  improvement 
which  would  otherwise  have  taken  that  direc¬ 
tion.  In  North  America,  on  the  contrary,  fifty 
or  sixty  pounds  is  often  found  a  sufficient 
stock  to  begin  a  plantation  with.  The  pur¬ 
chase  and  improvement  of  uncultivated  land 
is  there  the  most  profitable  employment  of 
the  smallest  as  well  as  of  the  greatest  capi¬ 
tals,  and  the  most  direct  road  to  all  the  for¬ 
tune  and  illustration  which  can  be  acquired 
in  that  country.  Such  land,  indeed,  is  in 
North  America  to  be  had  almost  for  nothing, 
or  at  a  price  much  below  the  value  of  the 
natural  produce — a  thing  impossible  in  Eu¬ 
rope,  or,  indeed,  in  any  country  where  all 
lands  have  long  been  private  property.  If 
landed  estates,  however,  were  divided  equal¬ 
ly  among  all  the  children  upon  the  death  of 
any  proprietor  who  left  a  numerous  family, 
the  estate  would  generally  be  sold.  So  much 
land  would  come  to  market  that  it  could  no 
longer  sell  at  a  monopoly  price.  The  free  rent 
of  the  land  would  go  nearer  to  pay  the  inter¬ 
est  of  the  purchase-money,  and  a  small  capi¬ 
tal  might  be  employed  in  purchasing  land 
as  profitably  as  in  any  other  way. 

England,  on  account  of  the  natural  fer¬ 
tility  of  the  soil,  of  the  great  extent  of  the 
sea-coast  in  proportion  to  that  of  the  whole 


180 


The  Wealth 

country,  and  of  the  many  navigable  rivers 
which  run  through  it  and  afford  the  conven- 
iency  of  water  carriage  to  some  of  the  most 
inland  parts  of  it,  is  perhaps  as  well  fitted 
by  nature  as  any  large  country  in  Europe  to 
be  the  seat  of  foreign  commerce,  of  manu¬ 
factures  for  distant  sale,  and  of  all  the  im¬ 
provements  which  these  can  occasion.  From 
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  too, 
the  English  legislature  has  been  peculiarly 
attentive  to  the  interests  of  commerce  and 
manufactures,  and  in  reality  there  is  no  coun¬ 
try  in  Europe,  Holland  itself  not  excepted, 
of  which  the  law  is,  upon  the  whole,  more 
favourable  to  this  sort  of  industry.  Commerce 
and  manufactures  have  accordingly  been 
continually  advancing  during  all  this  period. 
The  cultivation  and  improvement  of  the 
country  has,  no  doubt,  been  gradually  ad¬ 
vancing  too;  but  it  seems  to  have  followed 
slowly,  and  at  a  distance,  the  more  rapid 
progress  of  commerce  and  manufactures.  The 
greater  part  of  the  country  must  probably 
have  been  cultivated  before  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth;  and  a  very  great  part  of  it  still 
remains  uncultivated,  and  the  cultivation  of 
the  far  greater  part  much  inferior  to  what 
it  might  be.  The  law  of  England,  however, 
favours  agriculture  not  only  indirectly  by  the 
protection  of  commerce,  but  by  several  di¬ 
rect  encouragements.  Except  in  times  of 
scarcity,  the  exportation  of  corn  is  not  only 
free,  but  encouraged  by  a  bounty.  In  times 
of  moderate  plenty,  the  importation  of  for¬ 
eign  corn  is  loaded  with  duties  that  amount 
to  a  prohibition.  The  importation  of  live 
cattle,  except  from  Ireland,  is  prohibited  at 
all  times,  and  it  is  but  of  late  that  it  was 
permitted  from  thence.  Those  who  cultivate 
the  land,  therefore,  have  a  monopoly  against 
their  countrymen  for  the  two  greatest  and 
most  important  articles  of  land  produce,  bread 
and  butcher’s  meat.  These  encouragements, 
though  at  bottom,  perhaps,  as  I  shall  en¬ 
deavour  to  show  hereafter,  altogether  illusory, 
sufficiently  demonstrate  at  least  the  good 
intention  of  the  legislature  to  favour  agricul¬ 
ture.  But  what  is  of  much  more  importance 
than  all  of  them,  the  yeomanry  of  England 
are  rendered  as  secure,  as  independent,  and 
as  respectable  as  law  can  make  them.  No 
country,  therefore,  in  which  the  right  of 
primogeniture  takes  place,  which  pays  tithes, 
and  where  perpetuities,  though  contrary  to 
the  spirit  of  the  law,  are  admitted  in  some 
cases,  can  give  more  encouragement  to  agri¬ 
culture  than  England.  Such,  however,  not¬ 
withstanding,  is  the  state  of  its  cultivation. 
What  would  it  have  been  had  the  law  given 
no  direct  encouragement  to  agriculture  be¬ 
sides  what  arises  indirectly  from  the  progress 
of  commerce,  and  had  left  the  yeomanry  in 


of  Nations 

the  same  condition  as  in  most  other  coun¬ 
tries  of  Europe?  It  is  now  more  than  two 
hundred  years  since  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth,  a  period  as  long  as  the 
course  of  human  prosperity  usually  endures. 

France  seems  to  have  had  a  considerable 
share  of  foreign  commerce  near  a  century 
before  England  was  distinguished  as  a  com¬ 
mercial  country.  The  marine  of  France  was 
considerable,  according  to  the  notions  of  the 
times,  before  the  expedition  of  Charles  VIII 
to  Naples.  The  cultivation  and  improvement 
of  France,  however,  is,  upon  the  whole,  in¬ 
ferior  to  that  of  England.  The  law  of  the 
country  has  never  given  the  same  direct  en¬ 
couragement  to  agriculture. 

The  foreign  commerce  of  Spain  and  Portu¬ 
gal  to  the  other  parts  of  Europe,  though 
chiefly  carried  on  in  foreign  ships,  is  very 
considerable.  That  to  their  colonies  is  carried 
on  in  their  own,  and  is  much  greater,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  great  riches  and  extent  of  those 
colonies.  But  it  has  never  introduced  any  con¬ 
siderable  manufactures  for  distant  sale  into 
either  of  those  countries,  and  the  greater 
part  of  both  still  remains  uncultivated.  The 
foreign  commerce  of  Portugal  is  of  older 
standing  than  that  of  any  great  country  in 
Europe,  except  Italy. 

Italy  is  the  only  great  country  of  Europe 
which  seems  to  have  been  cultivated  and  im¬ 
proved  in  every  part  by  means  of  foreign 
commerce  and  manufactures  for  distant  sale. 
Before  the  invasion  of  Charles  VIII,  Italy 
according  to  Guicciardin,  was  cultivated  not 
less  in  the  most  mountainous  and  barren  parts 
of  the  country  than  in  the  plainest  and  most 
fertile.  The  advantageous  situation  of  the 
country,  and  the  great  number  of  independ¬ 
ent  states  which  at  that  time  subsisted  in 
it,  probably  contributed  not  a  little  to  this 
general  cultivation.  It  is  not  impossible  too, 
notwithstanding  this  general  expression  of 
one  of  the  most  judicious  and  reserved  of 
modern  historians,  that  Italy  was  not  at  that 
time  better  cultivated  than  England  is  at 
present. 

The  capital,  however,  that  is  acquired  to 
any  country  by  commerce  and  manufactures 
is  all  a  very  precarious  and  uncertain  pos¬ 
session  till  some  part  of  it  has  been  secured 
and  realized  in  the  cultivation  and  improve¬ 
ment  of  its  lands.  A  merchant,  it  has  been 
said  very  properly,  is  not  necessarily  the  citi¬ 
zen  of  any  particular  country.  It  is  in  a 
great  measure  indifferent  to  him  from  what 
place  he  carries  on  his  trade;  and  a  very 
trifling  disgust  will  make  him  remove  his  capi¬ 
tal,  and  together  with  it  all  the  industry  which 
it  supports,  from  one  country  to  another.  No 
part  of  it  can  be  said  to  belong  to  any  par¬ 
ticular  country,  till  it  has  been  spread  as  it 


181 


How  the  Towns  Improve  the  Country 


were  over  the  face  of  that  country,  either  in 
buildings  or  in  the  lasting  improvement  of 
lands.  No  vestige  now  remains  of  the  great 
wealth  said  to  have  been  possessed  by  the 
greater  part  of  the  Hans  towns  except  in  the 
obscure  histories  of  the  thirteenth  and  four¬ 
teenth  centuries.  It  is  even  uncertain  where 
some  of  them  were  situated  or  to  what  towns 
in  Europe  the  Latin  names  given  to  some  of 
them  belong.  But  though  the  misfortunes  of 
Italy  in  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  and  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  sixteenth  centuries  greatly  dimin¬ 
ished  the  commerce  and  manufactures  of 
the  cities  of  Lombardy  and  Tuscany,  those 
countries  still  continue  to  be  among  the  most 
populous  and  best  cultivated  in  Europe.  The 
civil  wars  of  Flanders,  and  the  Spanish  gov¬ 


ernment  which  succeeded  them,  chased  away 
the  great  commerce  of  Antwerp,  Ghent,  and 
Bruges.  But  Flanders  still  continues  to  be 
one  of  the  richest,  best  cultivated,  and  most 
populous  provinces  of  Europe.  The  ordinary 
revolutions  of  war  and  government  easily  dry 
up  the  sources  of  that  wealth  which  arises 
from  commerce  only.  That  which  arises  from 
the  more  solid  improvements  of  agriculture 
is  much  more  durable  and  cannot  be  destroyed 
but  by  those  more  violent  convulsions  occa¬ 
sioned  by  the  depredations  of  hostile  and  bar¬ 
barous  nations  continued  for  a  century  or  two 
together,  such  as  those  that  happened  for 
some  time  before  and  after  the  fall  of  the 
Roman  empire  in  the  western  provinces  of 
Europe. 


Book  Four 


OF  SYSTEMS  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 


INTRODUCTION 

Political  economy,  considered  as  a  branch 
of  the  science  of  a  statesman  or  legisla¬ 
tor,  proposes  two  distinct  objects:  first,  to 
provide  a  plentiful  revenue  or  subsistence  for 
the  people,  or  more  properly  to  enable  them 
to  provide  such  a  revenue  or  subsistence  for 
themselves;  and  secondly,  to  supply  the  state 
or  commonwealth  with  a  revenue  sufficient 
for  the  public  services.  It  proposes  to  enrich 
both  the  people  and  the  sovereign. 

The  different  progress  of  opulence  in  dif¬ 
ferent  ages  and  nations  has  given  occasion  to 
two  different  systems  of  political  economy 
with  regard  to  enriching  the  people.  The  one 
may  be  called  the  system  of  commerce,  the 
other  that  of  agriculture.  I  shall  endeavour  to 
explain  both  as  fully  and  distinctly  as  I 
can,  and  shall  begin  with  the  system  of  com¬ 
merce.  It  is  the  modern  system,  and  is  best 
understood  in  our  own  country  and  in  our 
own  times. 

CHAPTER  I 

Of  the  Principle  of  the  Commercial, 
or  Mercantile  System 

That  wealth  consists  in  money,  or  in  gold 
and  silver,  is  a  popular  notion  which  natural¬ 
ly  arises  from  the  double  function  of  money, 
as  the  instrument  of  commerce  and  as  the 
measure  of  value.  In  consequence  of  its  be¬ 
ing  the  instrument  of  commerce,  when  we 
have  money  we  can  more  readily  obtain  what¬ 
ever  else  we  have  occasion  for  than  by  means 
of  any  other  commodity.  The  great  affair, 
we  always  find,  is  to  get  money.  When  that 
is  obtained,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  making 
any  subsequent  purchase.  In  consequence  of 
its  being  the  measure  of  value,  we  estimate 
that  of  all  other  commodities  by  the  quantity 
of  money  which  they  will  exchange  for.  We 
say  of  a  rich  man  that  he  is  worth  a  great 
deal,  and  of  a  poor  man  that  he  is  worth 
very  little  money.  A  frugal  man,  or  a  man 
eager  to  be  rich,  is  said  to  love  money;  and  a 
careless,  a  generous,  or  a  profuse  man,  is  said 
to  be  indifferent  about  it.  To  grow  rich  is  to 


get  money;  and  wealth  and  money,  in  short, 
are,  in  common  language,  considered  as  in 
every  respect  synonymous. 

A  rich  country,  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
rich  man,  is  supposed  to  be  a  country  abound¬ 
ing  in  money;  and  to  heap  up  gold  and  silver 
in  any  country  is  supposed  to  be  the  readiest 
way  to  enrich  it.  For  some  time  after  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  America,  the  first  inquiry  of  the 
Spaniards,  when  they  arrived  upon  an  un¬ 
known  coast,  used  to  be,  if  there  was  any  gold 
or  silver  to  be  found  in  the  neighbourhood. 
By  the  information  which  they  received,  they 
judged  whether  it  was  worth  while  to  make 
a  settlement  there,  or  if  the  country  was 
worth  the  conquering.  Plano  Carpino,  a  monk, 
sent  ambassador  from  the  King  of  France  to 
one  of  the  sons  of  the  famous  Genghis  Khan, 
says  that  the  Tartars  used  frequently  to  ask 
him  if  there  was  plenty  of  sheep  and  oxen 
in  the  kingdom  of  France.  Their  inquiry  had 
the  same  object  with  that  of  the  Spaniards. 
They  wanted  to  know  if  the  country  was  rich 
enough  to  be  worth  the  conquering.  Among 
the  Tartars,  as  among  all  other  nations  of 
shepherds,  who  are  generally  ignorant  of  the 
use  of  money,  cattle  are  the  instruments  of 
commerce  and  the  measures  of  value.  Wealth, 
therefore,  according  to  them,  consisted  in 
cattle,  as  according  to  the  Spaniards  it  con¬ 
sisted  in  gold  and  silver.  Of  the  two,  the 
Tartar  notion,  perhaps,  was  the  nearest  to 
the  truth. 

Mr.  Locke  remarks  a  distinction  between 
money  and  other  movable  goods.  All  other 
movable  goods,  he  says,  are  of  so  consumable 
a  nature  that  the  wealth  which  consists  in 
them  cannot  be  much  depended  on,  and  a 
nation  which  abounds  in  them  one  year  may, 
without  any  exportation,  but  merely  their 
own  waste  and  extravagance,  be  in  great 
want  of  them  the  next.  Money,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  is  a  steady  friend,  which,  though  it 
may  travel  about  from  hand  to  hand,  yet  if 
it  can  be  kept  from  going  out  of  the  country, 
is  not  very  liable  to  be  wasted  and  consumed. 
Gold  and  silver,  therefore,  are,  according  to 
him,  the  most  solid  and  substantial  part  of 
the  movable  wealth  of  a  nation,  and  to  mul¬ 
tiply  those  metals  ought,  he  thinks,  upon  that 


182 


18:3 


Principle  of  the  Commercial  System 


account,  to  be  the  great  object  of  its  political 
economy. 

Others  admit  that  if  a  nation  could  be  sep¬ 
arated  from  all  the  world,  it  would  be  of  no 
consequence  how  much,  or  how  little  money 
circulated  in  it.  The  consumable  goods  which 
were  circulated  by  means  of  this  money  would 
only  be  exchanged  for  a  greater  or  a  smaller 
number  of  pieces;  but  the  real  wealth  or 
poverty  of  the  country,  they  allow,  would 
depend  altogether  upon  the  abundance  or 
scarcity  of  those  consumable  goods.  But  it  is 
otherwise,  they  think,  with  countries  which 
have  connections  with  foreign  nations,  and 
which  are  obliged  to  carry  on  foreign  wars, 
and  to  maintain  fleets  and  armies  in  distant 
countries.  This,  they  say,  cannot  be  done 
but  by  sending  abroad  money  to  pay  them 
with;  and  a  nation  cannot  send  much  money 
abroad  unless  it  has  a  good  deal  at  home. 
Every  such  nation,  therefore,  must  endeavour 
in  time  of  peace  to  accumulate  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver  that,  when  occasion  requires,  it  may  have 
wherewithal  to  carry  on  foreign  wars. 

In  consequence  of  these  popular  notions, 
all  the  different  nations  of  Europe  have  stud¬ 
ied,  though  to  little  purpose,  every  possible 
means  of  accumulating  gold  and  silver  in 
their  respective  countries.  Spain  and  Portu¬ 
gal,  the  proprietors  of  the  principal  mines 
which  supply  Europe  with  those  metals,  have 
either  prohibited  their  exportation  under  the 
severest  penalties,  or  subjected  it  to  a  con¬ 
siderable  duty.  The  like  prohibition  seems 
anciently  to  have  made  a  part  of  the  policy 
of  most  other  European  nations.  It  is  even 
to  be  found,  where  we  should  least  of  all 
expect  to  find  it,  in  some  old  Scotch  acts  of 
Parliament,  which  forbid  under  heavy  penal¬ 
ties  the  carrying  gold  or  silver  forth  of  the 
kingdom.  The  like  policy  anciently  took  place 
both  in  France  and  England. 

When  those  countries  became  commercial, 
the  merchants  found  this  prohibition,  upon 
many  occasions,  extremely  inconvenient.  They 
could  frequently  buy  more  advantageously 
with  gold  and  silver  than  with  any  other 
commodity  the  foreign  goods  which  they 
wanted,  either  to  import  into  their  own,  or 
to  carry  to  some  other  foreign  country.  They 
remonstrated,  therefore,  against  this  prohi¬ 
bition  as  hurtful  to  trade. 

They  represented,  first,  that  the  exportation 
of  gold  and  silver  in  order  to  purchase  for¬ 
eign  goods,  did  not  always  diminish  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  those  metals  in  the  kingdom.  That, 
on  the  contrary,  it  might  frequently  increase 
that  quantity;  because,  if  the  consumption 
of  foreign  goods  was  not  thereby  increased 
in  the  country,  those  goods  might  be  re¬ 
exported  to  foreign  countries,  and,  being  there 
sold  for  a  large  profit,  might  bring  back  much 


more  treasure  than  was  originally  sent  out  to 
purchase  them.  Mr.  Mun  compares  this  oper¬ 
ation  of  foreign  trade  to  the  seed-time  and 
harvest  of  agriculture.  “If  we  only  behold,” 
says  he,  “the  actions  of  the  husbandman  in 
the  seed-time,  when  he  casteth  away  much 
good  corn  into  the  ground,  we  shall  account 
him  rather  a  madman  than  a  husbandman. 
But  when  we  consider  his  labours  in  the  har¬ 
vest,  which  is  the  end  of  his  endeavours,  we 
shall  find  the  worth  and  plentiful  increase 
of  his  action.” 

They  represented,  secondly,  that  this  pro¬ 
hibition  could  not  hinder  the  exportation  of 
gold  and  silver,  which,  on  account  of  the 
smallness  of  their  bulk  in  proportion  to  their 
value,  could  easily  be  smuggled  abroad.  That 
this  exportation  could  only  be  prevented  by 
a  proper  attention  to,  what  they  called,  the 
balance  of  trade.  That  when  the  country  ex¬ 
ported  to  a  greater  value  than  it  imported,  a 
balance  became  due  to  it  from  foreign  na¬ 
tions,  which  was  necessarily  paid  to  it  in 
gold  and  silver,  and  thereby  increased  the 
quantity  of  those  metals  in  the  kingdom.  But 
that  when  it  imported  to  a  greater  value  than 
it  exported,  a  contrary  balance  became  due 
to  foreign  nations,  which  was  necessarily  paid 
to  them  in  the  same  manner,  and  thereby 
diminished  that  quantity.  That  in  this  case 
to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  those  metals 
could  not  prevent  it,  but  only,  by  making  it 
more  dangerous,  render  it  more  expensive. 
That  the  exchange  was  thereby  turned  more 
against  the  country  which  owed  the  balance 
than  it  otherwise  might  have  been;  the  mer¬ 
chant  who  purchased  a  bill  upon  the  foreign 
country  being  obliged  to  pay  the  banker  who 
sold  it,  not  only  for  the  natural  risk,  trouble, 
and  expense  of  sending  the  money  thither,  but 
for  the  extraordinary  risk  arising  from  the 
prohibition.  But  that  the  more  the  exchange 
was  against  any  country,  the  more  the  bal¬ 
ance  of  trade  became  necessarily  against  it; 
the  money  of  that  country  becoming  neces¬ 
sarily  of  so  much  less  value  in  comparison 
with  that  of  the  country  to  which  the  balance 
was  due.  That  if  the  exchange  between  Eng¬ 
land  and  Holland,  for  example,  was  five  per 
cent  against  England,  it  would  require  a 
hundred  and  five  ounces  of  silver  in  England 
to  purchase  a  bill  for  a  hundred  ounces  of 
silver  in  Holland:  that  a  hundred  and  five 
ounces  of  silver  in  England,  therefore,  would 
be  worth  only  a  hundred  ounces  of  silver  in 
Holland,  and  would  purchase  only  a  propor¬ 
tionable  quantity  of  Dutch  goods;  but  that 
a  hundred  ounces  of  silver  in  Holland,  on  the 
contrary,  would  be  worth  a  hundred  and  five 
ounces  in  England,  and  would  purchase  a 
proportionable  quantity  of  English  goods: 
that  the  English  goods  which  were  sold  to 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


184 

Holland  would  be  sold  so  much  cheaper;  and 
the  Dutch  goods  which  were  sold  to  England 
so  much  dearer  by  the  difference  of  the  ex¬ 
change;  that  the  one  would  draw  so  much 
less  Dutch  money  to  England,  and  the  other 
so  much  more  English  money  to  Holland,  as 
this  difference  amounted  to:  and  that  the 
balance  of  trade,  therefore,  would  necessarily 
be  so  much  more  against  England,  and  would 
require  a  greater  balance  of  gold  and  silver 
to  be  exported  to  Holland. 

Those  arguments  were  partly  solid  and 
partly  sophistical.  They  were  solid  so  far  as 
they  asserted  that  the  exportation  of  gold 
and  silver  in  trade  might  frequently  be  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  country.  They  were  solid, 
too,  in  asserting  that  no  prohibition  could 
prevent  their  exportation  when  private  peo¬ 
ple  found  any  advantage  in  exporting  them. 
But  they  were  sophistical  in  supposing  that 
either  to  preserve  or  to  augment  the  quantity 
of  those  metals  required  more  the  attention 
of  government  than  to  preserve  or  to  aug¬ 
ment  the  quantity  of  any  other  useful  com¬ 
modities,  which  the  freedom  of  trade,  with¬ 
out  any  such  attention,  never  fails  to  supply 
in  the  proper  quantity.  They  were  sophistical 
too,  perhaps,  in  asserting  that  the  high  price 
of  exchange  necessarily  increased  what  they 
called  the  unfavourable  balance  of  trade,  or 
occasioned  the  exportation  of  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  gold  and  silver.  That  high  price,  in¬ 
deed,  was  extremely  disadvantageous  to  the 
merchants  who  had  any  money  to  pay  in  for¬ 
eign  countries.  They  paid  so  much  dearer  for 
the  bills  which  their  bankers  granted  them 
upon  those  countries.  But  though  the  risk 
arising  from  the  prohibition  might  occasion 
some  extraordinary  expense  to  the  bankers, 
it  would  not  necessarily  carry  any  more  money 
out  of  the  country.  This  expense  would  gen¬ 
erally  be  all  laid  out  in  the  country,  in  smug¬ 
gling  the  money  out  of  it,  and  could  seldom 
occasion  the  exportation  of  a  single  sixpence 
beyond  the  precise  sum  drawn  for.  The  high 
price  of  exchange  too  would  naturally  dis¬ 
pose  the  merchants  to  endeavour  to  make 
their  exports  nearly  balance  their  imports,  in 
order  that  they  might  have  this  high  ex¬ 
change  to  pay  upon  as  small  a  sum  as  possi¬ 
ble.  The  high  price  of  exchange,  besides,  must 
necessarily  have  operated  as  a  tax,  in  raising 
the  price  of  foreign  goods,  and  thereby  di¬ 
minishing  their  consumption.  It  would  tend, 
therefore,  not  to  increase  but  to  diminish 
what  they  called  the  unfavourable  balance 
of  trade,  and  consequently  the  exportation 
of  gold  and  silver. 

Such  as  they  were,  however,  those  argu¬ 
ments  convinced  the  people  to  whom  they 
were  addressed.  They  were  addressed  by  mer¬ 
chants  to  parliaments  and  to  the  councils  of 


princes,  to  nobles  and  to  country  gentlemen, 
by  those  who  were  supposed  to  understand 
trade  to  those  who  were  conscious  to  them¬ 
selves  that  they  knew  nothing  about  the 
matter.  That  foreign  trade  enriched  the  coun¬ 
try,  experience  demonstrated  to  the  nobles 
and  country  gentlemen  as  well  as  to  the  mer¬ 
chants;  but  how,  or  in  what  manner,  none 
of  them  well  knew.  The  merchants  knew  per¬ 
fectly  in  what  manner  it  enriched  themselves. 
It  was  their  business  to  know  it.  But  to  know 
in  what  manner  it  enriched  the  country  was 
no  part  of  their  business.  This  subject  never 
came  into  their  consideration  but  when  they 
had  occasion  to  apply  to  their  country  for 
some  change  in  the  laws  relating  to  foreign 
trade.  It  then  became  necessary  to  say  some¬ 
thing  about  the  beneficial  effects  of  foreign 
trade,  and  the  manner  in  which  those  effects 
were  obstructed  by  the  laws  as  they  then 
stood.  To  the  judges  who  were  to  decide  the 
business  it  appeared  a  most  satisfactory  ac¬ 
count  of  the  matter,  when  they  were  told 
that  foreign  trade  brought  money  into  the 
country,  but  that  the  laws  in  question  hin¬ 
dered  it  from  bringing  so  much  as  it  other¬ 
wise  would  do.  Those  arguments  therefore 
produced  the  wished-for  effect.  The  pro¬ 
hibition  of  exporting  gold  and  silver  was  in 
France  and  England  confined  to  the  coin  of 
those  respective  countries.  The  exportation 
of  foreign  coin  and  of  bullion  was  made  free. 
In  Holland,  and  in  some  other  places,  this 
liberty  was  extended  even  to  the  coin  of  the 
country.  The  attention  of  government  was 
turned  away  from  guarding  against  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  gold  and  silver  to  watch  over  the 
balance  of  trade  as  the  only  cause  which 
could  occasion  any  augmentation  or  diminu¬ 
tion  of  those  metals.  From  one  fruitless  care 
it  was  turned  away  to  another  care  much 
more  intricate,  much  more  embarrassing,  and 
just  equally  fruitless.  The  title  of  Mun’s  book, 
England's  Treasure  in  Foreign  Trade ,  became 
a  fundamental  maxim  in  the  political  econ¬ 
omy,  not  of  England  only,  but  of  all  other 
commercial  countries.  The  inland  or  home 
trade,  the  most  important  of  all,  the  trade  in 
which  an  equal  capital  affords  the  greatest 
revenue,  and  creates  the  greatest  employment 
to  the  people  of  the  country,  was  considered 
as  subsidiary  only  to  foreign  trade.  It  neither 
brought  money  into  the  country,  it  was  said, 
nor  carried  any  out  of  it.  The  country,  there¬ 
fore,  could  never  become  either  richer  or 
poorer  by  means  of  it,  except  so  far  as  its 
prosperity  or  decay  might  indirectly  influence 
the  state  of  foreign  trade. 

A  country  that  has  no  mines  of  its  own 
must  undoubtedly  draw  its  gold  and  silver 
from  foreign  countries  in  the  same  manner  as 
one  that  has  no  vineyards  of  its  own  must 


185 


Principle  of  the  Commercial  System 


draw  its  wines.  It  does  not  seem  necessary, 
however,  that  the  attention  of  government 
should  be  more  turned  towards  the  one  than 
towards  the  other  object.  A  country  that  has 
wherewithal  to  buy  wine  will  always  get  the 
wine  which  it  has  occasion  for;  and  a  country 
that  has  wherewithal  to  buy  gold  and  silver 
will  never  be  in  want  of  those  metals.  They 
are  to  be  bought  for  a  certain  price  like  all 
other  commodities,  and  as  they  are  the  price 
of  all  other  commodities,  so  all  other  com¬ 
modities  are  the  price  of  those  metals.  We 
trust  with  perfect  security  that  the  freedom 
of  trade,  without  any  attention  of  govern¬ 
ment,  will  always  supply  us  with  the  wine 
which  we  have  occasion  for:  and  we  may 
trust  with  equal  security  that  it  will  always 
supply  us  with  all  the  gold  and  silver  which 
we  can  afford  to  purchase  or  to  employ,  either 
in  circulating  our  commodities,  or  in  other 
uses. 

The  quantity  of  every  commodity  which 
human  industry  can  either  purchase  or  pro¬ 
duce  naturally  regulates  itself  in  every  coun¬ 
try  according  to  the  effectual  demand,  or  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  demand  of  those  who  are  will¬ 
ing  to  pay  the  whole  rent,  labour,  and  profits 
which  must  be  paid  in  order  to  prepare  and 
bring  it  to  market.  But  no  commodities  regu¬ 
late  themselves  more  easily  or  more  exactly 
according  to  this  effectual  demand  than  gold 
and  silver;  because,  on  account  of  the  small 
bulk  and  great  value  of  those  metals,  no  com¬ 
modities  can  be  more  easily  transported  from 
one  place  to  another,  from  the  places  where 
they  are  cheap  to  those  where  they  are  dear, 
from  the  places  where  they  exceed  to  those 
where  they  fall  short  of  this  effectual  demand. 
If  there  were  in  England,  for  example,  an 
effectual  demand  for  an  additional  quantity 
of  gold,  a  packet-boat  could  bring  from  Lis¬ 
bon,  or  from  wherever  else  it  was  to  be  had, 
fifty  tons  of  gold,  which  could  be  coined  into 
more  than  five  millions  of  guineas.  But  if  there 
were  an  effectual  demand  for  grain  to  the 
same  value,  to  import  it  would  require,  at  five 
guineas  a  ton,  a  million  of  tons  of  shipping,  or 
a  thousand  ships  of  a  thousand  tons  each.  The 
navy  of  England  would  not  be  sufficient. 

When  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  im¬ 
ported  into  any  country  exceeds  the  effectual 
demand,  no  vigilance  of  government  can  pre¬ 
vent  their  exportation.  All  the  sanguinary 
laws  of  Spain  and  Portugal  are  not  able  to 
keep  their  gold  and  silver  at  home.  The  con¬ 
tinual  importations  from  Peru  and  Brazil  ex¬ 
ceed  the  effectual  demand  of  those  countries, 
and  sink  the  price  of  those  metals  there  below 
that  in  the  neighbouring  countries.  If,  on 
the  contrary,  in  any  particular  country  their 
quantity  fell  short  of  the  effectual  demand,  so 
as  to  raise  their  price  above  that  of  the  neigh¬ 


bouring  countries,  the  government  would  have 
no  occasion  to  take  any  pains  to  import  them. 
If  it  were  even  to  take  pains  to  prevent  their 
importation,  it  would  not  be  able  to  effectuate 
it.  Those  metals,  when  the  Spartans  had  got 
wherewithal  to  purchase  them,  broke  through 
all  the  barriers  which  the  laws  of  Lycurgus 
opposed  to  their  entrance  into  Lacedemon. 
All  the  sanguinary  laws  of  the  customs  are  not 
able  to  prevent  the  importation  of  the  teas  of 
the  Dutch  and  Gottenburgh  East  India  Com¬ 
panies,  because  somewhat  cheaper  than  those 
of  the  British  company.  A  pound  of  tea,  how¬ 
ever,  is  about  a  hundred  times  the  bulk  of  one 
of  the  highest  prices,  sixteen  shillings,  that  is 
commonly  paid  for  it  in  silver,  and  more  than 
two  thousand  times  the  bulk  of  the  same 
price  in  gold,  and  consequently  just  so  many 
times  more  difficult  to  smuggle. 

It  is  partly  owing  to  the  easy  transportation 
of  gold  and  silver  from  the  places  where  they 
abound  to  those  where  they  are  wanted  that 
the  price  of  those  metals  does  not  fluctuate 
continually  like  that  of  the  greater  part  of 
other  commodities,  which  are  hindered  by 
their  bulk  from  shifting  their  situation  when 
the  market  happens  to  be  either  over  or  un¬ 
der-stocked  with  them.  The  price  of  those 
metals,  indeed,  is  not  altogether  exempted 
from  variation,  but  the  changes  to  which  it  is 
liable  are  generally  slow,  gradual  and  uniform. 
In  Europe,  for  example,  it  is  supposed,  with¬ 
out  much  foundation,  perhaps,  that  during 
the  course  of  the  present  and  preceding  cen¬ 
tury  they  have  been  constantly,  but  grad¬ 
ually,  sinking  in  their  value,  on  account  of  the 
continual  importations  from  the  Spanish  West 
Indies.  But  to  make  any  sudden  change  in  the 
price  of  gold  and  silver,  so  as  to  raise  or  lower 
at  once,  sensibly  and  remarkably,  the  money 
price  of  all  other  commodities,  requires  such  a 
revolution  in  commerce  as  that  occasioned  by 
the  discovery  of  America. 

If,  notwithstanding  all  this,  gold  and  silver 
should  at  any  time  fall  short  in  a  country 
which  has  wherewithal  to  purchase  them,  there 
are  more  expedients  for  supplying  their 
place  than  that  of  almost  any  other  com¬ 
modity.  If  the  materials  of  manufacture  are 
wranted,  industry  must  stop.  If  provisions  are 
wanted,  the  people  must  starve.  But  if  money 
is  wanted,  barter  will  supply  its  place,  though 
with  a  good  deal  of  inconveniency.  Buying 
and  selling  upon  credit,  and  the  different 
dealers  compensating  their  credits  with  one 
another,  once  a  month  or  once  a  year,  will 
supply  it  with  less  inconveniency.  A  well-regu¬ 
lated  paper  money  will  supply  it,  not  only 
without  any  inconveniency,  but,  in  some 
cases,  with  some  advantages.  Upon  every  ac¬ 
count,  therefore,  the  attention  of  government 
never  was  so  unnecessarily  employed  as  when 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


186 

directed  to  watch  over  the  preservation  or 
increase  of  the  quantity  of  money  in  any 
country. 

No  complaint,  however,  is  more  common 
than  that  of  a  scarcity  of  money.  Money,  like 
wine,  must  always  be  scarce  with  those  who 
have  neither  wherewithal  to  buy  it  nor  credit 
to  borrow  it.  Those  who  have  either  will  sel¬ 
dom  be  in  want  either  of  the  money  or  of  the 
wine  which  they  have  occasion  for.  This  com¬ 
plaint,  however,  of  the  scarcity  of  money  is 
not  always  confined  to  improvident  spend¬ 
thrifts.  It  is  sometimes  general  through  a 
whole  mercantile  town  and  the  country  in  its 
neighbourhood.  Overtrading  is  the  common 
cause  of  it.  Sober  men,  whose  projects  have 
been  disproportioned  to  their  capitals,  are  as 
likely  to  have  neither  wherewithal  to  buy 
money  nor  credit  to  borrow  it,  as  prodigals 
whose  expense  has  been  disproportioned  to 
their  revenue.  Before  their  projects  can  be 
brought  to  bear,  their  stock  is  gone,  and  their 
credit  with  it.  They  run  about  everywhere  to 
borrow  money,  and  everybody  tells  them  that 
they  have  none  to  lend.  Even  such  general 
complaints  of  the  scarcity  of  money  do  not 
always  prove  that  the  usual  number  of  gold 
and  silver  pieces  are  not  circulating  in  the 
country,  but  that  many  people  want  those 
pieces  who  have  nothing  to  give  for  them. 
When  the  profits  of  trade  happen  to  be  great¬ 
er  than  ordinary,  overtrading  becomes  a  gen¬ 
eral  error  both  among  great  and  small  dealers. 
They  do  not  always  send  more  money  abroad 
than  usual,  but  they  buy  upon  credit,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  an  unusual  quantity  of 
goods,  which  they  send  to  some  distant  mar¬ 
ket  in  hopes  that  the  returns  will  come  in  be¬ 
fore  the  demand  for  payment.  The  demand 
comes  before  the  returns,  and  they  have  noth¬ 
ing  at  hand  with  which  they  can  either  pur¬ 
chase  money,  or  give  solid  security  for  bor¬ 
rowing.  It  is  not  any  scarcity  of  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver,  but  the  difficulty  which  such  people  find 
in  borrowing,  and  which  their  creditors  find 
in  getting  payment,  that  occasions  the  general 
complaint  of  the  scarcity  of  money. 

It  would  be  too  ridiculous  to  go  about  seri¬ 
ously  to  prove  that  wealth  does  not  con¬ 
sist  in  money,  or  in  gold  and  silver;  but  in 
what  money  purchases,  and  is  valuable  only 
for  purchasing.  Money,  no  doubt,  makes  al¬ 
ways  a  part  of  the  national  capital;  but  it  has 
already  been  shown  that  it  generally  makes 
but  a  small  part,  and  always  the  most  un¬ 
profitable  part  of  it. 

It  is  not  because  wealth  consists  more  essen¬ 
tially  in  money  than  in  goods  that  the  mer¬ 
chant  find  it  generally  more  easy  to  buy  goods 
with  money  than  to  buy  money  with  goods; 
hut  because  money  is  the  known  and  es¬ 
tablished  instrument  of  commerce,  for  which 


everything  is  readily  given  in  exchange,  but 
which  is  not  always  with  equal  readiness  to 
be  got  in  exchange  for  everything.  The  greater 
part  of  goods,  besides,  are  more  perishable 
than  money,  and  he  may  frequently  sustain  a 
much  greater  loss  by  keeping  them.  When  his 
goods  are  upon  hand,  too,  he  is  more  liable  to 
such  demands  for  money  as  he  may  not  be 
able  to  answer  than  when  he  has  got  their 
price  in  his  coffers.  Over  and  above  all  this, 
his  profit  arises  more  directly  from  selling 
than  from  buying,  and  he  is  upon  all  these  ac¬ 
counts  generally  much  more  anxious  to  ex¬ 
change  his  goods  for  money  than  his  money 
for  goods.  But  though  a  particular  merchant, 
with  abundance  of  goods  in  his  warehouse, 
may  sometimes  be  ruined  by  not  being  able 
to  sell  them  in  time,  a  nation  or  country  is  not 
liable  to  the  same  accident.  The  whole  capital 
of  a  merchant  frequently  consists  in  perish¬ 
able  goods  destined  for  purchasing  money. 
But  it  is  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  a  country 
which  can  ever  be  destined  for  purchasing 
gold  and  silver  from  their  neighbours.  The  far 
greater  part  is  circulated  and  consumed  among 
themselves;  and  even  of  the  surplus  which  is 
sent  abroad,  the  greater  part  is  generally 
destined  for  the  purchase  of  other  foreign 
goods.  Though  gold  and  silver,  therefore, 
could  not  be  had  in  exchange  for  the  goods 
destined  to  purchase  them,  the  nation  would 
not  be  ruined.  It  might,  indeed,  suffer  some 
loss  and  inconveniency,  and  be  forced  upon 
some  of  those  expedients  which  are  necessary 
for  supplying  the  place  of  money.  The  annual 
produce  of  its  land  and  labour,  however,  would 
be  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same,  as  usual, 
because  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same, 
consumable  capital  would  be  employed  in 
maintaining  it.  And  though  goods  do  not  al¬ 
ways  draw  money  so  readily  as  money  draws 
goods,  in  the  long  run  they  draw  it  more 
necessarily  than  even  it  draws  them.  Goods 
can  serve  many  other  purposes  besides  pur¬ 
chasing  money,  but  money  can  serve  no 
other  purpose  besides  purchasing  goods.  Money, 
therefore,  necessarily  runs  after  goods,  but 
goods  do  not  always  or  necessarily  run  after 
money.  The  man  who  buys  does  not  always 
mean  to  sell  again,  but  frequently  to  use  or  to 
consume;  whereas  he  who  sells  always  means 
to  buy  again.  The  one  may  frequently  have 
done  the  whole,  but  the  other  can  never  have 
done  more  than  the  one-half  of  his  business. 
It  is  not  for  its  own  sake  that  men  desire 
money,  but  for  the  sake  of  what  they  can  pur¬ 
chase  with  it. 

Consumable  commodities,  it  is  said,  are 
soon  destroyed;  whereas  gold  and  silver  are  of 
a  more  durable  nature,  and,  were  it  not  for 
this  continual  exportation,  might  be  accumu- 


187 


Principle  of  the  Commercial  System 


lated  for  ages  together,  to  the  incredible  aug¬ 
mentation  of  the  real  wealth  of  the  country. 
Nothing,  therefore,  it  is  pretended,  can  be 
more  disadvantageous  to  any  country  than  the 
trade  which  consists  in  the  exchange  of  such 
lasting  for  such  perishable  commodities.  We 
do  not,  however,  reckon  that  trade  disad¬ 
vantageous  which  consists  in  the  exchange  of 
the  hardware  of  England  for  the  wines  of 
France;  and  yet  hardware  is  a  very  durable 
commodity,  and  were  it  not  for  this  continual 
exportation  might,  too,  be  accumulated  for 
ages  together,  to  the  incredible  augmentation 
of  the  pots  and  pans  of  the  country.  But  it 
readily  occurs  that  the  number  of  such  uten¬ 
sils  is  in  every  country  necessarily  limited  by 
the  use  which  there  is  for  them;  that  it  would 
be  absurd  to  have  more  pots  and  pans  than 
were  necessary  for  cooking  the  victuals  usually 
consumed  there;  and  that  if  the  quantity  of 
victuals  were  to  increase,  the  number  of  pots 
and  pans  would  readily  increase  along  with  it, 
a  part  of  the  increased  quantity  of  victuals 
being  employed  in  purchasing  them,  or  in 
maintaining  an  additional  number  of  work¬ 
men  whose  business  it  was  to  make  them.  It 
should  as  readily  occur  that  the  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver  is  in  every  country  limited  by 
the  use  which  there  is  for  those  metals;  that 
their  use  consists  in  circulating  commodities 
as  coin,  and  in  affording  a  species  of  house¬ 
hold  furniture  as  plate;  that  the  quantity  of 
coin  in  every  country  is  regulated  by  the 
value  of  the  commodities  which  are  to  be  cir¬ 
culated  by  it:  increase  that  value,  and  im¬ 
mediately  a  part  of  it  will  be  sent  abroad 
to  purchase,  wherever  it  is  to  be  had,  the 
additional  quantity  of  coin  requisite  for  cir¬ 
culating  them:  that  the  quantity  of  plate  is 
regulated  by  the  number  and  wealth  of  those 
private  families  who  choose  to  indulge  them¬ 
selves  in  that  sort  of  magnificence:  increase 
the  number  and  wealth  of  such  families,  and 
a  part  of  this  increased  wealth  will  most  prob¬ 
ably  be  employed  in  purchasing,  wherever  it 
is  to  be  found,  an  additional  quantity  of 
plate:  that  to  attempt  to  increase  the  wealth 
of  any  country,  either  by  introducing  or  by 
detaining  in  it  an  unnecessary  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver,  is  as  absurd  as  it  would  be 
to  attempt  to  increase  the  good  cheer  of  pri¬ 
vate  families  by  obliging  them  to  keep  an  un¬ 
necessary  number  of  kitchen  utensils.  As  the 
expense  of  purchasing  those  unnecessary  uten¬ 
sils  would  diminish  instead  of  increasing  either 
the  quantity  of  goodness  of  the  family  provi¬ 
sions,  so  the  expense  of  purchasing  an  un¬ 
necessary  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  must,  in 
every  country,  as  necessarily  diminish  the 
wealth  which  feeds,  clothes,  and  lodges,  which 
maintains  and  employs  the  people.  Gold  and 
silver,  whether  in  the  shape  of  coin  or  of 


plate,  are  utensils,  it  must  be  remembered,  as 
much  as  the  furniture  of  the  kitchen.  Increase 
the  use  for  them,  increase  the  consumable 
commodities  which  are  to  be  circulated,  man¬ 
aged,  and  prepared  by  means  of  them,  and 
you  will  infallibly  increase  the  quantity;  but  if 
you  attempt,  by  extraordinary  means,  to  in¬ 
crease  the  quantity,  you  will  as  infallibly  di¬ 
minish  the  use  and  even  the  quantity  too, 
which  in  those  metals  can  never  be  greater 
than  what  the  use  requires.  Were  they  ever  to 
be  accumulated  beyond  this  quantity,  their 
transportation  is  so  easy,  and  the  loss  which 
attends  their  lying  idle  and  unemployed  so 
great,  that  no  law  could  prevent  their  being 
immediately  sent  out  of  the  country. 

It  is  not  always  necessary  to  accumulate 
gold  and  silver  in  order  to  enable  a  country 
to  carry  on  foreign  wars,  and  to  maintain 
fleets  and  armies  in  distant  countries.  Fleets 
and  armies  are  maintained,  not  with  gold  and 
silver,  but  with  consumable  goods.  The  nation 
which,  from  the  annual  produce  of  its  do¬ 
mestic  industry,  from  the  annual  revenue  aris¬ 
ing  out  of  its  lands,  labour,  and  consumable 
stock,  has  wherewithal  to  purchase  those  con¬ 
sumable  goods  in  distant  countries,  can  main¬ 
tain  foreign  wars  there. 

A  nation  may  purchase  the  pay  and  provi¬ 
sions  of  an  army  in  a  distant  country  three 
different  ways:  by  sending  abroad  either,  first, 
some  part  of  its  accumulated  gold  and  silver; 
or,  secondly,  some  part  of  the  annual  produce 
of  its  manufactures;  or,  last  of  all,  some  part 
of  its  annual  rude  produce. 

The  gold  and  silver  which  can  properly  be 
considered  as  accumulated  or  stored  up  in  any 
country  may  be  distinguished  into  three 
parts:  first,  the  circulating  money;  secondly, 
the  plate  of  private  families;  and,  last  of  all, 
the  money  which  may  have  been  collected  by 
many  years’  parsimony,  and  laid  up  in  the 
treasury  of  the  prince. 

It  can  seldom  happen  that  much  can  be 
spared  from  the  circulating  money  of  the 
country;  because  in  that  there  can  seldom  be 
much  redundancy.  The  value  of  goods  an¬ 
nually  bought  and  sold  in  any  country  re¬ 
quires  a  certain  quantity  of  money  to  circulate 
and  distribute  them  to  their  proper  consumers, 
and  can  give  employment  to  no  more.  The 
channel  of  circulation  necessarily  draws  to 
itself  a  sum  sufficient  to  fill  it,  and  never  ad¬ 
mits  any  more.  Something,  however,  is  gen¬ 
erally  withdrawn  from  this  channel  in  the  case 
of  foreign  war.  By  the  great  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  who  are  maintained  abroad,  fewer  are 
maintained  at  home.  Fewer  goods  are  circu¬ 
lated  there,  and  less  money  becomes  necessary 
to  circulate  them.  An  extraordinary  quantity 
of  paper  money,  of  some  sort  or  other,  such 
as  exchequer  notes,  navy  bills,  and  bank  bills 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


188 

in  England,  is  generally  issued  upon  such  oc¬ 
casions,  and  by  supplying  the  place  of  circu¬ 
lating  gold  and  silver,  gives  an  opportunity 
of  sending  a  greater  quantity  of  it  abroad.  All 
this,  however,  could  afford  but  a  poor  re¬ 
source  for  maintaining  a  foreign  war  of  great 
expense  and  several  years  duration. 

The  melting  down  the  plate  of  private  fam¬ 
ilies  has  upon  every  occasion  been  found  a 
still  more  insignificant  one.  The  French,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  last  war,  did  not  derive  so 
much  advantage  from  this  expedient  as  to 
compensate  the  loss  of  the  fashion. 

The  accumulated  treasures  of  the  prince 
have,  in  former  times,  afforded  a  much  greater 
and  more  lasting  resource.  In  the  present 
times,  if  you  except  the  king  of  Prussia,  to 
accumulate  treasure  seems  to  be  no  part  of 
the  policy  of  European  princes. 

The  funds  which  maintained  the  foreign 
wars  of  the  present  century,  the  most  expen¬ 
sive  perhaps  which  history  records,  seem  to 
have  had  little  dependency  upon  the  exporta¬ 
tion  either  of  the  circulating  money,  or  of  the 
plate  of  private  families,  or  of  the  treasure  of 
the  prince.  The  last  French  war  cost  Great 
Britain  upwards  of  ninety  millions,  including 
not  only  the  seventy-five  millions  of  new  debt 
that  was  contracted,  but  the  additional  two 
shillings  in  the  pound  land-tax,  and  what  was 
annually  borrowed  of  the  sinking  fund.  More 
than  two-thirds  of  this  expense  were  laid  out 
in  distant  countries;  in  Germany,  Portugal, 
America,  in  the  ports  of  the  Mediterranean,  in 
the  East  and  West  Indies.  The  kings  of  Eng¬ 
land  had  no  accumulated  treasure.  We  never 
heard  of  any  extraordinary  quantity  of  plate 
being  melted  down.  The  circulating  gold  and 
silver  of  the  country  had  not  been  supposed 
to  exceed  eighteen  millions.  Since  the  late 
recoinage  of  the  gold,  however,  it  is  believed 
to  have  been  a  good  deal  underrated.  Let  us 
suppose,  therefore,  according  to  the  most  ex¬ 
aggerated  computation  which  I  remember  to 
have  either  seen  or  heard  of,  that,  gold  and 
silver  together,  it  amounted  to  thirty  millions. 
Had  the  war  been  carried  on  by  means  of  our 
money,  the  whole  of  it  must,  even  according 
to  this  computation,  have  been  sent  out  and 
returned  again  at  least  twice  in  a  period  of  be¬ 
tween  six  and  seven  years.  Should  this  be  sup¬ 
posed,  it  would  afford  the  most  decisive  argu¬ 
ment  to  demonstrate  how  unnecessary  it  is  for 
government  to  watch  over  the  preservation  of 
money,  since  upon  this  supposition  the  whole 
money  of  the  country  must  have  gone  from  it 
and  returned  to  it  again,  two  different  times 
in  so  short  a  period,  without  anybody’s  know¬ 
ing  anything  of  the  matter.  The  channel  of  cir¬ 
culation,  however,  never  appeared  more  empty 
than  usual  during  any  part  of  this  period.  Few 
people  wanted  money  who  had  wherewithal  to 


pay  for  it.  The  profits  of  foreign  trade,  indeed, 
were  greater  than  usual  during  the  whole  war; 
but  especially  towards  the  end  of  it.  This  oc¬ 
casioned,  what  it  always  occasions,  a  general 
overtrading  in  all  the  parts  of  Great  Britain; 
and  this  again  occasioned  the  usual  complaint 
of  the  scarcity  of  money,  which  always  follows 
overtrading.  Many  people  wanted  it,  who  had 
neither  wherewithal  to  buy  it,  nor  credit  to 
borrow  it;  and  because  the  debtors  found  it 
difficult  to  borrow,  the  creditors  found  it  diffi¬ 
cult  to  get  payment.  Gold  and  silver,  however, 
were  generally  to  be  had  for  their  value,  by 
those  who  had  that  value  to  give  for  them. 

The  enormous  expense  of  the  late  war, 
therefore,  must  have  been  chiefly  defrayed, 
not  by  the  exportation  of  gold  and  silver,  but 
by  that  of  British  commodities  of  some  kind 
or  other.  When  the  government,  or  those  who 
acted  under  them,  contracted  with  a  merchant 
for  a  remittance  to  some  foreign  country,  he 
would  naturally  endeavour  to  pay  his  foreign 
correspondent,  upon  whom  he  had  granted  a 
bill,  by  sending  abroad  rather  commodities 
than  gold  and  silver.  If  the  commodities  of 
Great  Britain  were  not  in  demand  in  that 
country,  he  would  endeavour  to  send  them  to 
some  other  country,  in  which  he  could  pur¬ 
chase  a  bill  upon  that  country.  The  trans¬ 
portation  of  commodities,  when  properly 
suited  to  the  market,  is  always  attended  with 
a  considerable  profit;  whereas  that  of  gold  and 
silver  is  scarce  ever  attended  with  any.  When 
those  metals  are  sent  abroad  in  order  to  pur¬ 
chase  foreign  commodities,  the  merchant’s 
profit  arises,  not  from  the  purchase,  but  from 
the  sale  of  the  returns.  But  when  they  are 
sent  abroad  merely  to  pay  a  debt,  he  gets  no 
returns,  and  consequently  no  profit.  He  nat¬ 
urally,  therefore,  exerts  his  invention  to  find 
out  a  way  of  paying  his  foreign  debts  rather 
by  the  exportation  of  commodities  than  by 
that  of  gold  and  silver.  The  great  quantity 
of  British  goods  exported  during  the  course  of 
the  late  war,  without  bringing  back  any  re¬ 
turns,  is  accordingly  remarked  by  the  author 
of  The  Present  State  of  the  Nation. 

Besides  the  three  sorts  of  gold  and  silver 
above  mentioned,  there  is  in  all  great  commer¬ 
cial  countries  a  good  deal  of  bullion  alternate¬ 
ly  imported  and  exported  for  the  purposes  of 
foreign  trade.  This  bullion,  as  it  circulates 
among  different  commercial  countries  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  national  coin  circulates  in 
every  particular  country,  may  be  considered 
as  the  money  of  the  great  mercantile  republic. 
The  national  coin  receives  its  movement  and 
direction  from  the  commodities  circulated 
within  the  precincts  of  each  particular  coun¬ 
try:  the  money  of  the  mercantile  republic, 
from  those  circulated  between  different  coun¬ 
tries.  Both  are  employed  in  facilitating  ex- 


189 


Principle  of  the  Commercial  System 


changes,  the  one  between  different  individuals 
of  the  same,  the  other  between  those  of  dif¬ 
ferent  nations.  Part  of  this  money  of  the 
great  mercantile  republic  may  have  been,  and 
probably  was,  employed  in  carrying  on  the 
late  war.  In  time  of  a  general  war,  it  is  nat¬ 
ural  to  suppose  that  a  movement  and  direc¬ 
tion  should  be  impressed  upon  it,  different 
from  what  it  usually  follows  in  profound  peace; 
that  it  should  circulate  more  about  the  seat 
of  the  war,  and  be  more  employed  in  pur¬ 
chasing  there,  and  in  the  neighbouring  coun¬ 
tries,  the  pay  and  provisions  of  the  different 
armies.  But  whatever  part  of  this  money  of 
the  mercantile  republic  Great  Britain  may 
have  annually  employed  in  this  manner,  it 
must  have  been  annually  purchased,  either 
with  British  commodities,  or  with  something 
else  that  had  been  purchased  with  them; 
which  still  brings  us  back  to  commodities,  to 
the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  country,  as  the  ultimate  resources 
which  enabled  us  to  carry  on  the  war.  It  is 
natural  indeed  to  suppose  that  so  great  an 
annual  expense  must  have  been  defrayed 
from  a  great  annual  produce.  The  expense  of 
1761,  for  example,  amounted  to  more  than 
nineteen  millions.  No  accumulation  could  have 
supported  so  great  an  annual  profusion.  There 
is  no  annual  produce  even  of  gold  and  silver 
which  could  have  supported  it.  The  whole 
gold  and  silver  annually  imported  into  both 
Spain  and  Portugal,  according  to  the  best  ac¬ 
counts,  does  not  commonly  much  exceed  six 
millions  sterling,  which,  in  some  years,  would 
scarce  have  paid  four  month’s  expense  of  the 
late  war. 

The  commodities  most  proper  for  being 
transported  to  distant  countries,  in  order  to 
purchase  there  either  the  pay  and  provisions 
of  an  army,  or  some  part  of  the  money  of  the 
mercantile  republic  to  be  employed  in  pur¬ 
chasing  them,  seem  to  be  the  finer  and  more 
improved  manufactures;  such  as  contain  a 
great  value  in  a  small  bulk,  and  can,  there¬ 
fore,  be  exported  to  a  great  distance  at  little 
expense.  A  country  whose  industry  produces  a 
great  annual  surplus  of  such  manufactures, 
which  are  usually  exported  to  foreign  coun¬ 
tries,  may  carry  on  for  many  years  a  very  ex¬ 
pensive  foreign  war  without  either  exporting 
any  considerable  quantity  of  gold  and  silver, 
or  even  having  any  such  quantity  to  export. 
A  considerable  part  of  the  annual  surplus  of 
its  manufactures  must,  indeed,  in  this  case  be 
exported  without  bringing  back  any  returns  to 
the  country,  though  it  does  to  the  merchant; 
the  government  purchasing  of  the  merchant 
his  bills  upon  foreign  countries,  in  order  to 
purchase  there  the  pay  and  provisions  of  an 
army.  Some  part  of  this  surplus,  however, 
may  still  continue  to  bring  back  a  return.  The 


manufacturers,  during  the  war,  will  have  a 
double  demand  upon  them,  and  be  called  up¬ 
on,  first,  to  work  up  goods  to  be  sent  abroad, 
for  paying  the  bills  drawn  upon  foreign  coun¬ 
tries  for  the  pay  and  provisions  of  the  army; 
and,  secondly,  to  work  up  such  as  are  neces¬ 
sary  for  purchasing  the  common  returns  that 
had  usually  been  consumed  in  the  country. 
In  the  midst  of  the  most  destructive  foreign 
war,  therefore,  the  greater  part  of  manufac¬ 
tures  may  frequently  flourish  greatly;  and, 
on  the  contrary,  they  may  decline  on  the  re¬ 
turn  of  the  peace.  They  may  flourish  amidst 
the  ruin  of  their  country,  and  begin  to  decay 
upon  the  return  of  its  prosperity.  The  differ¬ 
ent  state  of  many  different  branches  of  the 
British  manufactures  during  the  late  war,  and 
for  some  time  after  the  peace,  may  serve  as 
an  illustration  of  what  has  been  just  now 
said. 

No  foreign  war  of  great  expense  or  dura¬ 
tion  could  conveniently  be  carried  on  by  the 
exportation  of  the  rude  produce  of  the  soil. 
The  expense  of  sending  such  a  quantity  of  it 
to  a  foreign  country  as  might  purchase  the 
pay  and  provisions  of  an  army  would  be  too 
great.  Few  countries  produce  much  more  rude 
produce  than  what  is  sufficient  for  the  sub¬ 
sistence  of  their  own  inhabitants.  To  send 
abroad  any  great  quantity  of  it,  therefore, 
would  be  to  send  abroad  a  part  of  the  nec¬ 
essary  subsistence  of  the  people.  It  is  other¬ 
wise  with  the  exportation  of  manufactures. 
The  maintenance  of  the  people  employed  in 
them  is  kept  at  home,  and  only  the  surplus 
part  of  their  work  is  exported.  Mr.  Hume 
frequently  takes  notice  of  the  inability  of  the 
ancient  kings  of  England  to  carry  on,  with¬ 
out  interruption,  any  foreign  war  of  long 
duration.  The  English,  in  those  days,  had 
nothing  wherewithal  to  purchase  the  pay  and 
provisions  of  their  armies  in  foreign  countries, 
but  either  the  rude  produce  of  the  soil,  of 
which  no  considerable  part  could  be  spared 
from  the  home  consumption,  or  a  few  manu¬ 
factures  of  the  coarsest  kind,  of  which,  as  well 
as  of  the  rude  produce,  the  transportation 
was  too  expensive.  This  inability  did  not 
arise  from  the  want  of  money,  but  of  the  finer 
and  more  improved  manufactures.  Buying 
and  selling  was  transacted  by  means  of  money 
in  England  then  as  well  as  now.  The  quan¬ 
tity  of  circulating  money  must  have  borne 
the  same  proportion  to  the  number  and  value 
of  purchases  and  sales  usually  transacted  at 
that  time,  which  it  does  to  those  transacted 
at  present;  or  rather  it  must  have  borne  a 
greater  proportion,  because  there  was  then 
no  paper,  which  now  occupies  a  great  part  of 
the  employment  of  gold  and  silver.  Among 
nations  to  whom  commerce  and  manufactures 
are  little  known,  the  sovereign,  upon  extraor- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


190 

dinary  occasions,  can  seldom  draw  any  con¬ 
siderable  aid  from  his  subjects,  for  reasons 
which  shall  be  explained  hereafter.  It  is  in 
such  countries,  therefore,  that  he  generally 
endeavours  to  accumulate  a  treasure,  as  the 
only  resource  against  such  emergencies.  Inde¬ 
pendent  of  this  necessity,  he  is  in  such  a  situ¬ 
ation  naturally  disposed  to  the  parsimony 
requisite  for  accumulation.  In  that  simple 
state,  the  expense  even  of  a  sovereign  is  not 
directed  by  the  vanity  which  delights  in  the 
gaudy  finery  of  a  court,  but  is  employed  in 
bounty  to  his  tenants,  and  hospitality  to  his 
retainers.  But  bounty  and  hospitality  very 
seldom  lead  to  extravagance;  though  vanity 
almost  always  does.  Every  Tartar  chief,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  has  a  treasure.  The  treasures  of 
Mazepa,  chief  of  the  Cossacs  in  the  Ukraine, 
the  famous  ally  of  Charles  the  XII,  are  said 
to  have  been  very  great.  The  French  kings 
of  the  Merovingian  race  all  had  treasures. 
When  they  divided  their  kingdom  among 
their  different  children,  they  divided  their 
treasure  too.  The  Saxon  princes,  and  the  first 
kings  after  the  Conquest,  seem  likewise  to 
have  accumulated  treasures.  The  first  exploit 
of  every  new  reign  was  commonly  to  seize  the 
treasure  of  the  preceding  king,  as  the  most 
essential  measure  for  securing  the  succession. 
The  sovereigns  of  improved  and  commercial 
countries  are  not  under  the  same  necessity  of 
accumulating  treasures,  because  they  can  gen¬ 
erally  draw  from  their  subjects  extraordinary 
aids  upon  extraordinary  occasions.  They  are 
likewise  less  disposed  to  do  so.  They  natu¬ 
rally,  perhaps  necessarily,  follow  the  mode  of 
the  times,  and  their  expense  comes  to  be  reg¬ 
ulated  by  the  same  extravagant  vanity  which 
directs  that  of  all  the  other  great  proprietors 
in  their  dominions.  The  insignificant  pag¬ 
eantry  of  their  court  becomes  every  day  more 
brilliant,  and  the  expense  of  it  not  only  pre¬ 
vents  accumulation,  but  frequently  encroaches 
upon  the  funds  destined  for  more  necessary 
expenses.  What  Dercyllidas  said  of  the  court 
of  Persia  may  be  applied  to  that  of  several 
European  princes,  that  he  saw  there  much 
splendour  but  little  strength,  and  many  ser¬ 
vants  but  few  soldiers. 

The  importation  of  gold  and  silver  is  not 
the  principal,  much  less  the  sole  benefit  which 
a  nation  derives  from  its  foreign  trade.  Be¬ 
tween  whatever  places  foreign  trade  is  carried 
on,  they  all  of  them  derive  two  distinct  bene¬ 
fits  from  it.  It  carries  out  that  surplus  part 
of  the  produce  of  their  land  and  labour  for 
which  there  is  no  demand  among  them,  and 
brings  back  in  return  for  it  something  else  for 
which  there  is  a  demand.  It  gives  a  value  to 
their  superfluities,  by  exchanging  them  for 
something  else,  which  may  satisfy  a  part  of 
their  wants,  and  increase  their  enjoyments.  By 


means  of  it  the  narrowness  of  the  home  mar¬ 
ket  does  not  hinder  the  division  of  labour  in 
any  particular  branch  of  art  or  manufac¬ 
ture  from  being  carried  to  the  highest  perfec¬ 
tion.  By  opening  a  more  extensive  market  for 
whatever  part  of  the  produce  of  their  labour 
may  exceed  the  home  consumption,  it  en¬ 
courages  them  to  improve  its  productive  pow¬ 
ers,  and  to  augment  its  annual  produce  to  the 
utmost,  and  thereby  to  increase  the  real  rev¬ 
enue  and  wealth  of  the  society.  These  great 
and  important  services  foreign  trade  is  con¬ 
tinually  occupied  in  performing  to  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  countries  between  which  it  is  carried 
on.  They  all  derive  great  benefit  from  it, 
though  that  in  which  the  merchant  resides 
generally  derives  the  greatest,  as  he  is  gen¬ 
erally  more  employed  in  supplying  the  wants, 
and  carrying  out  the  superfluities  of  his  own, 
than  of  any  other  particular  country.  To  im¬ 
port  the  gold  and  silver  which  may  be  wanted 
into  the  countries  which  have  no  mines  is, 
no  doubt,  a  part  of  the  business  of  foreign 
commerce.  It  is,  however,  a  most  insignificant 
part  of  it.  A  country  which  carried  on  for¬ 
eign  trade  merely  upon  this  account  could 
scarce  have  occasion  to  freight  a  ship  in  a 
century. 

It  is  not  by  the  importation  of  gold  and 
silver  that  the  discovery  of  America  has 
enriched  Europe.  By  the  abundance  of  the 
American  mines,  those  metals  have  become 
cheaper.  A  service  of  plate  can  now  be  pur¬ 
chased  for  about  a  third  part  of  the  com,  or 
a  third  part  of  the  labour,  which  it  would 
have  cost  in  the  fifteenth  century.  With  the 
same  annual  expense  of  labour  and  commodi¬ 
ties,  Europe  can  annually  purchase  about 
three  times  the  quantity  of  plate  which  it 
could  have  purchased  at  that  time.  But  when 
a  commodity  comes  to  be  sold  for  a  third  part 
of  what  had  been  its  usual  price,  not  only 
those  who  purchased  it  before  can  purchase 
three  times  their  former  quantity,  but  it  is 
brought  down  to  the  level  of  a  much  greater 
number  of  purchasers,  perhaps  to  more  than 
ten,  perhaps  to  more  than  twenty  times  the 
former  number.  So  that  there  may  be  in  Eu¬ 
rope  at  present  not  only  more  than  three 
times,  but  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  times 
the  quantity  of  plate  which  would  have  been 
in  it,  even  in  its  present  state  of  improvement, 
had  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines 
never  been  made.  So  far  Europe  has,  no  doubt, 
gained  a  real  conveniency,  though  surely  a 
very  trifling  one.  The  cheapness  of  gold  and 
silver  renders  those  metals  rather  less  fit  for 
the  purposes  of  money  than  they  were  before. 
In  order  to  make  the  same  purchases,  we 
must  load  ourselves  with  a  greater  quantity  of 
them,  and  carry  about  a  shilling  in  our  pock¬ 
et  where  a  groat  would  have  done  before.  It 


191 


Principle  of  the  Commercial  System 


is  difficult  to  say  which  is  most  trifling,  this 
inconveniency  or  the  opposite  conveniency. 
Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  could  have  made 
any  very  essential  change  in  the  state  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  The  discovery  of  America,  however,  cer¬ 
tainly  made  a  most  essential  one.  By  opening 
a  new  and  inexhaustible  market  to  all  the  com¬ 
modities  of  Europe,  it  gave  occasion  to  new 
divisions  of  labour  and  improvements  of  art, 
which  in  the  narrow  circle  of  the  ancient 
commerce,  could  never  have  taken  place  for 
want  of  a  market  to  take  off  the  greater  part 
of  their  produce.  The  productive  powers  of 
labour  were  improved,  and  its  produce  in¬ 
creased  in  all  the  different  countries  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  and  together  with  it  the  real  revenue 
and  wealth  of  the  inhabitants.  The  commodi¬ 
ties  of  Europe  were  almost  all  new  to  Amer¬ 
ica,  and  many  of  those  of  America  were  new 
to  Europe.  A  new  set  of  exchanges,  therefore, 
began  to  take  place  which  had  never  been 
thought  of  before,  and  which  should  naturally 
have  proved  as  advantageous  to  the  new, 
as  it  certainly  did  to  the  old  continent.  The 
savage  injustice  of  the  Europeans  rendered 
an  event,  which  ought  to  have  been  beneficial 
to  all,  ruinous  and  destructive  to  several  of 
those  unfortunate  countries. 

The  discovery  of  a  passage  to  the  East 
Indies  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which 
happened  much  about  the  same  time,  opened 
perhaps  a  still  more  extensive  range  to  for¬ 
eign  commerce  than  even  that  of  America, 
notwithstanding  the  greater  distance.  There 
were  but  two  nations  in  America  in  any  re¬ 
spect  superior  to  savages,  and  these  were  de¬ 
stroyed  almost  as  soon  as  discovered.  The  rest 
were  mere  savages.  But  the  empires  of  China, 
Indostan,  Japan,  as  well  as  several  others  in 
the  East  Indies,  without  having  richer  mines 
of  gold  or  silver,  were  in  every  other  respect 
much  richer,  better  cultivated,  and  more  ad¬ 
vanced  in  all  arts  and  manufactures  than 
either  Mexico  or  Peru,  even  though  we  should 
credit,  what  plainly  deserves  no  credit,  the  ex¬ 
aggerated  accounts  of  the  Spanish  writers 
concerning  the  ancient  state  of  those  empires. 
But  rich  and  civilised  nations  can  always  ex¬ 
change  to  a  much  greater  value  with  one  an¬ 
other  than  with  savages  and  barbarians. 
Europe,  however,  has  hitherto  derived  much 
less  advantage  from  its  commerce  with  the 
East  Indies  than  from  that  with  America. 
The  Portuguese  monopolized  the  East  India 
trade  to  themselves  for  about  a  century,  and 
it  was  only  indirectly  and  through  them  that 
the  other  nations  of  Europe  could  either  send 
out  or  receive  any  goods  from  that  country. 
When  the  Dutch,  in  the  beginning  of  the  last 
century,  began  to  encroach  upon  them,  they 
vested  their  whole  East  India  commerce  in 
an  exclusive  company.  The  English,  French, 


Swedes,  and  Danes  have  all  followed  their  ex¬ 
ample,  so  that  no  great  nation  in  Europe 
has  ever  yet  had  the  benefit  of  a  free  com¬ 
merce  to  the  East  Indies.  No  other  reason 
need  be  assigned  why  it  has  never  been  so 
advantageous  as  the  trade  to  America,  which, 
between  almost  every  nation  of  Europe  and 
its  own  colonies,  is  free  to  all  its  subjects.  The 
exclusive  privileges  of  those  East  India  com¬ 
panies,  their  great  riches,  the  great  favour 
and  protection  which  these  have  procured 
them  from  their  respective  governments,  have 
excited  much  envy  against  them.  This  envy 
has  frequently  represented  their  trade  as  al¬ 
together  pernicious,  on  account  of  the  great 
quantities  of  silver  which  it  every  year  ex¬ 
ports  from  the  countries  from  which  it  is  car¬ 
ried  on.  The  parties  concerned  have  replied 
that  their  trade,  by  this  continual  exportation 
of  silver,  might  indeed  tend  to  impoverish 
Europe  in  general,  but  not  the  particular 
country  from  which  it  was  carried  on;  because, 
by  the  exportation  of  a  part  of  the  returns  to 
other  European  countries,  it  annually  brought 
home  a  much  greater  quantity  of  that  metal 
than  it  carried  out.  Both  the  objection  and 
the  reply  are  founded  in  the  popular  notion 
which  I  have  been  just  now  examining.  It  is 
therefore  unnecessary  to  say  anything  further 
about  either.  By  the  annual  exportation  of 
silver  to  the  East  Indies,  plate  is  probably 
somewhat  dearer  in  Europe  than  it  otherwise 
might  have  been;  and  coined  silver  probably 
purchases  a  larger  quantity  both  of  labour 
and  commodities.  The  former  of  these  two 
effects  is  a  very  small  loss,  the  latter  a  very 
small  advantage;  both  too  insignificant  to  de¬ 
serve  any  part  of  the  public  attention.  The 
trade  to  the  East  Indies,  by  opening  a  market 
to  the  commodities  of  Europe,  or,  what  comes 
nearly  to  the  same  thing,  to  the  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver  which  is  purchased  with  those  commodi¬ 
ties,  must  necessarily  tend  to  increase  the  an¬ 
nual  production  of  European  commodities, 
and  consequently  the  real  wealth  and  revenue 
of  Europe.  That  it  has  hitherto  increased 
them  so  little  is  probably  owing  to  the  re¬ 
straints  which  it  everywhere  labours  under. 

I  thought  it  necessary,  though  at  the  hazard 
of  being  tedious,  to  examine  at  full  length 
this  popular  notion  that  wealth  consists  in 
money,  or  in  gold  and  silver.  Money  in  com¬ 
mon  language,  as  I  have  already  observed, 
frequently  signifies  wealth,  and  this  ambi¬ 
guity  of  expression  has  rendered  this  popular 
notion  so  familiar  to  us  that  even  they  who 
are  convinced  of  its  absurdity  are  very  apt  to 
forget  their  own  principles,  and  in  the  course 
of  their  reasonings  to  take  it  for  granted  as  a 
certain  and  undeniable  truth.  Some  of  the 
best  English  writers  upon  commerce  set  out 
with  observing  that  the  wealth  of  a  country 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


192 

consists,  not  in  its  gold  and  silver  only,  but 
in  its  lands,  houses,  and  consumable  goods 
of  all  different  kinds.  In  the  course  of  their 
reasonings,  however,  the  lands,  houses,  and 
consumable  goods  seem  to  slip  out  of  their 
memory,  and  the  strain  of  their  argument 
frequently  supposes  that  all  wealth  consists 
in  gold  and  silver,  and  that  to  multiply  those 
metals  is  the  great  object  of  national  industry 
and  commerce. 

The  two  principles  being  established,  how¬ 
ever,  that  wealth  consisted  in  gold  and  silver, 
and  that  those  metals  could  be  brought  into 
a  country  which  had  no  mines  only  by  the 
balance  of  trade,  or  by  exporting  to  a  greater 
value  than  it  imported,  it  necessarily  became 
the  great  object  of  political  economy  to  di¬ 
minish  as  much  as  possible  the  importation 
of  foreign  goods  for  home  consumption,  and 
to  increase  as  much  as  possible  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  the  produce  of  domestic  industry.  Its 
two  great  engines  for  enriching  the  country, 
therefore,  were  restraints  upon  importation, 
and  encouragements  to  exportation. 

The  restraints  upon  importation  were  of 
two  kinds. 

First,  restraints  upon  the  importation  of 
such  foreign  goods  for  home  consumption  as 
could  be  produced  at  home,  from  whatever 
country  they  were  imported. 

Secondly,  restraints  upon  the  importation 
of  goods  of  almost  all  kinds  from  those  partic¬ 
ular  countries  with  which  the  balance  of  trade 
was  supposed  to  be  disadvantageous. 

Those  different  restraints  consisted  some¬ 
times  in  high  duties,  and  sometimes  in  ab¬ 
solute  prohibitions. 

Exportation  was  encouraged  sometimes 
by  drawbacks,  sometimes  by  bounties,  some¬ 
times  by  advantageous  treaties  of  commerce 
with  foreign  states,  and  sometimes  by  the 
establishment  of  colonies  in  distant  countries. 

Drawbacks  were  given  upon  two  different 
occasions.  When  the  home  manufactures  were 
subject  to  any  duty  or  excise,  either  the 
whole  or  a  part  of  it  was  frequently  drawn 
back  upon  their  exportation;  and  when  for¬ 
eign  goods  liable  to  a  duty  were  imported  in 
order  to  be  exported  again,  either  the  whole 
or  a  part  of  this  duty  was  sometimes  given 
back  upon  such  exportation. 

Bounties  were  given  for  the  encourage¬ 
ment  either  of  some  beginning  manufactures, 
or  of  such  sorts  of  industry  of  other  kinds  as 
were  supposed  to  deserve  particular  favour. 

By  advantageous  treaties  of  commerce,  par¬ 
ticular  privileges  were  procured  in  some  for¬ 
eign  state  for  the  goods  and  merchants  of  the 
country,  beyond  what  were  granted  to  those 
of  other  countries. 

By  the  establishment  of  colonies  in  distant 
countries,  not  only  particular  privileges,  but  a 


monopoly  was  frequently  procured  for  the 
goods  and  merchants  of  the  country  which  es¬ 
tablished  them. 

The  two  sorts  of  restraints  upon  importa¬ 
tion  above-mentioned,  together  with  these 
four  encouragements  to  exportation,  consti¬ 
tute  the  six  principal  means  by  which  the 
commercial  system  proposes  to  increase  the 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  in  any  country  by 
turning  the  balance  of  trade  in  its  favour.  I 
shall  consider  each  of  them  in  a  particular 
chapter,  and  without  taking  much  further 
notice  of  their  supposed  tendency  to  bring 
money  into  the  country,  I  shall  examine  chief¬ 
ly  what  are  likely  to  be  the  effects  of  each  of 
them  upon  the  annual  produce  of  its  industry. 
According  as  they  tend  either  to  increase  or 
diminish  the  value  of  this  annual  produce, 
they  must  evidently  tend  either  to  increase 
or  diminish  the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of 
the  country. 

CHAPTER  II 

Of  Restraints  upon  the  Importation  from  For¬ 
eign  Countries  of  such  Goods  as  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  at  Home 

By  restraining,  either  by  high  duties  or  by 
absolute  prohibitions,  the  importation  of  such 
goods  from  foreign  countries  as  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  at  home,  the  monopoly  of  the  home 
market  is  more  or  less  secured  to  the  domestic 
industry  employed  in  producing  them.  Thus 
the  prohibition  of  importing  either  live  cattle 
or  salt  provisions  from  foreign  countries  se¬ 
cures  to  the  graziers  of  Great  Britain  the 
monopoly  of  the  home  market  for  butcher’s 
meat.  The  high  duties  upon  the  importation 
of  corn,  which  in  times  of  moderate  plenty 
amount  to  a  prohibition,  give  a  like  advan¬ 
tage  to  the  growers  of  that  commodity.  The 
prohibition  of  the  importation  of  foreign  wool¬ 
lens  is  equally  favourable  to  the  woollen 
manufacturers.  The  silk  manufacture,  though 
altogether  employed  upon  foreign  materials, 
has  lately  obtained  the  same  advantage.  The 
linen  manufacture  has  not  yet  obtained  it,  but 
is  making  great  strides  towards  it.  Many  other 
sorts  of  manufacturers  have,  in  the  same 
manner,  obtained  in  Great  Britain,  either  al¬ 
together  or  very  nearly,  a  monopoly  against 
their  countrymen.  The  variety  of  goods  of 
which  the  importation  into  Great  Britain  is 
prohibited,  either  absolutely,  or  under  certain 
circumstances,  greatly  exceeds  what  can  eas¬ 
ily  be  suspected  by  those  who  are  not  well 
acquainted  with  the  laws  of  the  customs. 

That  this  monopoly  of  the  home  market 
frequently  gives  great  encouragement  to  that 
particular  species  of  industry  which  enjoys  it, 
and  frequently  turns  towards  that  employ¬ 
ment  a  greater  share  of  both  the  labour  and 


193 


Restraints  on  Importation  of  Goods 


stock  of  the  society  than  would  otherwise  have 
gone  to  it,  cannot  be  doubted.  But  whether  it 
tends  either  to  increase  the  general  industry  of 
the  society,  or  to  give  it  the  most  advanta¬ 
geous  direction,  is  not,  perhaps,  altogether 
so  evident. 

The  general  industry  of  the  society  never 
can  exceed  what  the  capital  of  the  society  can 
employ.  As  the  number  of  workmen  that  can 
be  kept  in  employment  by  any  particular  per¬ 
son  must  bear  a  certain  proportion  to  his 
capital,  so  the  number  of  those  that  can  be 
continually  employed  by  all  the  members  of 
a  great  society  must  bear  a  certain  proportion 
to  the  whole  capital  of  that  society,  and  never 
can  exceed  that  proportion.  No  regulation  of 
commerce  can  increase  the  quantity  of  in¬ 
dustry  in  any  society  beyond  what  its  capital 
can  maintain.  It  can  only  divert  a  part  of  it 
into  a  direction  into  which  it  might  not  other¬ 
wise  have  gone;  and  it  is  by  no  means  certain 
that  this  artificial  direction  is  likely  to  be 
more  advantageous  to  the  society  than  that 
into  which  it  would  have  gone  of  its  own 
accord. 

Every  individual  is  continually  exerting  him¬ 
self  to  find  out  the  most  advantageous  em¬ 
ployment  for  whatever  capital  he  can  com¬ 
mand.  It  is  his  own  advantage,  indeed,  and 
not  that  of  the  society,  which  he  has  in  view. 
But  the  study  of  his  own  advantage  naturally, 
or  rather  necessarily,  leads  him  to  prefer  that 
employment  which  is  most  advantageous  to 
the  society. 

First,  every  individual  endeavours  to  em¬ 
ploy  his  capital  as  near  home  as  he  can,  and 
consequently  as  much  as  he  can  in  the  sup¬ 
port  of  domestic  industry;  provided  always 
that  he  can  thereby  obtain  the  ordinary,  or 
not  a  great  deal  less  than  the  ordinary  profits 
of  stock. 

Thus,  upon  equal  or  nearly  equal  profits, 
every  wholesale  merchant  naturally  prefers 
the  home  trade  to  the  foreign  trade  of  con¬ 
sumption,  and  the  foreign  trade  of  consump¬ 
tion  to  the  carrying  trade.  In  the  home  trade 
his  capital  is  never  so  long  out  of  his  sight  as 
it  frequently  is  in  the  foreign  trade  of  con¬ 
sumption.  He  can  know  better  the  character 
and  situation  of  the  persons  whom  he  trusts, 
and  if  he  should  happen  to  be  deceived,  he 
knows  better  the  laws  of  the  country  from 
which  he  must  seek  redress.  In  the  carrying 
trade,  the  capital  of  the  merchant  is,  as  it 
were,  divided  between  two  foreign  countries, 
and  no  part  of  it  is  ever  necessarily  brought 
home,  or  placed  under  his  own  immediate 
view  and  command.  The  capital  which  an 
Amsterdam  merchant  employs  in  carrying 
corn  from  Konigsberg  to  Lisbon,  and  fruit 
and  wine  from  Lisbon  to  Konigsberg,  must 
generally  be  the  one  half  of  it  at  Konigsberg 


and  the  other  half  at  Lisbon.  No  part  of  it 
need  ever  come  to  Amsterdam.  The  natural 
residence  of  such  a  merchant  should  either 
be  at  Konigsberg  or  Lisbon,  and  it  can  only 
be  some  very  particular  circumstances  which 
can  make  him  prefer  the  residence  of  Amster¬ 
dam.  The  uneasiness,  however,  which  he  feels 
at  being  separated  so  far  from  his  capital 
generally  determines  him  to  bring  part  both 
of  the  Konigsberg  goods  which  he  destines 
for  the  market  of  Lisbon,  and  of  the  Lisbon 
goods  which  he  destines  for  that  of  Konigs¬ 
berg,  to  Amsterdam:  and  though  this  neces¬ 
sarily  subjects  him  to  a  double  charge  of  load¬ 
ing  and  unloading,  as  well  as  to  the  payment 
of  some  duties  and  customs,  yet  for  the  sake 
of  having  some  part  of  his  capital  always 
under  his  own  view  and  command,  he  will¬ 
ingly  submits  to  this  extraordinary  charge; 
and  it  is  in  this  manner  that  every  country 
which  has  any  considerable  share  of  the  car¬ 
rying  trade  becomes  always  the  emporium,  or 
general  market,  for  the  goods  of  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  countries  whose  trade  it  carries  on.  The 
merchant,  in  order  to  save  a  second  loading 
and  unloading,  endeavours  always  to  sell  in 
the  home  market  as  much  of  the  goods  of  all 
those  different  countries  as  he  can,  and  thus, 
so  far  as  he  can,  to  convert  his  carrying  trade 
into  a  foreign  trade  of  consumption.  A  mer¬ 
chant,  in  the  same  manner,  who  is  engaged 
in  the  foreign  trade  of  consumption,  when 
he  collects  goods  for  foreign  markets,  will 
always  be  glad,  upon  equal  or  nearly  equal 
profits,  to  sell  as  great  a  part  of  them  at 
home  as  he  can.  He  saves  himself  the  risk 
and  trouble  of  exportation,  when,  so  far  as 
he  can,  he  thus  converts  his  foreign  trade  of 
consumption  into  a  home  trade.  Home  is  in 
this  manner  the  centre,  if  I  may  say  so,  round 
which  the  capitals  of  the  inhabitants  of  every 
country  are  continually  circulating,  and  to¬ 
wards  which  they  are  always  tending,  though 
by  particular  causes  they  may  sometimes  be 
driven  off  and  repelled  from  it  towards  more 
distant  employments.  But  a  capital  employed 
in  the  home  trade,  it  has  already  been  shown, 
necessarily  puts  into  motion  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  domestic  industry,  and  gives  revenue 
and  employment  to  a  greater  number  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country,  than  an  equal 
capital  employed  in  the  foreign  trade  of  con¬ 
sumption:  and  one  employed  in  the  foreign 
trade  of  consumption  has  the  same  advan¬ 
tage  over  an  equal  capital  employed  in  the 
carrying  trade.  Upon  equal,  or  only  nearly 
equal  profits,  therefore,  every  individual  natu¬ 
rally  inclines  to  employ  his  capital  in  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  likely  to  afford  the 
greatest  support  to  domestic  industry,  and 
to  give  revenue  and  employment  to  the 
greatest  number  of  people  of  his  own  country. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


194 

Secondly,  every  individual  who  employs 
his  capital  in  the  support  of  domestic  indus¬ 
try,  necessarily  endeavours  so  to  direct  that 
industry  that  its  produce  may  be  of  the 
greatest  possible  value. 

The  produce  of  industry  is  what  it  adds 
to  the  subject  or  materials  upon  which  it 
is  employed.  In  proportion  as  the  value  of 
this  produce  is  great  or  small,  so  will  like¬ 
wise  be  the  profits  of  the  employer.  But  it 
is  only  for  the  sake  of  profit  that  any  man 
employs  a  capital  in  the  support  of  industry; 
and  he  will  always,  therefore,  endeavour  to 
employ  it  in  the  support  of  that  industry  of 
which  the  produce  is  likely  to  be  of  the  great¬ 
est  value,  or  to  exchange  for  the  greatest 
quantity  either  of  money  or  of  other  goods. 

But  the  annual  revenue  of  every  society  is 
always  precisely  equal  to  the  exchangeable 
value  of  the  whole  annual  produce  of  its 
industry,  or  rather  is  precisely  the  same  thing 
with  that  exchangeable  value.  As  every  in¬ 
dividual,  therefore,  endeavours  as  much  as 
he  can  both  to  employ  his  capital  in  the  sup¬ 
port  of  domestic  industry,  and  so  to  direct 
that  industry  that  its  produce  may  be  of 
the  greatest  value;  every  individual  neces¬ 
sarily  labours  to  render  the  annual  revenue 
of  the  society  as  great  as  he  can.  He  gener¬ 
ally,  indeed,  neither  intends  to  promote  the 
public  interest,  nor  knows  how  much  he  is 
promoting  it.  By  preferring  the  support  of 
domestic  to  that  of  foreign  industry,  he  in¬ 
tends  only  his  own  security;  and  by  directing 
that  industry  in  such  a  manner  as  its  produce 
may  be  of  the  greatest  value,  he  intends  only 
his  own  gain,  and  he  is  in  this,  as  in  many 
other  cases,  led  by  an  invisible  hand  to  pro¬ 
mote  an  end  which  was  no  part  of  his  inten¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  it  always  the  worse  for  the  society 
that  it  was  no  part  of  it.  By  pursuing  his 
own  interest  he  frequently  promotes  that  of 
the  society  more  effectually  than  when  he 
really  intends  to  promote  it.  I  have  never 
known  much  good  clone  by  those  who  affected 
to  trade  for  the  public  good.  It  is  an  affecta¬ 
tion,  indeed,  not  very  common  among  mer¬ 
chants,  and  very  few  words  need  be  employed 
in  dissuading  them  from  it. 

What  is  the  species  of  domestic  industry 
which  his  capital  can  employ,  and  of  which 
the  produce  is  likely  to  be  of  the  greatest 
value,  every  individual,  it  is  evident,  can, 
in  his  local  situation,  judge  much  better  than 
any  statesman  or  lawgiver  can  do  for  him. 
The  statesman  who  should  attempt  to  direct 
private  people  in  what  manner  they  ought 
to  employ  their  capitals  would  not  only  load 
himself  with  a  most  unnecessary  attention, 
but  assume  an  authority  which  could  safely 
be  trusted,  not  only  to  no  single  person,  but 
to  no  council  or  senate  whatever,  and  which 


would  nowhere  be  so  dangerous  as  in  the 
hands  of  a  man  who  had  folly  and  presump¬ 
tion  enough  to  fancy  himself  fit  to  exercise  it. 

To  give  the  monopoly  of  the  home  market 
to  the  produce  of  domestic  industry,  in  any 
particular  art  or  manufacture,  is  in  some  meas¬ 
ure  to  direct  private  people  in  what  man¬ 
ner  they  ought  to  employ  their  capitals,  and 
must,  in  almost  all  cases,  be  either  a  use¬ 
less  or  a  hurtful  regulation.  If  the  produce 
of  domestic  can  be  brought  there  as  cheap  as 
that  of  foreign  industry,  the  regulation  is 
evidently  useless.  If  it  cannot,  it  must  gen¬ 
erally  be  hurtful.  It  is  the  maxim  of  every 
prudent  master  of  a  family  never  to  attempt 
to  make  at  home  what  it  will  cost  him  more 
to  make  than  to  buy.  The  tailor  does  not  at¬ 
tempt  to  make  his  own  shoes,  but  buys  them 
of  the  shoemaker.  The  shoemaker  does  not 
attempt  to  make  his  own  clothes,  but  employs 
a  tailor.  The  farmer  attempts  to  make  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other,  but  employs  those 
different  artificers.  All  of  them  find  it  for 
their  interest  to  employ  their  whole  industry 
in  a  way  in  which  they  have  some  advantage 
over  their  neighbours,  and  to  purchase  with 
a  part  of  its  produce,  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  with  the  price  of  a  part  of  it,  whatever 
else  they  have  occasion  for. 

What  is  prudence  in  the  conduct  of  every 
private  family  can  scarce  be  folly  in  that  of  a 
great  kingdom.  If  a  foreign  country  can  sup¬ 
ply  us  with  a  commodity  cheaper  than  we 
ourselves  can  make  it,  better  buy  it  of  them 
with  some  part  of  the  produce  of  our  own 
industry  employed  in  a  way  in  which  we  have 
some  advantage.  The  general  industry  of  the 
country,  being  always  in  proportion  to  the 
capital  which  employs  it,  will  not  thereby  be 
diminished,  no  more  than  that  of  the  above- 
mentioned  artificers;  but  only  left  to  find  out 
the  way  in  which  it  can  be  employed  with 
the  greatest  advantage.  It  is  certainly  not 
employed  to  the  greatest  advantage  when  it 
is  thus  directed  towards  an  object  which  it 
can  buy  cheaper  than  it  can  make.  The  value 
of  its  annual  produce  is  certainly  more  or  less 
diminished  when  it  is  thus  turned  away  from 
producing  commodities  evidently  of  more  val¬ 
ue  than  the  commodity  which  it  is  directed 
to  produce.  According  to  the  supposition,  that 
commodity  could  be  purchased  from  foreign 
countries  cheaper  than  it  can  be  made  at 
home.  It  could,  therefore,  have  been  pur¬ 
chased  with  a  part  only  of  the  commodities, 
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  with  a  part  only 
of  the  price  of  the  commodities,  which  the 
industry  employed  by  an  equal  capital  would 
have  produced  at  home,  had  it  been  left  to 
follow  its  natural  course.  The  industry  of  the 
country,  therefore,  is  thus  turned  away  from 
a  more  to  a  less  advantageous  employment, 


195 


Restraints  on  Importation  of  Goods 


and  the  exchangeable  value  of  its  annual 
produce,  instead  of  being  increased,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  intention  of  the  lawgiver,  must 
necessarily  be  diminished  by  every  such  regu¬ 
lation. 

By  means  of  such  regulations,  indeed,  a  par¬ 
ticular  manufacture  may  sometimes  be  ac¬ 
quired  sooner  than  it  could  have  been  other¬ 
wise,  and  after  a  certain  time  may  be  made 
at  home  as  cheap  or  cheaper  than  in  the  for¬ 
eign  country.  But  though  the  industry  of  the 
society  may  be  thus  carried  with  advantage 
into  a  particular  channel  sooner  than  it  could 
have  been  otherwise,  it  will  by  no  means  fol¬ 
low  that  the  sum  total,  either  of  its  industry, 
or  of  its  revenue,  can  ever  be  augmented  by 
any  such  regulation.  The  industry  of  the  so¬ 
ciety  can  augment  only  in  proportion  as  its 
capital  augments,  and  its  capital  can  augment 
only  in  proportion  to  what  can  be  gradually 
saved  out  of  its  revenue.  But  the  immediate 
effect  of  every  such  regulation  is  to  diminish 
its  revenue,  and  what  diminishes  its  revenue 
is  certainly  not  very  likely  to  augment  its 
capital  faster  than  it  would  have  augmented 
of  its  own  accord  had  both  capital  and  in¬ 
dustry  been  left  to  find  out  their  natural 
employments. 

Though  for  want  of  such  regulations  the 
society  should  never  acquire  the  proposed 
manufacture,  it  would  not,  upon  that  ac¬ 
count,  necessarily  be  the  poorer  in  any  one 
period  of  its  duration.  In  every  period  of  its 
duration  its  whole  capital  and  industry  might 
still  have  been  employed,  though  upon  differ¬ 
ent  objects,  in  the  manner  that  was  most  ad¬ 
vantageous  at  the  time.  In  every  period  its 
revenue  might  have  been  the  greatest  which 
its  capital  could  afford,  and  both  capital  and 
revenue  might  have  been  augmented  with  the 
greatest  possible  rapidity. 

The  natural  advantages  which  one  country 
has  over  another  in  producing  particular  com¬ 
modities  are  sometimes  so  great  that  it  is 
acknowledged  by  all  the  world  to  be  in  vain 
to  struggle  with  them.  By  means  of  glasses, 
hotbeds,  and  hot  walls,  very  good  grapes  can 
be  raised  in  Scotland,  and  very  good  wine  too 
can  be  made  of  them  at  about  thirty  times 
the  expense  for  which  at  least  equally  good 
can  be  brought  from  foreign  countries.  Would 
it  be  a  reasonable  law  to  prohibit  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  all  foreign  wines  merely  to  encour¬ 
age  the  making  of  claret  and  burgundy  in 
Scotland?  But  if  there  would  be  a  manifest 
absurdity  in  turning  towards  any  employ¬ 
ment  thirty  times  more  of  the  capital  and 
industry  of  the  country  than  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  purchase  from  foreign  countries  an 
equal  quantity  of  the  commodities  wanted, 
there  must  be  an  absurdity,  though  not  al¬ 
together  so  glaring,  yet  exactly  of  the  same 


kind,  in  turning  towards  any  such  employ¬ 
ment  a  thirtieth,  or  even  a  three-hundredth 
part  more  of  either.  Whether  the  advantages 
which  one  country  has  over  another  be  natu¬ 
ral  or  acquired  is  in  this  respect  of  no  conse¬ 
quence.  As  long  as  the  one  country  has  those 
advantages,  and  the  other  wants  them,  it  will 
always  be  more  advantageous  for  the  latter 
rather  to  buy  of  the  former  than  to  make.  It 
is  an  acquired  advantage  only,  which  one 
artificer  has  over  his  neighbour,  who  exercises 
another  trade;  and  yet  they  both  find  it  more 
advantageous  to  buy  of  one  another  than  to 
make  what  does  not  belong  to  their  particular 
trades. 

Merchants  and  manufacturers  are  the  peo¬ 
ple  who  derive  the  greatest  advantage  from 
this  monopoly  of  the  home  market.  The  pro¬ 
hibition  of  the  importation  of  foreign  cattle, 
and  of  salt  provisions,  together  with  the  high 
duties  upon  foreign  corn,  which  in  times  of 
moderate  plenty  amount  to  a  prohibition,  are 
not  near  so  advantageous  to  the  graziers  and 
farmers  of  Great  Britain  as  other  regulations 
of  the  same  kind  are  to  its  merchants  and 
manufacturers.  Manufactures,  those  of  the 
finer  kind  especially,  are  more  easily  trans¬ 
ported  from  one  country  to  another  than 
corn  or  cattle.  It  is  in  the  fetching  and  carry¬ 
ing  manufactures,  accordingly,  that  foreign 
trade  is  chiefly  employed.  In  manufactures, 
a  very  small  advantage  will  enable  foreigners 
to  undersell  our  own  workmen,  even  in  the 
home  market.  It  will  require  a  very  great  one 
to  enable  them  to  do  so  in  the  rude  produce 
of  the  soil.  If  the  free  importation  of  foreign 
manufactures  were  permitted,  several  of  the 
home  manufactures  would  probably  suffer, 
and  some  of  them,  perhaps,  go  to  ruin  alto¬ 
gether,  and  a  considerable  part  of  the  stock 
and  industry  at  present  employed  in  them 
would  be  forced  to  find  out  some  other  em¬ 
ployment.  But  the  freest  importation  of  the 
rude  produce  of  the  soil  could  have  no  such 
effect  upon  the  agriculture  of  the  country. 

If  the  importation  of  foreign  cattle,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  were  made  ever  so  free,  so  few  could 
be  imported  that  the  grazing  trade  of  Great 
Britain  could  be  little  affected  by  it.  Live 
cattle  are,  perhaps,  the  only  commodity  of 
which  the  transportation  is  more  expensive 
by  sea  than  by  land.  By  land  they  carry 
themselves  to  market.  By  sea,  not  only  the 
cattle,  but  their  food  and  their  water  too, 
must  be  carried  at  no  small  expense  and  in- 
conveniency.  The  short  sea  between  Ireland 
and  Great  Britain,  indeed,  renders  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  Irish  cattle  more  easy.  But  though 
the  free  importation  of  them,  which  was 
lately  permitted  only  for  a  limited  time,  were 
rendered  perpetual,  it  could  have  no  consider¬ 
able  effect  upon  the  interest  of  the  graziers 


196  The  Wealth 

of  Great  Britain.  Those  parts  of  Great  Britain 
which  border  upon  the  Irish  Sea  are  all  graz¬ 
ing  countries.  Irish  cattle  could  never  be  im¬ 
ported  for  their  use,  but  must  be  driven 
through  those  very  extensive  countries,  at  no 
small  expense  and  inconveniency,  before  they 
could  arrive  at  their  proper  market.  Fat  cattle 
could  not  be  driven  so  far.  Lean  cattle,  there¬ 
fore,  only  could  be  imported,  and  such  im¬ 
portation  could  interfere,  not  with  the  inter¬ 
est  of  the  feeding  or  fattening  countries,  to 
which,  by  reducing  the  price  of  lean  cattle,  it 
would  rather  be  advantageous,  but  with  that 
of  the  breeding  countries  only.  The  small 
number  of  Irish  cattle  imported  since  their 
importation  was  permitted,  together  with  the 
good  price  at  which  lean  cattle  still  continue 
to  sell,  seem  to  demonstrate  that  even  the 
breeding  countries  of  Great  Britain  are  never 
likely  to  be  much  affected  by  the  free  impor¬ 
tation  of  Irish  cattle.  The  common  people 
of  Ireland,  indeed,  are  said  to  have  sometimes 
opposed  with  violence  the  exportation  of  their 
cattle.  But  if  the  exporters  had  found  any 
great  advantage  in  continuing  the  trade,  they 
could  easily,  when  the  law  was  on  their  side, 
have  conquered  this  mobbish  opposition. 

Feeding  and  fattening  countries,  besides, 
must  always  be  highly  improved,  whereas 
breeding  countries  are  generally  uncultivated. 
The  high  price  of  lean  cattle,  by  augmenting 
the  value  of  uncultivated  land,  is  like  a 
bounty  against  improvement.  To  any  country 
which  was  highly  improved  throughout,  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  import  its 
lean  cattle  than  to  breed  them.  The  province 
of  Holland,  accordingly,  is  said  to  follow  this 
maxim  at  present.  The  mountains  of  Scot¬ 
land,  Wales,  and  Northumberland,  indeed, 
are  countries  not  capable  of  much  improve¬ 
ment,  and  seem  destined  by  nature  to  be  the 
breeding  countries  of  Great  Britain.  The  freest 
importation  of  foreign  cattle  could  have  no 
other  effect  than  to  hinder  those  breeding 
countries  from  taking  advantage  of  the  in¬ 
creasing  population  and  improvement  of  the 
rest  of  the  kingdom,  from  raising  their  price 
to  an  exorbitant  height,  and  from  laying  a 
real  tax  upon  all  the  more  improved  and  cul¬ 
tivated  parts  of  the  country. 

The  freest  importation  of  salt  provisions, 
in  the  same  manner,  could  have  as  little  effect 
upon  the  interest  of  the  graziers  of  Great 
Britain  as  that  of  live  cattle.  Salt  provisions 
are  not  only  a  very  bulky  commodity,  but 
when  compared  with  fresh  meat,  they  are  a 
commodity  both  of  worse  quality,  and  as  they 
cost  more  labour  and  expense,  of  higher  price. 
They  could  never,  therefore,  come  into  com¬ 
petition  with  the  fresh  meat,  though  they 
might  with  the  salt  provisions  of  the  country. 
They  might  be  used  for  victualling  ships  for 


of  Nations 

distant  voyages  and  such  like  uses,  but  could 
never  make  any  considerable  part  of  the  food 
of  the  people.  The  small  quantity  of  salt  pro¬ 
visions  imported  from  Ireland  since  their 
importation  was  rendered  free  is  an  experi¬ 
mental  proof  that  our  graziers  have  nothing 
to  apprehend  from  it.  It  does  not  appear  that 
the  price  of  butcher’s  meat  has  ever  been 
sensibly  affected  by  it. 

Even  the  free  importation  of  foreign  corn 
could  very  little  affect  the  interest  of  the 
farmers  of  Great  Britain.  Corn  is  a  much 
more  bulky  commodity  than  butcher’s  meat. 
A  pound  of  wheat  at  a  penny  is  as  dear  as 
a  pound  of  butcher’s  meat  at  fourpence.  The 
small  quantity  of  foreign  corn  imported  even 
in  times  of  the  greatest  scarcity  may  satisfy 
our  farmers  that  they  can  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  freest  importation.  The  average 
quantity  imported,  one  year  with  another, 
amounts  only,  according  to  the  very  well  in¬ 
formed  author  of  the  tracts  upon  the  corn 
trade,  to  twenty-three  thousand  seven  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty-eight  quarters  of  all  sorts  of 
grain,  and  does  not  exceed  the  five  hundred 
and  seventy-first  part  of  the  annual  consump¬ 
tion.  But  as  the  bounty  upon  corn  occasions 
a  greater  exportation  in  years  of  plenty,  so 
it  must  of  consequence  occasion  a  greater  im¬ 
portation  in  years  of  scarcity  than  in  the  ac¬ 
tual  state  of  tillage  would  otherwise  take 
place.  By  means  of  it  the  plenty  of  one  year 
does  not  compensate  the  scarcity  of  another, 
and  as  the  average  quantity  exported  is  neces¬ 
sarily  augmented  by  it,  so  must  likewise,  in 
the  actual  state  of  tillage,  the  average  quan¬ 
tity  imported.  If  there  were  no  bounty,  as 
less  corn  would  be  exported,  so  it  is  probable 
that,  one  year  with  another,  less  would  be 
imported  than  at  present.  The  corn-mer¬ 
chants,  the  fetchers  and  carriers  of  corn  be¬ 
tween  Great  Britain  and  foreign  countries 
would  have  much  less  employment,  and  might 
suffer  considerably;  but  the  country  gentle¬ 
men  and  farmers  could  suffer  very  little.  It 
is  in  the  corn  merchants  accordingly,  rather 
than  in  the  country  gentlemen  and  farmers, 
that  I  have  observed  the  greatest  anxiety  for 
the  renewal  and  continuation  of  the  bounty. 

Country  gentlemen  and  farmers  are,  to 
their  great  honour,  of  all  people,  the  least 
subject  to  the  wretched  spirit  of  monopoly. 
The  undertaker  of  a  great  manufactory  is 
sometimes  alarmed  if  another  work  of  the 
same  kind  is  established  within  twenty  miles 
of  him.  The  Dutch  undertaker  of  the  woollen 
manufacture  at  Abbeville  stipulated  that  no 
work  of  the  same  kind  should  be  established 
within  thirty  leagues  of  that  city.  Farmers 
and  country  gentlemen,  on  the  contrary,  are 
generally  disposed  rather  to  promote  than  to 
obstruct  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of 


Restraints  on  Importation  of  Goods 


their  neighbours’  farms  and  estates.  They  have 
no  secrets  such  as  those  of  the  greater  part 
of  manufacturers,  but  are  generally  rather 
fond  of  communicating  to  their  neighbours 
and  of  extending  as  far  as  possible  any 
new  practice  which  they  have  found  to  be 
advantageous.  Pius  Questus ,  says  old  Cato, 
stabilissimusque,  minimeque  invidiosus;  mini- 
meque  mate  cogitantes  sunt ,  qui  in  eo  studio 
occupati  sunt.  Country  gentlemen  and  farm¬ 
ers,  dispersed  in  different  parts  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  cannot  so  easily  combine  as  merchants 
and  manufacturers,  who,  being  collected  into 
towns,  and  accustomed  to  that  exclusive  cor¬ 
poration  spirit  which  prevails  in  them,  natu¬ 
rally  endeavour  to  obtain  against  all  their 
countrymen  the  same  exclusive  privilege 
which  they  generally  possess  against  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  their  respective  towns.  They  ac¬ 
cordingly  seem  to  have  been  the  original 
inventors  of  those  restraints  upon  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  foreign  goods  which  secure  to  them 
the  monopoly  of  the  home  market.  It  was 
probably  in  imitation  of  them,  and  to  put 
themselves  upon  a  level  with  those  who,  they 
found,  were  disposed  to  oppress  them,  that 
the  country  gentlemen  and  farmers  of  Great 
Britain  in  so  far  forgot  the  generosity  which 
is  natural  to  their  station  as  to  demand  the 
exclusive  privilege  of  supplying  their  country¬ 
men  with  corn  and  butcher’s  meat.  They  did 
not  perhaps  take  time  to  consider  how  much 
less  their  interest  could  be  affected  by  the 
freedom  of  trade  than  that  of  the  people 
whose  example  they  followed. 

To  prohibit  by  a  perpetual  law  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  foreign  corn  and  cattle  is  in  reality 
to  enact  that  the  population  and  industry  of 
the  country  shall  at  no  time  exceed  what  the 
rude  produce  of  its  own  soil  can  maintain. 

There  seem,  however,  to  be  two  cases  in 
which  it  will  generally  be  advantageous  to 
lay  some  burden  upon  foreign  for  the  en¬ 
couragement  of  domestic  industry. 

The  first  is,  when  some  particular  sort  of 
industry  is  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the 
country.  The  defence  of  Great  Britain,  for 
example,  depends  very  much  upon  the  num¬ 
ber  of  its  sailors  and  shipping.  The  Act  of 
Navigation,  therefore,  very  properly  endeav¬ 
ours  to  give  the  sailors  and  shipping  of  Great 
Britain  the  monopoly  of  the  trade  of  their 
own  country,  in  some  cases  by  absolute  pro¬ 
hibitions  and  in  others  by  heavy  burdens 
upon  the  shipping  of  foreign  countries.  The 
following  are  the  principal  dispositions  of  this 
Act. 

First,  all  ships,  of  which  the  owners  and 
three-fourths  of  the  mariners  are  not  British 
subjects,  are  prohibited,  upon  pain  of  for¬ 
feiting  ship  and  cargo,  from  trading  to  the 
British  settlements  and  plantations,  or  from 


197 

being  employed  in  the  coasting  trade  of  Great 
Britain. 

Secondly,  a  great  variety  of  the  most  bulky 
articles  of  importation  can  be  brought  into 
Great  Britain  only,  either  in  such  ships  as  are 
above  described,  or  in  ships  of  the  country 
where  those  goods  are  purchased,  and  of 
which  the  owners,  masters,  and  three-fourths 
of  the  mariners  are  of  that  particular  country; 
and  when  imported  even  in  ships  of  this 
latter  kind,  they  are  subject  to  double  aliens’ 
duty.  If  imported  in  ships  of  any  other  coun¬ 
try,  the  penalty  is  forfeiture  of  ship  and 
goods.  When  this  act  was  made,  the  Dutch 
were,  what  they  still  are,  the  great  carriers 
of  Europe,  and  by  this  regulation  they  were 
entirely  excluded  from  being  the  carriers  to 
Great  Britain,  or  from  importing  to  us  the 
goods  of  any  other  European  country. 

Thirdly,  a  great  variety  of  the  most  bulky 
articles  of  importation  are  prohibited  from 
being  imported,  even  in  British  ships,  from 
any  country  but  that  in  which  they  are  pro¬ 
duced,  under  pains  of  forfeiting  ship  and 
cargo.  This  regulation,  too,  was  probably  in¬ 
tended  against  the  Dutch.  Holland  was  then, 
as  now,  the  great  emporium  for  all  European 
goods,  and  by  this  regulation  British  ships 
were  hindered  from  loading  in  Holland  the 
goods  of  any  other  European  country. 

Fourthly,  salt  fish  of  all  kinds,  whale-fins, 
whale-bone,  oil,  and  blubber,  not  caught  by 
and  cured  on  board  British  vessels,  when  im¬ 
ported  into  Great  Britain,  are  subjected  to 
double  aliens’  duty.  The  Dutch,  as  they  are 
still  the  principal,  were  then  the  only  fishers 
in  Europe  that  attempted  to  supply  foreign 
nations  with  fish.  By  this  regulation,  a  very 
heavy  burden  was  laid  upon  their  supplying 
Great  Britain. 

When  the  Act  of  Navigation  was  made, 
though  England  and  Holland  were  not  actu¬ 
ally  at  war,  the  most  violent  animosity  sub¬ 
sisted  between  the  two  nations.  It  had  begun 
during  the  government  of  the  Long  Parlia¬ 
ment,  which  first  framed  this  act,  and  it 
broke  out  soon  after  in  the  Dutch  wars  dur¬ 
ing  that  of  the  Protector  and  of  Charles  the 
Second.  It  is  not  impossible,  therefore,  that 
some  of  the  regulations  of  this  famous  act 
may  have  proceeded  from  national  animosity. 
They  are  as  wise,  however,  as  if  they  had  all 
been  dictated  by  the  most  deliberate  wisdom. 
National  animosity  at  that  particular  time 
aimed  at  the  very  same  object  which  the  most 
deliberate  wisdom  would  have  recommended, 
the  diminution  of  the  naval  power  of  Holland, 
the  only  naval  power  which  could  endanger 
the  security  of  Enlgand. 

The  Act  of  Navigation  is  not  favourable 
to  foreign  commerce,  or  to  the  growth  of 
that  opulence  which  can  arise  from  it.  The 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


198 

interest  of  a  nation  in  its  commercial  rela¬ 
tions  to  foreign  nations  is,  like  that  of  a  mer¬ 
chant  with  regard  to  the  different  people  with 
whom  he  deals,  to  buy  as  cheap  and  to  sell 
as  dear  as  possible.  But  it  will  be  most  likely 
to  buy  cheap,  when  by  the  most  perfect  free¬ 
dom  of  trade  it  encourages  all  nations  to 
bring  to  it  the  goods  which  it  has  occasion 
to  purchase;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  it  will 
be  most  likely  to  sell  dear,  when  its  markets 
are  thus  filled  with  the  greatest  number  of 
buyers.  The  Act  of  Navigation,  it  is  true,  lays 
no  burden  upon  foreign  ships  that  come  to 
export  the  produce  of  British  industry.  Even 
the  ancient  aliens’  duty,  which  used  to  be 
paid  upon  all  goods  exported  as  well  as  im¬ 
ported,  has,  by  several  subsequent  acts,  been 
taken  off  from  the  greater  part  of  the  articles 
of  exportation.  But  if  foreigners,  either  by 
prohibitions  or  high  duties,  are  hindered  from 
coming  to  sell,  they  cannot  always  afford  to 
come  to  buy;  because  coming  without  a  cargo, 
they  must  lose  the  freight  from  their  own 
country  to  Great  Britain.  By  diminishing  the 
number  of  sellers,  therefore,  we  necessarily 
diminish  that  of  buyers,  and  are  thus  likely 
not  only  to  buy  foreign  goods  dearer,  but  to 
sell  our  own  cheaper,  than  if  there  was  a  more 
perfect  freedom  of  trade.  As  defence,  how¬ 
ever,  it  is  of  much  more  importance  than  opu¬ 
lence,  the  Act  of  Navigation  is,  perhaps,  the 
wisest  of  all  the  commercial  regulations  of 
England. 

The  second  case,  in  which  it  will  generally 
be  advantageous  to  lay  some  burden  upon 
foreign  for  the  encouragement  of  domestic 
industry  is,  when  some  tax  is  imposed  at 
home  upon  the  produce  of  the  latter.  In  this 
case,  it  seems  reasonable  that  an  equal  tax 
should  be  imposed  upon  the  like  produce  of 
the  former.  This  would  not  give  the  monopoly 
of  the  home  market  to  domestic  industry,  nor 
turn  towards  a  particular  employment  a 
greater  share  af  the  stock  and  labour  of  the 
country  than  what  would  naturally  go  to  it. 
It  would  only  hinder  any  part  of  what  would 
naturally  go  to  it  from  being  turned  away  by 
the  tax  into  a  less  natural  direction,  and 
would  leave  the  competition  between  foreign 
and  domestic  industry,  after  the  tax,  as  near¬ 
ly  as  possible  upon  the  same  footing  as  before 
it.  In  Great  Britain,  when  any  such  tax  is 
laid  upon  the  produce  of  domestic  industry, 
it  is  usual  at  the  same  time,  in  order  to  stop 
the  clamorous  complaints  of  our  merchants 
and  manufacturers  that  they  will  be  under¬ 
sold  at  home,  to  lay  a  much  heavier  duty 
upon  the  importation  of  all  foreign  goods  of 
the  same  kind. 

This  second  limitation  of  the  freedom  of 
trade  according  to  some  people  should,  upon 
some  occasions,  be  extended  much  farther 


than  to  the  precise  foreign  commodities  which 
could  come  into  competition  with  those  which 
had  been  taxed  at  home.  When  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life  have  been  taxed  in  any  country, 
it  becomes  proper,  they  pretend,  to  tax  not 
only  the  like  necessaries  of  life  imported  from 
other  countries,  but  all  sorts  of  foreign  goods 
which  can  come  into  competition  with  any¬ 
thing  that  is  the  produce  of  domestic  indus¬ 
try.  Subsistence,  they  say,  becomes  necessar¬ 
ily  dearer  in  consequence  of  such  taxes;  and 
the  price  of  labour  must  always  rise  with  the 
price  of  the  labourers’  subsistence.  Every 
commodity,  therefore,  which  is  the  produce  of 
domestic  industry,  though  not  immediately 
taxed  itself,  becomes  dearer  in  consequence  of 
such  taxes,  because  the  labour  which  pro¬ 
duces  it  becomes  so.  Such  taxes,  therefore, 
are  really  equivalent,  they  say,  to  a  tax 
upon  every  particular  commodity  produced 
at  home.  In  order  to  put  domestic  upon  the 
same  footing  with  foreign  industry,  therefore, 
it  becomes  necessary,  they  think,  to  lay  some 
duty  upon  every  foreign  commodity  equal  to 
this  enhancement  of  the  price  of  the  home 
commodities  with  which  it  can  come  into 
competition. 

Whether  taxes  upon  the  necessaries  of  life, 
such  as  those  in  Great  Britain  upon  soap, 
salt,  leather,  candles,  etc.,  necessarily  raise 
the  price  of  labour,  and  consequently  that  of 
all  other  commodities,  I  shall  consider  here¬ 
after  when  I  come  to  treat  of  taxes.  Suppos¬ 
ing,  however,  in  the  meantime,  that  they  have 
this  effect,  and  they  have  it  undoubtedly,  this 
general  enhancement  of  the  price  of  all  com¬ 
modities,  in  consequence  of  that  of  labour,  is 
a  case  which  differs  in  the  two  following  re¬ 
spects  from  that  of  a  particular  commodity 
of  which  the  price  was  enhanced  by  a  particu¬ 
lar  tax  immediately  imposed  upon  it. 

First,  it  might  always  be  known  with  great 
exactness  how  far  the  price  of  such  a  com¬ 
modity  could  be  enhanced  by  such  a  tax: 
but  how  far  the  general  enhancement  of  the 
price  of  labour  might  affect  that  of  every 
different  commodity  about  which  labour  was 
employed  could  never  be  known  with  any  tol¬ 
erable  exactness.  It  would  be  impossible, 
therefore,  to  proportion  with  any  tolerable 
exactness  the  tax  upon  every  foreign  to  this 
enhancement  of  the  price  of  every  home  com¬ 
modity. 

Secondly,  taxes  upon  the  necessaries  of  life 
have  nearly  the  same  effect  upon  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  people  as  a  poor  soil  and 
a  bad  climate.  Provisions  are  thereby  ren¬ 
dered  dearer  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  re¬ 
quired  extraordinary  labour  and  expense  to 
raise  them.  As  in  the  natural  scarcity  arising 
from  soil  and  climate  it  would  be  absurd  to 
direct  the  people  in  what  manner  they  ought 


199 


Restraints  on  Importation  of  Goods 


to  employ  their  capitals  and  industry,  so  is 
it  likewise  in  the  artificial  scarcity  arising 
from  such  taxes.  To  be  left  to  accommodate, 
as  well  as  they  could,  their  industry  to  their 
situation,  and  to  find  out  those  employments 
in  which,  notwithstanding  their  unfavourable 
circumstances,  they  might  have  some  advan¬ 
tage  either  in  the  home  or  in  the  foreign  mar¬ 
ket,  is  what  in  both  cases  would  evidently  be 
most  for  their  advantage.  To  lay  a  new  tax 
upon  them,  because  they  are  already  over¬ 
burdened  with  taxes,  and  because  they  al¬ 
ready  pay  too  dear  for  the  necessaries  of  life, 
to  make  them  likewise  pay  too  dear  for  the 
greater  part  of  other  commodities,  is  certainly 
a  most  absurd  way  of  making  amends. 

Such  taxes,  when  they  have  grown  up  to  a 
certain  height,  are  a  curse  equal  to  the  bar¬ 
renness  of  the  earth  and  the  inclemency  of 
the  heavens;  and  yet  it  is  in  the  richest  and 
most  industrious  countries  that  they  have 
been  most  generally  imposed.  No  other  coun¬ 
tries  could  support  so  great  a  disorder.  As  the 
strongest  bodies  only  can  live  and  enjoy 
health  under  an  unwholesome  regimen,  so  the 
nations  only  that  in  every  sort  of  industry 
have  the  greatest  natural  and  acquired  ad¬ 
vantages  can  subsist  and  prosper  under  such 
taxes.  Holland  is  the  country  in  Europe  in 
which  they  abound  most,  and  which  from 
peculiar  circumstances  continues  to  prosper, 
not  by  means  of  them,  as  has  been  most  ab¬ 
surdly  supposed,  but  in  spite  of  them. 

As  there  are  two  cases  in  which  it  will  gen¬ 
erally  be  advantageous  to  lay  some  burden 
upon  foreign  for  the  encouragement  of  do¬ 
mestic  industry,  so  there  are  two  others  in 
which  it  may  sometimes  be  a  matter  of  de¬ 
liberation;  in  the  one,  how  far  it  is  proper  to 
continue  the  free  importation  of  certain  for¬ 
eign  goods;  and  in  the  other,  how  far,  or  in 
what  manner,  it  may  be  proper  to  restore  that 
free  importation  after  it  has  been  for  some 
time  interrupted. 

The  case  in  which  it  may  sometimes  be  a 
matter  of  deliberation  how  far  it  is  proper  to 
continue  the  free  importation  of  certain  for¬ 
eign  goods  is,  when  some  foreign  nation  re¬ 
strains  by  high  duties  or  prohibitions  the  im¬ 
portation  of  some  of  our  manufactures  into 
their  country.  Revenge  in  this  case  naturally 
dictates  retaliation,  and  that  we  should  im¬ 
pose  the  like  duties  and  prohibitions  upon  the 
importation  of  some  or  all  of  their  manufac¬ 
tures  into  ours.  Nations,  accordingly,  seldom 
fail  to  retaliate  in  this  manner.  The  French 
have  been  particularly  forward  to  favour 
their  own  manufactures  by  restraining  the  im¬ 
portation  of  such  foreign  goods  as  could  come 
into  competition  with  them.  In  this  consisted 
a  great  part  of  the  policy  of  Mr.  Colbert,  who, 
notwithstanding  his  great  abilities,  seems  in 


this  case  to  have  been  imposed  upon  by 
the  sophistry  of  merchants  and  manufactur¬ 
ers,  who  are  always  demanding  a  monopoly 
against  their  countrymen.  It  is  at  present  the 
opinion  of  the  most  intelligent  men  in  France 
that  his  operations  of  this  kind  have  not  been 
beneficial  to  his  country.  That  minister,  by 
the  tariff  of  1667,  imposed  very  high  duties 
upon  a  great  number  of  foreign  manufactures. 
Upon  his  refusing  to  moderate  them  in  favour 
of  the  Dutch,  they  in  1671  prohibited  the 
importation  of  the  wines,  brandies,  and  manu¬ 
factures  of  France.  The  war  of  1672  seems  to 
have  been  in  part  occasioned  by  this  commer¬ 
cial  dispute.  The  peace  of  Nimeguen  put  an 
end  to  it  in  1678  by  moderating  some  of  those 
duties  in  favour  of  the  Dutch,  who  in  conse¬ 
quence  took  off  their  prohibition.  It  was 
about  the  same  time  that  the  French  and 
English  began  mutually  to  oppress  each 
other’s  industry  by  the  like  duties  and  prohi¬ 
bitions,  of  which  the  French,  however,  seem 
to  have  set  the  first  example.  The  spirit  of 
hostility  which  has  subsisted  between  the  two 
nations  ever  since  has  hitherto  hindered  them 
from  being  moderated  on  either  side.  In  1697 
the  English  prohibited  the  importation  of 
bonelace,  the  manufacture  of  Flanders.  The 
government  of  that  country,  at  that  time 
under  the  dominion  of  Spain,  prohibited  in  re¬ 
turn  the  importation  of  English  woollens.  In 
1700,  the  prohibition  of  importing  bonelace 
into  England  was  taken  off  upon  condition 
that  the  importance  of  English  woollens  into 
Flanders  should  be  put  on  the  same  footing 
as  before. 

There  may  be  good  policy  in  retaliations  of 
this  kind,  when  there  is  a  probability  that  they 
will  procure  the  repeal  of  the  high  duties  or 
prohibitions  complained  of.  The  recovery  of 
a  great  foreign  market  will  generally  more 
than  compensate  the  transitory  inconveniency 
of  paying  dearer  during  a  short  time  for  some 
sorts  of  goods.  To  judge  whether  such  retalia¬ 
tions  are  likely  to  produce  such  an  effect  does 
not,  perhaps,  belong  so  much  to  the  science  of 
a  legislator,  whose  deliberations  ought  to  be 
governed  by  general  principles  which  are  al¬ 
ways  the  same,  as  to  the  skill  of  that  insidious 
and  crafty  animal,  vulgarly  called  a  states¬ 
man  or  politician,  whose  councils  are  directed 
by  the  momentary  fluctuations  of  affairs. 
When  there  is  no  probability  that  any  such 
repeal  can  be  procured,  it  seems  a  bad  method 
of  compensating  the  injury  done  to  certain 
classes  of  our  people  to  do  another  injury 
ourselves,  not  only  to  those  classes,  but  to  al¬ 
most  all  the  other  classes  of  them.  When  our 
neighbours  prohibit  some  manufacture  of 
ours,  we  generally  prohibit,  not  only  the 
same,  for  that  alone  would  seldom  affect 
them  considerably,  but  some  other  manufac- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


200 

ture  of  theirs.  This  may  no  doubt  give  en¬ 
couragement  to  some  particular  class  of  work¬ 
men  among  ourselves,  and  by  excluding  some 
of  their  rivals,  may  enable  them  to  raise  their 
price  in  the  home  market.  Those  workmen, 
however,  who  suffered  by  our  neighbours’ 
prohibition  will  not  be  benefited  by  ours.  On 
the  contrary,  they  and  almost  all  the  other 
classes  of  our  citizens  will  thereby  be  obliged 
to  pay  dearer  than  before  for  certain  goods. 
Every  such  law,  therefore,  imposes  a  real  tax 
upon  the  whole  country,  not  in  favour  of  that 
particular  class  of  workmen  who  were  injured 
by  our  neighbours’  prohibition,  but  of  some 
other  class. 

The  case  in  which  it  may  sometimes  be  a 
matter  of  deliberation,  how  far,  or  in  what 
manner,  it  is  proper  to  restore  the  free  im¬ 
portation  of  foreign  goods,  after  it  has  been 
for  some  time  interrupted,  is,  when  particular 
manufactures,  by  means  of  high  duties  or 
prohibitions  upon  all  foreign  goods  which  can 
come  into  competition  with  them,  have  been 
so  far  extended  as  to  employ  a  great  multi¬ 
tude  of  hands.  Humanity  may  in  this  case 
require  that  the  freedom  of  trade  should  be 
restored  only  by  slow  gradations,  and  with 
a  good  deal  of  reserve  and  circumspection. 
Were  those  high  duties  and  prohibitions  tak¬ 
en  away  all  at  once,  cheaper  foreign  goods 
of  the  same  kind  might  be  poured  so  fast  into 
the  home  market  as  to  deprive  all  at  once 
many  thousands  of  our  people  of  their  ordi¬ 
nary  employment  and  means  of  subsistence. 
The  disorder  which  this  would  occasion  might 
no  doubt  be  very  considerable.  It  would  in 
all  probability,  however,  be  much  less  than 
is  commonly  imagined,  for  the  two  following 
reasons:  — 

First,  all  those  manufactures,  of  which  any 
part  is  commonly  exported  to  other  European 
countries  without  a  bounty,  could  be  very 
little  affected  by  the  freest  importation  of 
foreign  goods.  Such  manufactures  must  be 
sold  as  cheap  abroad  as  any  other  foreign 
goods  of  the  same  quality  and  kind,  and  con¬ 
sequently  must  be  sold  cheaper  at  home. 
They  would  still,  therefore,  keep  possession 
of  the  home  market,  and  though  a  capricious 
man  of  fashion  might  sometimes  prefer  for¬ 
eign  wares,  merely  because  they  were  foreign, 
to  cheaper  and  better  goods  of  the  same  kind 
that  were  made  at  home,  this  folly  could, 
from  the  nature  of  things,  extend  to  so  few 
that  it  could  make  no  sensible  impression 
upon  the  general  employment  of  the  people. 
But  a  great  part  of  all  the  different  branches 
of  our  woollen  manufacture,  of  our  tanned 
leather,  and  of  our  hardware,  are  annually 
exported  to  other  European  countries  with¬ 
out  any  bounty,  and  these  are  the  manufac¬ 
tures  which  employ  the  greatest  number  of 


hands.  The  silk,  perhaps,  is  the  manufacture 
which  would  suffer  the  most  by  this  freedom 
of  trade,  and  after  it  the  linen,  though  the 
latter  much  less  than  the  former. 

Secondly,  though  a  great  number  of  people 
should,  by  thus  restoring  the  freedom  of 
trade,  be  thrown  all  at  once  out  of  their  ordi¬ 
nary  employment  and  common  method  of 
subsistence,  it  would  by  no  means  follow  that 
they  would  thereby  be  deprived  either  of  em¬ 
ployment  or  subsistence.  By  the  reduction  of 
the  army  and  navy  at  the  end  of  the  late 
war,  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  soldiers 
and  seamen,  a  number  equal  to  what  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  greatest  manufactures,  were  all 
at  once  thrown  out  of  their  ordinary  employ¬ 
ment;  but,  though  they  no  doubt  suffered 
some  inconveniency,  they  were  not  thereby 
deprived  of  all  employment  and  subsistence. 
The  greater  part  of  the  seamen,  it  is  prob¬ 
able,  gradually  betook  themselves  to  the  mer¬ 
chant-service  as  they  could  find  occasion,  and 
in  the  meantime  both  they  and  the  soldiers 
were  absorbed  in  the  great  mass  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  employed  in  a  great  variety  of  occu¬ 
pations.  Not  only  no  great  convulsion,  but  no 
sensible  disorder  arose  from  so  great  a  change 
in  the  situation  of  more  than  a  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  men,  all  accustomed  to  the  use  of  arms, 
and  many  of  them  to  rapine  and  plunder. 
The  number  of  vagrants  was  scarce  anywhere 
sensibly  increased  by  it,  even  the  wages  of 
labour  were  not  reduced  by  it  in  any  occupa¬ 
tion,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  ex¬ 
cept  in  that  of  seamen  in  the  merchant  serv¬ 
ice.  But  if  we  compare  together  the  habits 
of  a  soldier  and  of  any  sort  of  manufacturer, 
we  shall  find  that  those  of  the  latter  do  not 
tend  so  much  to  disqualify  him  from  being 
employed  in  a  new  trade,  as  those  of  the 
former  from  being  employed  in  any.  The 
manufacturer  has  always  been  accustomed  to 
look  for  his  subsistence  from  his  labour  only: 
the  soldier  to  expect  it  from  his  pay.  Applica¬ 
tion  and  industry  have  been  familiar  to  the 
one;  idleness  and  dissipation  to  the  other.  But 
it  is  surely  much  easier  to  change  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  industry  from  one  sort  of  labour  to 
another  than  to  turn  idleness  and  dissipation 
to  any.  To  the  greater  part  of  manufactures 
besides,  it  has  already  been  observed,  there 
are  other  collateral  manufactures  of  so  sim¬ 
ilar  a  nature  that  a  workman  can  easily  trans¬ 
fer  his  industry  from  one  of  them  to  another. 
The  greater  part  of  such  workmen  too  are 
occasionally  employed  in  country  labour.  The 
stock  which  employed  them  in  a  particular 
manufacture  before  will  still  remain  in  the 
country  to  employ  an  equal  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  in  some  other  way.  The  capital  of  the 
country  remaining  the  same,  the  demand  for 
labour  will  likewise  be  the  same,  or  very  near- 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


ly  the  same,  though  it  may  be  exerted  in 
different  places  and  for  different  occupations. 
Soldiers  and  seamen,  indeed,  when  discharged 
from  the  king’s  service,  are  at  liberty  to  exer¬ 
cise  any  trade,  within  any  town  or  place  of 
Great  Britain  or  Ireland.  Let  the  same  natu¬ 
ral  liberty  of  exercising  what  species  of  in¬ 
dustry  they  please,  be  restored  to  all  his 
Majesty’s  subjects,  in  the  same  manner  as  to 
soldiers  and  seamen;  that  is,  break  down  the 
exclusive  privileges  of  corporations,  and  re¬ 
peal  the  Statute  of  Apprenticeship,  both 
which  are  real  encroachments  upon  natural 
liberty,  and  add  to  these  the  repeal  of  the 
Law  of  Settlements,  so  that  a  poor  workman, 
when  thrown  out  of  employment  either  in 
one  trade  or  in  one  place,  may  seek  for  it  in 
another  trade  or  in  another  place  without  the 
fear  either  of  a  prosecution  or  of  a  removal, 
and  neither  the  public  nor  the  individuals 
will  suffer  much  more  from  the  occasional 
disbanding  some  particular  classes  of  manu¬ 
facturers  than  from  that  of  soldiers.  Our 
manufacturers  have  no  doubt  great  merit 
with  their  country,  but  they  cannot  have 
more  than  those  who  defend  it  with  their 
blood,  nor  deserve  to  be  treated  with  more 
delicacy. 

To  expect,  indeed,  that  the  freedom  of 
trade  should  ever  be  entirely  restored  in 
Great  Britain  is  as  absurd  as  to  expect  that 
an  Oceana  or  Utopia  should  ever  be  estab¬ 
lished  in  it.  Not  only  the  prejudices  of  the 
public,  but  what  is  much  more  unconquer¬ 
able,  the  private  interests  of  many  individ¬ 
uals,  irresistibly  oppose  it.  Were  the  officers  of 
the  army  to  oppose  with  the  same  zeal  and 
unanimity  any  reduction  in  the  numbers  of 
forces  with  which  master  manufacturers  set 
themselves  against  every  law  that  is  likely  to 
increase  the  number  of  their  rivals  in  the 
home  market;  were  the  former  to  animate 
their  soldiers  in  the  same  manner  as  the  latter 
enflame  their  workmen  to  attack  with  vio¬ 
lence  and  outrage  the  proposers  of  any  such- 
regulation,  to  attempt  to  reduce  the  army 
would  be  as  dangerous  as  it  has  now  become 
to  attempt  to  diminish  in  any  respect  the 
monopoly  which  our  manufacturers  have  ob¬ 
tained  against  us.  This  monopoly  has  so  much 
increased  the  number  of  some  particular  tribes 
of  them  that,  like  an  overgrown  standing 
army,  they  have  become  formidable  to  the 
government,  and  upon  many  occasions  intim¬ 
idate  the  legislature.  The  Member  of  Par¬ 
liament  who  supports  every  proposal  for 
strengthening  this  monopoly  is  sure  to  ac¬ 


201 

quire  not  only  the  reputation  of  understand¬ 
ing  trade,  but  great  popularity  and  influence 
with  an  order  of  men  whose  numbers  and 
wealth  render  them  of  great  importance.  If 
he  opposes  them,  on  the  contrary,  and  still 
more  if  he  has  authority  enough  to  be  able 
to  thwart  them,  neither  the  most  acknowl¬ 
edged  probity,  nor  the  highest  rank,  nor  the 
greatest  public  services  can  protect  him  from 
the  most  infamous  abuse  and  detraction,  from 
personal  insults,  nor  sometimes  from  real 
danger,  arising  from  the  insolent  outrage  of 
furious  and  disappointed  monopolists. 

The  undertaker  of  a  great  manufacture, 
who,  by  the  home  markets  being  suddenly 
laid  open  to  the  competition  of  foreigners, 
should  be  obliged  to  abandon  his  trade,  would 
no  doubt  suffer  very  considerably.  That  part 
of  his  capital  which  had  usually  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  purchasing  materials  and  in  paying 
his  workmen  might,  without  much  difficulty, 
perhaps,  find  another  employment.  But  that 
part  of  it  which  was  fixed  in  workhouses,  and 
in  the  instruments  of  trade,  could  scarce  be 
disposed  of  without  considerable  loss.  The 
equitable  regard,  therefore,  to  his  interest 
requires  that  changes  of  this  kind  should 
never  be  introduced  suddenly,  but  slowly, 
gradually,  and  after  a  very  long  warning. 
The  legislature,  were  it  possible  that  its  de¬ 
liberations  could  be  always  directed,  not  by 
the  clamorous  importunity  of  partial  inter¬ 
ests,  but  by  an  extensive  view  of  the  general 
good,  ought  upon  this  very  account,  perhaps, 
to  be  particularly  careful  neither  to  establish 
any  new  monopolies  of  this  kind,  nor  to  ex¬ 
tend  further  those  which  are  already  estab¬ 
lished.  Every  such  regulation  introduces  some 
degree  of  real  disorder  into  the  constitution 
of  the  state,  which  it  will  be  difficult  after¬ 
wards  to  cure  without  occasioning  another 
disorder. 

How  far  it  may  be  proper  to  impose  taxes 
upon  the  importation  of  foreign  goods,  in 
order  not  to  prevent  their  importation  but  to 
raise  a  revenue  for  government,  I  shall  con¬ 
sider  hereafter  when  I  come  to  treat  of  taxes. 
Taxes  imposed  with  a  view  to  prevent,  or 
even  to  diminish  importation,  are  evidently 
as  destructive  of  the  revenue  of  the  customs 
as  of  the  freedom  of  trade. 

CHAPTER  III 

Of  the  extraordinary  Restraints  upon  the  Im¬ 
portation  of  Goods  of  almost  all  kinds  from 
those  Countries  with  which  the  Balance  is 
supposed  to  be  disadvantageous 


Part  1 

Of  the  Unreasonableness  of  those  Restraints  even  upon  the  Principles  of  the  Commercial  System 
To  lay  extraordinary  restraints  upon  the  those  particular  countries  with  which  the 
importation  of  goods  of  almost  all  kinds  from  balance  of  trade  is  supposed  to  be  disadvan- 


202 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


tageous,  is  the  second  expedient  by  which  the 
commercial  system  proposes  to  increase  the 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver.  Thus  in  Great 
Britain,  Silesia  lawns  may  be  imported  for 
home  consumption  upon  paying  certain  du¬ 
ties.  But  French  cambrics  and  lawns  are  pro¬ 
hibited  to  be  imported,  except  into  the  port 
of  London,  there  to  be  warehoused  for  expor¬ 
tation.  Higher  duties  are  imposed  upon  the 
wines  of  France  than  upon  those  of  Portugal, 
or  indeed  of  any  other  country.  By  what  is 
called  the  impost  1692,  a  duty  of  five-and- 
twenty  per  cent  of  the  rate  or  value  was  laid 
upon  all  French  goods;  while  the  goods  of 
other  nations  were,  the  greater  part  of  them, 
subjected  to  much  lighter  duties,  seldom  ex¬ 
ceeding  five  per  cent.  The  wine,  brandy,  salt 
and  vinegar  of  France  were  indeed  excepted; 
these  commodities  being  subjected  to  other 
heavy  duties,  either  by  other  laws,  or  by  par¬ 
ticular  clauses  of  the  same  law.  In  1696,  a 
second  duty  of  twenty-five  per  cent,  the  first 
not  having  been  thought  a  sufficient  discour¬ 
agement,  was  imposed  upon  all  French  goods, 
except  brandy;  together  with  a  new  duty 
of  five-and-twenty  pounds  upon  the  ton  of 
French  wine,  and  another  of  fifteen  pounds 
upon  the  tun  of  French  vinegar.  French  goods 
have  never  been  omitted  in  any  of  those  gen¬ 
eral  subsidies,  or  duties  of  five  per  cent,  which 
have  been  imposed  upon  all,  or  the  greater 
part  of  the  goods  enumerated  in  the  book  of 
rates.  If  we  count  the  one-third  and  two-third 
subsidies  as  making  a  complete  subsidy  be¬ 
tween  them,  there  have  been  five  of  these 
general  subsidies;  so  that  before  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  present  war  seventy-five 
per  cent  may  be  considered  as  the  lowest  duty 
to  which  the  greater  part  of  the  goods  of  the 
growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  France 
were  liable.  But  upon  the  greater  part  of 
goods,  those  duties  are  equivalent  to  a  pro¬ 
hibition.  The  French  in  their  turn  have,  I 
believe,  treated  our  goods  and  manufactures 
just  as  hardly;  though  I  am  not  so  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  particular  hardships  which 
they  have  imposed  upon  them.  Those  mu¬ 
tual  restraints  have  put  an  end  to  almost  all 
fair  commerce  between  the  two  nations,  and 
smugglers  are  now  the  principal  importers, 
either  of  British  goods  into  France,  or  of 
French  goods  into  Great  Britain.  The  princi¬ 
ples  which  I  have  been  examining  in  the  fore¬ 
going  chapter  took  their  origin  from  private 
interest  and  the  spirit  of  monopoly;  those 
which  I  am  going  to  examine  in  this,  from 
national  prejudice  and  animosity.  They  are, 
accordingly,  as  might  well  be  expected,  still 
more  unreasonable.  They  are  so,  even  upon 
the  principles  of  the  commercial  system. 

First,  though  it  were  certain  that  in  the 
case  of  a  free  trade  between  France  and  Eng¬ 


land,  for  example,  the  balance  would  be  in 
favour  of  France,  it  would  by  no  means  fol¬ 
low  that  such  a  trade  would  be  disadvanta¬ 
geous  to  England,  or  that  the  general  balance 
of  its  whole  trade  would  thereby  be  turned 
more  against  it.  If  the  wines  of  France  are 
better  and  cheaper  than  those  of  Portugal,  or 
its  linens  than  those  of  Germany,  it  would  be 
more  advantageous  for  Great  Britain  to  pur¬ 
chase  both  the  wine  and  the  foreign  linen 
which  it  had  occasion  for  of  France  than  of 
Portugal  and  Germany.  Though  the  value  of 
the  annual  importations  from  France  would 
thereby  be  greatly  augmented,  the  value  of 
the  whole  annual  importations  would  be  di¬ 
minished,  in  proportion  as  the  French  goods 
of  the  same  quality  were  cheaper  than  those 
of  the  other  two  countries.  This  would  be  the 
case,  even  upon  the  supposition  that  the 
whole  French  goods  imported  were  to  be  con¬ 
sumed  in  Great  Britain. 

But,  secondly,  a  great  part  of  them  might 
be  re-exported  to  other  countries,  where,  being 
sold  with  profit,  they  might  bring  back  a  re¬ 
turn  equal  in  value,  perhaps,  to  the  prime  cost 
of  the  whole  French  goods  imported.  What 
has  frequently  been  said  of  the  East  India 
trade  might  possibly  be  true  of  the  French; 
that  though  the  greater  part  of  East  India 
goods  were  bought  with  gold  and  silver,  the 
re-exportation  of  a  part  of  them  to  other  coun¬ 
tries  brought  back  more  gold  and  silver  to  that 
which  carried  on  the  trade  than  the  prime  cost 
of  the  whole  amounted  to.  One  of  the  most 
important  branches  of  the  Dutch  trade,  at 
present,  consists  in  the  carriage  of  French 
goods  to  other  European  countries.  Some  part 
even  of  the  French  wine  drank  in  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  is  clandestinely  imported  from  Holland 
and  Zeeland.  If  there  was  either  a  free  trade 
between  France  and  England,  or  if  French 
goods  could  be  imported  upon  paying  only  the 
same  duties  as  those  of  other  European  na¬ 
tions,  to  be  drawn  back  upon  exportation, 
England  might  have  some  share  of  a  trade 
which  is  found  so  advantageous  to  Holland. 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  there  is  no  certain  cri¬ 
terion  by  which  we  can  determine  on  which 
side  what  is  called  the  balance  between  any 
two  countries  lies,  or  which  of  them  exports  to 
the  greatest  value.  National  prejudice  and  ani¬ 
mosity,  prompted  always  by  the  private  in¬ 
terest  of  particular  traders,  are  the  principles 
which  generally  direct  our  judgment  upon  all 
questions  concerning  it.  There  are  two  criteri- 
ons,  however,  which  have  frequently  been  ap¬ 
pealed  to  upon  such  occasions,  the  custom¬ 
house  books  and  the  course  of  exchange.  The 
custom-house  books,  I  think,  it  is  now  gen¬ 
erally  acknowledged,  are  a  very  uncertain  cri¬ 
terion,  on  account  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the 
valuation  at  which  the  greater  part  of  goods 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


are  rated  in  them.  The  course  of  exchange  is, 
perhaps,  almost  equally  so. 

When  the  exchange  between  two  places, 
such  as  London  and  Paris,  is  at  par,  it  is  said 
to  be  a  sign  that  the  debts  due  from  London 
to  Paris  are  compensated  by  those  due  from 
Paris  to  London.  On  the  contrary,  when  a 
premium  is  paid  at  London  for  a  bill  upon 
Paris,  it  is  said  to  be  a  sign  that  the  debts  due 
from  London  to  Paris  are  not  compensated  by 
those  due  from  Paris  to  London,  but  that  a 
balance  in  money  must  be  sent  out  from  the 
latter  place;  for  the  risk,  trouble,  and  expense 
of  exporting  which,  the  premium  is  both  de¬ 
manded  and  given.  But  the  ordinary  state  of 
debt  and  credit  between  those  two  cities  must 
necessarily  be  regulated,  it  is  said,  by  the  ordi¬ 
nary  course  of  their  dealings  with  one  another. 
When  neither  of  them  imports  from  the  other 
to  a  greater  amount  than  it  exports  to  that 
other,  the  debts  and  credits  of  each  may  com¬ 
pensate  one  another.  But  when  one  of  them 
imports  from  the  other  to  a  greater  value  than 
it  exports  to  that  other,  the  former  necessarily 
becomes  indebted  to  the  latter  in  a  greater 
sum  than  the  latter  becomes  indebted  to  it; 
the  debts  and  credits  of  each  do  not  compen¬ 
sate  one  another,  and  money  must  be  sent  out 
from  that  place  of  which  the  debts  overbal¬ 
ance  the  credits.  The  ordinary  course  of  ex¬ 
change,  therefore,  being  an  indication  of  the 
ordinary  state  of  debt  and  credit  between  two 
places,  must  likewise  be  an  indication  of  the 
ordinary  course  of  their  exports  and  imports, 
as  these  necessarily  regulate  that  state. 

But  though  the  ordinary  course  of  exchange 
should  be  allowed  to  be  a  sufficient  indica¬ 
tion  of  the  ordinary  state  of  debt  and  credit 
between  any  two  places,  it  would  not  from 
thence  follow  that  the  balance  of  trade  was  in 
favour  of  that  place  which  had  the  ordinary 
state  of  debt  and  credit  in  its  favour.  The  or¬ 
dinary  state  of  debt  and  credit  between  any 
two  places  is  not  always  entirely  regulated  by 
the  ordinary  course  of  their  dealings  with  one 
another;  but  is  often  influenced  by  that  of  the 
dealings  of  either  with  many  other  places.  If 
it  is  usual,  for  example,  for  the  merchants  of 
England  to  pay  for  the  goods  which  they  buy 
of  Hamburg,  Danzig,  Riga,  etc.,  by  bills  upon 
Holland,  the  ordinary  state  of  debt  and  credit 
between  England  and  Holland  will  not  be  reg¬ 
ulated  entirely  by  the  ordinary  course  of  the 
dealings  of  those  two  countries  with  one  an¬ 
other,  but  will  be  influenced  by  that  of  the 
dealings  of  England  with  those  other  places. 
England  may  be  obliged  to  send  out  every 
year  money  to  Holland,  though  its  annual  ex¬ 
ports  to  that  country  may  exceed  very  much 
the  annual  value  of  its  imports  from  thence; 
and  though  what  is  called  the  balance  of  trade 
may  be  very  much  in  favour  of  England. 


203 

In  the  way,  besides,  in  which  the  par  of  ex¬ 
change  has  hitherto  been  computed,  the  ordi¬ 
nary  course  of  exchange  can  afford  no  suffi¬ 
cient  indication  that  the  ordinary  state  of 
debt  and  credit  is  in  favour  of  that  country 
which  seems  to  have,  or  which  is  supposed  to 
have,  the  ordinary  course  of  exchange  in  its 
favour:  or,  in  other  words,  the  real  exchange 
may  be,  and,  in  fact,  often  is  so  very  different 
from  the  computed  one,  that  from  the  course 
of  the  latter  no  certain  conclusion  can,  upon 
many  occasions,  be  drawn  concerning  that  of 
the  former. 

When  for  a  sum  of  money  paid  in  England, 
containing,  according  to  the  standard  of  the 
English  mint,  a  certain  number  of  ounces  of 
pure  silver,  you  receive  a  bill  for  a  sum  of 
money  to  be  paid  in  France,  containing,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  standard  of  the  French  mint, 
an  equal  number  of  ounces  of  pure  silver,  ex¬ 
change  is  said  to  be  at  par  between  England 
and  France.  When  you  pay  more,  you  are 
supposed  to  give  a  premium,  and  exchange  is 
said  to  be  against  England  and  in  favour  of 
France.  When  you  pay  less,  you  are  supposed 
to  get  a  premium,  and  exchange  is  said  to  be 
against  France  and  in  favour  of  England. 

But,  first,  we  cannot  always  judge  of  the 
value  of  the  current  money  of  different  coun¬ 
tries  by  the  standard  of  their  respective  mints. 
In  some  it  is  more,  in  others  it  is  less  worn, 
dipt,  and  otherwise  degenerated  from  that 
standard.  But  the  value  of  the  current  coin  of 
every  country,  compared  with  that  of  any 
other  country,  is  in  proportion  not  to  the 
quantity  of  pure  silver  which  it  ought  to  con¬ 
tain,  but  to  that  which  it  actually  does  con¬ 
tain.  Before  the  reformation  of  the  silver  coin 
in  King  William’s  time,  exchange  between 
England  and  Holland,  computed  in  the  usual 
manner  according  to  the  standard  of  their  re¬ 
spective  mints,  was  five-and-twenty  per  cent 
against  England.  But  the  value  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  coin  of  England,  as  we  learn  from  Mr. 
Lowndes,  was  at  that  time  rather  more  than 
five-and-twenty  per  cent  below  its  standard 
value.  The  real  exchange,  therefore,  may  even 
at  that  time  have  been  in  favour  of  England, 
notwithstanding  the  computed  exchange  was 
so  much  against  it;  a  smaller  number  of  ounces 
of  pure  silver  actually  paid  in  England  may 
have  purchased  a  bill  for  a  greater  number  of 
ounces  of  pure  silver  to  be  paid  in  Holland, 
and  the  man  who  was  supposed  to  give  may 
in  reality  have  got  the  premium.  The  French 
coin  was,  before  the  late  reformation  of  the 
English  gold  coin,  much  less  worn  than  the 
English,  and  was  perhaps  two  or  three  per 
cent  nearer  its  standard.  If  the  computed  ex¬ 
change  with  France,  therefore,  was  not  more 
than  two  or  three  per  cent  against  England, 
the  real  exchange  might  have  been  in  its  fa- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


204 

vour.  Since  the  reformation  of  the  gold  coin, 
the  exchange  has  been  constantly  in  favour  of 
England,  and  against  France. 

Secondly,  in  some  countries,  the  expense  of 
coinage  is  defrayed  by  the  government;  in 
others,  it  is  defrayed  by  the  private  people 
who  carry  their  bullion  to  the  mint,  and  the 
government  even  derives  some  revenue  from 
the  coinage.  In  England,  it  is  defrayed  by  the 
government,  and  if  you  carry  a  pound  weight 
of  standard  silver  to  the  mint,  you  get  back 
sixty-two  shillings,  containing  a  pound  weight 
of  the  like  standard  silver.  In  France,  a  duty 
of  eight  per  cent  is  deducted  for  the  coinage, 
which  not  only  defrays  the  expense  of  it,  but 
affords  a  small  revenue  to  the  government.  In 
England,  as  the  coinage  costs  nothing,  the 
current  coin  can  never  be  much  more  valuable 
than  the  quantity  of  bullion  which  it  actually 
contains.  In  France,  the  workmanship,  as  you 
pay  for  it,  adds  to  the  value  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  to  that  of  wrought  plate.  A  sum  of 
French  money,  therefore,  containing  a  certain 
weight  of  pure  silver,  is  more  valuable  than  a 
sum  of  English  money  containing  an  equal 
weight  of  pure  silver,  and  must  require  more 
bullion,  or  other  commodities,  to  purchase  it. 
Though  the  current  coin  of  the  two  countries, 
therefore,  were  equally  near  the  standards  of 
their  respective  mints,  a  sum  of  English  mon¬ 
ey  could  not  well  purchase  a  sum  of  French 
money  containing  an  equal  number  of  ounces 
of  pure  silver,  nor  consequently  a  bill  upon 
France  for  such  a  sum.  If  for  such  a  bill  no 
more  additional  money  was  paid  than  what 
was  sufficient  to  compensate  the  expense  of 
the  French  coinage,  the  real  exchange  might 
be  at  par  between  the  two  countries,  their 
debts  and  credits  might  mutually  compensate 
one  another,  while  the  computed  exchange 
was  considerably  in  favour  of  France.  If  less 
than  this  was  paid,  the  real  exchange  might 
be  in  favour  of  England,  while  the  computed 
was  in  favour  of  France. 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  in  some  places,  as  at 
Amsterdam,  Hamburg,  Venice,  etc.,  foreign 
bills  of  exchange  are  paid  in  what  they  call 
bank  money;  while  in  others,  as  at  London, 
Lisbon,  Antwerp,  Leghorn,  etc.,  they  are  paid 
in  the  common  currency  of  the  country.  What 
is  called  bank  money  is  always  of  more  value 
than  the  same  nominal  sum  of  common  cur¬ 
rency.  A  thousand  guilders  in  the  Bank  of 
Amsterdam,  for  example,  are  of  more  value 
than  a  thousand  guilders  of  Amsterdam  cur¬ 
rency.  The  difference  between  them  is  called 
the  agio  of  the  bank,  which,  at  Amsterdam,  is 
generally  about  five  per  cent.  Supposing  the 
current  money  of  the  two  countries  equally 
near  to  the  standard  of  their  respective  mints, 
and  that  the  one  pays  foreign  bills  in  this  com¬ 
mon  currency,  while  the  other  pays  them  in 


bank  money,  it  is  evident  that  the  computed 
exchange  may  be  in  favour  of  that  which  pays 
in  bank  money,  though  the  real  exchange 
should  be  in  favour  of  that  which  pays  in  cur¬ 
rent  money;  for  the  same  reason  that  the  com¬ 
puted  exchange  may  be  in  favour  of  that 
which  pays  in  better  money,  or  in  money  near¬ 
er  to  its  own  standard,  though  the  real  ex¬ 
change  should  be  in  favour  of  that  which  pays 
in  worse.  The  computed  exchange,  before  the 
late  reformation  of  the  gold  coin,  was  general¬ 
ly  against  London  with  Amsterdam,  Ham¬ 
burg,  Venice,  and,  I  believe,  with  all  other 
places  which  pay  in  what  is  called  bank  mon¬ 
ey.  It  will  by  no  means  follow,  however,  that 
the  real  exchange  was  against  it.  Since  the  ref¬ 
ormation  of  the  gold  coin,  it  has  been  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  London  even  with  those  places.  The 
computed  exchange  has  generally  been  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  London  with  Lisbon,  Antwerp,  Leg¬ 
horn,  and,  if  you  except  France,  I  believe, 
with  most  other  parts  of  Europe  that  pay  in 
common  currency;  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  the  real  exchange  was  so  too. 

DIGRESSION  CONCERNING  BANKS  OF  DE¬ 
POSIT,  PARTICULARLY  CONCERNING 
THAT  OF  AMSTERDAM 

The  currency  of  a  great  state,  such  as 
France  or  England,  generally  consists  almost 
entirely  of  its  own  coin.  Should  this  currency, 
therefore,  be  at  any  time  worn,  dipt,  or  other¬ 
wise  degraded  below  its  standard  value,  the 
state  by  a  reformation  of  its  coin  can  effectu¬ 
ally  re-establish  its  currency.  But  the  cur¬ 
rency  of  a  small  state,  such  as  Genoa  or  Ham¬ 
burg,  can  seldom  consist  altogether  in  its  own 
coin,  but  must  be  made  up,  in  a  great  meas¬ 
ure,  of  the  coins  of  all  the  neighbouring  states 
with  which  its  inhabitants  have  a  continual 
intercourse.  Such  a  state,  therefore,  by  reform¬ 
ing  its  coin,  will  not  always  be  able  to  reform 
its  currency.  If  foreign  bills  of  exchange  are 
paid  in  this  currency,  the  uncertain  value  of 
any  sum,  of  what  is  in  its  own  nature  so  un¬ 
certain,  must  render  the  exchange  always  very 
much  against  such  a  state,  its  currency  being, 
in  all  foreign  states,  necessarily  valued  even 
below  what  it  is  worth. 

In  order  to  remedy  the  inconvenience  to 
which  this  disadvantageous  exchange  must 
have  subjected  their  merchants,  such  small 
states,  when  they  began  to  attend  to  the  in¬ 
terest  of  trade,  have  frequently  enacted,  that 
foreign  bills  of  exchange  of  a  certain  value 
should  be  paid  not  in  common  currency,  but 
by  an  order  upon,  or  by  a  transfer  in  the  books 
of  a  certain  bank,  established  upon  the  credit, 
and  under  the  protection  of  the  state;  this 
bank  being  always  obliged  to  pay,  in  good  and 
true  money,  exactly  according  to  the  standard 
of  the  state.  The  banks  of  Venice,  Genoa,  Am- 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


sterdam,  Hamburg,  and  Nuremberg,  seem  to 
have  been  all  originally  established  with  this 
view,  though  some  of  them  may  have  after¬ 
wards  been  made  subservient  to  other  pur¬ 
poses.  The  money  of  such  banks  being  better 
than  the  common  currency  of  the  country, 
necessarily  bore  an  agio,  which  was  greater  or 
smaller  according  as  the  currency  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  more  or  less  degraded  below  the 
standard  of  the  state.  The  agio  of  the  Bank  of 
Hamburg,  for  example,  which  is  said  to  be 
commonly  about  fourteen  per  cent  is  the  sup¬ 
posed  difference  between  the  good  standard 
money  of  the  state,  and  the  dipt,  worn,  and 
diminished  currency  poured  into  it  from  all 
the  neighbouring  states. 

Before  1609  the  great  quantity  of  dipt  and 
worn  foreign  coin,  which  the  extensive  trade 
of  Amsterdam  brought  from  all  parts  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  reduced  the  value  of  its  currency  about 
nine  per  cent  below  that  of  good  money  fresh 
from  the  mint.  Such  money  no  sooner  ap¬ 
peared  than  it  was  melted  down  or  carried 
away,  as  it  always  is  in  such  circumstances. 
The  merchants,  with  plenty  of  currency,  could 
not  always  find  a  sufficient  quantity  of  good 
money  to  pay  their  bills  of  exchange;  and  the 
value  of  those  bills,  in  spite  of  several  regula¬ 
tions  which  were  made  to  prevent  it,  became 
in  a  great  measure  uncertain. 

In  order  to  remedy  these  inconveniences,  a 
bank  was  established  in  1609  under  the  guar¬ 
antee  of  the  city.  This  bank  received  both 
foreign  coin,  and  the  light  and  worn  coin  of 
the  country  at  its  real  intrinsic  value  in  the 
good  standard  money  of  the  country,  deduct¬ 
ing  only  so  much  as  was  necessary  for  defray¬ 
ing  the  expense  of  coinage,  and  the  other  nec¬ 
essary  expense  of  management.  For  the  value 
which  remained,  after  this  small  deduction 
was  made,  it  gave  a  credit  in  its  books.  This 
credit  was  called  bank  money,  which,  as  it 
represented  money  exactly  according  to  the 
standard  of  the  mint,  was  always  of  the  same 
real  value,  and  intrinsically  worth  more  than 
current  money.  It  was  at  the  same  time  en¬ 
acted,  that  all  bills  drawn  upon  or  negotiated 
at  Amsterdam  of  the  value  of  six  hundred 
guilders  and  upwards  should  be  paid  in  bank 
money,  which  at  once  took  away  all  uncer¬ 
tainty  in  the  value  of  those  bills.  Every  mer¬ 
chant,  in  consequence  of  this  regulation,  was 
obliged  to  keep  an  account  with  the  bank  in 
order  to  pay  his  foreign  bills  of  exchange, 
which  necessarily  occasioned  a  certain  demand 
for  bank  money. 

Bank  money,  over  and  above  its  intrinsic 
superiority  to  currency,  and  the  additional 
value  which  this  demand  necessarily  gives  it, 
has  likewise  some  other  advantages.  It  is  se¬ 
cure  from  fire,  robbery,  and  other  accidents; 
the  city  of  Amsterdam  is  bound  for  it;  it  can 


205 

be  paid  away  by  a  simple  transfer,  without 
the  trouble  of  counting,  or  the  risk  of  trans¬ 
porting  it  from  one  place  to  another.  In  con¬ 
sequence  of  those  different  advantages,  it 
seems  from  the  beginning  to  have  borne  an 
agio,  and  it  is  generally  believed  that  all  the 
money  originally  deposited  in  the  bank  was 
allowed  to  remain  there,  nobody  caring  to  de¬ 
mand  payment  of  a  debt  which  he  could  sell 
for  a  premium  in  the  market.  By  demanding 
payment  of  the  bank,  the  owner  of  a  bank 
credit  would  lose  this  premium.  As  a  shilling 
fresh  from  the  mint  will  buy  no  more  goods 
in  the  market  than  one  of  our  common  worn 
shillings,  so  the  good  and  true  money  which 
might  be  brought  from  the  coffers  of  the  bank 
into  those  of  a  private  person,  being  mixed 
and  confounded  with  the  common  currency  of 
the  country,  would  be  of  no  more  value  than 
that  currency  from  which  it  could  no  longer 
be  readily  distinguished.  While  it  remained  in 
the  coffers  of  the  bank,  its  superiority  was 
known  and  ascertained.  When  it  had  come 
into  those  of  a  private  person,  its  superiority 
could  not  well  be  ascertained  without  more 
trouble  than  perhaps  the  difference  was  worth. 
By  being  brought  from  the  coffers  of  the  bank, 
besides,  it  lost  all  the  other  advantages  of 
bank  money;  its  security,  its  easy  and  safe 
transferability,  its  use  in  paying  foreign  bills 
of  exchange.  Over  and  above  all  this,  it  could 
not  be  brought  from  those  coffers,  as  it  will 
appear  by  and  by,  without  previously  paying 
for  the  keeping. 

Those  deposits  of  coin,  or  those  deposits 
which  the  bank  was  bound  to  restore  in  coin, 
constituted  the  original  capital  of  the  bank, 
or  the  whole  value  of  what  was  represented  by 
what  is  called  bank  money.  At  present  they 
are  supposed  to  constitute  but  a  very  small 
part  of  it.  In  order  to  facilitate  the  trade  in 
bullion,  the  bank  has  been  for  these  many 
years  in  the  practice  of  giving  credit  in  its 
books  upon  deposits  of  gold  and  silver  bullion. 
This  credit  is  generally  about  five  per  cent 
below  the  mint  price  of  such  bullion.  The  bank 
grants  at  the  same  time  what  is  called  a  reci¬ 
pe  or  receipt,  entitling  the  person  who  makes 
the  deposit,  or  the  bearer,  to  take  out  the 
bullion  again  at  any  time  within  six  months, 
upon  re-transferring  to  the  bank  a  quantity  of 
bank  money  equal  to  that  for  which  credit 
had  been  given  in  its  books  when  the  deposit 
was  made,  and  upon  paying  one-fourth  per 
cent  for  the  keeping,  if  the  deposit  was  in  sil¬ 
ver;  and  one-half  per  cent  if  it  was  in  gold; 
but  at  the  same  time  declaring  that,  in  de¬ 
fault  of  such  payment,  and  upon  the  expira¬ 
tion  of  this  term,  the  deposit  should  belong  to 
the  bank  at  the  price  at  which  it  had  been  re¬ 
ceived,  or  for  which  credit  had  been  given  in 
the  transfer  books.  What  is  thus  paid  for  the 


206 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


keeping  of  the  deposit  may  be  considered  as 
a  sort  of  warehouse  rent;  and  why  this  ware¬ 
house  rent  should  be  so  much  dearer  for  gold 
than  for  silver,  several  different  reasons  have 
been  assigned.  The  fineness  of  gold,  it  has  been 
said,  is  more  difficult  to  be  ascertained  than 
that  of  silver.  Frauds  are  more  easily  prac¬ 
tised,  and  occasion  a  greater  loss  in  the  more 
precious  metal.  Silver,  besides,  being  the 
standard  metal,  the  state,  it  has  been  said, 
wishes  to  encourage  more  the  making  of  de¬ 
posits  of  silver  than  those  of  gold. 

Deposits  of  bullion  are  most  commonly 
made  when  the  price  is  somewhat  lower  than 
ordinary;  and  they  are  taken  out  again  when 
it  happens  to  rise.  In  Holland  the  market  price 
of  bullion  is  generally  above  the  mint  price, 
for  the  same  reason  that  it  was  so  in  England 
before  the  late  reformation  of  the  gold  coin. 
The  difference  is  said  to  be  commonly  from 
about  six  to  sixteen  stivers  upon  the  mark,  or 
eight  ounces  of  silver  of  eleven  parts  fine  and 
one  part  alloy.  The  bank  price,  or  the  credit 
which  the  bank  gives  for  deposits  of  such  sil¬ 
ver  (when  made  in  foreign  coin,  of  which  the 
fineness  is  well  known  and  ascertained,  such  as 
Mexico  dollars) ,  is  twenty-two  guilders  the 
mark;  the  mint  price  is  about  twenty-three 
guilders,  and  the  market  price  is  from  twenty- 
three  guilders  six  to  twenty-three  guilders  six¬ 
teen  stivers,  or  from  two  to  three  per  cent 
above  the  mint  price.1  The  proportions  be¬ 
tween  the  bank  price,  the  mint  price,  and  the 
market  price  of  gold  bullion  are  nearly  the 


1  The  following  are  the  prices  at  which  the  Bank 
of  Amsterdam  at  present  (September,  1775)  re¬ 
ceives  bullion  and  coin  of  different  kinds:  — 


Silver 


Mexico  dollars  "1 

French  crowns  f 

English  silver  coin  J 

Mexico  dollars  new  coin 

Ducatoons 
Rix  dollars 


Guilders 
B — 22  per  mark 

21  10 
3 

2  8 


Bar  silver  containing  eleven-twelfths  fine  silver 
21  per  mark,  and  in  this  proportion  down  to  ^4 
fine,  on  which  5  guilders  are  given. 

Fine  bars,  23  per  mark. 

Gold 

Portugal  coin  *1 

Guineas  >  B — 310  per  mark 

Louis  d’ors  new  J 

Ditto  old  300 

New  ducats  4  19  8  per  ducat 

Bar  or  ingot  gold  is  received  in  proportion  to  its 
fineness  compared  with  the  above  foreign  gold 
coin.  Upon  fine  bars  the  bank  gives  340  per  mark. 
In  general,  however,  something  more  is  given  upon 
coin  of  a  known  fineness,  than  upon  gold  and  silver 
bars,  of  which  the  fineness  cannot  be  ascertained 
but  by  a  process  of  melting  and  assaying. 


same.  A  person  can  generally  sell  his  receipt 
for  the  difference  between  the  mint  price  of 
bullion  and  the  market  price.  A  receipt  for 
bullion  is  almost  always  worth  something,  and 
it  very  seldom  happens,  therefore,  that  any¬ 
body  suffers  his  receipt  to  expire,  or  allows  his 
bullion  to  fall  to  the  bank  at  the  price  at 
which  it  had  been  received,  either  by  not  tak¬ 
ing  it  out  before  the  end  of  the  six  months,  or 
by  neglecting  to  pay  the  one-fourth  or  one-half 
per  cent  in  order  to  obtain  a  new  receipt  for 
another  six  months.  This,  however,  though  it 
happens  seldom,  is  said  to  happen  sometimes, 
and  more  frequently  with  regard  to  gold  than 
with  regard  to  silver,  on  account  of  the  higher 
warehouse-rent  which  is  paid  for  the  keeping 
of  the  more  precious  metal. 

The  person  who  by  making  a  deposit  of  bul¬ 
lion  obtains  both  a  bank  credit  and  a  receipt, 
pays  his  bills  of  exchange  as  they  become  due 
with  his  bank  credit;  and  either  sells  or  keeps 
his  receipt  according  as  he  judges  that  the 
price  of  bullion  is  likely  to  rise  or  to  fall.  The 
receipt  and  the  bank  credit  seldom  keep  long 
together,  and  there  is  no  occasion  that  they 
should.  The  person  who  has  a  receipt,  and 
who  wants  to  take  out  bullion,  finds  always 
plenty  of  bank  credits,  or  bank  money  to  buy 
at  the  ordinary  price;  and  the  person  who  has 
bank  money,  and  wants  to  take  out  bullion, 
finds  receipts  always  in  equal  abundance. 

The  owners  of  bank  credits,  and  the  holders 
of  receipts,  constitute  two  different  sorts  of 
creditors  against  the  bank.  The  holder  of  a 
receipt  cannot  draw  out  the  bullion  for  which 
it  is  granted,  without  reassigning  to  the  bank 
a  sum  of  bank  money  equal  to  the  price  at 
which  the  bullion  had  been  received.  If  he  has 
no  bank  money  of  his  own,  he  must  purchase 
it  of  those  who  have  it.  The  owner  of  bank 
money  cannot  draw  out  bullion  without  pro¬ 
ducing  to  the  bank  receipts  for  the  quantity 
which  he  wants.  If  he  has  none  of  his  own,  he 
must  buy  them  of  those  who  have  them.  The 
holder  of  a  receipt,  when  he  purchases  bank 
money,  purchases  the  power  of  taking  out  a 
quantity  of  bullion,  of  which  the  mint  price  is 
five  per  cent  above  the  bank  price.  The  agio 
of  five  per  cent  therefore,  which  he  commonly 
pays  for  it,  is  paid  not  for  an  imaginary  but 
for  a  real  value.  The  owner  of  bank  money, 
when  he  purchases  a  receipt,  purchases  the 
power  of  taking  out  a  quantity  of  bullion  of 
which  the  market  price  is  commonly  from  two 
to  three  per  cent  above  the  mint  price.  The 
price  which  he  pays  for  it,  therefore,  is  paid 
likewise  for  a  real  value.  The  price  of  the  re¬ 
ceipt,  and  the  price  of  the  bank  money,  com¬ 
pound  or  make  up  between  them  the  full  value 
or  price  of  the  bullion. 

Upon  deposits  of  the  coin  current  in  the 
country,  the  bank  grants  receipts  likewise  as 


207 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


well  as  bank  credits;  but  those  receipts  are 
frequently  of  no  value,  and  will  bring  no  price 
in  the  market.  Upon  ducatoons,  for  example, 
which  in  the  currency  pass  for  three  guilders 
three  stivers  each,  the  bank  gives  a  credit  of 
three  guilders  only,  or  five  per  cent  below  their 
current  value.  It  grants  a  receipt  likewise  en¬ 
titling  the  bearer  to  take  out  the  number  of 
ducatoons  deposited  at  any  time  within  six 
months,  upon  paying  one-fourth  per  cent  for 
the  keeping.  This  receipt  will  frequently  bring 
no  price  in  the  market.  Three  guilders  bank 
money  generally  sell  in  the  market  for  three 
guilders  three  stivers,  the  full  value  of  the 
ducatoons,  if  they  were  taken  out  of  the  bank; 
and  before  they  can  be  taken  out,  one-fourth 
per  cent  must  be  paid  for  the  keeping,  which 
would  be  mere  loss  to  the  holder  of  the  re¬ 
ceipt.  If  the  agio  of  the  bank,  however,  should 
at  any  time  fall  to  three  per  cent  such  receipts 
might  bring  some  price  in  the  market,  and 
might  sell  for  one  and  three-fourths  per  cent. 
But  the  agio  of  the  bank  being  now  generally 
about  five  per  cent  such  receipts  are  frequent¬ 
ly  allowed  to  expire,  or  as  they  express  it,  to 
fall  to  the  bank.  The  receipts  which  are  given 
for  deposits  of  gold  ducats  fall  to  it  yet  more 
frequently,  because  a  higher  warehouse-rent, 
or  one-half  per  cent  must  be  paid  for  the  keep¬ 
ing  of  them  before  they  can  be  taken  out 
again.  The  five  per  cent  which  the  bank  gains, 
when  deposits  either  of  coin  or  bullion  are  al¬ 
lowed  to  fall  to  it,  may  be  considered  as  the 
warehouse-rent  for  the  perpetual  keeping  of 
such  deposits. 

The  sum  of  bank  money  for  which  the  re¬ 
ceipts  are  expired  must  be  very  considerable. 
It  must  comprehend  the  whole  original  capi¬ 
tal  of  the  bank,  which,  it  is  generally  sup¬ 
posed,  has  been  allowed  to  remain  there  from 
the  time  it  was  first  deposited,  nobody  caring 
either  to  renew  his  receipt  or  to  take  out  his 
deposit,  as,  for  the  reasons  already  assigned, 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  could  be  done 
without  loss.  But  whatever  may  be  the 
amount  of  this  sum,  the  proportion  which  it 
bears  to  the  whole  mass  of  bank  money  is 
supposed  to  be  very  small.  The  Bank  of  Am¬ 
sterdam  has  for  these  many  years  past  been 
the  great  warehouse  of  Europe  for  bullion,  for 
which  the  receipts  are  very  seldom  allowed  to 
expire,  or,  as  they  express  it,  to  fall  to  the 
bank.  The  far  greater  part  of  the  bank  money, 
or  of  the  credits  upon  the  books  of  the  bank, 
is  supposed  to  have  been  created,  for  these 
many  years  past,  by  such  deposits  which  the 
dealers  in  bullion  are  continually  both  making 
and  withdrawing. 

No  demand  can  be  made  upon  the  bank  but 
by  means  of  a  recipe  or  receipt.  The  smaller 
mass  of  bank  money,  for  which  the  receipts 
are  expired,  is  mixed  and  confounded  with  the 


much  greater  mass  for  which  they  are  still  in 
force;  so  that,  though  there  may  be  a  consid¬ 
erable  sum  of  bank  money  for  which  there 
are  no  receipts,  there  is  no  specific  sum  or 
portion  of  it  which  may  not  at  any  time  be 
demanded  by  one.  The  bank  cannot  be  debtor 
to  two  persons  for  the  same  thing;  and  the 
owner  of  bank  money  who  has  no  receipt  can¬ 
not  demand  payment  of  the  bank  till  he  buys 
one.  In  ordinary  and  quiet  times,  he  can  find 
no  difficulty  in  getting  one  to  buy  at  the  mar¬ 
ket  price,  which  generally  corresponds  with 
the  price  at  which  he  can  sell  the  coin  or  bul¬ 
lion  it  entitles  him  to  take  out  of  the  bank. 

It  might  be  otherwise  during  a  public  ca¬ 
lamity;  an  invasion,  for  example,  such  as  that 
of  the  French  in  1672.  The  owners  of  bank 
money  being  then  all  eager  to  draw  it  out  of 
the  bank,  in  order  to  have  it  their  own  keep¬ 
ing,  the  demand  for  receipts  might  raise  their 
price  to  an  exorbitant  height.  The  holders  of 
them  might  form  extravagant  expectations, 
and,  instead  of  two  or  three  per  cent,  demand 
half  the  bank  money  for  which  credit  had  been 
given  upon  the  deposits  that  the  receipts  had 
respectively  been  granted  for.  The  enemy,  in¬ 
formed  of  the  constitution  of  the  bank,  might 
even  buy  them  up,  in  order  to  prevent  the  car¬ 
rying  away  of  the  treasure.  In  such  emergen¬ 
cies,  the  bank,  it  is  supposed,  would  break 
through  its  ordinary  rule  of  making  payment 
only  to  the  holders  of  receipts.  The  holders  of 
receipts,  who  had  no  bank  money,  must  have 
received  within  two  or  three  per  cent  of  the 
value  of  the  deposit  for  which  their  respective 
receipts  had  been  granted.  The  bank,  there¬ 
fore,  it  is  said,  would  in  this  case  make  no 
scruple  of  paying,  either  with  money  or  bul¬ 
lion,  the  full  value  of  what  the  owners  of  bank 
money  who  could  get  no  receipts  were  credited 
for  in  its  books;  paying  at  the  same  time  two 
or  three  per  cent  to  such  holders  of  receipts 
as  had  no  bank  money,  that  being  the  whole 
value  which  in  this  state  of  things  could  justly 
be  supposed  due  to  them. 

Even  in  ordinary  and  quiet  times  it  is  the 
interest  of  the  holders  of  receipts  to  depress 
the  agio,  in  order  either  to  buy  bank  money 
(and  consequently  the  bullion,  which  their 
receipts  would  then  enable  them  to  take  out  of 
the  bank)  so  much  cheaper,  or  to  sell  their 
receipts  to  those  who  have  bank  money,  and 
who  want  to  take  out  bullion,  so  much  dearer; 
the  price  of  a  receipt  being  generally  equal  to 
the  difference  between  the  market  price  of 
bank  money,  and  that  of  the  coin  or  bullion 
for  which  the  receipt  had  been  granted.  It  is 
the  interest  of  the  owners  of  bank  money,  on 
the  contrary,  to  raise  the  agio,  in  order  either 
to  sell  their  bank  money  so  much  dearer,  or 
to  buy  a  receipt  so  much  cheaper.  To  prevent 
the  stock-jobbing  tricks  which  those  opposite 


208  The  Wealth 

interests  might  sometimes  occasion,  the  bank 
has  of  late  years  come  to  the  resolution  to  sell 
at  all  times  bank  money  for  currency,  at  five 
per  cent  agio,  and  to  buy  it  in  again  at  four 
per  cent  agio.  In  consequence  of  this  resolu¬ 
tion,  the  agio  can  never  either  rise  above  five 
or  sink  below  four  per  cent,  and  the  propor¬ 
tion  between  the  market  price  of  bank  and 
that  of  current  money  is  kept  at  all  times  very 
near  to  the  proportion  between  their  intrinsic 
values.  Before  this  resolution  was  taken,  the 
market  price  of  bank  money  used  sometimes 
to  rise  so  high  as  nine  per  cent  agio,  and  some¬ 
times  to  sink  so  low  as  par,  according  as  oppo¬ 
site  interests  happened  to  influence  the  mar¬ 
ket. 

The  Bank  of  Amsterdam  professes  to  lend 
out  no  part  of  what  is  deposited  with  it,  but, 
for  every  guilder  for  which  it  gives  credit  in 
its  books,  to  keep  in  its  repositories  the  value 
of  a  guilder  either  in  money  or  bullion.  That 
it  keeps  in  its  repositories  all  the  money  or 
bullion  for  which  there  are  receipts  in  force, 
for  which  it  is  at  all  times  liable  to  be  called 
upon,  and  which,  in  reality,  is  continually  go¬ 
ing  from  it  and  returning  to  it  again,  cannot 
well  be  doubted.  But  whether  it  does  so  like¬ 
wise  with  regard  to  that  part  of  its  capital,  for 
which  the  receipts  are  long  ago  expired,  for 
which  in  ordinary  and  quiet  times  it  cannot 
be  called  upon,  and  which  in  reality  is  very 
likely  to  remain  with  it  for  ever,  or  as  long  as 
the  States  of  the  United  Provinces  subsist, 
may  perhaps  appear  more  uncertain.  At  Am¬ 
sterdam,  however,  no  point  of  faith  is  better 
established  than  that  for  every  guilder,  cir¬ 
culated  as  bank  money,  there  is  a  correspond¬ 
ent  guilder  in  gold  or  silver  to  be  found  in  the 
treasure  of  the  bank.  The  city  is  guarantee 
that  it  should  be  so.  The  bank  is  under  the 
direction  of  the  four  reigning  burgomasters 
who  are  changed  every  year.  Each  new  set  of 
burgomasters  visits  the  treasure,  compares  it 
with  the  books,  receives  it  upon  oath,  and  de¬ 
livers  it  over,  with  the  same  awful  solemnity, 
to  the  set  which  succeeds;  and  in  that  sober 
and  religious  country  oaths  are  not  yet  dis¬ 
regarded.  A  rotation  of  this  kind  seems  alone 
a  sufficient  security  against  any  practices 
which  cannot  be  avowed.  Amidst  all  the  revo¬ 
lutions  which  faction  has  ever  occasioned  in 
the  government  of  Amsterdam,  the  prevailing 
party  has  at  no  time  accused  their  predeces¬ 
sors  of  infidelity  in  the  administration  of  the 
bank.  No  accusation  could  have  affected  more 
deeply  the  reputation  and  fortune  of  the  dis¬ 
graced  party,  and  if  such  an  accusation  could 
have  been  supported,  we  may  be  assured  that 
it  would  have  been  brought.  In  1672,  when 
the  French  king  was  at  Utrecht,  the  Bank  of 
Amsterdam  paid  so  readily  as  left  no  doubt 
of  the  fidelity  with  which  it  had  observed  its 


of  Nations 

engagements.  Some  of  the  pieces  which  were 
then  brought  from  its  repositories  appeared 
to  have  been  scorched  with  the  fire  which 
happened  in  the  town-house  soon  after  the 
bank  was  established.  Those  pieces,  therefore, 
must  have  lain  there  from  that  time. 

What  may  be  the  amount  of  the  treasure 
in  the  bank  is  a  question  which  has  long  em¬ 
ployed  speculations  of  the  curious.  Nothing 
but  conjecture  can  be  offered  concerning  it.  It 
is  generally  reckoned  that  there  are  about  two 
thousand  people  who  keep  accounts  with  the 
bank,  and  allowing  them  to  have,  one  with 
another,  the  value  of  fifteen  hundred  pounds 
sterling  lying  upon  their  respective  accounts 
(a  very  large  allowance),  the  whole  quantity 
of  bank  money,  and  consequently  of  treasure 
in  the  bank,  will  amount  to  about  three  mil¬ 
lions  sterling,  or,  at  eleven  guilders  the  pound 
sterling,  thirty-three  millions  of  guilders — a 
great  sum,  and  sufficient  to  carry  on  a  very 
extensive  circulation,  but  vastly  below  the  ex¬ 
travagant  ideas  which  some  people  have 
formed  of  this  treasure. 

The  city  of  Amsterdam  derives  a  consider¬ 
able  revenue  from  the  bank.  Besides  what  may 
be  called  the  warehouse-rent  above  mentioned, 
each  person,  upon  first  opening  an  account 
with  the  bank,  pays  a  fee  of  ten  guilders;  and 
for  every  new  account  three  guilders  three 
stivers;  for  every  transfer  two  stivers;  and  if 
the  transfer  is  for  less  than  three  hundred 
guilders,  six  stivers,  in  order  to  discourage  the 
multiplicity  of  small  transactions.  The  person 
who  neglects  to  balance  his  account  twice  in 
the  year  forfeits  twenty-five  guilders.  The  per¬ 
son  who  orders  a  transfer  for  more  than  is 
upon  his  account,  is  obliged  to  pay  three  per 
cent  for  the  sum  overdrawn,  and  his  order  is 
set  aside  into  the  bargain.  The  bank  is  sup¬ 
posed,  too,  to  make  a  considerable  profit  by 
the  sale  of  the  foreign  coin  or  bullion  which 
sometimes  falls  to  it  by  the  expiring  of  re¬ 
ceipts,  and  which  is  always  kept  till  it  can  be 
sold  with  advantage.  It  makes  a  profit  like¬ 
wise  by  selling  bank  money  at  five  per  cent 
agio,  and  buying  it  in  at  four.  These  different 
emoluments  amount  to  a  good  deal  more  than 
what  is  necessary  for  paying  the  salaries  of 
officers,  and  defraying  the  expense  of  manage¬ 
ment.  What  is  paid  for  the  keeping  of  bullion 
upon  receipts  is  alone  supposed  to  amount  to 
a  neat  annual  revenue  of  between  one  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  and  two  hundred  thousand 
guilders.  Public  utility,  however,  and  not  reve¬ 
nue,  was  the  original  object  of  this  institution. 
Its  object  was  to  relieve  the  merchants  from 
the  inconvenience  of  a  disadvantageous  ex¬ 
change.  The  revenue  which  has  arisen  from  it 
was  unforeseen,  and  may  be  considered  as 
accidental.  But  it  is  now  time  to  return  from 
this  long  digression,  into  which  I  have  been 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


insensibly  led  in  endeavouring  to  explain  the 
reasons  why  the  exchange  between  the  coun¬ 
tries  which  pay  in  what  is  called  bank  money, 
and  those  which  pay  in  common  currency, 
should  generally  appear  to  be  in  favour  of  the 
former  and  against  the  latter.  The  former  pay 
in  a  species  of  money  of  which  the  intrinsic 


209 

value  is  always  the  same,  and  exactly  agree¬ 
able  to  the  standard  of  their  respective  mints; 
the  latter  is  a  species  of  money  of  which 
the  intrinsic  value  is  continually  varying, 
and  is  almost  always  more  or  less  below  that 
standard. 


Part  2 

Of  the  Unreasonableness  of  those  extraordinary  Restraints  upon  other  Principles 


In  the  foregoing  part  of  this  chapter  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show,  even  upon  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  commercial  system,  how  unneces¬ 
sary  it  is  to  lay  extraordinary  restraints  upon 
the  importation  of  goods  from  those  coun¬ 
tries  with  which  the  balance  of  trade  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  disadvantageous. 

Nothing,  however,  can  be  more  absurd  than 
this  whole  doctrine  of  the  balance  of  trade, 
upon  which,  not  only  these  restraints,  but  al¬ 
most  all  the  other  regulations  of  commerce  are 
founded.  When  two  places  trade  with  one  an¬ 
other,  this  doctrine  supposes  that,  if  the  bal¬ 
ance  be  even,  neither  of  them  either  loses  or 
gains;  but  if  it  leans  in  any  degree  to  one  side, 
that  one  of  them  loses  and  the  other  gains 
in  proportion  to  its  declension  from  the  exact 
equilibrium.  Both  suppositions  are  false.  A 
trade  which  is  forced  by  means  of  bounties 
and  monopolies  may  be  and  commonly  is 
disadvantageous  to  the  country  in  whose  fa¬ 
vour  it  is  meant  to  be  established,  as  I  shall 
endeavour  to  show  hereafter.  But  that  trade 
which,  without  force  or  constraint,  is  natu¬ 
rally  and  regularly  carried  on  between  any  two 
places  is  always  advantageous,  though  not 
always  equally  so,  to  both. 

By  advantage  or  gain,  I  understand  not  the 
increase  of  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver, 
but  that  of  the  exchangeable  value  of  the  an¬ 
nual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the 
country,  or  the  increase  of  the  annual  revenue 
of  its  inhabitants. 

If  the  balance  be  even,  and  if  the  trade  be¬ 
tween  the  two  places  consist  altogether  in  the 
exchange  of  their  native  commodities,  they 
will,  upon  most  occasions,  not  only  both  gain, 
but  they  will  gain  equally,  or  very  near 
equally;  each  will  in  this  case  afford  a  market 
for  a  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of  the  other; 
each  will  replace  a  capital  which  had  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  raising  and  preparing  for  the  market 
this  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of  the  other, 
and  which  had  been  distributed  among,  and 
given  revenue  and  maintenance  to  a  certain 
number  of  its  inhabitants.  Some  part  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  each,  therefore,  will  indirectly 
derive  their  revenue  and  maintenance  from 
the  other.  As  the  commodities  exchanged, 
too,  are  supposed  to  be  of  equal  value,  so 
the  two  capitals  employed  in  the  trade  will, 


upon  most  occasions,  be  equal,  or  very  nearly 
equal;  and  both  being  employed  in  raising 
the  native  commodities  of  the  two  countries, 
the  revenue  and  maintenance  which  their  dis¬ 
tribution  will  afford  to  the  inhabitants  of  each 
will  be  equal,  or  very  nearly  equal.  This  rev¬ 
enue  and  maintenance,  thus  mutually  afford¬ 
ed,  will  be  greater  or  smaller  in  proportion 
to  the  extent  of  their  dealings.  If  these  should 
annually  amount  to  an  hundred  thousand 
pounds,  for  example,  or  to  a  million  on  each 
side,  each  of  them  would  afford  an  annual  rev¬ 
enue  in  the  one  case  of  an  hundred  thousand 
pounds,  in  the  other  of  a  million,  to  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  other. 

If  their  trade  should  be  of  such  a  nature 
that  one  of  them  exported  to  the  other  noth¬ 
ing  but  native  commodities,  while  the  returns 
of  that  other  consisted  altogether  in  foreign 
goods;  the  balance,  in  this  case,  would  still  be 
supposed  even,  commodities  being  paid  for 
with  commodities.  They  would,  in  this  case 
too,  both  gain,  but  they  would  not  gain 
equally;  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  country 
which  exported  nothing  but  native  commod¬ 
ities  would  derive  the  greatest  revenue  from 
the  trade.  If  England,  for  example,  should  im¬ 
port  from  France  nothing  but  the  native  com¬ 
modities  of  that  country,  and,  not  having 
such  commodities  of  its  own  as  were  in  de¬ 
mand  there,  should  annually  repay  them  by 
sending  thither  a  large  quantity  of  foreign 
goods,  tobacco,  we  shall  suppose,  and  East 
India  goods;  this  trade,  though  it  would  give 
some  revenue  to  the  inhabitants  of  both  coun¬ 
tries,  would  give  more  to  those  of  France  than 
to  those  of  England.  The  whole  French  capi¬ 
tal  annually  employed  in  it  would  annually 
be  distributed  among  the  people  of  France. 
But  that  part  of  the  English  capital  only 
which  was  employed  in  producing  the  Eng¬ 
lish  commodities  with  which  those  foreign 
goods  were  purchased  would  be  annually  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  people  of  England.  The 
greater  part  of  it  would  replace  the  capitals 
which  had  been  employed  in  Virginia,  Indo- 
stan,  and  China,  and  which  had  given  reve¬ 
nue  and  maintenance  to  the  inhabitants  of 
those  distant  countries.  If  the  capitals  were 
equal,  or  nearly  equal,  therefore  this  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  French  capital  would  augment 


210  The  Wealth 

much  more  the  revenue  of  the  people  of 
France  than  that  of  the  English  capital  would 
the  revenue  of  the  people  of  England.  France 
would  in  this  case  carry  on  a  direct  foreign 
trade  of  consumption  with  England;  whereas 
England  would  carry  on  a  round-about  trade 
of  the  same  kind  with  France.  The  different 
effects  of  a  capital  employed  in  the  direct 
and  of  one  employed  in  the  round-about  for¬ 
eign  trade  of  consumption  have  already  been 
fully  explained. 

There  is  not,  probably,  between  any  two 
countries  a  trade  which  consists  altogether  in 
the  exchange  either  of  native  commodities  on 
both  sides,  or  of  native  commodities  on  one 
side  and  of  foreign  goods  on  the  other.  Almost 
all  countries  exchange  with  one  another  partly 
native  and  partly  foreign  goods.  That  coun¬ 
try,  however,  in  whose  cargoes  there  is  the 
greatest  proportion  of  native,  and  the  least  of 
foreign  goods,  will  always  be  the  principal 
gainer. 

If  it  was  not  with  tobacco  and  East  India 
goods,  but  with  gold  and  silver,  that  England 
paid  for  the  commodities  annually  imported 
from  France,  the  balance,  in  this  case,  would 
be  supposed  uneven,  commodities  not  being 
paid  for  with  commodities,  but  with  gold  and 
silver.  The  trade,  however,  would,  in  this  case, 
as  in  the  foregoing,  give  some  revenue  to  the 
inhabitants  of  both  countries,  but  more  to 
those  of  France  than  to  those  of  England.  It 
would  give  some  revenue  to  those  of  England. 
The  capital  which  had  been  employed  in  pro¬ 
ducing  the  English  goods  that  purchased  this 
gold  and  silver,  the  capital  which  had  been 
distributed  among,  and  given  revenue  to,  cer¬ 
tain  inhabitants  of  England,  would  thereby 
be  replaced  and  enabled  to  continue  that  em¬ 
ployment.  The  whole  capital  of  England  would 
no  more  be  diminished  by  this  exportation  of 
gold  and  silver  than  by  the  exportation  of  an 
equal  value  of  any  other  goods.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  would  in  most  cases  be  augmented. 
No  goods  are  sent  abroad  but  those  for  which 
the  demand  is  supposed  to  be  greater  abroad 
than  at  home,  and  of  which  the  returns  con¬ 
sequently,  it  is  expected,  will  be  of  more  value 
at  home  than  the  commodities  exported.  If 
the  tobacco  which,  in  England,  is  worth  only 
a  hundred  thousand  pounds,  when  sent  to 
France  will  purchase  wine  which  is,  in  Eng¬ 
land,  worth  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand,  this 
exchange  will  equally  augment  the  capital  of 
England  by  ten  thousand  pounds.  If  a  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  pounds  of  English  gold,  in  the 
same  manner,  purchase  French  wine  which, 
in  England,  is  worth  a  hundred  and  ten  thou¬ 
sand,  this  exchange  will  equally  augment  the 
capital  of  England  by  ten  thousand  pounds. 
As  a  merchant  who  has  a  hundred  and  ten 
thousand  pounds  worth  of  wine  in  his  cellar 


of  Nations 

is  a  richer  man  than  he  who  has  only  a  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  pounds  worth  of  tobacco  in 
his  warehouse,  so  is  he  likewise  a  richer  man 
than  he  who  has  only  a  hundred  thousand 
pounds  worth  of  gold  in  his  coffers.  He  can 
put  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of  in¬ 
dustry,  and  give  revenue,  maintenance,  and 
employment  to  a  greater  number  of  people 
than  either  of  the  other  two.  But  the  capital 
of  the  country  is  equal  to  the  capitals  of  all 
its  different  inhabitants,  and  the  quantity  of 
industry  which  can  be  annually  maintained 
in  it  is  equal  to  what  all  those  different  cap¬ 
itals  can  maintain.  Both  the  capital  of  the 
country,  therefore,  and  the  quantity  of  in¬ 
dustry  which  can  be  annually  maintained  in 
it,  must  generally  be  augmented  by  this  ex¬ 
change.  It  would,  indeed,  be  more  advanta¬ 
geous  for  England  that  it  could  purchase  the 
wines  of  France  with  its  own  hardware  and 
broadcloth  than  with  either  the  tobacco  of 
Virginia  or  the  gold  and  silver  of  Brazil  and 
Peru.  A  direct  foreign  trade  of  consumption  is 
always  more  advantageous  than  a  round¬ 
about  one.  But  a  round-about  foreign  trade 
of  consumption,  which  is  carried  on  with  gold 
and  silver,  does  not  seem  to  be  less  advan¬ 
tageous  than  any  other  equally  round-about 
one.  Neither  is  a  country  which  has  no  mines 
more  likely  to  be  exhausted  of  gold  and  silver 
by  this  annual  exportation  of  those  metals 
than  one  which  does  not  grow  tobacco  by  the 
like  annual  exportation  of  that  plant.  As  a 
country  which  has  wherewithal  to  buy  tobacco 
will  never  be  long  in  want  of  it,  so  neither 
will  one  be  long  in  want  of  gold  and  silver 
which  has  wherewithal  to  purchase  those 
metals. 

It  is  a  losing  trade,  it  is  said,  which  a  work¬ 
man  carries  on  with  the  alehouse;  and  the 
trade  which  a  manufacturing  nation  would 
naturally  carry  on  with  a  wine  country  may 
be  considered  as  a  trade  of  the  same  nature. 
I  answer,  that  the  trade  with  the  alehouse 
is  not  necessarily  a  losing  trade.  In  its  own 
nature  it  is  just  as  advantageous  as  any  other, 
though  perhaps  somewhat  more  liable  to  be 
abused.  The  employment  of  a  brewer,  and 
even  that  of  a  retailer  of  fermented  liquors, 
are  as  necessary  divisions  of  labour  as  any 
other.  It  will  generally  be  more  advantageous 
for  a  workman  to  buy  of  the  brewer  the  quan¬ 
tity  he  has  occasion  for  than  to  brew  it  him¬ 
self,  and  if  he  is  a  poor  workman,  it  will  gen¬ 
erally  be  more  advantageous  for  him  to  buy 
it  by  little  and  little  of  the  retailer  than  a 
large  quantity  of  the  brewer.  He  may  no 
doubt  buy  too  much  of  either,  as  he  may  of 
any  other  dealers  in  his  neighbourhood,  of  the 
butcher,  if  he  is  a  glutton,  or  of  the  draper, 
if  he  affects  to  be  a  beau  among  his  compan¬ 
ions.  It  is  advantageous  to  the  great  body  of 


Unreasonableness  of  Restraints 


workmen,  notwithstanding,  that  all  these 
trades  should  be  free,  though  this  freedom 
may  be  abused  in  all  of  them,  and  is  more 
likely  to  be  so,  perhaps,  in  some  than  in 
others.  Though  individuals,  besides,  may 
sometimes  ruin  their  fortunes  by  an  excessive 
consumption  of  fermented  liquors,  there  seems 
to  be  no  risk  that  a  nation  should  do  so. 
Though  in  every  country  there  are  many  peo¬ 
ple  who  spend  upon  such  liquors  more  than 
they  can  afford,  there  are  always  many  more 
who  spend  less.  It  deserves  to  be  remarked 
too,  that,  if  we  consult  experience,  the  cheap¬ 
ness  of  wine  seems  to  be  a  cause,  not  of 
drunkenness,  but  of  sobriety.  The  inhabitants 
of  the  wine  countries  are  in  general  the  sober¬ 
est  people  in  Europe;  witness  the  Spainards, 
the  Italians,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  south¬ 
ern  provinces  of  France.  People  are  seldom 
guilty  of  excess  in  what  is  their  daily  fare.  No¬ 
body  affects  the  character  of  liberality  and 
good  fellowship  by  being  profuse  of  a  liquor 
which  is  as  cheap  as  small  beer.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  in  the  countries  which,  either  from  ex¬ 
cessive  heat  or  cold,  produce  no  grapes,  and 
where  wine  consequently  is  dear  and  a  rarity, 
drunkenness  is  a  common  vice,  as  among  the 
northern  nations,  and  all  those  who  live  be¬ 
tween  the  tropics,  the  negroes,  for  example,  on 
the  coast  of  Guinea.  When  a  French  regiment 
comes  from  some  of  the  northern  provinces 
of  France,  where  wine  is  somewhat  dear,  to 
be  quartered  in  the  southern,  where  it  is  very 
cheap,  the  soldiers,  I  have  frequently  heard  it 
observed  are  at  first  debauched  by  the  cheap¬ 
ness  and  novelty  of  good  wine;  but  after  a  few 
months’  residence,  the  greater  part  of  them 
become  as  sober  as  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants. 
Were  the  duties  upon  foreign  wines,  and  the 
excises  upon  malt,  beer,  and  ale  to  be  taken 
away  all  at  once,  it  might,  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner,  occasion  in  Great  Britain  a  pretty  general 
and  temporary  drunkenness  among  the  mid¬ 
dling  and  inferior  ranks  of  people,  which 
would  probably  be  soon  followed  by  a  per¬ 
manent  and  almost  universal  sobriety.  At 
present  drunkenness  is  by  no  means  the  vice 
of  people  of  fashion,  or  of  those  who  can 
easily  afford  the  most  expensive  liquors.  A 
gentleman  drunk  with  ale  has  scarce  ever 
been  seen  among  us.  The  restraints  upon  the 
wine  trade  in  Great  Britain,  besides,  do  not 
so  much  seem  calculated  to  hinder  the  people 
from  going,  if  I  may  say  so,  to  the  alehouse, 
as  from  going  where  they  can  buy  the  best 
and  cheapest  liquor.  They  favour  the  wine 
trade  of  Portugal,  and  discourage  that  of 
France.  The  Portugese,  it  is  said,  indeed,  are 
better  customers  for  our  manufactures  than 
the  French,  and  should  therefore  be  encour¬ 
aged  in  preference  to  them.  As  they  give  us 
their  custom,  it  is  pretended,  we  should  give 


211 

them  ours.  The  sneaking  arts  of  underling 
tradesmen  are  thus  erected  into  political 
maxims  for  the  conduct  of  a  great  empire:  for 
it  is  the  most  underling  tradesmen  only  who 
make  it  a  rule  to  employ  chiefly  their  own 
customers.  A  great  trader  purchases  his  goods 
always  where  they  are  cheapest  and  best, 
without  regard  to  any  little  interest  of  this 
kind. 

By  such  maxims  as  these,  however,  nations 
have  been  taught  that  their  interest  consisted 
in  beggaring  all  their  neighbours.  Each  na¬ 
tion  has  been  made  to  look  with  an  invidious 
eye  upon  the  prosperity  of  all  the  nations 
with  which  it  trades,  and  to  consider  their 
gain  as  its  own  loss.  Commerce,  which  ought 
naturally  to  be,  among  nations,  as  among 
individuals,  a  bond  of  union  and  friendship, 
has  become  the  most  fertile  source  of  discord 
and  animosity.  The  capricious  ambition  of 
kings  and  ministers  has  not,  during  the  pres¬ 
ent  and  the  preceding  century,  been  more 
fatal  to  the  repose  of  Europe  than  the  im¬ 
pertinent  jealousy  of  merchants  and  manufac¬ 
turers.  The  violence  and  injustice  of  the  rulers 
of  mankind  is  an  ancient  evil,  for  which,  I  am 
afraid,  the  nature  of  human  affairs  can  scarce 
admit  of  a  remedy.  But  the  mean  rapacity, 
the  monopolizing  spirit  of  merchants  and 
manufacturers,  who  neither  are,  nor  ought  to 
be,  the  rulers  of  mankind,  though  it  cannot 
perhaps  be  corrected  may  very  easily  be  pre¬ 
vented  from  disturbing  the  tranquillity  of 
anybody  but  themselves. 

That  it  was  the  spirit  of  monopoly  which 
originally  both  invented  and  propagated  this 
doctrine  cannot  be  doubted;  and  they  who 
first  taught  it  were  by  no  means  such  fools  as 
they  who  believed  it.  In  every  country  it  al¬ 
ways  is  and  must  be  the  interest  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people  to  buy  whatever  they 
want  of  those  who  sell  it  cheapest.  The  propo¬ 
sition  is  so  very  manifest  that  it  seems  ridic¬ 
ulous  to  take  any  pains  to  prove  it;  nor  could 
it  ever  have  been  called  in  question  had  not 
the  interested  sophistry  of  merchants  and 
manufacturers  confounded  the  common  sense 
of  mankind.  Their  interest  is,  in  this  respect, 
directly  opposite  to  that  of  the  great  body  of 
the  people.  As  it  is  the  interest  of  the  free¬ 
men  of  a  corporation  to  hinder  the  rest  of  the 
inhabitants  from  employing  any  workmen  but 
themselves,  so  it  is  the  interest  of  the  mer¬ 
chants  and  manufacturers  of  every  country 
to  secure  to  themselves  the  monopoly  of  the 
home  market.  Hence  in  Great  Britain,  and  in 
most  other  European  countries,  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  duties  upon  almost  all  goods  imported 
by  alien  merchants.  Hence  the  high  duties  and 
prohibitions  upon  all  those  foreign  manufac¬ 
tures  which  can  come  into  competition  with 
our  own.  Hence,  too,  the  extraordinary  re- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


212 

strain ts  upon  the  importation  of  almost  all 
sorts  of  goods  from  those  countries  with  which 
the  balance  of  trade  is  supposed  to  be  dis¬ 
advantageous;  that  is,  from  those  against 
whom  national  animosity  happens  to  be  most 
violently  inflamed. 

The  wealth  of  a  neighbouring  nation,  how¬ 
ever,  though  dangerous  in  war  and  politics,  is 
certainly  advantageous  in  trade.  In  a  state  of 
hostility  it  may  enable  our  enemies  to  main¬ 
tain  fleets  and  armies  superior  to  our  own; 
but  in  a  state  of  peace  and  commerce  it  must 
likewise  enable  them  to  exchange  with  us  to 
a  greater  value,  and  to  afford  a  better  market, 
either  for  the  immediate  produce  of  our  own 
industry,  or  for  whatever  is  purchased  with 
that  produce.  As  a  rich  man  is  likely  to  be  a 
better  customer  to  the  industrious  people  in 
his  neighbourhood  than  a  poor,  so  is  likewise 
a  rich  nation.  A  rich  man,  indeed,  who  is 
himself  a  manufacturer,  is  a  very  dangerous 
neighbour  to  all  those  who  deal  in  the  same 
way.  All  the  rest  of  the  neighbourhood,  how¬ 
ever,  by  far  the  greatest  number,  profit  by 
the  good  market  which  his  expense  affords 
them.  They  even  profit  by  his  underselling 
the  poorer  workmen  who  deal  in  the  same 
way  with  him.  The  manufacturers  of  a  rich 
nation,  in  the  same  manner,  may  no  doubt  be 
very  dangerous  rivals  to  those  of  their  neigh¬ 
bours.  This  very  competition,  however,  is  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  great  body  of  the  people, 
who  profit  greatly  besides  by  the  good  mar¬ 
ket  which  the  great  expense  of  such  a  nation 
affords  them  in  every  other  way.  Private  peo¬ 
ple  who  want  to  make  a  fortune  never  think 
of  retiring  to  the  remote  and  poor  provinces 
of  the  country,  but  resort  either  to  the  capital, 
or  to  some  of  the  great  commercial  towns. 
They  know  that  where  little  wealth  circulates 
there  is  little  to  be  got,  but  that  where  a  great 
deal  is  in  motion,  some  share  of  it  may  fall 
to  them.  The  same  maxims  which  would  in 
this  manner  direct  the  common  sense  of  one, 
or  ten,  or  twenty  individuals,  should  regulate 
the  judgment  of  one,  or  ten,  or  twenty  mil¬ 
lions,  and  should  make  a  whole  nation  regard 
the  riches  of  its  neighbours  as  a  probable 
cause  and  occasion  for  itself  to  acquire  riches. 
A  nation  that  would  enrich  itself  by  foreign 
trade  is  certainly  most  likely  to  do  so  when 
its  neighbours  are  all  rich,  industrious,  and 
commercial  nations.  A  great  nation  surround¬ 
ed  on  all  sides  by  wandering  savages  and  poor 
barbarians  might,  no  doubt,  acquire  riches  by 
the  cultivation  of  its  own  lands,  and  by  its 
own  interior  commerce,  but  not  by  foreign 
trade.  It  seems  to  have  been  in  this  manner 
that  the  ancient  Egyptians  and  the  modern 
Chinese  acquired  their  great  wealth.  The 
ancient  Egyptians,  it  is  said,  neglected  for¬ 
eign  commerce,  and  the  modern  Chinese,  it 


is  known,  hold  it  in  the  utmost  contempt,  and 
scarce  deign  to  afford  it  the  decent  protection 
of  the  laws.  The  modern  maxims  of  foreign 
commerce,  by  aiming  at  the  impoverishment 
of  all  our  neighbours,  so  far  as  they  are  ca¬ 
pable  of  producing  their  intended  effect,  tend 
to  render  that  very  commerce  insignificant 
and  contemptible. 

It  is  in  consequence  of  these  maxims  that 
the  commerce  between  France  and  England 
has  in  both  countries  been  subjected  to  so 
many  discouragements  and  restraints.  If  those 
two  countries,  however,  were  to  consider  their 
real  interest,  without  either  mercantile  jeal¬ 
ousy  or  national  animosity,  the  commerce  of 
France  might  be  more  advantageous  to  Great 
Britain  than  that  of  any  other  country,  and 
for  the  same  reason  that  of  Great  Britain  to 
France.  France  is  the  nearest  neighbour  to 
Great  Britain.  In  the  trade  between  the  south¬ 
ern  coast  of  England  and  the  northern  and 
north-western  coasts  of  France,  the  returns 
might  be  expected,  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
the  inland  trade,  four,  five,  or  six  times  in  the 
year.  The  capital,  therefore,  employed  in  this 
trade  could  in  each  of  the  two  countries  keep 
in  motion  four,  five,  or  six  times  the  quantity 
of  industry,  and  afford  employment  and  sub¬ 
sistence  to  four,  five,  or  six  times  the  number 
of  people,  which  an  equal  capital  could  do  in 
the  greater  part  of  the  other  branches  of 
foreign  trade.  Between  the  parts  of  France 
and  Great  Britain  most  remote  from  one  an¬ 
other,  the  returns  might  be  expected,  at  least, 
once  in  the  year,  and  even  this  trade  would  so 
far  be  at  least  equally  advantageous  as  the 
greater  part  of  the  other  branches  of  our  for¬ 
eign  European  trade.  It  would  be,  at  least, 
three  times  more  advantageous  than  the 
boasted  trade  with  our  North  American  col¬ 
onies,  in  which  the  returns  were  seldom  made 
in  less  than  three  years,  frequently  not  in  less 
than  four  or  five  years.  France,  besides,  is 
supposed  to  contain  twenty-four  millions  of 
inhabitants.  Our  North  American  colonies 
were  never  supposed  to  contain  more  than 
three  millions;  and  France  is  a  much  richer 
country  than  North  America;  though,  on 
account  of  the  more  unequal  distribution  of 
riches,  there  is  much  more  poverty  and  beg¬ 
gary  in  the  one  country  than  in  the  other. 
France,  therefore,  could  afford  a  market  at 
least  eight  times  more  extensive,  and,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  superior  frequency  of  the  re¬ 
turns,  four-and-twenty  times  more  advanta¬ 
geous  than  that  which  our  North  American 
colonies  ever  afforded.  The  trade  of  Great 
Britain  would  be  just  as  advantageous  to 
France,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  wealth,  pop¬ 
ulation,  and  proximity  of  the  respective  coun¬ 
tries,  would  have  the  same  superiority  over 
that  which  France  carries  on  with  her  own 


Drawbacks 


colonies.  Such  is  the  very  great  difference  be¬ 
tween  that  trade,  which  the  wisdom  of  both 
nations  has  thought  proper  to  discourage,  and 
that  which  it  has  favoured  the  most. 

But  the  very  same  circumstances  which 
would  have  rendered  an  open  and  free  com¬ 
merce  between  the  two  countries  so  advan¬ 
tageous  to  both,  have  occasioned  the  prin¬ 
cipal  obstructions  to  that  commerce.  Being 
neighbours,  they  are  necessarily  enemies,  and 
the  wealth  and  power  of  each  becomes,  upon 
that  account,  more  formidable  to  the  other; 
and  what  would  increase  the  advantage  of 
national  friendship  serves  only  to  inflame  the 
violence  of  national  animosity.  They  are  both 
rich  and  industrious  nations;  and  the  mer¬ 
chants  and  manufacturers  of  each  dread  the 
competition  of  the  skill  and  activity  of  those 
of  the  other.  Mercantile  jealousy  is  excited, 
and  both  inflames,  and  is  itself  inflamed,  by 
the  violence  of  national  animosity;  and  the 
traders  of  both  countries  have  announced, 
with  all  the  passionate  confidence  of  inter¬ 
ested  falsehood,  the  certain  ruin  of  each,  in 
consequence  of  that  unfavourable  balance  of 
trade,  which,  they  pretend,  would  be  the  in¬ 
fallible  effect  of  an  unrestrained  commerce 
with  the  other. 

There  is  no  commercial  country  in  Europe 
of  which  the  approaching  ruin  has  not  fre¬ 
quently  been  foretold  by  the  pretended  doc¬ 
tors  of  this  system  from  an  unfavourable  bal¬ 
ance  of  trade.  After  all  the  anxiety,  however, 
which  they  have  excited  about  this,  after  all 
the  vain  attempts  of  almost  all  trading  na¬ 
tions  to  turn  that  balance  in  their  own  favour 
and  against  their  neighbours,  it  does  not  ap¬ 
pear  that  any  one  nation  in  Europe  has  been 
in  any  respect  impoverished  by  this  cause. 
Every  town  and  country,  on  the  contrary,  in 
proportion  as  they  have  opened  their  ports 
to  all  nations,  instead  of  being  ruined  by  this 
free  trade,  as  the  principles  of  the  commercial 
system  would  lead  us  to  expect,  have  been  en¬ 
riched  by  it.  Though  there  are  in  Europe,  in¬ 
deed,  a  few  towns  which  in  some  respects  de¬ 
serve  the  name  of  free  ports,  there  is  no 
country  which  does  so.  Holland,  perhaps,  ap¬ 
proaches  the  nearest  to  this  character  of  any, 
though  still  very  remote  from  it;  and  Holland, 
it  is  acknowledged,  not  only  derives  its  whole 
wealth,  but  a  great  part  of  its  necessary  sub¬ 
sistence,  from  foreign  trade. 

There  is  another  balance,  indeed,  which  has 
already  been  explained,  very  different  from 
the  balance  of  trade,  and  which,  according  as 
it  happens  to  be  either  favourable  or  un¬ 
favourable,  necessarily  occasions  the  prosper¬ 
ity  or  decay  of  every  nation.  This  is  the  bal¬ 
ance  of  the  annual  produce  and  consumption. 
If  the  exchangeable  value  of  the  annual  pro¬ 
duce,  it  has  already  been  observed,  exceeds 


213 

that  of  the  annual  consumption,  the  capital 
of  the  society  must  annually  increase  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  this  excess.  The  society  in  this  case 
lives  within  its  revenue,  and  what  is  annually 
saved  out  of  its  revenue  is  naturally  added  to 
its  capital,  and  employed  so  as  to  increase  still 
further  the  annual  produce.  If  the  exchange¬ 
able  value  of  the  annual  produce,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  fall  short  of  the  annual  consumption, 
the  capital  of  the  society  must  annually  decay 
in  proportion  to  this  deficiency.  The  expense 
of  the  society  in  this  case  exceeds  its  revenue, 
and  necessarily  encroaches  upon  its  capital. 
Its  capital,  therefore,  must  necessarily  decay, 
and  together  with  it  the  exchangeable  value 
of  the  annual  produce  of  its -industry. 

This  balance  of  produce  and  consumption 
is  entirely  different  from  what  is  called  the 
balance  of  trade.  It  might  take  place  in  a 
nation  which  had  no  foreign  trade,  but  which 
was  entirely  separated  from  all  the  world.  It 
may  take  place  in  the  whole  globe  of  the 
earth,  of  which  the  wealth,  population,  and 
improvement  may  be  either  gradually  increas¬ 
ing  or  gradually  decaying. 

The  balance  of  produce  and  consumption 
may  be  constantly  in  favour  of  a  nation, 
though  what  is  called  the  balance  of  trade  be 
generally  against  it.  A  nation  may  import  to 
a  greater  value  than  it  exports  for  half  a 
century,  perhaps,  together;  the  gold  and  silver 
which  comes  into  it  during  all  this  time  may 
be  all  immediately  sent  out  of  it;  its  circulat¬ 
ing  coin  may  gradually  decay,  different  sorts 
of  paper  money  being  substituted  in  its  place, 
and  even  the  debts,  too,  which  it  contracts  in 
the  principal  nations  with  whom  it  deals,  may 
be  gradually  increasing;  and  yet  its  real 
wealth,  the  exchangeable  value  of  the  annual 
produce  of  its  lands  and  labour,  may,  during 
the  same  period,  have  been  increasing  in  a 
much  greater  proportion.  The  state  of  our 
North  American  colonies,  and  of  the  trade 
which  they  carried  on  with  Great  Britain,  be¬ 
fore  the  commencement  of  the  present  dis¬ 
turbances,1  may  serve  as  a  proof  that  this 
is  by  no  means  an  impossible  supposition. 

CHAPTER  IV 

Of  Drawbacks 

Merchants  and  manufacturers  are  not  con¬ 
tented  with  the  monopoly  of  the  home  market, 
but  desire  likewise  the  most  extensive  for¬ 
eign  sale  for  their  goods.  Their  country  has 
no  jurisdiction  in  foreign  nations,  and  there¬ 
fore  can  seldom  procure  them  any  monopoly 
there.  They  are  generally  obliged,  therefore, 
to  content  themselves  with  petitioning  for 
certain  encouragements  to  exportation. 

Of  these  encouragements  what  are  called 
Drawbacks  seem  to  be  the  most  reasonable. 

1  This  paragraph  was  written  in  the  year  1775. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


214 

To  allow  the  merchant  to  draw  back  upon 
exportation,  either  the  whole  or  a  part  of 
whatever  excise  or  inland  duty  is  imposed 
upon  domestic  industry,  can  never  occasion 
the  exportation  of  a  greater  quantity  of  goods 
than  what  would  have  been  exported  had  no 
duty  been  imposed.  Such  encouragements  do 
not  tend  to  turn  towards  any  particular  em¬ 
ployment  a  greater  share  of  the  capital  of  the 
country  than  what  would  go  to  that  employ¬ 
ment  of  its  own  accord,  but  only  to  hinder 
the  duty  from  driving  away  any  part  of  that 
share  to  other  employments.  They  tend  not  to 
overturn  that  balance  which  naturally  es¬ 
tablishes  itself  among  all  the  various  employ¬ 
ments  of  the  society;  but  to  hinder  it  from 
being  overturned  by  the  duty.  They  tend  not 
to  destroy,  but  to  preserve  what  it  is  in  most 
cases  advantageous  to  preserve,  the  natural 
division  and  distribution  of  labour  in  the 
society. 

The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  draw¬ 
backs  upon  the  re-exportation  of  foreign  goods 
imported,  which  in  Great  Britain  generally 
amount  to  by  much  the  largest  part  of  the 
duty  upon  importation.  By  the  second  of  the 
rules  annexed  to  the  Act  of  Parliament  which 
imposed  what  is  now  called  the  Old  Subsidy, 
every  merchant,  whether  English  or  alien,  was 
allowed  to  draw  back  half  that  duty  upon 
exportation;  the  English  merchant,  provided 
the  exportation  took  place  within  twelve 
months;  the  alien,  provided  it  took  place  with¬ 
in  nine  months.  Wines,  currants,  and  wrought 
silks  were  the  only  goods  which  did  not  fall 
within  this  rule,  having  other  and  more  ad¬ 
vantageous  allowances.  The  duties  imposed 
by  this  Act  of  Parliament  were  at  that  time 
the  only  duties  upon  the  importation  of  for¬ 
eign  goods.  The  term  within  which  this  and 
all  other  drawbacks  could  be  claimed  was 
afterwards  (by  the  7th  George  I,  c.  21,  sect. 
10)  extended  to  three  years. 

The  duties  which  have  been  imposed  since 
the  Old  Subsidy  are,  the  greater  part  of  them, 
wholly  drawn  back  upon  exportation.  This 
general  rule,  however,  is  liable  to  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  exceptions,  and  the  doctrine  of  draw¬ 
backs  has  become  a  much  less  simple  matter 
than  it  was  at  their  first  institution. 

Upon  the  exportation  of  some  foreign  goods, 
of  which  it  was  expected  that  the  importation 
would  greatly  exceed  what  was  necessary  for 
the  home  consumption,  the  whole  duties  are 
drawn  back,  without  retaining  even  half  the 
Old  Subsidy.  Before  the  revolt  of  our  North 
American  colonies,  we  had  the  monopoly  of 
the  tobacco  of  Maryland  and  Virginia.  We 
imported  about  ninety-six  thousand  hogs¬ 
heads,  and  the  home  consumption  was  not 
supposed  to  exceed  fourteen  thousand.  To  fa¬ 
cilitate  the  great  exportation  which  was  nec¬ 


essary,  in  order  to  rid  us  of  the  rest,  the 
whole  duties  were  drawn  back,  provided  the 
exportation  took  place  within  three  years. 

We  still  have,  though  not  altogether,  yet 
very  nearly,  the  monopoly  of  the  sugars  of 
our  West  Indian  Islands.  If  sugars  are  ex¬ 
ported  within  a  year,  therefore,  all  the  duties 
upon  importation  are  drawn  back,  and  if  ex¬ 
ported  within  three  years  all  the  duties,  ex¬ 
cept  half  the  Old  Subsidy,  which  still  con¬ 
tinues  to  be  retained  upon  the  exportation 
of  the  greater  part  of  goods.  Though  the  im¬ 
portation  of  sugar  exceeds,  a  good  deal,  what 
is  necessary  for  the  home  consumption,  the 
excess  is  inconsiderable  in  comparison  of  what 
it  used  to  be  in  tobacco. 

Some  goods,  the  particular  objects  of  the 
jealousy  of  our  own  manufacturers,  are  pro¬ 
hibited  to  be  imported  for  home  consump¬ 
tion.  They  may,  however,  upon  paying  certain 
duties,  be  imported  and  warehoused  for  ex¬ 
portation.  But  upon  such  exportation,  no  part 
of  these  duties  are  drawn  back.  Our  manufac¬ 
turers  are  unwilling,  it  seems,  that  even  this 
restricted  importation  should  be  encouraged, 
and  are  afraid  lest  some  part  of  these  goods 
should  be  stolen  out  of  the  warehouse,  and 
thus  come  into  competition  with  their  own. 
It  is  under  these  regulations  only  that  we  can 
import  wrought  silks,  French  cambrics  and 
lawns,  calicoes  painted,  printed,  stained  or 
dyed,  etc. 

We  are  unwilling  even  to  be  the  carriers  of 
French  goods,  and  choose  rather  to  forego  a 
profit  to  ourselves  than  to  suffer  those,  whom 
we  consider  as  our  enemies,  to  make  any 
profit  by  our  means.  Not  only  half  the  Old 
Subsidy,  but  the  second  twenty-five  per  cent, 
is  retained  upon  the  exportation  of  all  French 
goods. 

By  the  fourth  of  the  rules  annexed  to  the 
Old  Subsidy,  the  drawback  allowed  upon  the 
exportation  of  all  wines  amounted  to  a  great 
deal  more  than  half  the  duties  which  were,  at 
that  time,  paid  upon  their  importation;  and  it 
seems,  at  that  time,  to  have  been  the  object 
of  the  legislature  to  give  somewhat  more  than 
ordinary  encouragement  to  the  carrying  trade 
in  wine.  Several  of  the  other  duties  too,  which 
were  imposed  either  at  the  same  time,  or  sub¬ 
sequent  to  the  Old  Subsidy — what  is  called 
the  additional  duty,  the  New  Subsidy,  the 
One-third  and  Two-thirds  Subsidies,  the  im¬ 
post  1692,  the  coinage  on  wine — were  allowed 
to  be  wholly  drawn  back  upon  exportation. 
All  those  duties,  however,  except  the  addi¬ 
tional  duty  and  impost  1692,  being  paid  down 
in  ready  money,  upon  importation,  the  in¬ 
terest  of  so  large  a  sum  occasioned  an  ex¬ 
pense,  which  made  it  unreasonable  to  expect 
any  profitable  carrying  trade  in  this  article. 
Only  a  part,  therefore,  of  the  duty  called  the 


Drawbacks 


215 


impost  on  wine,  and  no  part  of  the  twenty- 
five  pounds  the  ton  upon  French  wines,  or  of 
the  duties  imposed  in  1745,  in  1763,  and  in 
1778,  were  allowed  to  be  drawn  back  upon 
exportation.  The  two  imposts  of  five  per  cent, 
imposed  in  1779  and  1781,  upon  all  the  former 
duties  of  customs,  being  allowed  to  be  wholly 
drawn  back  upon  the  exportation  of  all  other 
goods,  were  likewise  allowed  to  be  drawn 
back  upon  that  of  wine.  The  last  duty  that 
has  been  particularly  imposed  upon  wine, 
that  of  1780,  is  allowed  to  be  wholly  drawn 
back,  an  indulgence  which,  when  so  many 
heavy  duties  are  retained,  most  probably 
could  never  occasion  the  exportation  of  a 
single  ton  of  wine.  These  rules  take  place 
with  regard  to  all  places  of  lawful  exportation, 
except  the  British  colonies  in  America. 

The  15th  Charles  II,  c.  7,  called  An  Act  for 
the  Encouragement  of  Trade,  had  given  Great 
Britain  the  monopoly  of  supplying  the  col¬ 
onies  with  all  the  commodities  of  the  growth 
or  manufacture  of  Europe;  and  consequently 
with  wines.  In  a  country  of  so  extensive  a 
coast  as  our  North  American  and  West  Indian 
colonies,  where  our  authority  was  always  so 
very  slender,  and  where  the  inhabitants  were 
allowed  to  carry  out,  in  their  own  ships,  their 
non-enumerated  commodities,  at  first  to  all 
parts  of  Europe,  and  afterwards  to  all  parts 
of  Europe  south  of  Cape  Finisterre,  it  is  not 
very  probable  that  this  monopoly  could  ever 
be  much  respected;  and  they  probably,  at  all 
times,  found  means  of  bringing  back  some 
cargo  from  the  countries  to  which  they  were 
allowed  to  carry  out  one.  They  seem,  however, 
to  have  found  some  difficulty  in  importing 
European  wines  from  the  places  of  their 
growth,  and  they  could  not  well  import  them 
from  Great  Britain  where  they  were  loaded 
with  many  heavy  duties,  of  which  a  consider¬ 
able  part  was  not  drawn  back  upon  exporta¬ 
tion.  Maderia  wine,  not  being  a  European 
commodity,  could  be  imported  directly  into 
America  and  the  West  Indies,  countries  which, 
in  all  their  non-enumerated  commodities,  en¬ 
joyed  a  free  trade  to  the  island  of  Maderia. 
These  circumstances  had  probably  introduced 
that  general  taste  for  Maderia  wine,  which  our 
officers  found  established  in  all  our  colonies 
at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  which  be¬ 
gan  in  1755,  and  which  they  brought  back 
with  them  to  the  mother  country,  where  that 
wine  had  not  been  much  in  fashion  before. 
Upon  the  conclusion  of  that  war,  in  1763  (by 
the  4th  George  III,  c.  15,  sect.  12) ,  all  the 
duties,  except  £3  10s.,  were  allowed  to  be 
drawn  back  upon  the  exportation  to  the  col¬ 
onies  of  all  wines,  except  French  wines,  to  the 
commerce  and  consumption  of  which  national 
prejudice  would  allow  no  sort  of  encourage¬ 
ment.  The  period  between  the  granting  of  this 


indulgence  and  the  revolt  of  our  North  Amer¬ 
ican  colonies  was  probably  too  short  to  ad¬ 
mit  of  any  considerable  change  in  the  customs 
of  those  countries. 

The  same  act,  which,  in  the  drawback  up¬ 
on  all  wines,  except  French  wines,  thus  fa¬ 
voured  the  colonies  so  much  more  than  other 
countries;  in  those  upon  the  greater  part  of 
other  commodities  favoured  them  much  less. 
Upon  the  exportation  of  the  greater  part  of 
commodities  to  other  countries,  half  the  old 
subsidy  was  drawn  back.  But  this  law  enacted 
that  no  part  of  that  duty  should  be  drawn 
back  upon  the  exportation  to  the  colonies 
of  any  commodities,  of  the  growth  or  manu¬ 
facture  either  of  Europe  or  the  East  Indies, 
except  wines,  white  calicoes,  and  muslins. 

Drawbacks  were,  perhaps,  originally  grant¬ 
ed  for  the  encouragement  of  the  carrying 
trade,  which,  as  the  freight  of  the  ships  is 
frequently  paid  by  foreigners  in  money,  was 
supposed  to  be  peculiarly  fitted  for  bringing 
gold  and  silver  into  the  country.  But  though 
the  carrying  trade  certainly  deserves  no  pe¬ 
culiar  encouragement,  though  the  motive  of 
the  institution  was  perhaps  abundantly  fool¬ 
ish,  the  institution  itself  seems  reasonable 
enough.  Such  drawbacks  cannot  force  into 
this  trade  a  greater  share  of  the  capital  of  the 
country  than  what  would  have  gone  to  it  of 
its  own  accord  had  there  been  no  duties  upon 
importation.  They  only  prevent  its  being  ex¬ 
cluded  altogether  by  those  duties.  The  carry¬ 
ing  trade,  though  it  deserves  no  preference, 
ought  not  to  be  precluded,  but  to  be  left  free 
like  all  other  trades.  It  is  a  necessary  resource 
for  those  capitals  which  cannot  find  employ¬ 
ment  either  in  the  agriculture  or  in  the  manu¬ 
factures  of  the  country,  either  in  its  home 
trade  or  in  its  foreign  trade  of  consumption. 

The  revenue  of  the  customs,  instead  of 
suffering,  profits  from  such  drawbacks  by  that 
part  of  the  duty  which  is  retained.  If  the 
whole  duties  had  been  retained,  the  foreign 
goods  upon  which  they  are  paid  could  seldom 
have  been  exported,  nor  consequently  im¬ 
ported,  for  want  of  a  market.  The  duties, 
therefore,  of  which  a  part  is  retained  would 
never  have  been  paid. 

These  reasons  seem  sufficiently  to  justify 
drawbacks,  and  would  justify  them,  though 
the  whole  duties,  whether  upon  the  produce 
of  domestic  industry,  or  upon  foreign  goods, 
were  always  drawn  back  upon  exportation. 
The  revenue  of  excise  would  in  this  case,  in¬ 
deed,  suffer  a  little,  and  that  of  the  customs 
a  good  deal  more;  but  the  natural  balance  of 
industry,  the  natural  division  and  distribution 
of  labour,  which  is  always  more  or  less  dis¬ 
turbed  by  such  duties,  would  be  more  nearly 
re-established  by  such  a  regulation. 

These  reasons,  however,  will  justify  draw- 


216  The  Wealth 

hacks  only  upon  exporting  goods  to  those 
countries  which  are  altogether  foreign  and 
independent,  not  to  those  in  which  our  mer¬ 
chants  and  manufacturers  enjoy  a  monopoly. 
A  drawback,  for  example,  upon  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  European  goods  to  our  American  col¬ 
onies  will  not  always  occasion  a  greater  ex¬ 
portation  than  what  would  have  taken  place 
without  it.  By  means  of  the  monopoly  which 
our  merchants  and  manufacturers  enjoy  there, 
the  same  quantity  might  frequently,  perhaps, 
be  sent  thither,  though  the  whole  duties  were 
retained.  The  drawback,  therefore,  may  fre¬ 
quently  be  pure  loss  to  the  revenue  of  excise 
and  customs,  without  altering  the  state  of  the 
trade,  or  rendering  it  in  any  respect  more 
extensive.  How  far  such  drawbacks  can  be 
justified,  as  a  proper  encouragement  to  the 
industry  of  our  colonies,  or  how  far  it  is  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  mother  country,  that  they 
should  be  exempted  from  taxes  which  are 
paid  by  all  the  rest  of  their  fellow  subjects, 
will  appear  hereafter  when  I  come  to  treat  the 
colonies. 

Drawbacks,  however,  it  must  always  be 
understood,  are  useful  only  in  those  cases  in 
which  the  goods  for  the  exportation  of  which 
they  are  given  are  really  exported  to  some  for¬ 
eign  country;  and  not  clandestinely  re-im¬ 
ported  into  our  own.  That  some  drawbacks, 
particularly  those  upon  tobacco,  have  fre¬ 
quently  been  abused  in  this  manner,  and  have 
given  occasion  to  many  frauds  equally  hurtful 
both  to  the  revenue  and  to  the  fair  trader, 
is  well  known. 

CHAPTER  V 

Of  Bounties 

Bounties  upon  exportation  are,  in  Great 
Britain,  frequently  petitioned  for,  and  some¬ 
times  granted  to  the  produce  of  particular 
branches  of  domestic  industry.  By  means  of 
them  our  merchants  and  manufacturers,  it  is 
pretended,  will  be  enabled  to  sell  their  goods 
as  cheap,  or  cheaper  than  their  rivals  in  the 
foreign  market.  A  greater  quantity,  it  is  said, 
will  thus  be  exported,  and  the  balance  of  trade 
consequently  turned  more  in  favour  of  our 
own  country.  We  cannot  give  our  workmen  a 
monopoly  in  the  foreign  as  we  have  done  in 
the  home  market.  We  cannot  force  foreigners 
to  buy  their  goods  as  we  have  done  our  own 
countrymen.  The  next  best  expedient,  it  has 
been  thought,  therefore,  is  to  pay  them  for 
buying.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  mercan¬ 
tile  system  proposes  to  enrich  the  whole  coun¬ 
try,  and  to  put  money  into  all  our  pockets 
by  means  of  the  balance  of  trade. 

Bounties,  it  is  allowed,  ought  to  be  given 
to  those  branches  of  trade  only  which  cannot 
be  carried  on  without  them.  But  every  branch 


of  Nations 

of  trade  in  which  the  merchant  can  sell  his 
goods  for  a  price  which  replaces  to  him,  with 
the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  the  whole  capital 
employed  in  preparing  and  sending  them  to 
market,  can  be  carried  on  without  a  bounty. 
Every  such  branch  is  evidently  upon  a  level 
with  all  the  other  branches  of  trade  which  are 
carried  on  without  bounties,  and  cannot  there¬ 
fore  require  one  more  than  they.  Those  trades 
only  require  bounties  in  which  the  merchant 
is  obliged  to  sell  his  goods  for  a  price  which 
does  not  replace  to  him  his  capital,  together 
with  the  ordinary  profit;  or  in  which  he  is 
obliged  to  sell  them  for  less  than  it  really 
costs  him  to  send  them  to  market.  The  bounty 
is  given  in  order  to  make  up  this  loss,  and  to 
encourage  him  to  continue,  or  perhaps  to 
begin,  a  trade  of  which  the  expense  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  greater  than  the  returns,  of  which 
every  operation  eats  up  a  part  of  the  capital 
employed  in  it,  and  which  is  of  such  a  nature 
that,  if  all  other  trades  resembled  it,  there 
would  soon  be  no  capital  left  in  the  country. 

The  trades,  it  is  to  be  observed,  which  are 
carried  on  by  means  of  bounties,  are  the  only 
ones  which  can  be  carried  on  between  two 
nations  for  any  considerable  time  together,  in 
such  a  manner  as  that  one  of  them  shall  al¬ 
ways  and  regularly  lose,  or  sell  its  goods  for 
less  than  it  really  costs  to  send  them  to  mar¬ 
ket.  But  if  the  bounty  did  not  repay  to  the 
merchant  what  he  would  otherwise  lose  upon 
the  price  of  his  goods,  his  own  interest  would 
soon  oblige  him  to  employ  his  stock  in  an¬ 
other  way,  or  to  find  out  a  trade  in  which  the 
price  of  the  goods  would  replace  to  him,  with 
the  ordinary  profit,  the  capital  employment 
in  sending  them  to  market.  The  effect  of 
bounties,  like  that  of  all  the  other  expedients 
of  the  mercantile  system,  can  only  be  to  force 
the  trade  of  a  country  into  a  channel  much 
less  advantageous  than  that  in  which  it  would 
naturally  run  of  its  own  accord. 

The  ingenious  and  well-informed  author  of 
the  tracts  upon  the  corn  trade  has  shown  very 
clearly  that,  since  the  bounty  upon  the  expor¬ 
tation  of  corn  was  first  established,  the  price 
of  the  corn  exported,  valued  moderately 
enough,  has  exceeded  that  of  the  corn  im¬ 
ported,  valued  very  high,  by  a  much  greater 
sum  than  the  amount  of  the  whole  bounties 
which  have  been  paid  during  that  period. 
This,  he  imagines,  upon  the  true  principles 
of  the  mercantile  system,  is  a  clear  proof  that 
this  forced  corn  trade  is  beneficial  to  the  na¬ 
tion;  the  value  of  the  exportation  exceeding 
that  of  the  importation  by  a  much  greater 
sum  than  the  whole  extraordinary  expense 
which  the  public  has  been  at  in  order  to  get 
it  exported.  He  does  not  consider  that  this 
extraordinary  expense,  or  the  bounty,  is  the 
smallest  part  of  the  expense  which  the  ex- 


Bounties 


portation  of  corn  really  costs  the  society.  The 
capital  which  the  farmer  employed  in  raising 
it  must  likewise  be  taken  into  the  account. 
Unless  the  price  of  the  corn  when  sold  in  the 
foreign  markets  replaces,  not  only  the  bounty, 
but  this  capital,  together  with  the  ordinary 
profits  of  stock,  the  society  is  a  loser  by  the 
difference,  or  the  national  stock  is  so  much 
diminished.  But  the  very  reason  for  which  it 
has  been  thought  necessary  to  grant  a  bounty 
is  the  supposed  insufficiency  of  the  price  to 
do  this. 

The  average  price  of  corn,  it  has  been  said, 
has  fallen  considerably  since  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  bounty.  That  the  average  price 
of  corn  began  to  fall  somewhat  towards  the 
end  of  the  last  century,  and  has  continued 
to  do  so  during  the  course  of  the  sixty-four 
first  years  of  the  present,  I  have  already  en¬ 
deavoured  to  show.  But  this  event,  supposing 
it  to  be  as  real  as  I  believe  it  to  be,  must  have 
happened  in  spite  of  the  bounty,  and  cannot 
possibly  have  happened  in  consequence  of  it. 
It  has  happened  in  France,  as  well  as  in  Eng¬ 
land,  though  in  France  there  was  not  only  no 
bounty,  but,  till  1764,  the  exportation  of 
corn  was  subjected  to  a  general  prohibition. 
This  gradual  fall  in  the  average  price  of  grain, 
it  is  probable,  therefore,  is  ultimately  owing 
neither  to  the  one  regulation  nor  to  the  other, 
but  to  that  gradual  and  insensible  rise  in  the 
real  value  of  silver,  which,  in  the  first  book  in 
this  discourse,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show 
has  taken  place  in  the  general  market  of  Eu¬ 
rope  during  the  course  of  the  present  century. 
It  seems  to  be  altogether  impossible  that  the 
bounty  could  ever  contribute  to  lower  the 
price  of  grain. 

In  years  of  plenty,  it  has  already  been  ob¬ 
served,  the  bounty,  by  occasioning  an  extraor¬ 
dinary  exportation,  necessarily  keeps  up  the 
price  of  corn  in  the  home  market  above  what 
it  would  naturally  fall  to.  To  do  so  was  the 
avowed  purpose  of  the  institution.  In  years 
of  scarcity,  though  the  bounty  is  frequently 
suspended,  yet  the  great  exportation  which  it 
occasions  in  years  of  plenty  must  frequently 
hinder  more  or  less  the  plenty  of  one  year 
from  relieving  the  scarcity  of  another.  Both 
in  years  of  plenty  and  in  years  of  scarcity, 
therefore,  the  bounty  necessarily  tends  to 
raise  the  money  price  of  corn  somewhat  higher 
than  it  otherwise  would  be  in  the  home 
market. 

That,  in  the  actual  state  of  tillage,  the 
bounty  must  necessarily  have  this  tendency 
will  not,  I  apprehend,  be  disputed  by  any 
reasonable  person.  But  it  has  been  thought 
by  many  people  that  it  tends  to  encourage 
tillage,  and  that  in  two  different  ways;  first, 
by  opening  a  more  extensive  foreign  market 
to  the  corn  of  the  farmer,  it  tends,  they 


217 

imagine,  to  increase  the  demand  for,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  production  of  that  commodity; 
and  secondly,  by  securing  to  him  a  better 
price  than  he  could  otherwise  expect  in  the 
actual  state  of  tillage,  it  tends,  they  suppose, 
to  encourage  tillage.  This  double  encourage¬ 
ment  must,  they  imagine,  in  a  long  period  of 
years,  occasion  such  an  increase  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  corn  as  may  lower  its  price  in  the 
home  market  much  more  than  the  bounty  can 
raise  it,  in  the  actual  state  which  tillage  may, 
at  the  end  of  that  period,  happen  to  be  in. 

I  answer,  that  whatever  extension  of  the 
foreign  market  can  be  occasioned  by  the 
bounty  must,  in  every  particular  year,  be 
altogether  at  the  expense  of  the  home  market; 
as  every  bushel  of  corn  which  is  exported 
by  means  of  the  bounty,  and  which  would 
not  have  been  exported  without  the  bounty, 
would  have  remained  in  the  home  market  to 
increase  the  consumption  and  to  lower  the 
price  of  that  commodity.  The  corn  bounty,  it 
is  to  be  observed,  as  well  as  every  other 
bounty  upon  exportation,  imposes  two  differ¬ 
ent  taxes  upon  the  people;  first,  the  tax  which 
they  are  obliged  to  contribute  in  order  to  pay 
the  bounty;  and  secondly,  the  tax  which  arises 
from  the  advanced  price  of  the  commodity  in 
the  home  market,  and  which,  as  the  whole 
body  of  the  people  are  purchasers  of  corn, 
must,  in  this  particular  commodity,  be  paid 
by  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  In  this  par¬ 
ticular  commodity,  therefore,  this  second  tax 
is  by  much  the  heavier  of  the  two.  Let  us 
suppose  that,  taking  one  year  with  another, 
the  bounty  of  five  shillings  upon  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  raises  the  price 
of  that  commodity  in  the  home  market  only 
sixpence  the  bushel,  or  four  shillings  the 
quarter,  higher  than  it  otherwise  would  have 
been  in  the  actual  state  of  the  crop.  Even 
upon  this  very  moderate  supposition,  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  over  and  above  con¬ 
tributing  the  tax  which  pays  the  bounty  of 
five  shillings  upon  every  quarter  of  wheat  ex¬ 
ported,  must  pay  another  of  four  shillings 
upon  every  quarter  which  they  themselves 
consume.  But,  according  to  the  very  well- 
informed  author  of  the  tracts  upon  the  corn 
trade,  the  average  proportion  of  the  corn  ex¬ 
ported  to  that  consumed  at  home  is  not  more 
than  that  of  one  to  thirty-one.  For  every  five 
shillings,  therefore,  which  they  contribute  to 
the  payment  of  the  first  tax,  they  must  con¬ 
tribute  six  pounds  four  shillings  to  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  second.  So  very  heavy  a  tax 
upon  the  first  necessary  of  life  must  either 
reduce  the  subsistence  of  the  labouring  poor, 
or  it  must  occasion  some  augmentation  in 
their  pecuniary  wages  proportionable  to  that 
in  the  pecuniary  price  of  their  subsistence. 
So  far  as  it  operates  in  the  one  way,  it  must 


218 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


reduce  the  ability  of  the  labouring  poor  to 
educate  and  bring  up  their  children,  and  must, 
so  far,  tend  to  restrain  the  population  of  the 
country.  So  far  as  it  operates  in  the  other,  it 
must  reduce  the  ability  of  the  employers  of 
the  poor  to  employ  so  great  a  number  as  they 
otherwise  might  do,  and  must,  so  far,  tend  to 
restrain  the  industry  of  the  country.  The 
extraordinary  exportation  of  corn,  therefore, 
occasioned  by  the  bounty,  not  only,  in  every 
particular  year,  diminishes  the  home,  just 
as  much  as  it  extends  the  foreign,  market 
and  consumption,  but,  by  restraining  the  pop¬ 
ulation  and  industry  of  the  country,  its  final 
tendency  is  to  stunt  and  restrain  the  gradual 
extension  of  the  home  market;  and  thereby, 
in  the  long  run,  rather  to  diminish,  than  to 
augment,  the  whole  market  and  consumption 
of  corn. 

This  enhancement  of  the  money  price  of 
corn,  however,  it  has  been  thought,  by  ren¬ 
dering  that  commodity  more  profitable  to 
the  farmer,  must  necessarily  encourage  its 
production. 

I  answer,  that  this  might  be  the  case  if 
the  effect  of  the  bounty  was  to  raise  the  real 
price  of  corn,  or  to  enable  the  farmer,  with  an 
equal  quantity  of  it,  to  maintain  a  greater 
number  of  labourers  in  the  same  manner, 
whether  liberal,  moderate,  or  scanty,  that 
other  labourers  are  commonly  maintained  in 
his  neighbourhood.  But  neither  the  bounty,  it 
is  evident,  nor  any  other  human  institution, 
can  have  any  such  effect.  It  is  not  the  real, 
but  the  nominal  price  of  corn,  which  can  in 
any  considerable  degree  be  affected  by  the 
bounty.  And  though  the  tax  which  that  in¬ 
stitution  imposes  upon  the  whole  body  of  the 
people  may  be  very  burdensome  to  those  who 
pay  it,  it  is  of  very  little  advantage  to  those 
who  receive  it. 

The  real  effect  of  the  bounty  is  not  so  much 
to  raise  the  real  value  of  corn  as  to  degrade 
the  real  value  of  silver,  or  to  make  an  equal 
quantity  of  it  exchange  for  a  smaller  quan¬ 
tity,  not  only  of  corn,  but  of  all  other  home¬ 
made  commodities:  for  the  money  price  of 
corn  regulates  that  of  all  other  home-made 
commodities. 

It  regulates  the  money  price  of  labour, 
which  must  always  be  such  as  to  enable  the 
labourer  to  purchase  a  quantity  of  corn  suffi¬ 
cient  to  maintain  him  and  his  family  either 
in  the  liberal,  moderate,  or  scanty  manner  in 
which  the  advancing,  stationary,  or  declining 
circumstances  of  the  society  oblige  his  em¬ 
ployers  to  maintain  him. 

It  regulates  the  money  price  of  all  the 
other  parts  of  the  rude  produce  of  land,  which, 
in  every  period  of  improvement,  must  bear 
a  certain  proportion  to  that  of  corn,  though 
this  proportion  is  different  in  different  periods. 


It  regulates,  for  example,  the  money  price  of 
grass  and  hay,  of  butcher’s  meat,  of  horses, 
and  the  maintenance  of  horses,  of  land  car¬ 
riage  consequently,  or  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  inland  commerce  of  the  country. 

By  regulating  the  money  price  of  all  the 
other  parts  of  the  rude  produce  of  land,  it 
regulates  that  of  the  materials  of  almost  all 
manufactures.  By  regulating  the  money  price 
of  labour,  it  regulates  that  of  manufacturing 
art  and  industry.  And  by  regulating  both,  it 
regulates  that  of  the  complete  manufacture. 
The  money  price  of  labour,  and  of  everything 
that  is  the  produce  either  of  land  or  labour, 
must  necessarily  either  rise  or  fall  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  money  price  of  corn. 

Though  in  consequence  of  the  bounty, 
therefore,  the  farmer  should  be  enabled  to 
sell  his  corn  for  four  shillings  a  bushel  instead 
of  three-and-sixpence,  and  to  pay  his  land¬ 
lord  a  money  rent  proportionable  to  this  rise 
in  the  money  price  of  his  produce,  yet  if,  in 
consequence  of  this  rise  in  the  price  of  corn, 
four  shillings  will  purchase  no  more  home¬ 
made  goods  of  any  other  kind  than  three-and- 
sixpence  would  have  done  before,  neither  the 
circumstances  of  the  farmer  nor  those  of  the 
landlord  will  be  much  mended  by  this  change. 
The  farmer  will  not  be  able  to  cultivate  much 
better:  the  landlord  will  not  be  able  to  live 
much  better.  In  the  purchase  of  foreign  com¬ 
modities  this  enhancement  in  the  price  of 
corn  may  give  them  some  little  advantage. 
In  that  of  home-made  commodities  it  can 
give  them  none  at  all.  And  almost  the  whole 
expense  of  the  farmer,  and  the  far  greater 
part  even  of  that  of  the  landlord,  is  in  home¬ 
made  commodities. 

That  degradation  in  the  value  of  silver 
which  is  the  effect  of  the  fertility  of  the  mines, 
and  which  operates  equally,  or  very  near 
equally,  through  the  greater  part  of  the  com¬ 
mercial  world,  is  a  matter  of  very  little 
consequence  to  any  particular  country.  The 
consequent  rise  of  all  money  prices,  though 
it  does  not  make  those  who  receive  them 
really  richer,  does  not  make  them  really  poor¬ 
er.  A  service  of  plate  becomes  really  cheaper, 
and  everything  else  remains  precisely  of  the 
same  real  value  as  before. 

But  that  degradation  in  the  value  of  silver 
which,  being  the  effect  either  of  the  peculiar 
situation  or  of  the  political  institutions  of  a 
particular  country,  takes  place  only  in  that 
country,  is  a  matter  of  very  great  conse¬ 
quence,  which,  far  from  tending  to  make 
anybody  really  richer,  tends  to  make  every¬ 
body  really  poorer.  The  rise  in  the  money 
price  of  all  commodities,  which  is  in  this  case 
peculiar  to  that  country,  tends  to  discourage 
more  or  less  every  sort  of  industry  which  is 
carried  on  within  it,  and  to  enable  foreign 


Bounties 


219 


nations,  by  furnishing  almost  all  sorts  of  goods 
for  a  smaller  quantity  of  silver  than  its  own 
workmen  can  afford  to  do,  to  undersell  them, 
not  only  in  the  foreign,  but  even  in  the  home 
market. 

It  is  the  peculiar  situation  of  Spain  and 
Portugal  as  proprietors  of  the  mines  to  be 
the  distributors  of  gold  and  silver  to  all  the 
other  countries  of  Europe.  Those  metals  ought 
naturally,  therefore,  to  be  somewhat  cheaper 
in  Spain  and  Portugal  than  in  any  other  part 
of  Europe.  The  difference,  however,  should 
be  no  more  than  the  amount  of  the  freight 
and  insurance;  and,  on  account  of  the  great 
value  and  small  bulk  of  those  metals,  their 
freight  is  no  great  matter,  and  their  insur¬ 
ance  is  the  same  as  that  of  any  other  goods 
of  equal  value.  Spain  and  Portugal,  therefore, 
could  suffer  very  little  from  their  peculiar 
situation,  if  they  did  not  aggravate  its  dis¬ 
advantages  by  their  political  institutions. 

Spain  by  taxing,  and  Portugal  by  prohibit¬ 
ing  the  exportation  of  gold  and  silver,  load 
that  exportation  with  the  expense  of  smug¬ 
gling,  and  raise  the  value  of  those  metals  in 
other  countries  so  much  more  above  what  it 
is  in  their  own  by  the  whole  amount  of  this 
expense.  When  you  dam  up  a  stream  of  water, 
as  soon  as  the  dam  is  full  as  much  water  must 
run  over  the  dam-head  as  if  there  was  no  dam 
at  all.  The  prohibition  of  exportation  cannot 
detain  a  greater  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
in  Spain  and  Portugal  than  what  they  can 
afford  to  employ,  than  what  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  their  land  and  labour  will  allow  them 
to  employ,  in  coin,  plate,  gilding,  and  other 
ornaments  of  gold  and  silver.  When  they  have 
got  this  quantity  the  dam  is  full,  and  the 
whole  stream  which  flows  in  afterwards  must 
run  over.  The  annual  exportation  of  gold  and 
silver  from  Spain  and  Portugal  accordingly 
is,  by  all  accounts,  notwithstanding  these  re¬ 
straints,  very  near  equal  to  the  whole  annual 
importation.  As  the  water,  however,  must  al¬ 
ways  be  deeper  behind  the  dam-head  than 
before  it,  so  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
which  these  restraints  detain  in  Spain  and 
Portugal  must,  in  proportion  to  the  annual 
produce  of  their  land  and  labour,  be  greater 
than  what  is  to  be  found  in  other  countries. 
The  higher  and  stronger  the  dam-head,  the 
greater  must  be  the  difference  in  the  depth  of 
water  behind  and  before  it.  The  higher  the 
tax,  the  higher  the  penalties  with  which  the 
prohibition  is  guarded,  the  more  vigilant  and 
severe  the  police  which  looks  after  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  the  law,  the  greater  must  be  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  proportion  of  gold  and  silver  to 
the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
Spain  and  Portugal,  and  to  that  of  other 
countries.  It  is  said  accordingly  to  be  very 
considerable,  and  that  you  frequently  find 


there  a  profusion  of  plate  in  houses  where 
there  is  nothing  else  which  would,  in  other 
countries,  be  thought  suitable  or  correspond¬ 
ent  to  this  sort  of  magnificence.  The  cheapness 
of  gold  and  silver,  or  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  dearness  of  all  commodities,  which  is  the 
necessary  effect  of  this  redundancy  of  the 
precious  metals,  discourages  both  the  agricul- 
ture  and  manufactures  of  Spain  and  Portugal, 
and  enables  foreign  nations  to  supply  them 
with  many  sorts  of  rude,  and  with  almost  all 
sorts  of  manufactured  produce,  for  a  smaller 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  than  what  they 
themselves  can  either  raise  or  make  them  for 
at  home.  The  tax  and  prohibition  operate  in 
two  different  ways.  They  not  only  lower  very 
much  the  value  of  the  precious  metals  in 
Spain  and  Portugal,  but  by  detaining  there 
a  certain  quantity  of  those  metals  which 
would  otherwise  flow  over  other  countries, 
they  keep  up  their  value  in  those  other  coun¬ 
tries  somewhat  above  what  it  otherwise  would 
be,  and  thereby  give  those  countries  a  double 
advantage  in  their  commerce  with  Spain  and 
Portugal.  Open  the  flood-gates,  and  there  will 
presently  be  less  water  above,  and  more  be¬ 
low,  the  dam-head,  and  it  will  soon  come  to  a 
level  in  both  places.  Remove  the  tax  and  the 
prohibition,  and  as  the  quantity  of  gold  and 
silver  will  diminish  considerably  in  Spain  and 
Portugal,  so  it  will  increase  somewhat  in 
other  countries,  and  the  value  of  those  metals, 
their  proportion  to  the  annual  produce  of 
land  and  labour,  will  soon  come  to  a  level,  or 
very  near  to  a  level,  in  all.  The  loss  which 
Spain  and  Portugal  could  sustain  by  this  ex¬ 
portation  of  their  gold  and  silver  would  be 
altogether  nominal  and  imaginary.  The  nom¬ 
inal  value  of  their  goods,  and  of  the  annual 
produce  of  their  land  and  labour,  would  fall, 
and  would  be  expressed  or  represented  by  a 
smaller  quantity  of  silver  than  before;  but 
their  real  value  would  be  the  same  as  before, 
and  would  be  sufficient  to  maintain,  com¬ 
mand,  and  employ,  the  same  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour.  As  the  nominal  value  of  their  goods 
would  fall,  the  real  value  of  what  remained  of 
their  gold  and  silver  would  rise,  and  a  smaller 
quantity  of  those  metals  would  answer  all  the 
same  purposes  of  commerce  and  circulation 
which  had  employed  a  greater  quantity  be¬ 
fore.  The  gold  and  silver  which  would  go 
abroad  would  not  go  abroad  for  nothing,  but 
would  bring  back  an  equal  value  of  goods  of 
some  kind  or  another.  Those  goods,  too,  would 
not  be  all  matters  of  mere  luxury  and  expense, 
to  be  consumed  by  idle  people  who  produce 
nothing  in  return  for  their  consumption.  As 
the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  idle  people 
would  not  be  augmented  by  this  extraordi¬ 
nary  exportation  of  gold  and  silver,  so  neither 
would  their  consumption  be  much  augmented 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


220 

by  it.  Those  goods  would,  probably,  the 
greater  part  of  them,  and  certainly  some  part 
of  them,  consist  in  materials,  tools,  and  pro¬ 
visions,  for  the  employment  and  maintenance 
of  industrious  people,  who  would  reproduce, 
with  a  profit,  the  full  value  of  their  consump¬ 
tion.  A  part  of  the  dead  stock  of  the  society 
would  thus  be  turned  into  active  stock,  and 
would  put  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of 
industry  than  had  been  employed  before.  The 
annual  produce  of  their  land  and  labour 
would  immediately  be  augmented  a  little,  and 
in  a  few  years  would,  probably,  be  augmented 
a  great  deal;  their  industry  being  thus  re¬ 
lieved  from  one  of  the  most  oppressive  bur¬ 
dens  which  it  at  present  labours  under. 

The  bounty  upon  the  exportation  of  corn 
necessarily  operates  exactly  in  the  same  way 
as  this  absurd  policy  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 
Whatever  be  the  actual  state  of  tillage,  it  ren¬ 
ders  our  corn  somewhat  dearer  in  the  home 
market  than  it  otherwise  would  be  in  that 
state,  and  somewhat  cheaper  in  the  foreign; 
and  as  the  average  money  price  of  corn  regu¬ 
lates  more  or  less  that  of  all  other  commodi¬ 
ties,  it  lowers  the  value  of  silver  considerably 
in  the  one,  and  tends  to  raise  it  a  little  in  the 
other.  It  enables  foreigners,  the  Dutch  in  par¬ 
ticular,  not  only  to  eat  our  corn  cheaper  than 
they  otherwise  could  do,  but  sometimes  to  eat 
it  cheaper  than  even  our  own  people  can  do 
upon  the  same  occasions,  as  we  are  assured 
by  an  excellent  authority,  that  of  Sir  Matthew 
Decker.  It  hinders  our  own  workmen  from 
furnishing  their  goods  for  so  small  a  quantity 
of  silver  as  they  otherwise  might  do;  and  en¬ 
ables  the  Dutch  to  furnish  theirs  for  a  smaller. 
It  tends  to  render  our  manufactures  some¬ 
what  dearer  in  every  market,  and  theirs  some¬ 
what  cheaper  than  they  otherwise  would  be, 
and  consequently  to  give  their  industry  a  dou¬ 
ble  advantage  over  our  own. 

The  bounty,  as  it  raises  in  the  home  market 
not  so  much  the  real  as  the  nominal  price  of 
our  corn,  as  it  augments,  not  the  quantity  of 
labour  which  a  certain  quantity  of  corn  can 
maintain  and  employ  but  only  the  quantity 
of  silver  which  it  will  exchange  for,  it  dis¬ 
courages  our  manufactures,  without  rendering 
any  considerable  service  either  to  our  farmers 
or  country  gentlemen.  It  puts,  indeed,  a  little 
more  money  into  the  pockets  of  both,  and  it 
will  perhaps  be  somewhat  difficult  to  per¬ 
suade  the  greater  part  of  them  that  this  is 
not  rendering  them  a  very  considerable  serv¬ 
ice.  But  if  this  money  sinks  in  its  value,  in 
the  quantity  of  labour,  provisions,  and  home¬ 
made  commodities  of  all  different  kinds  which 
it  is  capable  of  purchasing  as  much  as  it 
rises  in  its  quantity,  the  service  will  be  little 
more  than  nominal  and  imaginary. 

There  is,  perhaps,  but  one  set  of  men  in  the 


whole  commonwealth  to  whom  the  bounty 
either  was  or  could  be  essentially  serviceable. 
These  were  the  corn  merchants,  the  exporters 
and  importers  of  corn.  In  years  of  plenty  the 
bounty  necessarily  occasioned  a  greater  ex¬ 
portation  than  would  otherwise  have  taken 
place;  and  by  hindering  the  plenty  of  one 
year  from  relieving  the  scarcity  of  another, 
it  occasioned  in  years  of  scarcity  a  greater 
importation  than  would  otherwise  have  been 
necessary.  It  increased  the  business  of  the 
corn  merchant  in  both;  and  in  years  of  scar¬ 
city,  it  not  only  enabled  him  to  import  a 
greater  quantity,  but  to  sell  it  for  a  better 
price,  and  consequently  with  a  greater  profit 
than  he  could  otherwise  have  made,  if  the 
plenty  of  one  year  had  not  been  more  or  less 
hindered  from  relieving  the  scarcity  of  an¬ 
other.  It  is  in  this  set  of  men,  accordingly, 
that  I  have  observed  the  greatest  zeal  for  the 
continuance  or  renewal  of  the  bounty. 

Our  country  gentlemen,  when  they  imposed 
the  high  duties  upon  the  importation  of  for¬ 
eign  corn,  which  in  times  of  moderate  plenty 
amount  to  a  prohibition,  and  when  they  es¬ 
tablished  the  bounty,  seem  to  have  imitated 
the  conduct  of  our  manufacturers.  By  the 
one  institution,  they  secured  to  themselves 
the  monopoly  of  the  home  market,  and  by  the 
other  they  endeavoured  to  prevent  that  mar¬ 
ket  from  ever  being  overstocked  with  their 
commodity.  By  both  they  endeavoured  to 
raise  its  real  value,  in  the  same  manner  as  our 
manufacturers  had,  by  the  like  institutions, 
raised  the  real  value  of  many  different  sorts 
of  manufactured  goods.  They  did  not  per¬ 
haps  attend  to  the  great  and  essential  differ¬ 
ence  which  nature  has  established  between 
corn  and  almost  every  other  sort  of  goods. 
When,  either  by  the  monopoly  of  the  home 
market,  or  by  a  bounty  upon  exportation, 
you  enable  our  woollen  or  linen  manufactur¬ 
ers  to  sell  their  goods  for  somewhat  a  better 
price  than  they  otherwise  could  get  for  them, 
you  raise,  not  only  the  nominal,  but  the  real 
price  of  those  goods.  You  render  them  equiva¬ 
lent  to  a  greater  quantity  of  labour  and  sub¬ 
sistence,  you  increase  not  only  the  nominal, 
but  the  real  profit,  the  real  wealth  and  reve¬ 
nue  of  those  manufacturers,  and  you  enable 
them  either  to  live  better  themselves,  or  to 
employ  a  greater  quantity  of  labour  in  those 
particular  manufactures.  You  really  encourage 
those  manufactures,  and  direct  towards  them 
a  greater  quantity  of  the  industry  of  the 
country  than  what  would  probably  go  to 
them  of  its  own  accord.  But  when  by  the  like 
institutions  you  raise  the  nominal  or  money- 
price  of  corn,  you  do  not  raise  its  real  value. 
You  do  not  increase  the  real  wealth,  the  real 
revenue  either  of  our  farmers  or  country  gen¬ 
tlemen.  You  do  not  encourage  the  growth  of 


Bounties 


corn,  because  you  do  not  enable  them  to 
maintain  and  employ  more  labourers  in  rais¬ 
ing  it.  The  nature  of  things  has  stamped  upon 
corn  a  real  value  which  cannot  be  altered  by 
merely  altering  its  money  price.  No  bounty 
upon  exportation,  no  monopoly  of  the  home 
market,  can  raise  that  value.  The  freest  com¬ 
petition  cannot  lower  it.  Through  the  world 
in  general  that  value  is  equal  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  which  it  can  maintain,  and  in  every 
particular  place  it  is  equal  to  the  quantity  of 
labour  which  it  can  maintain  in  the  way, 
whether  liberal,  moderate,  or  scanty,  in  which 
labour  is  commonly  maintained  in  that  place. 
Woollen  or  linen  cloth  are  not  the  regulating 
commodities  by  which  the  real  value  of  all 
other  commodities  must  be  finally  measured 
and  determined;  corn  is.  The  real  value  of 
every  other  commodity  is  finally  measured 
and  determined  by  the  proportion  which  its 
average  money  price  bears  to  the  average 
money  price  of  corn.  The  real  value  of  corn 
does  not  vary  with  those  variations  in  its 
average  money  price,  which  sometimes  occur 
from  one  century  to  another.  It  is  the  real 
value  of  silver  which  varies  with  them. 

Bounties  upon  the  exportation  of  any  home¬ 
made  commodity  are  liable,  first  to  that  gen¬ 
eral  objection  which  may  be  made  to  all  the 
different  expedients  of  the  mercantile  system; 
the  objection  of  forcing  some  part  of  the  in¬ 
dustry  of  the  country  into  a  channel  less 
advantageous  than  that  in  which  it  would 
run  of  its  own  accord:  and,  secondly,  to  the 
particular  objection  of  forcing  it,  not  only 
into  a  channel  that  is  less  advantageous,  but 
into  one  that  is  actually  disadvantageous; 
the  trade  which  cannot  be  carried  on  but  by 
means  of  a  bounty  being  necessarily  a  losing 
trade.  The  bounty  upon  the  exportation  of 
corn  is  liable  to  this  further  objection,  that  it 
can  in  no  respect  promote  the  raising  of  that 
particular  commodity  of  which  it  was  meant 
to  encourage  the  production.  When  our  coun¬ 
try  gentlemen,  therefore,  demanded  the  es¬ 
tablishment  of  the  bounty,  though  they  acted 
in  imitation  of  our  merchants  and  manufac¬ 
turers,  they  did  not  act  with  that  complete 
comprehension  of  their  own  interest  which 
commonly  directs  the  conduct  of  those  two 
other  orders  of  people.  They  loaded  the  pub¬ 
lic  revenue  with  a  very  considerable  expense; 
they  imposed  a  very  heavy  tax  upon  the 
whole  body  of  the  people;  but  they  did  not, 
in  any  sensible  degree,  increase  the  real  value 
of  their  own  commodity;  and  by  lowering 
somewhat  the  real  value  of  silver,  they  dis¬ 
couraged  in  some  degree,  the  general  industry 
of  the  country,  and,  instead  of  advancing,  re¬ 
tarded  more  or  less  the  improvement  of  their 
own  lands,  which  necessarily  depends  upon 
the  general  industry  of  the  country. 


221 

To  encourage  the  production  of  any  com¬ 
modity,  a  bounty  upon  production,  one  should 
imagine,  would  have  a  more  direct  operation 
than  one  upon  exportation.  It  would,  besides, 
impose  only  one  tax  upon  the  people,  that 
which  they  must  contribute  in  order  to  pay 
the  bounty.  Instead  of  raising,  it  would  tend 
to  lower  the  price  of  the  commodity  in  the 
home  market;  and  thereby,  instead  of  im¬ 
posing  a  second  tax  upon  the  people,  it  might, 
at  least,  in  part,  repay  them  for  what  they 
had  contributed  to  the  first.  Bounties  upon 
production,  however,  have  been  very  rarely 
granted.  The  prejudices  established  by  the 
commercial  system  have  taught  us  to  believe 
that  national  wealth  arises  more  immediately 
from  exportation  than  from  production.  It 
has  been  more  favoured  accordingly,  as  the 
more  immediate  means  of  bringing  money 
into  the  country.  Bounties  upon  production, 
it  has  been  said  too,  have  been  found  by  ex¬ 
perience  more  liable  to  frauds  than  those  upon 
exportation.  How  far  this  is  true,  I  know  not. 
That  bounties  upon  exportation  have  been 
abused  to  many  fraudulent  purposes  is  very 
well  known.  But  it  is  not  the  interest  ol 
merchants  and  manufacturers,  the  great  in¬ 
ventors  of  all  these  expedients,  that  the  home 
market  should  be  overstocked  with  their 
goods,  an  event  which  a  bounty  upon  produc¬ 
tion  might  sometimes  occasion.  A  bounty 
upon  exportation,  by  enabling  them  to  send 
abroad  the  surplus  part,  and  to  keep  up  the 
price  of  what  remains  in  the  home  market, 
effectually  prevents  this.  Of  all  the  expedients 
of  the  mercantile  system,  accordingly,  it  is 
the  one  of  which  they  are  the  fondest.  I  have 
known  the  different  undertakers  of  some  par¬ 
ticular  works  agree  privately  among  them¬ 
selves  to  give  a  bounty  out  of  their  own  pock¬ 
ets  upon  the  exportation  of  a  certain  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  goods  which  they  dealt  in.  This 
expedient  succeeded  so  well  that  it  more  than 
doubled  the  price  of  their  goods  in  the  home 
market,  notwithstanding  a  very  considerable 
increase  in  the  produce.  The  operation  of  the 
bounty  upon  corn  must  have  been  wonder¬ 
fully  different  if  it  has  lowered  the  money 
price  of  that  commodity. 

Something  like  a  bounty  upon  production, 
however,  has  been  granted  upon  some  particu¬ 
lar  occasions.  The  tonnage  bounties  given  to 
the  white-herring  and  whale  fisheries  may, 
perhaps,  be  considered  as  somewhat  of  this 
nature.  They  tend  directly,  it  may  be  sup¬ 
posed,  to  render  the  goods  cheaper  in  the 
home  market  than  they  otherwise  would  be. 
In  other  respects  their  effects,  it  must  be  ac¬ 
knowledged,  are  the  same  as  those  of  bounties 
upon  exportation.  By  means  of  them  a  part  of 
the  capital  of  the  country  is  employed  in 
bringing  goods  to  market,  of  which  the  price 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


222 

does  not  repay  the  cost  together  with  the 
ordinary  profits  of  stock. 

But  though  the  tonnage  bounties  of  those 
fisheries  do  not  contribute  to  the  opulence  of 
the  nation,  it  may  perhaps  be  thought  that 
they  contribute  to  its  defence  by  augmenting 
the  number  of  its  sailors  and  shipping.  This, 
it  may  be  alleged,  may  sometimes  be  done  by 
means  of  such  bounties  at  a  much  smaller  ex¬ 
pense  than  by  keeping  up  a  great  standing 
navy,  if  I  may  use  such  an  expression,  in  the 
same  way  as  a  standing  army. 

Notwithstanding  these  favourable  allega¬ 
tions,  however,  the  following  considerations 
dispose  me  to  believe  that,  in  granting  at 
least  one  of  these  bounties,  the  legislature  has 
been  very  grossly  imposed  upon. 

First,  the  herring  buss  bounty  seems  too 
large. 

From  the  commencement  of  the  winter  fish¬ 
ing,  1771,  to  the  end  of  the  winter  fishing, 
1781,  the  tonnage  bounty  upon  the  herring 
buss  fishery  has  been  at  thirty  shillings  the 
ton.  During  these  eleven  years  the  whole  num¬ 
ber  of  barrels  caught  by  the  herring  buss  fish¬ 
ery  of  Scotland  amounted  to  378,347.  The 
herrings  caught  and  cured  at  sea  are  called 
sea-sticks.  In  order  to  render  them  what  are 
called  merchantable  herrings,  it  is  necessary 
to  repack  them  with  an  additional  quantity  of 
salt;  and  in  this  case,  it  is  reckoned  that  three 
barrels  of  sea-sticks  are  usually  repacked  into 
two  barrels  of  merchantable  herrings.  The 
number  of  barrels  of  merchantable  herrings, 
therefore,  caught  during  these  eleven  years 
will  amount  only,  according  to  this  account, 
to  252, 231^4.  During  these  eleven  years  the 
tonnage  bounties  paid  amounted  to  £155,463 
11s.  or  to  8s.  21/4d.  upon  every  barrel  of  sea- 
sticks,  and  to  12s.  3%d.  upon  every  barrel  of 
merchantable  herrings. 

The  salt  with  which  these  herrings  are 
cured  is  sometimes  Scotch  and  sometimes  for¬ 
eign  salt,  both  which  are  delivered  free  of 
all  excise  duty  to  the  fish-curers.  The  excise 
duty  upon  Scotch  salt  is  at  present  Is.  6d., 
that  upon  foreign  salt  10s.  the  bushel.  A  bar¬ 
rel  of  herrings  is  supposed  to  require  about 
one  bushel  and  one-fourth  of  a  bushel  foreign 
salt.  Two  bushels  are  the  supposed  average  of 
Scotch  salt.  If  the  herrings  are  entered  for 
exportation,  no  part  of  this  duty  is  paid  up; 
if  entered  for  home  consumption,  whether 
the  herrings  were  cured  with  foreign  or  with 
Scotch  salt,  only  one  shilling  the  barrel  is 
paid  up.  It  was  the  old  Scotch  duty  upon  a 
bushel  of  salt,  the  quantity  which,  at  a  low 
estimation,  had  been  supposed  necessary  for 
curing  a  barrel  of  herrings.  In  Scotland,  for¬ 
eign  salt  is  very  little  used  for  any  other  pur¬ 
pose  but  the  curing  of  fish.  But  from  the  5th 
April  1771  to  the  5th  April  1782,  the  quantity 


of  foreign  salt  imported  amounted  to  936,974 
bushels,  at  eighty-four  pounds  the  bushel:  the 
quantity  of  Scotch  salt,  delivered  from  the 
works  to  the  fish-curers,  to  no  more  than 
168,226,  at  fifty-six  pounds  the  bushel  only. 
It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  it  is  princi¬ 
pally  foreign  salt  that  is  used  in  the  fisheries. 
Upon  every  barrel  of  herrings  exported  there 
is,  besides,  a  bounty  of  2s.  8d.,  and  more  than 
two-thirds  of  the  buss  caught  herrings  are  ex¬ 
ported.  Put  all  these  things  together  and  you 
will  find  that,  during  these  eleven  years,  every 
barrel  of  buss  caught  herrings,  cured  with 
Scotch  salt  when  exported,  has  cost  govern¬ 
ment  17s.  ll%d.;  and  when  entered  for  home 
consumption  14s.  3%d.;  and  that  every  barrel 
cured  with  foreign  salt,  when  exported,  has 
cost  government  £1  7s.  5%d.;  and  when  en¬ 
tered  for  home  consumption  £1  3s.  9%d.  The 
price  of  a  barrel  of  good  merchantable  her¬ 
rings  runs  from  seventeen  and  eighteen  to 
four  and  five  and  twenty  shillings,  about  a 
guinea  at  an  average.1 

Secondly,  the  bounty  to  the  white-herring 
fishery  is  a  tonnage  bounty;  and  is  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  burden  of  the  ship,  not  to  her 
diligence  or  success  in  the  fishery;  and  it  has, 
I  am  afraid,  been  too  common  for  vessels  to 
fit  out  for  the  sole  purpose  of  catching,  not 
the  fish,  but  the  bounty.  In  the  year  1759, 
when  the  bounty  was  at  fifty  shillings  the  ton, 
the  whole  buss  fishery  of  Scotland  brought  in 
only  four  barrels  of  sea-sticks.  In  that  year 
each  barrel  of  sea-sticks  cost  government  in 
bounties  alone  £113  15s.;  each  barrel  of  mer¬ 
chantable  herrings  £159  7s.  6d. 

Thirdly,  the  mode  of  fishing  for  which  this 
tonnage  bounty  in  the  white-herring  fishery 
has  been  given  (by  busses  or  decked  vessels 
from  twenty  to  eighty  tons  burthen) ,  seems 
not  so  well  adapted  to  the  situation  of  Scot¬ 
land  as  to  that  of  Holland,  from  the  practice 
of  which  country  it  appears  to  have  been  bor¬ 
rowed.  Holland  lies  at  a  great  distance  from 
the  seas  to  which  herrings  are  known  princi¬ 
pally  to  resort,  and  can,  therefore,  carry  on 
that  fishery  only  in  decked  vessels,  which  can 
carry  water  and  provisions  sufficient  for  a 
voyage  to  a  distant  sea.  But  the  Hebrides  or 
western  islands,  the  islands  of  Shetland,  and 
the  northern  and  northwestern  coasts  of 
Scotland,  the  countries  in  whose  neighbour¬ 
hood  the  herring  fishery  is  principally  carried 
on,  are  everywhere  intersected  by  arms  of  the 
sea,  which  run  up  a  considerable  way  into  the 
land,  and  which,  in  the  language  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  are  called  sea-lochs.  It  is  to  these  sea- 
lochs  that  the  herrings  principally  resort 
during  the  seasons  in  which  they  visit  those 
seas;  for  the  visits  of  this  and,  I  am  assured, 

1  See  the  accounts  at  the  end  of  the  volume 
[appendix]. 


Bounties 


223 


of  many  other  sorts  of  fish  are  not  quite  regu¬ 
lar  and  constant.  A  boat  fishery,  therefore, 
seems  to  be  the  mode  of  fishing  best  adapted 
to  the  peculiar  situation  of  Scotland,  the  fish¬ 
ers  carrying  the  herrings  on  shore,  as  fast  as 
they  are  taken,  to  be  either  cured  or  con¬ 
sumed  fresh.  But  the  great  encouragement 
which  a  bounty  of  thirty  shillings  the  ton 
gives  to  the  buss  fishery  is  necessarily  a  dis¬ 
couragement  to  the  boat  fishery,  which,  hav¬ 
ing  no  such  bounty,  cannot  bring  its  cured 
fish  to  market  upon  the  same  terms  as  the 
buss  fishery.  The  boat  fishery,  accordingly, 
which  before  the  establishment  of  the  buss 
bounty  was  very  considerable,  and  is  said  to 
have  employed  a  number  of  seamen  not  in¬ 
ferior  to  what  the  buss  fishery  employs  at 
present,  is  now  gone  almost  entirely  to  decay. 
Of  the  former  extent,  however,  of  this  now 
ruined  and  abandoned  fishery,  I  must  ac¬ 
knowledge  that  I  cannot  pretend  to  speak 
with  much  precision.  As  no  bounty  was  paid 
upon  the  outfit  of  the  boat  fishery,  no  account 
was  taken  of  it  by  the  officers  of  the  customs 
or  salt  duties. 

Fourthly,  in  many  parts  of  Scotland,  during 
certain  seasons  of  the  year,  herrings  make  no 
inconsiderable  part  of  the  food  of  the  common 
people.  A  bounty,  which  tended  to  lower  their 
price  in  the  home  market,  might  contribute 
a  good  deal  to  the  relief  of  a  great  number  of 
our  fellow-subjects,  whose  circumstances  are 
by  no  means  affluent.  But  the  herring  buss 
bounty  contributes  to  no  such  good  purpose. 
It  has  ruined  the  boat  fishery,  which  is,  by 
far,  the  best  adapted  for  the  supply  of  the 
home  market,  and  the  additional  bounty  of 
2s.  8d.  the  barrel  upon  exportation  carries 
the  greater  part,  more  than  two-thirds,  of  the 
produce  of  the  buss  fishery  abroad.  Between 
thirty  and  forty  years  ago,  before  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  the  buss  bounty,  fifteen  shillings 
the  barrel,  I  have  been  assured,  was  the  com¬ 
mon  price  of  white  herrings.  Between  ten  and 
fifteen  years  ago,  before  the  boat  fishery  was 
entirely  ruined,  the  price  is  said  to  have  run 
from  seventeen  to  twenty  shillings  the  barrel. 
For  these  last  five  years,  it  has,  at  an  average, 
been  at  twenty-five  shillings  the  barrel.  This 
high  price,  however,  may  have  been  owing  to 
the  real  scarcity  of  the  herrings  upon  the 
coast  of  Scotland.  I  must  observe,  too,  that 
the  cask  or  barrel,  which  is  usually  sold  with 
the  herrings,  and  of  which  the  price  is  in¬ 
cluded  in  all  the  foregoing  prices,  has,  since 
the  commencement  of  the  American  war, 
risen  to  about  double  its  former  price,  or 
from  about  three  shillings  to  about  six  shil¬ 
lings.  I  must  likewise  observe  that  the  ac¬ 
counts  I  have  received  of  the  prices  of  former 
times  have  been  by  no  means  quite  uniform 
and  consistent;  and  an  old  man  of  great  ac¬ 


curacy  and  experience  has  assured  me  that, 
more  than  fifty  years  ago,  a  guinea  was  the 
usual  price  of  a  barrel  of  good  merchantable 
herrings;  and  this.  I  imagine,  may  still  be 
looked  upon  as  the  average  price.  All  ac¬ 
counts,  however,  I  think,  agree  that  the  price 
has  not  been  lowered  in  the  home  market  in 
consequence  of  the  buss  bounty. 

When  the  undertakers  of  fisheries,  after 
such  liberal  bounties  have  been  bestowed 
upon  them,  continue  to  sell  their  commodity 
at  the  same,  or  even  at  a  higher  price  than 
they  were  accustomed  to  do  before,  it  might 
be  expected  that  their  profits  should  be  very 
great;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  those  of 
some  individuals  may  have  been  so.  In  gen¬ 
eral,  however,  I  have  every  reason  to  believe 
they  have  been  quite  otherwise.  The  usual 
effect  of  such  bounties  is  to  encourage  rash 
undertakers  to  adventure  in  a  business  which 
they  do  not  understand,  and  what  they  lose 
by  their  own  negligence  and  ignorance  more 
than  compensates  all  that  they  can  gain  by 
the  utmost  liberality  of  government.  In  1750, 
by  the  same  act,  which  first  gave  the  bounty 
of  thirty  shillings  the  ton  for  the  encourage¬ 
ment  of  the  white-herring  fishery  (the  23rd 
George  II,  c.  24) ,  a  joint-stock  company  was 
erected,  with  a  capital  of  five  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds,  to  which  the  subscribers  (over 
and  above  all  other  encouragements,  the  ton¬ 
nage  bounty  just  now  mentioned,  the  exporta¬ 
tion  bounty  of  two  shillings  and  eightpence 
the  barrel,  the  delivery  of  both  British  and 
foreign  salt  duty  free)  were,  during  the  space 
of  fourteen  years,  for  every  hundred  pounds 
which  they  subscribed  and  paid  in  to  the 
stock  of  the  society,  entitled  to  three  pounds 
a  year,  to  be  paid  by  the  receiver-general  of 
the  customs  in  equal  half-yearly  payments. 
Besides  this  great  company,  the  residence  of 
whose  governor  and  directors  was  to  be  in 
London,  it  was  declared  lawful  to  erect  differ¬ 
ent  fishing-chambers  in  all  the  different  out- 
ports  of  the  kingdom,  provided  a  sum  not  less 
than  ten  thousand  pounds  was  subscribed  into 
the  capital  of  each,  to  be  managed  at  its  own 
risk,  and  for  its  own  profit  and  loss.  The  same 
annuity,  and  the  same  encouragements  of  all 
kinds,  were  given  to  the  trade  of  those  inferior 
chambers  as  to  that  of  the  great  company. 
The  subscription  of  the  great  company  was 
soon  filled  up,  and  several  different  fishing- 
chambers  were  erected  in  the  different  out- 
ports  of  the  kingdom.  In  spite  of  all  these 
encouragements,  almost  all  those  different 
companies,  both  great  and  small,  lost  either 
the  whole,  or  the  greater  part  of  their  capi¬ 
tals;  scarce  a  vestige  now  remains  of  any  of 
them,  and  the  white-herring  fishery  is  now 
entirely,  or  almost  entirely,  carried  on  by 
private  adventurers. 


224 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


If  any  particular  manufacture  was  neces¬ 
sary,  indeed,  for  the  defence  of  the  society,  it 
might  not  always  be  prudent  to  depend  upon 
our  neighbours  for  the  supply;  and  if  such 
manufacture  could  not  otherwise  be  supported 
at  home,  it  might  not  be  unreasonable  that 
all  the  other  branches  of  industry  should  be 
taxed  in  order  to  support  it.  The  bounties 
upon  the  exportation  of  British-made  sail¬ 
cloth  and  British-made  gunpowder  may,  per¬ 
haps,  both  be  vindicated  upon  this  principle. 

But  though  it  can  very  seldom  be  reason¬ 
able  to  tax  the  industry  of  the  great  body  of 
the  people  in  order  to  support  that  of  some 
particular  class  of  manufacturers,  yet  in  the 
wantonness  of  great  prosperity,  when  the  pub¬ 
lic  enjoys  a  greater  revenue  than  it  knows  well 
what  to  do  with,  to  give  such  bounties  to 
favourite  manufactures  may,  perhaps,  be  as 
natural  as  to  incur  any  other  idle  expense.  In 
public  as  well  as  in  private  expenses,  great 
wealth  may,  perhaps,  frequently  be  admitted 
as  an  apology  for  great  folly.  But  there  must 
surely  be  something  more  than  ordinary  ab¬ 
surdity  in  continuing  such  profusion  in  times 
of  general  difficulty  and  distress. 

What  is  called  a  bounty  is  sometimes  no 
more  than  a  drawback,  and  consequently  is 
not  liable  to  the  same  objections  as  what  is 
properly  a  bounty.  The  bounty,  for  example, 
upon  refined  sugar  exported  may  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  drawback  of  the  duties  upon  the 
brown  and  muscovado  sugars  from  which  it 
is  made.  The  bounty  upon  wrought  silk  ex¬ 
ported,  a  drawback  of  the  duties  upon  raw 
and  thrown  silk  imported.  The  bounty  upon 
gunpowder  exported,  a  drawback  of  the  duties 
upon  brimstone  and  saltpetre  imported.  In 
the  language  of  the  customs  those  allowances 
only  are  called  drawbacks  which  are  given 
upon  goods  exported  in  the  same  form  in 
which  they  are  imported.  When  that  form  has 
been  so  altered  by  manufacture  of  any  kind 
as  to  come  under  a  new  denomination,  they 
are  called  bounties. 

Premiums  given  by  the  public  to  artists 
and  manufacturers  who  excel  in  their  particu¬ 
lar  occupations  are  not  liable  to  the  same  ob¬ 
jections  as  bounties.  By  encouraging  extraor¬ 
dinary  dexterity  and  ingenuity,  they  serve 
to  keep  up  the  emulation  of  the  workmen  ac¬ 
tually  employed  in  those  respective  occupa¬ 
tions,  and  are  not  considerable  enough  to 
turn  towards  any  one  of  them  a  greater  share 
of  the  capital  of  the  country  than  what  would 
go  to  it  of  its  own  accord.  Their  tendency  is 
not  to  overturn  the  natural  balance  of  em¬ 
ployments,  but  to  render  the  work  which  is 
done  in  each  as  perfect  and  complete  as  pos¬ 
sible.  The  expense  of  premiums,  besides,  is 
very  trifling;  that  of  bounties  very  great.  The 
bounty  upon  corn  alone  has  sometimes  cost 


the  public  in  one  year  more  than  three  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  pounds. 

DIGRESSION  CONCERNING  THE  CORN 
TRADE  AND  CORN  LAWS 

I  cannot  conclude  this  chapter  concerning 
bounties  without  observing  that  the  praises 
which  have  been  bestowed  upon  the  law 
which  establishes  the  bounty  upon  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  corn,  and  upon  that  system  of 
regulations  which  is  connected  with  it,  are 
altogether  unmerited.  A  particular  examina¬ 
tion  of  the  nature  of  the  corn  trade,  and  of 
the  principal  British  laws  which  relate  to 
it,  will  sufficiently  demonstrate  the  truth  of 
this  assertion.  The  great  importance  of  this 
subject  must  justify  the  length  of  the  digres¬ 
sion. 

The  trade  of  the  corn  merchant  is  com¬ 
posed  of  four  different  branches,  which, 
though  they  may  sometimes  be  all  carried  on 
by  the  same  person,  are  in  their  own  nature 
four  separate  and  distinct  trades.  These  are, 
first,  the  trade  of  the  inland  dealer;  second¬ 
ly,  that  of  the  merchant  importer  for  home 
consumption;  thirdly,  that  of  the  merchant 
exporter  of  home  produce  for  foreign  con¬ 
sumption;  and,  fourthly,  that  of  the  merchant 
carrier,  or  of  the  importer  of  corn  in  order 
to  export  it  again. 

I.  The  interest  of  the  inland  dealer,  and 
that  of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  how  op¬ 
posite  soever  they  may  at  first  sight  appear, 
are,  even  in  years  of  the  greatest  scarcity, 
exactly  the  same.  It  is  his  interest  to  raise  the 
price  of  his  corn  as  high  as  the  real  scarcity  of 
the  season  requires,  and  it  can  never  be  his 
interest  to  raise  it  higher.  By  raising  the 
price  he  discourages  the  consumption,  and 
puts  everybody  more  or  less,  but  particularly 
the  inferior  ranks  of  people,  upon  thrift  and 
good  management.  If,  by  raising  it  too  high, 
he  discourages  the  consumption  so  much  that 
the  supply  of  the  season  is  likely  to  go  beyond 
the  consumption  of  the  season,  and  to  last 
for  some  time  after  the  next  crop  begins  to 
come  in,  he  runs  the  hazard,  not  only  of  losing 
a  considerable  part  of  his  corn  by  natural 
causes,  but  of  being  obliged  to  sell  what  re¬ 
mains  of  it  for  much  less  than  what  he  might 
have  had  for  it  several  months  before.  If  by 
not  raising  the  price  high  enough  he  discour¬ 
ages  the  consumption  so  little  that  the  sup¬ 
ply  of  the  season  is  likely  to  fall  short  of  the 
consumption  of  the  season,  he  not  only  loses 
a  part  of  the  profit  which  he  might  otherwise 
have  made,  but  he  exposes  the  people  to 
suffer  before  the  end  of  the  season,  instead  of 
the  hardships  of  a  dearth,  the  dreadful  hor¬ 
rors  of  a  famine.  It  is  the  interest  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  that  their  daily,  weekly,  and  monthly 
consumption  should  be  proportioned  as  exact- 


Bounties 


225 


ly  as  possible  to  the  supply  of  the  season.  The 
interest  of  the  inland  corn  dealer  is  the  same. 
By  supplying  them,  as  nearly  as  he  can  judge, 
in  this  proportion,  he  is  likely  to  sell  all  his 
corn  for  the  highest  price,  and  with  the  great¬ 
est  profit;  and  his  knowledge  of  the  state  of 
the  crop,  and  of  his  daily,  weekly,  and  month¬ 
ly  sales,  enable  him  to  judge,  with  more  or 
less  accuracy,  how  far  they  really  are  sup¬ 
plied  in  this  manner.  Without  intending  the 
interest  of  the  people,  he  is  necessarily  led, 
by  a  regard  to  his  own  interest,  to  treat 
them,  even  in  years  of  scarcity,  pretty  much 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  prudent  master  of 
a  vessel  is  sometimes  obliged  to  treat  his 
crew.  When  he  foresees  that  provisions  are 
likely  to  run  short,  he  puts  them  upon  short 
allowance.  Though  from  excess  of  caution  he 
should  sometimes  do  this  without  any  real 
necessity,  yet  all  the  inconveniences  which  his 
crew  can  thereby  suffer  are  inconsiderable  in 
comparison  of  the  danger,  misery,  and  ruin  to 
which  they  might  sometimes  be  exposed  by  a 
less  provident  conduct.  Though  from  excess 
of  avarice,  in  the  same  manner,  the  inland 
corn  merchant  should  sometimes  raise  the 
price  of  his  corn  somewhat  higher  than  the 
scarcity  of  the  season  requires,  yet  all  the  in¬ 
conveniences  which  the  people  can  suffer  from 
this  conduct,  which  effectually  secures  them 
from  a  famine  in  the  end  of  the  season,  are 
inconsiderable  in  comparison  of  what  they 
might  have  been  exposed  to  by  a  more  liberal 
way  of  dealing  in  the  beginning  of  it.  The 
corn  merchant  himself  is  likely  to  suffer  the 
most  by  this  excess  of  avarice;  not  only  from 
the  indignation  which  it  generally  excites 
against  him,  but,  though  he  should  escape  the 
effects  of  this  indignation,  from  the  quantity 
of  corn  which  it  necessarily  leaves  upon  his 
hands  in  the  end  of  the  season,  and  which,  if 
the  next  season  happens  to  prove  favourable, 
he  must  always  sell  for  a  much  lower  price 
than  he  might  otherwise  have  had. 

Were  it  possible,  indeed,  for  one  great 
company  of  merchants  to  possess  themselves 
of  the  whole  crop  of  an  extensive  country,  it 
might,  perhaps,  be  their  interest  to  deal  with 
it  as  the  Dutch  are  said  to  do  with  the  spicer- 
ies  of  the  Moluccas,  to  destroy  or  throw  away 
a  considerable  part  of  it  in  order  to  keep  up 
the  price  of  the  rest.  But  it  is  scarce  possible, 
even  by  the  violence  of  law,  to  establish  such 
an  extensive  monopoly  with  regard  to  corn; 
and,  wherever  the  law  leaves  the  trade  free, 
it  is  of  all  commodities  the  least  liable  to  be 
engrossed  or  monopolized  by  the  force  of  a 
few  large  capitals,  which  buy  up  the  greater 
part  of  it.  Not  only  its  value  far  exceeds  what 
the  capitals  of  a  few  private  men  are  capable 
of  purchasing,  but,  supposing  they  were  capa¬ 
ble  of  purchasing  it,  the  manner  in  which  it  is 


produced  renders  this  purchase  altogether  im¬ 
practicable.  As  in  every  civilised  country  it 
is  the  commodity  of  which  the  annual  con¬ 
sumption  is  the  greatest,  so  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  industry  is  annually  employed  in 
producing  corn  than  in  producing  any  other 
commodity.  When  it  first  comes  from  the 
ground,  too,  it  is  necessarily  divided  among 
a  greater  number  of  owners  than  any  other 
commodity;  and  these  owners  can  never  be 
collected  into  one  place  like  a  number  of  in¬ 
dependent  manufacturers,  but  are  necessarily 
scattered  through  all  the  different  corners 
of  the  country.  These  first  owners  either  im¬ 
mediately  supply  the  consumers  in  their  own 
neighbourhood,  or  they  supply  other  inland 
dealers  who  supply  those  consumers.  The  in¬ 
land  dealers  in  corn,  therefore,  including  both 
the  farmer  and  the  baker,  are  necessarily  more 
numerous  than  the  dealers  in  any  other  com¬ 
modity,  and  their  dispersed  situation  renders 
it  altogether  impossible  for  them  to  enter 
into  any  general  combination.  If  in  a  year  of 
scarcity,  therefore,  any  of  them  should  find 
that  he  had  a  good  deal  more  corn  upon  hand 
than,  at  the  current  price,  he  could  hope  to 
dispose  of  before  the  end  of  the  season,  he 
would  never  think  of  keeping  up  this  price  to 
his  own  loss,  and  to  the  sole  benefit  of  his 
rivals  and  competitors,  but  would  immediately 
lower  it,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  his  corn  before 
the  new  crop  began  to  come  in.  The  same  mo¬ 
tives,  the  same  interests,  which  would  thus 
regulate  the  conduct  of  any  one  dealer,  would 
regulate  that  of  every  other,  and  oblige  them 
all  in  general  to  sell  their  corn  at  the  price 
which,  according  to  the  best  of  their  judg¬ 
ment,  was  most  suitable  to  the  scarcity  or 
plenty  of  the  season. 

Whoever  examines  with  attention  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  dearths  and  famines  which  have 
afflicted  any  part  of  Europe,  during  either 
the  course  of  the  present  or  that  of  the  two 
preceding  centuries,  of  several  of  which  we 
have  pretty  exact  accounts,  will  find,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  that  a  dearth  never  has  arisen  from  any 
combination  among  the  inland  dealers  in  corn, 
nor  from  any  other  cause  but  a  real  scarcity, 
occasioned  sometimes  perhaps,  and  in  some 
particular  places,  by  the  waste  of  war,  but 
in  by  far  the  greatest  number  of  cases  by  the 
fault  of  the  seasons;  and  that  a  famine  has 
never  arisen  from  any  other  cause  but  the 
violence  of  government  attempting,  by  im¬ 
proper  means,  to  remedy  the  inconveniences 
of  a  dearth. 

In  an  extensive  corn  country,  between  all 
the  different  parts  of  which  there  is  a  free 
commerce  and  communication,  the  scarcity 
occasioned  by  the  most  unfavourable  seasons 
can  never  be  so  great  as  to  produce  a  famine; 
and  the  scantiest  crop,  if  managed  with  fru- 


226  The  Wealth 

gality  and  economy,  will  maintain  through 
the  year  the  same  number  of  people  that  are 
commonly  fed  on  a  more  affluent  manner  by 
one  of  moderate  plenty.  The  seasons  most  un¬ 
favourable  to  the  crop  are  those  of  exces¬ 
sive  drought  or  excessive  rain.  But  as  corn 
grows  equally  upon  high  and  low  lands,  upon 
grounds  that  are  disposed  to  be  too  wet,  and 
upon  those  that  are  disposed  to  be  too  dry, 
either  the  drought  or  the  rain  which  is  hurt¬ 
ful  to  one  part  of  the  country  is  favourable 
to  another;  and  though  both  in  the  wet  and 
in  the  dry  season  the  crop  is  a  good  deal  less 
than  in  one  more  properly  tempered,  yet  in 
both  what  is  lost  in  one  part  of  the  country 
is  in  some  measure  compensated  by  what  is 
gained  in  the  other.  In  rice  countries,  where 
the  crop  not  only  requires  a  very  moist  soil, 
but  where  in  a  certain  period  of  its  growing 
it  must  be  laid  under  water,  the  effects  of  a 
drought  are  much  more  dismal.  Even  in  such 
countries,  however,  the  drought  is,  perhaps, 
scarce  ever  so  universal  as  necessarily  to  oc¬ 
casion  a  famine,  if  the  government  would 
allow  a  free  trade.  The  drought  in  Bengal,  a 
few  years  ago,  might  probably  have  occa¬ 
sioned  a  very  great  dearth.  Some  improper 
regulations,  some  injudicious  restraints  im¬ 
posed  by  the  servants  of  the  East  India 
Company  upon  the  rice  trade,  contributed, 
perhaps,  to  turn  that  dearth  into  a  famine. 

When  the  government,  in  order  to  remedy 
the  inconveniences  of  a  dearth,  orders  all  the 
dealers  to  sell  their  corn  at  what  it  supposes 
a  reasonable  price,  it  either  hinders  them  from 
bringing  it  to  market,  which  may  sometimes 
produce  a  famine  even  in  the  beginning  of  the 
season;  or  if  they  bring  it  thither,  it  enables 
the  people,  and  thereby  encourages  them  to 
consume  it  so  fast  as  must  necessarily  pro¬ 
duce  a  famine  before  the  end  of  the  season. 
The  unlimited,  unrestrained  freedom  of  the 
corn  trade,  as  it  is  the  only  effectual  preventa¬ 
tive  of  the  miseries  of  a  famine,  so  it  is  the 
best  palliative  of  the  inconveniences  of  a 
dearth;  for  the  inconveniences  of  a  real  scar¬ 
city  cannot  be  remedied,  they  can  only  be 
palliated.  No  trade  deserves  more  the  full 
protection  of  the  law,  and  no  trade  requires 
it  so  much,  because  no  trade  is  so  much  ex¬ 
posed  to  popular  odium. 

In  years  of  scarcity  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people  impute  their  distress  to  the  avarice 
of  the  corn  merchant,  who  becomes  the  object 
of  their  hatred  and  indignation.  Instead  of 
making  profit  upon  such  occasions,  therefore, 
he  is  often  in  danger  of  being  utterly  ruined, 
and  of  having  his  magazines  plundered  and 
destroyed  by  their  violence.  It  is  in  years  of 
scarcity,  however,  when  prices  are  high,  that 
the  corn  merchant  expects  to  make  his  prin¬ 
cipal  profit.  He  is  generally  in  contract  with 


of  Nations 

some  farmers  to  furnish  him  for  a  certain 
number  of  years  with  a  certain  quantity  of 
corn  at  a  certain  price.  This  contract  price  is 
settled  according  to  what  is  supposed  to  be 
the  moderate  and  reasonable,  that  is,  the  or¬ 
dinary  or  average  price,  which  before  the  late 
years  of  scarcity  was  commonly  about  eight- 
and-twenty  shillings  for  the  quarter  of  wheat, 
and  for  that  of  other  grain  in  proportion.  In 
years  of  scarcity,  therefore,  the  corn  mer¬ 
chant  buys  a  great  part  of  his  corn  for  the 
ordinary  price,  and  sells  it  for  a  much  higher. 
That  this  extraordinary  profit,  however,  is  no 
more  than  sufficient  to  put  his  trade  upon  a 
fair  level  with  other  trades,  and  to  compen¬ 
sate  the  many  losses  which  he  sustains  upon 
other  occasions,  both  from  the  perishable  na¬ 
ture  of  the  commodity  itself,  and  from  the 
frequent  and  unforeseen  fluctuations  of  its 
price,  seems  evident  enough,  from  this  single 
circumstance,  that  great  fortunes  are  as  sel¬ 
dom  made  in  this  as  in  any  other  trade.  The 
popular  odium,  however,  which  attends  it  in 
years  of  scarcity,  the  only  years  in  which  it 
can  be  very  profitable,  renders  people  of  char¬ 
acter  and  fortune  averse  to  enter  into  it.  It 
is  abandoned  to  an  inferior  set  of  dealers; 
and  millers,  bakers,  mealmen,  and  meal  fac¬ 
tors,  together  with  a  number  of  wretched 
hucksters,  are  almost  the  only  middle  people 
that,  in  the  home  market,  come  between  the 
grower  and  the  consumer. 

The  ancient  policy  of  Europe,  instead  of 
discountenancing  this  popular  odium  against 
a  trade  so  beneficial  to  the  public,  seems,  on 
the  contrary,  to  have  authorized  and  en¬ 
couraged  it. 

By  the  5th  and  6th  of  Edward  VI,  c.  14,  it 
was  enacted  that  whoever  should  buy  any 
corn  or  grain  with  intent  to  sell  it  again, 
should  be  reputed  an  unlawful  engrosser,  and 
should,  for  the  first  fault,  suffer  two  months’ 
imprisonment,  and  forfeit  the  value  of  the 
corn;  for  the  second,  suffer  six  months’  im¬ 
prisonment,  and  forfeit  double  the  value;  and 
for  the  third,  be  set  in  the  pillory,  suffer  im¬ 
prisonment  during  the  king’s  pleasure,  and 
forfeit  all  his  goods  and  chattels.  The  ancient 
policy  of  most  other  parts  of  Europe  was  no 
better  than  that  of  England. 

Our  ancestors  seem  to  have  imagined  that 
the  people  would  buy  their  corn  cheaper  of 
the  farmer  than  of  the  corn  merchant,  who, 
they  were  afraid,  would  require,  over  and 
above  the  price  which  he  paid  to  the  farmer, 
an  exorbitant  profit  to  himself.  They  endeav¬ 
oured,  therefore,  to  annihilate  his  trade  al¬ 
together.  They  even  endeavoured  to  hinder  as 
much  as  possible  any  middle  man  of  any  kind 
from  coming  in  between  the  grower  and  the 
consumer;  and  this  was  the  meaning  of  the 
many  restraints  which  they  imposed  upon  the 


Bounties 


trade  of  those  whom  they  called  kidders  or 
carriers  of  corn,  a  trade  which  nobody  was  al¬ 
lowed  to  exercise  without  a  licence  ascertain¬ 
ing  his  qualifications  as  a  man  of  probity  and 
fair  dealing.  The  authority  of  three  justices  of 
the  peace  was,  by  the  statute  of  Edward  VI, 
necessary  in  order  to  grant  this  licence.  But 
even  this  restraint  was  afterwards  thought 
insufficient,  and  by  a  statute  of  Elizabeth  the 
privilege  of  granting  it  was  confined  to  the 
quarter-sessions. 

The  ancient  policy  of  Europe  endeavoured 
in  this  manner  to  regulate  agriculture,  the 
great  trade  of  the  country,  by  maxims  quite 
different  from  those  w^hich  it  established  with 
regard  to  manufactures,  the  great  trade  of  the 
towns.  By  leaving  the  farmer  no  other  cus¬ 
tomers  but  either  the  consumers  or  their  im¬ 
mediate  factors,  the  kidders  and  carriers  of 
corn,  it  endeavoured  to  force  him  to  exercise 
the  trade,  not  only  of  a  farmer,  but  of  a  corn 
merchant  or  corn  retailer.  On  the  contrary,  it 
in  many  cases  prohibited  the  manufacturer 
from  exercising  the  trade  of  a  shopkeeper,  or 
from  selling  his  own  goods  by  retail.  It  meant 
by  the  one  law  to  promote  the  general  inter¬ 
est  of  the  country,  or  to  render  corn  cheap, 
without,  perhaps,  its  being  well  understood 
how  this  was  to  be  done.  By  the  other  it 
meant  to  promote  that  of  a  particular  order 
of  men,  the  shopkeepers,  who  would  be  so 
much  undersold  by  the  manufacturer,  it  was 
supposed,  that  their  trade  would  be  ruined  if 
he  was  allowed  to  retail  at  all. 

The  manufacturer,  however,  though  he  had 
been  allowed  to  keep  a  shop,  and  to  sell  his 
own  goods  by  retail,  could  not  have  undersold 
the  common  shopkeeper.  Whatever  part  of 
his  capital  he  might  have  placed  in  his  shop, 
he  must  have  withdrawn  it  from  his  manufac¬ 
ture.  In  order  to  carry  on  his  business  on  a 
level  with  that  of  other  people,  as  he  must 
have  had  the  profit  of  a  manufacturer  on  the 
one  part,  so  he  must  have  had  that  of  a  shop¬ 
keeper  upon  the  other.  Let  us  suppose,  for 
example,  that  in  the  particular  town  where 
he  lived,  ten  per  cent  was  the  ordinary  profit 
both  of  manufacturing  and  shopkeeping  stock; 
he  must  in  this  case  have  charged  upon  every 
piece  of  his  own  goods  which  he  sold  in  his 
shop,  a  profit  of  twenty  per  cent.  When  he 
carried  them  from  his  workhouse  to  his  shop, 
he  must  have  valued  them  at  the  price  for 
which  he  could  have  sold  them  to  a  dealer  or 
shopkeeper,  who  would  have  bought  them  by 
wholesale.  If  he  valued  them  lower,  he  lost 
a  part  of  the  profit  of  his  manufacturing  capi¬ 
tal.  When  again  he  sold  them  from  his  shop, 
unless  he  got  the  same  price  at  which  a 
shopkeeper  would  have  sold  them,  he  lost  a 
part  of  the  profit  of  his  shopkeeping  capital. 
Though  he  might  appear,  therefore,  to  make 


227 

a  double  profit  upon  the  same  piece  of  goods, 
yet  as  these  goods  made  successively  a  part  of 
two  distinct  capitals,  he  made  but  a  single 
profit  upon  the  whole  capital  employed  about 
them;  and  if  he  made  less  than  his  profit,  he 
was  a  loser,  or  did  not  employ  his  whole  capi¬ 
tal  with  the  same  advantage  as  the  greater 
part  of  his  neighbours. 

What  the  manufacturer  was  prohibited  to 
do,  the  farmer  was  in  some  measure  enjoined 
to  do;  to  divide  his  capital  between  two  differ¬ 
ent  employments;  to  keep  one  part  of  it  in 
his  granaries  and  stack  yard,  for  supplying 
the  occasional  demands  of  the  market;  and 
to  employ  the  other  in  the  cultivation  of  his 
land.  But  as  he  could  not  afford  to  employ  the 
latter  for  less  than  the  ordinary  profits  of 
farming  stock,  so  he  could  as  little  afford  to 
employ  the  former  for  less  than  the  ordinary 
profits  of  mercantile  stock.  Whether  the  stock 
which  really  carried  on  the  business  of  the 
corn  merchant  belonged  to  the  person  wdio 
was  called  a  farmer,  or  to  the  person  wTho  was 
called  a  corn  merchant,  an  equal  profit  was 
in  both  cases  requisite  in  order  to  indemnify 
its  owner  for  employing  it  in  this  manner;  in 
order  to  put  his  business  upon  a  level  with 
other  trades,  and  in  order  to  hinder  him  from 
having  an  interest  to  change  it  as  soon  as 
possible  for  some  other.  The  farmer,  therefore, 
who  was  thus  forced  to  exercise  the  trade  of 
a  corn  merchant,  could  not  afford  to  sell  his 
corn  cheaper  than  any  other  corn  merchant 
would  have  been  obliged  to  do  in  the  case  of 
a  free  competition. 

The  dealer  who  can  employ  his  whole  stock 
in  one  single  branch  of  busniess  has  an  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  same  kind  with  the  workman  who 
can  employ  his  whole  labour  in  one  single 
operation.  As  the  latter  acquires  a  dexterity 
which  enables  him,  with  the  same  two  hands, 
to  perform  a  much  greater  quantity  of  work; 
so  the  former  acquires  so  easy  and  ready  a 
method  of  transacting  his  business,  of  buying 
and  disposing  of  his  goods,  that  with  the  same 
capital  he  can  transact  a  much  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  business.  As  the  one  can  commonly 
afford  his  work  a  good  deal  cheaper,  so  the 
other  can  commonly  afford  his  goods  some¬ 
what  cheaper  than  if  his  stock  and  attention 
were  both  employed  about  a  greater  variety 
of  objects.  The  greater  part  of  manufacturers 
could  not  afford  to  retail  their  own  goods  so 
cheap  as  a  vigilant  and  active  shopkeeper, 
whose  sole  business  it  was  to  buy  them  at 
wholesale  and  to  retail  them  again.  The 
greater  part  of  farmers  could  still  less  afford 
to  retail  their  own  corn,  to  supply  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  a  town,  at  perhaps  four  or  five  miles 
distance  from  the  greater  part  of  them,  so 
cheap  as  a  vigilant  and  active  corn  merchant, 
whose  sole  business  it  was  to  purchase  corn  by 


228  The  Wealth 

wholesale,  to  collect  it  into  a  great  magazine, 
and  to  retail  it  again. 

The  law  which  prohibited  the  manufacturer 
from  exercising  the  trade  of  a  shopkeeper  en¬ 
deavoured  to  force  this  division  in  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  stock  to  go  on  faster  than  it 
might  otherwise  have  done.  The  law  which 
obliged  the  farmer  to  exercise  the  trade  of  a 
corn  merchant  endeavoured  to  hinder  it  from 
going  on  so  fast.  Both  laws  were  evident  vio¬ 
lations  of  natural  liberty,  and  therefore  un¬ 
just;  and  they  were  both,  too,  as  impolitic  as 
they  were  unjust.  It  is  the  interest  of  every 
society  that  things  of  this  kind  should  never 
either  be  forced  or  obstructed.  The  man  who 
employs  either  his  labour  or  his  stock  in  a 
greater  variety  of  ways  than  his  situation  ren¬ 
ders  necessary  can  never  hurt  his  neighbour 
by  underselling  him.  He  may  hurt  himself, 
and  he  generally  does  so.  Jack  of  all  trades 
will  never  be  rich,  says  the  proverb.  But  the 
law  ought  always  to  trust  people  with  the  care 
of  their  own  interest,  as  in  their  local  situa¬ 
tions  they  must  generally  be  able  to  judge 
better  of  it  than  the  legislator  can  do.  The 
law,  however,  which  obliged  the  farmer  to  ex¬ 
ercise  the  trade  of  a  corn  merchant  was  by 
far  the  most  pernicious  of  the  two. 

It  obstructed  not  only  that  division  in  the 
employment  of  stock  which  is  so  advanta¬ 
geous  to  every  society,  but  it  obstructed  like¬ 
wise  the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  the 
land.  By  obliging  the  farmer  to  carry  on  two 
trades  instead  of  one,  it  forced  him  to  divide 
his  capital  into  two  parts,  of  which  one  only 
could  be  employed  in  cultivation.  But  if  he 
had  been  at  liberty  to  sell  his  whole  crop  to 
a  corn  merchant  as  fast  as  he  could  thresh 
it  out,  his  whole  capital  might  have  returned 
immediately  to  the  land,  and  have  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  buying  more  cattle,  and  hiring  more 
servants,  in  order  to  improve  and  cultivate 
it  better.  But  by  being  obliged  to  sell  his 
corn  by  retail,  he  was  obliged  to  keep  a  great 
part  of  his  capital  in  his  granaries  and  stack 
yard  through  the  year,  and  could  not,  there¬ 
fore,  cultivate  so  well  as  with  the  same  capi¬ 
tal  he  might  otherwise  have  done.  This  law, 
therefore,  necessarily  obstructed  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  land,  and,  instead  of  tending  to 
render  corn  cheaper,  must  have  tended  to  ren¬ 
der  it  scarcer,  and  therefore  dearer,  than  it 
would  otherwise  have  been. 

After  the  business  of  the  farmer,  that  of  the 
corn  merchant  is  in  reality  the  trade  which, 
if  properly  protected  and  encouraged,  would 
contribute  the  most  to  the  raising  of  corn.  It 
would  support  the  trade  of  the  farmer,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  trade  of  the  wholesale 
dealer  supports  that  of  the  manufacturer. 

The  wholesale  dealer,  by  affording  a  ready 
market  to  the  manufacturer,  by  taking  his 


of  Nations 

goods  off  his  hand  as  fast  as  he  can  make 
them,  and  by  sometimes  even  advancing 
their  price  to  him  before  he  has  made  them, 
enables  him  to  keep  his  whole  capital,  and 
sometimes  even  more  than  his  whole  capital, 
constantly  employed  in  manufacturing,  and 
consequently  to  manufacture  a  much  greater 
quantity  of  goods  than  if  he  was  obliged  to 
dispose  of  them  himself  to  the  immediate 
consumers,  or  even  to  the  retailers.  As  the 
capital  of  the  wholesale  merchant,  too,  is 
generally  sufficient  to  replace  that  of  many 
manufacturers,  this  intercourse  between  him 
and  them  interests  the  owner  of  a  large  capital 
to  support  the  owners  of  a  great  number  of 
small  ones,  and  to  assist  them  in  those  losses 
and  misfortunes  which  might  otherwise  prove 
ruinous  to  them. 

An  intercourse  of  the  same  kind  universally 
established  between  the  farmers  and  the  corn 
merchants  would  be  attended  with  effects 
equally  beneficial  to  the  farmers.  They  would 
be  enabled  to  keep  their  whole  capitals,  and 
even  more  than  their  whole  capitals,  constant¬ 
ly  employed  in  cultivation.  In  case  of  any  of 
those  accidents,  to  which  no  trade  is  more 
liable  than  theirs,  they  would  find  in  their  or¬ 
dinary  customer,  the  wealthy  corn  merchant, 
a  person  who  had  both  an  interest  to  support 
them,  and  the  ability  to  do  it,  and  they  would 
not,  as  at  present,  be  entirely  dependent  upon 
the  forbearance  of  their  landlord,  or  the  mercy 
of  his  steward.  Were  it  possible,  as  perhaps 
it  is  not,  to  establish  this  intercourse  univer¬ 
sally,  and  all  at  once,  were  it  possible  to  turn 
all  at  once  the  whole  farming  stock  of  the 
kingdom  to  its  proper  business,  the  cultivation 
of  land,  withdrawing  it  from  every  other  em¬ 
ployment  into  which  any  part  of  it  may  be 
at  present  diverted,  and  were  it  possible,  in 
order  to  support  and  assist  upon  occasion  the 
operations  of  this  great  stock,  to  provide  all 
at  once  another  stock  almost  equally  great, 
it  is  not  perhaps  very  easy  to  imagine  how 
great,  how  extensive,  and  how  sudden  would 
be  the  improvement  which  this  change  of  cir¬ 
cumstances  would  alone  produce  upon  the 
whole  face  of  the  country. 

The  statute  of  Edward  VI,  therefore,  by 
prohibiting  as  much  as  possible  any  middle 
man  from  coming  between  the  grower  and  the 
consumer,  endeavoured  to  annihilate  a  trade, 
of  which  the  free  exercise  is  not  only  the  best 
palliative  of  the  inconveniences  of  a  dearth 
but  the  best  preventative  of  that  calamity: 
after  the  trade  of  the  farmer,  no  trade  contrib¬ 
uting  so  much  to  the  growing  of  corn  as  that 
of  the  corn  merchant. 

The  rigour  of  this  law  was  afterwards  sof¬ 
tened  by  several  subsequent  statutes,  which 
successively  permitted  the  engrossing  of  corn 
when  the  price  of  wheat  should  not  exceed 


Bounties 


twenty,  twenty-four,  thirty-two,  and  forty 
shillings  the  quarter.  At  last,  by  the  15th  of 
Charles  II,  c.  7,  the  engrossing  or  buying  of 
corn  in  order  to  sell  it  again,  as  long  as  the 
price  of  wheat  did  not  exceed  forty-eight 
shillings  the  quarter,  and  that  of  other  grain 
in  proportion,  was  declared  lawful  to  all  per¬ 
sons  not  being  forestalled,  that  is,  not  selling 
again  in  the  same  market  within  three  months. 
All  the  freedom  which  the  trade  of  the  inland 
corn  dealer  has  ever  yet  enjoyed  was  bestowed 
upon  it  by  this  statute.  The  statute  of  the 
12th  of  the  present  king,1  which  repeals  almost 
all  the  other  ancient  laws  against  engrossers 
and  forestalled,  does  not  repeal  the  restric¬ 
tions  of  this  particular  statute,  which  there¬ 
fore  still  continue  in  force. 

This  statute,  however,  authorizes  in  some 
measure  two  very  absurd  popular  prejudices. 

First,  it  supposes  that  when  the  price  of 
wheat  has  risen  so  high  as  forty-eight  shillings 
the  quarter,  and  that  of  other  grains  in  pro¬ 
portion,  corn  is  likely  to  be  so  engrossed  as  to 
hurt  the  people.  But  from  what  has  been  al¬ 
ready  said,  it  seems  evident  enough  that  corn 
can  at  no  price  be  so  engrossed  by  the  inland 
dealers  as  to  hurt  the  people:  and  forty-eight 
shillings  the  quarter,  besides,  though  it  may 
be  considered  as  a  very  high  price,  yet  in 
years  of  scarcity  it  is  a  price  which  frequently 
takes  place  immediately  after  harvest,  when 
scarce  any  part  of  the  new  crop  can  be  sold 
off,  and  when  it  is  impossible  even  for  igno¬ 
rance  to  suppose  that  any  part  of  it  can  be  so 
engrossed  as  to  hurt  the  people. 

Secondly,  it  supposes  that  there  is  a  certain 
price  at  which  corn  is  likely  to  be  forestalled, 
that  is,  bought  up  in  order  to  be  sold  again 
soon  after  in  the  same  market,  so  as  to  hurt 
the  people.  But  if  a  merchant  ever  buys  up 
corn,  either  going  to  a  particular  market  or 
in  a  particular  market,  in  order  to  sell  it  again 
soon  after  in  the  same  market,  it  must  be  be¬ 
cause  he  judges  that  the  market  cannot  be  so 
liberally  supplied  through  the  whole  season 
as  upon  that  particular  occasion,  and  that  the 
price,  therefore,  must  soon  rise.  If  he  judges 
wrong  in  this,  and  if  the  price  does  not  rise, 
he  not  only  loses  the  whole  profit  of  the  stock 
which  he  employs  in  this  manner,  but  a  part 
of  the  stock  itself,  by  the  expense  and  loss 
which  necessarily  attend  the  storing  and  keep¬ 
ing  of  corn.  He  hurts  himself,  therefore,  much 
more  essentially  than  he  can  hurt  even  the 
particular  people  whom  he  may  hinder  from 
supplying  themselves  upon  that  particular 
market  day,  because  they  may  afterwards 
supply  themselves  just  as  cheap  upon  any 
other  market  day.  If  he  judges  right,  instead 
of  hurting  the  great  body  of  the  people,  he 
renders  them  a  most  important  service.  By 

1  George  III. — Ed. 


229 

making  them  feel  the  inconveniencies  of  a 
dearth  somewhat  earlier  than  they  otherwise 
might  do,  he  prevents  their  feeling  them  after¬ 
wards  so  severely  as  they  certainly  would  do, 
if  the  cheapness  of  price  encouraged  them  to 
consume  faster  than  suited  the  real  scarcity 
of  the  season.  When  the  scarcity  is  real,  the 
best  thing  that  can  be  done  for  the  people  is 
to  divide  the  inconveniencies  of  it  as  equally 
as  possible  through  all  the  different  months, 
and  weeks,  and  days  of  the  year.  The  interest 
of  the  corn  merchant  makes  him  study  to  do 
this  as  exactly  as  he  can:  and  as  no  other  per¬ 
son  can  have  either  the  same  interest,  or  the 
same  knowledge,  or  the  same  abilities  to  do 
it  so  exactly  as  he,  this  most  important  oper¬ 
ation  of  commerce  ought  to  be  trusted  en¬ 
tirely  to  him;  or,  in  other  words,  the  corn 
trade,  so  far  at  least  as  concerns  the  supply 
of  the  home  market,  ought  to  be  left  perfectly 
free. 

The  popular  fear  of  engrossing  and  fore¬ 
stalling  may  be  compared  to  the  popular  ter¬ 
rors  and  suspicions  of  witchcraft.  The  unfor¬ 
tunate  wretches  accused  of  this  latter  crime 
were  not  more  innocent  of  the  misfortunes 
imputed  to  them  than  those  who  have  been 
accused  of  the  former.  The  law  which  put  an 
end  to  all  prosecutions  against  witchcraft, 
which  put  it  out  of  any  man’s  power  to  gratify 
his  own  malice  by  accusing  his  neighbour  of 
that  imaginary  crime,  seems  effectually  to 
have  put  an  end  to  those  fears  and  suspicions 
by  taking  away  the  great  cause  which  encour¬ 
aged  and  supported  them.  The  law  which 
should  restore  entire  freedom  to  the  inland 
trade  of  corn  would  probably  prove  as  effec¬ 
tual  to  put  an  end  to  the  popular  fears  of 
engrossing  and  forestalling. 

The  15th  of  Charles  II,  c.  7,  however,  with 
all  its  imperfections,  has  perhaps  contributed 
more  both  to  the  plentiful  supply  of  the  home 
market,  and  to  the  increase  of  tillage,  than 
any  other  law  in  the  statute  book.  It  is  from 
this  law  that  the  inland  corn  trade  has  de¬ 
rived  all  the  liberty  and  protection  which  it 
has  ever  yet  enjoyed;  and  both  the  supply  of 
the  home  market,  and  the  interest  of  tillage, 
are  much  more  effectually  promoted  by  the 
inland  than  either  by  the  importation  or  ex¬ 
portation  trade. 

The  proportion  of  the  average  quantity  of 
all  sorts  of  grain  imported  into  Great  Britain 
to  that  of  all  sorts  of  grain  consumed,  it  has 
been  computed  by  the  author  of  the  tracts 
upon  the  corn  trade,  does  not  exceed  that  of 
one  to  five  hundred  and  seventy.  For  sup¬ 
plying  the  home  market,  therefore,  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  inland  trade  must  be  to  that 
of  the  importation  trade  as  five  hundred  and 
seventy  to  one. 

The  average  quantity  of  all  sorts  of  grain 


230 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


exported  from  Great  Britain  does  not,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  same  author,  exceed  the  one-and- 
thirtieth  part  of  the  annual  produce.  For  the 
encouragement  of  tillage,  therefore,  by  pro¬ 
viding  a  market  for  the  home  produce,  the 
importance  of  the  inland  trade  must  be  to 
that  of  the  exportation  trade  as  thirty  to  one. 

I  have  no  great  faith  in  political  arithme¬ 
tic,  and  I  mean  not  to  warrant  the  exactness 
of  either  of  these  computations.  I  mention 
them  only  in  order  to  show  of  how  much  less 
consequence,  in  the  opinion  of  the  most  judi¬ 
cious  and  experienced  persons,  the  foreign 
trade  of  corn  is  than  the  home  trade.  The 
great  cheapness  of  corn  in  the  years  im¬ 
mediately  preceding  the  establishment  of  the 
bounty  may  perhaps,  with  reason,  be  ascribed 
in  some  measure  to  the  operation  of  this  stat¬ 
ute  of  Charles  II,  which  had  been  enacted 
about  five-and-twenty  years  before,  and  which 
had  therefore  full  time  to  produce  its  effect. 

A  very  few  words  will  sufficiently  explain 
all  that  I  have  to  say  concerning  the  other 
three  branches  of  the  corn  trade. 

II.  The  trade  of  the  merchant  importer 
of  foreign  corn  for  home  consumption  evident¬ 
ly  contributes  to  the  immediate  supply  of  the 
home  market,  and  must  so  far  be  immediately 
beneficial  to  the  great  body  of  the  people.  It 
tends,  indeed,  to  lower  somewhat  the  average 
money  price  of  corn,  but  not  to  diminish  its 
real  value,  or  the  quantity  of  labour  which  it 
is  capable  of  maintaining.  If  importation  was 
at  all  times  free,  our  farmers  and  country 
gentlemen  would,  probably,  one  year  with  an¬ 
other,  get  less  money  for  their  corn  than  they 
do  at  present,  when  importation  is  at  most 
times  in  effect  prohibited;  but  the  money 
which  they  got  would  be  of  more  value, 
would  buy  more  goods  of  all  other  kinds,  and 
would  employ  more  labour.  Their  real  wealth, 
their  real  revenue,  therefore,  would  be  the 
same  as  at  present,  though  it  might  be  ex¬ 
pressed  by  a  smaller  quantity  of  silver;  and 
they  would  neither  be  disabled  nor  discour¬ 
aged  from  cultivating  corn  as  much  as  they  do 
at  present.  On  the  contrary,  as  the  rise  in  the 
real  value  of  silver,  in  consequence  of  lowering 


the  money  price  of  corn,  lowers  somewhat  the 
money  price  of  all  other  commodities,  it  gives 
the  industry  of  the  country,  where  it  takes 
place,  some  advantage  in  all  foreign  markets, 
and  thereby  tends  to  encourage  and  increase 
that  industry.  But  the  extent  of  the  home 
market  for  corn  must  be  in  proportion  to  the 
general  industry  of  the  country  where  it 
grows,  or  to  the  number  of  those  who  produce 
something  else,  and  therefore  have  something 
else,  or  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the 
price  of  something  else,  to  give  in  exchange 
for  corn.  But  in  every  country  the  home 
market,  as  it  is  the  nearest  and  most  con¬ 
venient,  so  is  it  likewise  the  greatest  and 
most  important  market  for  corn.  That  rise  in 
the  real  value  of  silver,  therefore,  which  is 
the  effect  of  lowering  the  average  money  price 
of  corn,  tends  to  enlarge  the  greatest  and 
most  important  market  for  corn,  and  thereby 
to  encourage,  instead  of  discouraging,  its 
growth. 

By  the  22nd  of  Charles  II,  c.  13,  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  wheat,  whenever  the  price  in  the 
home  market  did  not  exceed  fifty-three  shil¬ 
lings  and  fourpence  the  quarter,  was  subjected 
to  a  duty  of  sixteen  shillings  the  quarter;  and 
to  a  duty  of  eight  shillings  whenever  the  price 
did  not  exceed  four  pounds.  The  former  of 
these  two  prices  has,  for  more  than  a  century 
past,  taken  place  only  in  times  of  very  great 
scarcity;  and  the  latter  has,  so  far  as  I  know, 
not  taken  place  at  all.  Yet,  till  wheat  had 
risen  above  this  latter  price,  it  was  by  this 
statute  subjected  to  a  very  high  duty;  and,  till 
it  had  risen  above  the  former,  to  a  duty  which 
amounted  to  a  prohibition.  The  importation 
of  other  sorts  of  grain  was  restrained  at  rates, 
and  by  duties,  in  proportion  to  the  value  of 
the  grain,  almost  equally  high.1  Subsequent 
laws  still  further  increased  those  duties. 

The  distress  which,  in  years  of  scarcity,  the 
strict  execution  of  those  laws  might  have 
brought  upon  the  people,  would  probably  have 
been  very  great.  But,  upon  such  occasions,  its 
execution  was  generally  suspended  by  tempo¬ 
rary  statutes,  which  permitted,  for  a  limited 
time,  the  importation  of  foreign  corn.  The 


1  Before  the  13th  of  the  present  king,  the  following  were  the  duties  payable  upon  the  importation  of 
the  different  sorts  of  grain:  — 


Grain  Duties  Duties 


Beans  to  28s.  per  qr. 

19s. 

lOd. 

after  till  40s.  16s. 

8d. 

Barley  to  28s. 

19s. 

lOd. 

32s.  16s. 

Malt  is  prohibited  by  the  annual  Malt-tax  Bill. 

Oats  to  16s. 

5s. 

lOd. 

after 

Pease  to  40s. 

16s. 

lOd. 

after 

Rye  to  36s. 

19s. 

lOd. 

till  40s.  16s. 

8d. 

Wheat  to  44s. 

21s. 

9d. 

till  53s.  4d.  17s. 

till  4  1.  and  after  that  about  Is.  4d. 


Buckwheat  to  32s.  per  qr.  to  pay  16s. 


Duties 
then  12d. 

1 2d. 

oy2d. 

9%d. 

then  12d. 
then  8s. 


These  different  duties  were  imposed,  partly  by  the  22nd  of  Charles  II,  in  place  of  the  Old  Subsidy, 
partly  by  the  New  Subsidy,  by  the  One-third  and  Two-thirds  Subsidy,  and  by  the  Subsidy,  1747. 


Bounties 


necessity  of  these  temporary  statutes  suffi¬ 
ciently  demonstrates  the  impropriety  of  this 
general  one. 

These  restraints  upon  importation,  though 
prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  bounty,  were 
dictated  by  the  same  spirit,  by  the  same  prin¬ 
ciples,  which  afterwards  enacted  that  regula¬ 
tion.  How  hurtful  soever  in  themselves,  these 
or  some  other  restraints  upon  importation  be¬ 
came  necessary  in  consequence  of  that  regula¬ 
tion.  If,  when  wheat  was  either  below  forty- 
eight  shillings  the  quarter,  or  not  much  above 
it,  foreign  corn  could  have  been  imported 
either  duty  free,  or  upon  paying  only  a  small 
duty,  it  might  have  been  exported  again,  with 
the  benefit  of  the  bounty,  to  the  great  loss  of 
the  public  revenue,  and  to  the  entire  perver¬ 
sion  of  the  institution,  of  which  the  object 
was  to  extend  the  market  for  the  home 
growth,  not  that  for  the  growth  of  foreign 
countries. 

III.  The  trade  of  the  merchant  exporter  of 
corn  for  foreign  consumption  certainly  does 
not  contribute  directly  to  the  plentiful  sup¬ 
ply  of  the  home  market.  It  does  so,  however, 
indirectly.  From  whatever  source  this  supply 
may  be  usually  drawn,  whether  from  home 
growth  or  from  foreign  importation,  unless 
more  corn  is  either  usually  grown,  or  usually 
imported  into  the  country,  than  what  is  usu¬ 
ally  consumed  in  it,  the  supply  of  the  home 
market  can  never  be  very  plentiful.  But  unless 
the  surplus  can  in  all  ordinary  cases  be  ex¬ 
ported,  the  growers  will  be  careful  never  to 
grow  more,  and  the  importers  never  to  import 
more,  than  what  the  bare  consumption  of  the 
home  market  requires.  That  market  will  very 
seldom  be  overstocked;  but  it  will  generally 
be  understocked,  the  people  whose  business 
it  is  to  supply  it  being  generally  afraid  lest 
their  goods  should  be  left  upon  their  hands. 
The  prohibition  of  exportation  limits  the  im¬ 
provement  and  cultivation  of  the  country  to 
what  the  supply  of  its  own  inhabitants  re¬ 
quires.  The  freedom  of  exportation  enables  it 
to  extend  cultivation  for  the  supply  of  foreign 
nations. 

By  the  12th  of  Charles  II,  c.  4,  the  expor¬ 
tation  of  corn  was  permitted  whenever  the 
price  of  wheat  did  not  exceed  forty  shillings 
the  quarter,  and  that  of  other  grain  in  propor¬ 
tion.  By  the  15th  of  the  same  prince,  this 
liberty  was  extended  till  the  price  of  wheat 
exceeded  forty-eight  shillings  the  quarter;  and 
by  the  22nd,  to  all  higher  prices.  A  poundage, 
indeed,  was  to  be  paid  to  the  king  upon  such 
exportation.  But  all  grain  was  rated  so  low 
in  the  book  of  rates  that  this  poundage 
amounted  only  upon  wheat  to  a  shilling,  upon 
oats  to  fourpence,  and  upon  all  other  grain  to 
sixpence  the  quarter.  By  the  1st  of  William 
and  Mary,  the  act  which  established  the 


231 

bounty,  this  small  duty  was  virtually  taken 
off  whenever  the  price  of  wheat  did  not  exceed 
forty-eight  shillings  the  quarter;  and  by  the 
11th  and  12th  of  William  III,  c.  20,  it  was 
expressly  taken  off  at  all  higher  prices. 

The  trade  of  the  merchant  exporter  was,  in 
this  manner,  not  only  encouraged  by  a  bounty, 
but  rendered  much  more  free  than  that  of  the 
inland  dealer.  By  the  last  of  these  statutes, 
corn  could  be  engrossed  at  any  price  for  ex¬ 
portation,  but  it  could  not  be  engrossed  for 
inland  sale  except  when  the  price  did  not  ex¬ 
ceed  forty-eight  shillings  the  quarter.  The  in¬ 
terest  of  the  inland  dealer,  however,  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  shown,  can  never  be  opposite  to 
that  of  the  great  body  of  the  people.  That  of 
the  merchant  exporter  may,  and  in  fact  some¬ 
times  is.  If,  while  his  own  country  labours 
under  a  dearth,  a  neighbouring  country  should 
be  afflicted  with  a  famine,  it  might  be  his  in¬ 
terest  to  carry  corn  to  the  latter  country  in 
such  quantities  as  might  very  much  aggravate 
the  calamities  of  the  dearth.  The  plentiful 
supply  of  the  home  market  was  not  the  direct 
object  of  those  statutes;  but,  under  the  pre¬ 
tence  of  encouraging  agriculture,  to  raise  the 
money  price  of  corn  as  high  as  possible,  and 
thereby  to  occasion,  as  much  as  possible,  a 
constant  dearth  in  the  home  market.  By  the 
discouragement  of  importation,  the  supply  of 
that  market,  even  in  times  of  great  scarcity, 
was  confined  to  the  home  growth;  and  by  the 
encouragement  of  exportation,  when  the  price 
was  so  high  as  forty-eight  shillings  the  quar¬ 
ter,  that  market  was  not,  even  in  times  of  con¬ 
siderable  scarcity,  allowed  to  enjoy  the  whole 
of  that  growth.  The  temporary  laws,  prohib¬ 
iting  for  a  limited  time  the  exportation  of 
corn,  and  taking  off  for  a  limited  time  the 
duties  upon  its  importation,  expedients  to 
which  Great  Britain  has  been  obliged  so  fre¬ 
quently  to  have  recourse,  sufficiently  demon¬ 
strate  the  impropriety  of  her  general  system. 
Had  that  system  been  good,  she  would  not 
so  frequently  have  been  reduced  to  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  departing  from  it. 

Were  all  nations  to  follow  the  liberal  sys¬ 
tem  of  free  exportation  and  free  importation, 
the  different  states  into  which  a  great  conti¬ 
nent  was  divided  would  so  far  resemble  the 
different  provinces  of  a  great  empire.  As 
among  the  different  provinces  of  a  great  em¬ 
pire  the  freedom  of  the  inland  trade  appears, 
both  from  reason  and  experience,  not  only  the 
best  palliative  of  a  dearth,  but  the  most  effec¬ 
tual  preventative  of  a  famine;  so  would  the 
freedom  of  the  exportation  and  importation 
trade  be  among  the  different  states  into  which 
a  great  continent  was  divided.  The  larger 
the  continent,  the  easier  the  communication 
through  all  the  different  parts  of  it,  both  by 
land  and  by  water,  the  less  would  any  one 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


232 

particular  part  of  it  ever  be  exposed  to  either 
of  these  calamities,  the  scarcity  of  any  one 
country  being  more  likely  to  be  relieved  by 
the  plenty  of  some  other.  But  very  few  coun¬ 
tries  have  entirely  adopted  this  liberal  sys¬ 
tem.  The  freedom  of  the  corn  trade  is  almost 
everywhere  more  or  less  restrained,  and,  in 
many  countries,  is  confined  by  such  absurd 
regulations  as  frequently  aggravate  the  un¬ 
avoidable  misfortune  of  a  dearth  into  the 
dreadful  calamity  of  a  famine.  The  demand  of 
such  countries  for  corn  may  frequently  be¬ 
come  so  great  and  so  urgent  that  a  small  state 
in  their  neighbourhood,  which  happened  at 
the  same  time  to  be  labouring  under  some 
degree  of  dearth,  could  not  venture  to  supply 
them  without  exposing  itself  to  the  like 
dreadful  calamity.  The  very  bad  policy  of 
one  country  may  thus  render  it  in  some  meas¬ 
ure  dangerous  and  imprudent  to  establish 
what  would  otherwise  be  the  best  policy  in 
another.  The  unlimited  freedom  of  exporta¬ 
tion,  however,  would  be  much  less  dangerous 
in  great  states,  in  which  the  growth  being 
much  greater,  the  supply  could  seldom  be 
much  affected  by  any  quantity  of  corn  that 
was  likely  to  be  exported.  In  a  Swiss  canton, 
or  in  some  of  the  little  states  of  Italy,  it  may 
perhaps  sometimes  be  necessary  to  restrain 
the  exportation  of  corn.  In  such  great  coun¬ 
tries  as  France  or  England  it  scarce  ever  can. 
To  hinder,  besides,  the  farmer  from  sending 
his  goods  at  all  times  to  the  best  market  is 
evidently  to  sacrifice  the  ordinary  laws  of 
justice  to  an  idea  of  public  utility,  to  a  sort 
of  reasons  of  state;  an  act  of  legislative 
authority  which  ought  to  be  exercised  only, 
which  can  be  pardoned  only  in  cases  of  the 
most  urgent  necessity.  The  price  at  which  the 
exportation  of  corn  is  prohibited,  if  it  is  ever 
to  be  prohibited,  ought  always  to  be  a  very 
high  price. 

The  laws  concerning  corn  may  everywhere 
be  compared  to  the  laws  concerning  religion. 
The  people  feel  themselves  so  much  interested 
in  what  relates  either  of  their  subsistence  in 
this  life,  or  to  their  happiness  in  a  life  to  come, 
that  government  must  yield  to  their  prej¬ 
udices,  and,  in  order  to  preserve  the  public 
tranquillity,  establish  that  system  which  they 
approve  of.  It  is  upon  this  account,  perhaps, 
that  we  so  seldom  find  a  reasonable  system 
established  with  regard  to  either  of  those  two 
capital  objects. 

IV.  The  trade  of  the  merchant  carrier,  or 
of  the  importer  of  foreign  corn  in  order  to  ex¬ 
port  it  again,  contributes  to  the  plentiful 
supply  of  the  home  market.  It  is  not  indeed 
the  direct  purpose  of  his  trade  to  sell  his  corn 
there.  But  he  will  generally  be  willing  to  do 
so,  and  even  for  a  good  deal  less  money  than 
he  might  expect  in  a  foreign  market;  because 


he  saves  in  this  manner  the  expense  of  loading 
and  unloading,  of  freight  and  insurance.  The 
inhabitants  of  the  country  which,  by  means  of 
the  carrying  trade,  becomes  the  magazine  and 
storehouse  for  the  supply  of  other  countries 
can  very  seldom  be  in  want  themselves. 
Though  the  carrying  trade  might  thus  con¬ 
tribute  to  reduce  the  average  money  price  of 
corn  in  the  home  market,  it  would  not  there¬ 
by  lower  its  real  value.  It  would  only  raise 
somewhat  the  real  value  of  silver. 

The  carrying  trade  was  in  effect  prohibited 
in  Great  Britain,  upon  all  ordinary  occasions, 
by  the  high  duties  upon  the  importation  of 
foreign  corn,  of  the  greater  part  of  which 
there  was  no  drawback;  and  upon  extraordi¬ 
nary  occasions,  when  a  scarcity  made  it  nec¬ 
essary  to  suspend  those  duties  by  temporary 
statutes,  exportation  was  always  prohibited. 
By  this  system  of  laws,  therefore,  the  carrying 
trade  was  in  effect  prohibited  upon  all  oc¬ 
casions. 

That  system  of  laws,  therefore,  which  is 
connected  with  the  establishment  of  the 
bounty,  seems  to  deserve  no  part  of  the 
praise  which  has  been  bestowed  upon  it.  The 
improvement  and  prosperity  of  Great  Britain, 
which  has  been  so  often  ascribed  to  those 
laws,  may  very  easily  be  accounted  for  by 
other  causes.  That  security  which  the  laws  in 
Great  Britain  give  to  every  man  that  he  shall 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  own  labour  is  alone 
sufficient  to  make  any  country  flourish,  not¬ 
withstanding  these  and  twenty  other  absurd 
regulations  of  commerce;  and  this  security  was 
perfected  by  the  revolution  much  about  the 
same  time  that  the  bounty  was  established. 
The  natural  effort  of  every  individual  to  bet¬ 
ter  his  own  condition,  when  suffered  to  exert 
itself  with  freedom  and  security,  is  so  powerful 
a  principle  that  it  is  alone,  and  without  any 
assistance,  not  only  capable  of  carrying  on 
the  society  to  wealth  and  prosperity,  but  of 
surmounting  a  hundred  impertinent  obstruc¬ 
tions  with  which  the  folly  of  human  laws  too 
often  incumbers  its  operations;  though  the 
effect  of  these  obstructions  is  always  more  or 
less  either  to  encroach  upon  its  freedom,  or  to 
diminish  its  security.  In  Great  Britain  indus¬ 
try  is  perfectly  secure;  and  though  it  is  far 
from  being  perfectly  free,  it  is  as  free  or  freer 
than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe. 

Though  the  period  of  the  greatest  prosper¬ 
ity  and  improvement  of  Great  Britain  has 
been  posterior  to  that  system  of  laws  which  is 
connected  with  the  bounty,  we  must  not  upon 
that  account  impute  it  to  those  laws.  It  has 
been  posterior  likewise  to  the  national  debt. 
But  the  national  debt  has  most  assuredly  not 
been  the  cause  of  it. 

Though  the  system  of  laws  which  is  con¬ 
nected  with  tie  bounty  has  exactly  the  same 


233 


Treaties  of  Commerce 


tendency  with  the  police  of  Spain  and  Portu¬ 
gal,  to  lower  somewhat  the  value  of  the  pre¬ 
cious  metals  in  the  country  where  it  takes 
place,  yet  Great  Britain  is  certainly  one  of 
the  richest  countries  in  Europe,  while  Spain 
and  Portugal  are  perhaps  among  the  most 
beggarly.  This  difference  of  situation,  however, 
may  easily  be  accounted  for  from  two  different 
causes.  First,  the  tax  of  Spain,  the  prohibition 
in  Portugal  of  exporting  gold  and  silver,  and 
the  vigilant  police  which  watches  over  the  ex¬ 
ecution  of  those  laws,  must,  in  two  very  poor 
countries,  which  between  them  import  annu¬ 
ally  upwards  of  six  millions  sterling,  operate 
not  only  more  directly  but  much  more  forci¬ 
bly  in  reducing  the  value  of  those  metals  there 
than  the  corn  laws  can  do  in  Great  Britain. 
And,  secondly,  this  bad  policy  is  not  in  those 
countries  counterbalanced  by  the  general 
liberty  and  security  of  the  people.  Industry  is 
there  neither  free  nor  secure,  and  the  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  governments  of  both  Spain  and 
Portugal  are  such  as  would  alone  be  sufficient 
to  perpetuate  their  present  state  of  poverty, 
even  though  their  regulations  of  commerce 
were  as  wise  as  the  greater  part  of  them  are 
absurd  and  foolish. 

The  13th  of  the  present  king,  c.  43,  seems  to 
have  established  a  new  system  with  regard  to 
the  corn  laws,  in  many  respects  better  than 
the  ancient  one,  but  in  one  or  two  respects 
perhaps  not  quite  so  good. 

By  this  statute  the  high  duties  upon  impor¬ 
tations  for  home  consumption  are  taken  off  so 
soon  as  the  price  of  middling  wheat  rises  to 
forty-eight  shillings  the  quarter;  that  of  mid¬ 
dling  rye,  pease  or  beans,  to  thirty-two  shil¬ 
lings;  that  of  barley  to  twenty-four  shillings; 
and  that  of  oats  to  sixteen  shillings;  and  in¬ 
stead  of  them  a  small  duty  is  imposed  of  only 
sixpence  upon  the  quarter  of  wheat,  and  upon 
that  of  other  grain  in  proportion.  With  regard 
to  all  these  different  sorts  of  grain,  but  par¬ 
ticularly  with  regard  to  wheat,  the  home  mar¬ 
ket  is  thus  opened  to  foreign  supplies  at 
prices  considerably  lower  than  before. 

By  the  same  statute  the  old  bounty  of  five 
shillings  upon  the  exportation  of  wheat  ceases 
so  soon  as  the  price  rises  to  forty-four  shil¬ 
lings  the  quarter,  instead  of  forty-eight,  the 
price  at  which  it  ceased  before;  that  of  two 
shillings  and  sixpence  upon  the  exportation  of 
barley  ceases  so  soon  as  the  price  rises  to 
twenty-two  shillings,  instead  of  twenty-four, 
the  price  at  which  it  ceased  before;  that  of 
two  shillings  and  sixpence  upon  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  oatmeal  ceases  so  soon  as  the  price  rises 
to  fourteen  shillings,  instead  of  fifteen,  the 
price  at  which  it  ceased  before.  The  bounty 
upon  rye  is  reduced  from  three  shillings  and 
sixpence  to  three  shillings,  and  it  ceases  so 
soon  as  the  price  rises  to  twenty-eight  shil¬ 


lings  instead  of  thirty-two,  the  price  at  which 
it  ceased  before.  If  bounties  are  as  improper 
as  I  have  endeavoured  to  prove  them  to  be, 
the  sooner  they  cease,  and  the  lower  they 
are,  so  much  the  better. 

The  same  statute  permits,  at  the  lowest 
prices,  the  importation  of  corn,  in  order  to  be 
exported  again  duty  free,  provided  it  is  in 
the  meantime  lodged  in  a  warehouse  under 
the  joint  locks  of  the  king  and  the  importer. 
This  liberty,  indeed,  extends  to  no  more  than 
twenty-five  of  the  different  ports  of  Great 
Britain.  They  are,  however,  the  principal  ones, 
and  there  may  not,  perhaps,  be  warehouses 
proper  for  this  purpose  in  the  greater  part 
of  the  others. 

So  far  this  law  seems  evidently  an  improve¬ 
ment  upon  the  ancient  system. 

But  by  the  same  law  a  bounty  of  two  shil¬ 
lings  the  quarter  is  given  for  the  exportation 
of  oats  whenever  the  price  does  not  exceed 
fourteen  shillings.  No  bounty  had  ever  been 
given  before  for  the  exportation  of  this  grain, 
no  more  than  for  that  of  pease  or  beans. 

By  the  same  law,  too,  the  exportation  of 
wheat  is  prohibited  so  soon  as  the  price  rises 
to  forty-four  shillings  the  quarter;  that  of  rye 
so  soon  as  it  rises  to  twenty-eight  shillings; 
that  of  barley  so  soon  as  it  rises  to  twenty-two 
shillings;  and  that  of  oats  so  soon  as  they  rise 
to  fourteen  shillings.  Those  several  prices 
seem  all  of  them  a  good  deal  too  low,  and 
there  seems  to  be  an  impropriety,  besides,  in 
prohibiting  exportation  altogether  at  those 
precise  prices  at  which  that  bounty,  which 
was  given  in  order  to  force  it,  is  withdrawn. 
The  bounty  ought  certainly  either  to  have 
been  withdrawn  at  a  much  lower  price,  or 
exportation  ought  to  have  been  allowed  at  a 
much  higher. 

So  far,  therefore,  this  law  seems  to  be  in¬ 
ferior  to  the  ancient  system.  With  all  its  im¬ 
perfections,  however,  we  may  perhaps  say  of 
it  what  was  said  of  the  laws  of  Solon,  that, 
though  not  the  best  in  itself,  it  is  the  best 
which  the  interests,  prejudices,  and  temper 
of  the  times  would  admit  of.  It  may  perhaps 
in  due  time  prepare  the  way  for  a  better. 

Chapter  VI 

Of  Treaties  of  Commerce 

When  a  nation  binds  itself  by  treaty  either 
to  permit  the  entry  of  certain  goods  from  one 
foreign  country  which  it  prohibits  from  all 
others,  or  to  exempt  the  goods  of  one  country 
from  duties  to  which  it  subjects  those  of  all 
others,  the  country,  or  at  least  the  merchants 
and  manufacturers  of  the  country,  whose 
commerce  is  so  favoured,  must  necessarily  de¬ 
rive  great  advantage  from  the  treaty.  Those 
merchants  and  manufacturers  enjoy  a  sort  of 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


234 

monopoly  in  the  country  which  is  so  indul¬ 
gent  to  them.  That  country  becomes  a  mar¬ 
ket  both  more  extensive  and  more  advanta¬ 
geous  for  their  goods:  more  extensive,  because 
the  goods  of  other  nations  being  either  ex¬ 
cluded  or  subjected  to  heavier  duties,  it  takes 
off  a  greater  quantity  of  theirs:  more  ad¬ 
vantageous,  because  the  merchants  of  the 
favoured  country,  enjoying  a  sort  of  monopoly 
there,  will  often  sell  their  goods  for  a  better 
price  than  if  exposed  to  the  free  competition 
of  all  other  nations. 

Such  treaties,  however,  though  they  may  be 
advantageous  to  the  merchants  and  manufac¬ 
turers  of  the  favoured,  are  necessarily  dis¬ 
advantageous  to  those  of  the  favouring  coun¬ 
try.  A  monopoly  is  thus  granted  against  them 
to  a  foreign  nation;  and  they  must  frequently 
buy  the  foreign  goods  they  have  occasion  for 
dearer  than  if  the  free  competition  of  other 
nations  was  admitted.  That  part  of  its  own 
produce  with  which  such  a  nation  purchases 
foreign  goods  must  consequently  be  sold 
cheaper,  because  when  two  things  are  ex¬ 
changed  for  one  another,  the  cheapness  of  the 
one  is  a  necessary  consequence,  or  rather  the 
same  thing  with  the  dearness  of  the  other.  The 
exchangeable  value  of  its  annual  produce, 
therefore,  is  likely  to  be  diminished  by  every 
such  treaty.  This  diminution,  however,  can 
scarce  amount  to  any  positive  loss,  but  only  to 
a  lessening  of  the  gain  which  it  might  other¬ 
wise  make.  Though  it  sells  its  goods  cheaper 
than  it  otherwise  might  do,  it  will  not  prob¬ 
ably  sell  them  for  less  than  they  cost;  nor,  as 
in  the  case  of  bounties,  for  a  price  which  will 
not  replace  the  capital  employed  in  bringing 
them  to  market,  together  with  the  ordinary 
profits  of  stock.  The  trade  could  not  go  on 
long  if  it  did.  Even  the  favouring  country, 
therefore,  may  still  gain  by  the  trade,  though 
less  than  if  there  was  a  free  competition. 

Some  treaties  of  commerce,  however,  have 
been  supposed  advantageous  upon  principles 
very  different  from  these;  and  a  commercial 
country  has  sometimes  granted  a  monopoly 
of  this  kind  against  itself  to  certain  goods  of 
a  foreign  nation,  because  it  expected  that  in 
the  whole  commerce  between  them,  it  would 
annually  sell  more  than  it  would  buy,  and  that 
a  balance  in  gold  and  silver  would  be  annu¬ 
ally  returned  to  it.  It  is  upon  this  principle 
that  the  treaty  of  commerce  between  England 
and  Portugal,  concluded  in  1703  by  Mr. 
Methuen,  has  been  so  much  commended.  The 
following  is  a  literal  translation  of  that  treaty, 
which  consists  of  three  articles  only. 

Art.  I. 

His  sacred  royal  majesty  of  Portugal1  prom¬ 
ises,  both  in  his  own  name,  and  that  of  his 

1  Pedro  IL— Ed. 


successors,  to  admit,  for  ever  hereafter,  into 
Portugal,  the  woollen  cloths,  and  the  rest  of 
the  woollen  manufactures  of  the  British,  as 
was  accustomed,  till  they  were  prohibited  by 
the  law;  nevertheless  upon  this  condition: 

Art.  II. 

That  is  to  say,  that  her  sacred  royal  maj¬ 
esty  of  Great  Britain2  shall,  in  her  own  name, 
and  that  of  her  successors,  be  obliged,  for  ever 
hereafter,  to  admit  the  wines  of  the  growth  of 
Portugal  into  Britain;  so  that  at  no  time, 
whether  there  shall  be  peace  or  war  between 
the  kingdoms  of  Britain  and  France,  anything 
more  shall  be  demanded  for  these  wines  by 
the  name  of  custom  or  duty,  or  by  whatso¬ 
ever  other  title,  directly  or  indirectly,  whether 
they  shall  be  imported  into  Great  Britain  in 
pipes  or  hogsheads,  or  other  casks,  than  what 
shall  be  demanded  for  the  like  quantity  or 
measure  of  French  wine,  deducting  or  abating 
a  third  part  of  the  custom  or  duty.  But  if  at 
any  time  this  deduction  or  abatement  of  cus¬ 
toms,  which  is  to  be  made  as  aforesaid,  shall 
in  any  manner  be  attempted  and  prejudiced, 
it  shall  be  just  and  lawful  for  his  sacred  royal 
majesty  of  Portugal,  again  to  prohibit  the 
woollen  cloths,  and  the  rest  of  the  British 
woollen  manufactures. 

Art.  III. 

The  most  excellent  lords  the  plenipotenti¬ 
aries  promise  and  take  upon  themselves,  that 
their  above-named  masters  shall  ratify  this 
treaty;  and  within  the  space  of  two  months 
the  ratifications  shall  be  exchanged. 

By  this  treaty  the  crown  of  Portugal  be¬ 
comes  bound  to  admit  the  English  woollens 
upon  the  same  footing  as  before  the  prohibi¬ 
tion;  that  is,  not  to  raise  the  duties  which  had 
been  paid  before  that  time.  But  it  does  not 
become  bound  to  admit  them  upon  any  better 
terms  than  those  of  any  other  nation,  of 
France  or  Holland  for  example.  The  crown  of 
Great  Britain,  on  the  contrary,  becomes  bound 
to  admit  the  wines  of  Portugal  upon  paying 
only  two-thirds  of  the  duty  which  is  paid  for 
those  of  France,  the  wines  most  likely  to 
come  into  competition  with  them.  So  far  this 
treaty,  therefore,  is  evidently  advantageous 
to  Portugal,  and  disadvantageous  to  Great 
Britain. 

It  has  been  celebrated,  however,  as  a  mas¬ 
terpiece  of  the  commercial  policy  of  England. 
Portugal  receives  annually  from  the  Brazils 
a  greater  quantity  of  gold  than  can  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  its  domestic  commerce,  whether 
in  the  shape  of  coin  or  of  plate.  The  surplus 
is  too  valuable  to  be  allowed  to  lie  idle  and 
locked  up  in  coffers,  and  as  it  can  find  no 
advantageous  market  at  home,  it  must,  not- 

2Queen  Anne. — Ed. 


235 


Treaties  of  Commerce 


withstanding  any  prohibition,  be  sent  abroad, 
and  exchanged  for  something  for  which  there 
is  a  more  advantageous  market  at  home.  A 
large  share  of  it  comes  annually  to  England, 
in  return  either  for  English  goods,  or  for 
those  of  other  European  nations  that  receive 
their  returns  through  England.  Mr.  Baretti 
was  informed  that  the  weekly  packet-boat 
from  Lisbon  brings,  one  week  with  another, 
more  than  fifty  thousand  pounds  in  gold  to 
England.  The  sum  had  probably  been  ex¬ 
aggerated.  It  would  amount  to  more  than 
two  millions  six  hundred  thousand  pounds  a 
year,  which  is  more  than  the  Brazils  are 
supposed  to  afford. 

Our  merchants  were  some  years  ago  out  of 
humour  with  the  crown  of  Portugal.  Some 
privileges  which  had  been  granted  them,  not 
by  treaty,  but  by  the  free  grace  of  that  crown, 
at  the  solicitation  indeed,  it  is  probable,  and 
in  return  for  much  greater  favours,  defence 
and  protection,  from  the  crown  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  had  been  either  infringed  or  revoked.  The 
people,  therefore,  usually  most  interested  in 
celebrating  the  Portugal  trade  were  then 
rather  disposed  to  represent  it  as  less  advan¬ 
tageous  than  it  had  commonly  been  imagined. 
The  far  greater  part,  almost  the  whole,  they 
pretended,  of  this  annual  importation  of  gold, 
was  not  on  account  of  Great  Britain,  but  of 
other  European  nations;  the  fruits  and  wines 
of  Portugal  annually  imported  into  Great 
Britain  nearly  compensating  the  value  of  the 
British  goods  sent  thither. 

Let  us  suppose,  however,  that  the  whole 
was  on  account  of  Great  Britain,  and  that  it 
amounted  to  a  still  greater  sum  than  Mr. 
Baretti  seems  to  imagine;  this  trade  would 
not,  upon  that  account,  be  more  advantageous 
than  any  other  in  which,  for  the  same  value 
sent  out,  we  received  an  equal  value  of  con¬ 
sumable  goods  in  return. 

It  is  but  a  very  small  part  of  this  importa¬ 
tion  which,  it  can  be  supposed,  is  employed 
as  an  annual  addition  either  to  the  plate  or  to 
the  coin  of  the  kingdom.  The  rest  must  all  be 
sent  abroad  and  exchanged  for  consumable 
goods  of  some  kind  or  other.  But  if  those  con¬ 
sumable  goods  were  purchased  directly  with 
the  produce  of  English  industry,  it  would  be 
more  for  the  advantage  of  England  than  first 
to  purchase  with  that  produce  the  gold  of 
Portugal,  and  afterwards  to  purchase  with 
that  gold  those  consumable  goods.  A  direct 
foreign  trade  of  consumption  is  always  more 
advantageous  than  a  round-about  one;  and  to 
bring  the  same  value  of  foreign  goods  to  the 
home  market,  requires  a  much  smaller  cap¬ 
ital  in  the  one  way  than  in  the  other.  If  a 
smaller  share  of  its  industry,  therefore,  had 
been  employed  in  producing  goods  fit  for  the 
Portugal  market,  and  a  greater  in  producing 


those  fit  for  the  other  markets,  where  those 
consumable  goods  for  which  there  is  a  demand 
in  Great  Britain  are  to  be  had,  it  would  have 
been  more  for  the  advantage  of  England.  To 
procure  both  the  gold,  which  it  wants  for  its 
own  use,  and  the  consumable  goods,  would, 
in  this  way,  employ  a  much  smaller  capital 
than  at  present.  There  would  be  a  spare 
capital,  therefore,  to  be  employed  for  other 
purposes,  in  exciting  an  additional  quantity 
of  industry,  and  in  raising  a  greater  annual 
produce. 

Though  Britain  were  entirely  excluded  from 
the  Portugal  trade,  it  could  find  very  little 
difficulty  in  procuring  all  the  annual  supplies 
of  gold  which  it  wants,  either  for  the  purposes 
of  plate,  or  of  coin,  or  of  foreign  trade.  Gold, 
like  every  other  commodity,  is  always  some¬ 
where  or  another  to  be  got  for  its  value 
by  those  who  have  that  value  to  give  for  it. 
The  annual  surplus  of  gold  in  Portugal,  be¬ 
sides,  would  still  be  sent  abroad,  and  though 
not  carried  away  by  Great  Britain,  would  be 
carried  away  by  some  other  nation,  which 
would  be  glad  to  sell  it  again  for  its  price,  in 
the  same  manner  as  Great  Britain  does  at 
present.  In  buying  gold  of  Portugal,  indeed, 
we  buy  it  at  the  first  hand;  whereas,  in  buy¬ 
ing  it  of  any  other  nation,  except  Spain,  we 
should  buy  it  at  the  second,  and  might  pay 
somewhat  dearer.  This  difference,  however, 
would  surely  be  too  insignificant  to  deserve 
the  public  attention. 

Almost  all  our  gold,  it  is  said,  comes  from 
Portugal.  With  other  nations  the  balance  of 
trade  is  either  against  us,  or  not  much  in  our 
favour.  But  we  should  remember  that  the 
more  gold  we  import  from  one  country,  the 
less  we  must  necessarily  import  from  all 
others.  The  effectual  demand  for  gold,  like 
that  for  every  other  commodity,  is  in  every 
country  limited  to  a  certain  quantity.  If  nine- 
tenths  of  this  quantity  are  imported  from  one 
country,  there  remains  a  tenth  only  to  be  im¬ 
ported  from  all  others.  The  more  gold  besides 
that  is  annually  imported  from  some  partic¬ 
ular  countries,  over  and  above  what  is  requi¬ 
site  for  plate  and  for  coin,  the  more  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  exported  to  some  others;  and  the 
more  that  most  insignificant  object  of  modern 
policy,  the  balance  of  trade,  appears  to  be  in 
our  favour  with  some  particular  countries, 
the  more  it  must  necessarily  appear  to  be 
against  us  with  many  others. 

It  was  upon  this  silly  notion,  however,  that 
England  could  not  subsist  without  the  Portu¬ 
gal  trade,  that,  towards  the  end  of  the  late 
war,  France  and  Spain,  without  pretending 
either  offence  or  provocation,  required  the 
King  of  Portugal  to  exclude  all  British  ships 
from  his  ports,  and  for  the  security  of  this 
exclusion,  to  receive  into  them  French  or 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


23  6 

Spanish  garrisons.  Had  the  king  of  Portugal 
submitted  to  those  ignominious  terms  which 
his  brother-in-law  the  king  of  Spain  proposed 
to  him,  Britain  would  have  been  freed  from  a 
much  greater  inconveniency  than  the  loss  of 
the  Portugal  trade,  the  burden  of  supporting 
a  very  weak  ally,  so  unprovided  of  every¬ 
thing  for  his  own  defence  that  the  whole 
power  of  England,  had  it  been  directed  to 
that  single  purpose,  could  scarce  perhaps  have 
defended  him  for  another  campaign.  The  loss 
of  the  Portugal  trade  would,  no  doubt,  have 
occasioned  a  considerable  embarrassment  to 
the  merchants  at  that  time  engaged  in  it,  who 
might  not,  perhaps,  have  found  out,  for  a 
year  or  two,  any  other  equally  advantageous 
method  of  employing  their  capitals;  and  in 
this  would  probably  have  consisted  all  the  in¬ 
conveniency  which  England  could  have  suf¬ 
fered  from  this  notable  piece  of  commercial 
policy. 

The  great  annual  importation  of  gold  and 
silver  is  neither  for  the  purpose  of  plate  nor  of 
coin,  but  of  foreign  trade.  A  round-about 
foreign  trade  of  consumption  can  be  carried  on 
more  advantageously  by  means  of  these 
metals  than  of  almost  any  other  goods.  As 
they  are  the  universal  instruments  of  com¬ 
merce,  they  are  more  readily  received  in  re¬ 
turn  for  all  commodities  than  any  other  goods; 
and  on  account  of  their  small  bulk  and  great 
value,  it  costs  less  to  transport  them  backward 
and  forward  from  one  place  to  another  than 
almost  any  other  sort  of  merchandise,  and 
they  lose  less  of  their  value  by  being  so 
transported.  Of  all  the  commodities,  therefore, 
which  are  bought  in  one  foreign  country,  for 
no  other  purpose  but  to  be  sold  or  exchanged 
again  for  some  other  goods  in  another,  there 
are  none  so  convenient  as  gold  and  silver.  In 
facilitating  all  the  different  round-about  for¬ 
eign  trades  of  consumption  which  are  carried 
on  in  Great  Britain  consists  the  principal  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  Portugal  trade;  and  though  it 
is  not  a  capital  advantage,  it  is  no  doubt  a 
considerable  one. 

That  any  annual  addition  which,  it  can 
reasonably  be  supposed,  is  made  either  to  the 
plate  or  to  the  coin  of  the  kingdom,  could  re¬ 
quire  but  a  very  small  annual  importation  of 
gold  and  silver,  seems  evident  enough;  and 
though  we  had  no  direct  trade  with  Portugal, 
this  small  quantity  could  always,  somewhere 
or  another,  be  very  easily  got. 

Though  the  goldsmith’s  trade  be  very  con¬ 
siderable  in  Great  Britain,  the  far  greater 
part  of  the  new  plate  which  they  annually 
sell  is  made  from  other  old  plate  melted  down; 
so  that  the  addition  annually  made  to  the 
whole  plate  of  the  kingdom  cannot  be  very 
great,  and  could  require  but  a  very  small 
annual  importation. 


It  is  the  same  case  with  the  coin.  Nobody 
imagines,  I  believe,  that  even  the  greater  part 
of  the  annual  coinage,  amounting,  for  ten 
years  together,  before  the  late  reformation 
of  the  gold  coin,  to  upwards  of  eight  hundred 
thousand  pounds  a  year  in  gold,  was  an  annual 
addition  to  the  money  before  current  in  the 
kingdom.  In  a  country  where  the  expense  of 
the  coinage  is  defrayed  by  the  government, 
the  value  of  the  coin,  even  when  it  contains 
its  full  standard  weight  of  gold  and  silver, 
can  never  be  much  greater  than  that  of  an 
equal  quantity  of  those  metals  uncoined;  be¬ 
cause  it  requires  only  the  trouble  of  going  to 
the  mint,  and  the  delay  perhaps  of  a  few 
weeks,  to  procure  for  any  quantity  of  un¬ 
coined  gold  and  silver  an  equal  quantity  of 
those  metals  in  coin.  But,  in  every  country, 
the  greater  part  of  the  current  coin  is  almost 
always  more  or  less  worn,  or  otherwise  de¬ 
generated  from  its  standard.  In  Great  Britain 
it  was,  before  the  late  reformation,  a  good 
deal  so,  the  gold  being  more  than  two  per 
cent  and  the  silver  more  than  eight  per  cent 
below  its  standard  weight.  But  if  forty-four 
guineas  and  a  half,  containing  their  full  stand¬ 
ard  weight,  a  pound  weight  of  gold,  could  pur¬ 
chase  very  little  more  than  a  pound  weight 
could  of  uncoined  gold,  forty-four  guineas  and 
a  half  wanting  a  part  of  their  weight  could  not 
purchase  a  pound  weight,  and  something  was 
to  be  added  in  order  to  make  up  the  defi¬ 
ciency.  The  current  price  of  gold  bullion  at 
market,  therefore,  instead  of  being  the  same 
with  the  mint  price,  or  £46  14s.  6d.,  was  then 
about  £47  14s.  and  sometimes  about  £48. 
When  the  greater  part  of  the  coin,  however, 
was  in  this  degenerate  condition,  forty-four 
guineas  and  a  half,  fresh  from  the  mint, 
would  purchase  no  more  goods  in  the  market 
than  any  other  ordinary  guineas,  because 
when  they  came  into  the  coffers  of  the  mer¬ 
chant,  being  confounded  with  other  money, 
they  could  not  afterwards  be  distinguished 
without  more  trouble  than  the  difference  was 
worth.  Like  other  guineas  they  were  worth 
no  more  than  £46  14s.  6d.  If  thrown  into  the 
melting  pot,  however,  they  produced,  without 
any  sensible  loss,  a  pound  weight  of  standard 
gold,  which  could  be  sold  at  any  time  for 
between  £47  14s.  and  £48  either  of  gold  or 
silver,  as  fit  for  all  the  purposes  of  coin  as  that 
which  had  been  melted  down.  There  was  an 
evident  profit,  therefore,  in  melting  down  new 
coined  money,  and  it  was  done  so  instanta¬ 
neously,  that  no  precaution  of  government 
could  prevent  it.  The  operations  of  the  mint 
were,  upon  this  account,  somewhat  like  the 
web  of  Penelope;  the  work  that  was  done  in 
the  day  was  undone  in  the  night.  The  mint 
was  employed,  not  so  much  in  making  daily 
additions  to  the  coin,  as  in  replacing  the 


237 


Treaties  of  Commerce 


very  best  part  of  it  which  was  daily  melted 
down. 

Were  the  private  people,  who  carry  their 
gold  and  silver  to  the  mint,  to  pay  themselves 
for  the  coinage,  it  would  add  to  the  value  of 
those  metals  in  the  same  manner  as  the  fash¬ 
ion  does  to  that  of  plate.  Coined  gold  and 
silver  would  be  more  valuable  than  uncoined. 
The  seignorage,  if  it  was  not  exorbitant,  would 
add  to  the  bullion  the  whole  value  of  the 
duty;  because,  the  government  having  every¬ 
where  the  exclusive  privilege  of  coining,  no 
coin  can  come  to  market  cheaper  than  they 
think  proper  to  afford  it.  If  the  duty  was  ex¬ 
orbitant  indeed,  that  is,  if  it  was  very  much 
above  the  real  value  of  the  labour  and  expense 
requisite  for  coinage,  false  coiners,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  might  be  encouraged,  by 
the  great  difference  between  the  value  of 
bullion  and  that  of  coin,  to  pour  in  so  great 
a  quantity  of  counterfeit  money  as  might  re¬ 
duce  the  value  of  the  government  money.  In 
France,  however,  though  the  seignorage  is 
eight  per  cent,  no  sensible  inconveniency  of 
this  kind  is  found  to  arise  from  it.  The  dangers 
to  which  a  false  coiner  is  everywhere  exposed, 
if  he  lives  in  the  country  of  which  he  counter¬ 
feits  the  coin,  and  to  which  his  agents  or  cor¬ 
respondents  are  exposed  if  he  lives  in  a  for¬ 
eign  country,  are  by  far  too  great  to  be  in¬ 
curred  for  the  sake  of  a  profit  of  six  or  seven 
per  cent. 

The  seignorage  in  France  raises  the  value  of 
the  coin  higher  than  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  pure  gold  which  it  contains.  Thus 
by  the  edict  of  January  1726,  the1  mint  price 
of  fine  gold  of  twenty-four  carats  was  fixed  at 
seven  hundred  and  forty  livres  nine  sous  and 
one  denier  one-eleventh,  the  mark  of  eight 
Paris  ounces.  The  gold  coin  of  France,  making 
an  allowance  for  the  remedy  of  the  mint,  con¬ 
tains  twenty-one  carats  and  three-fourths  of 
fine  gold,  and  two  carats  one  fourth  of  alloy. 
The  mark  of  standard  gold,  therefore,  is  worth 
no  more  than  about  six  hundred  and  seventy- 
one  livres  ten  deniers.  But  in  France  this  mark 
of  standard  gold  is  coined  into  thirty  Louis- 
d’ors  of  twenty-four  livres  each,  or  into  seven 
hundred  and  twenty  livres.  The  coinage,  there¬ 
fore,  increases  the  value  of  a  mark  of  standard 
gold  bullion,  by  the  difference  between  six 
hundred  and  seventy-one  livres  ten  deniers, 
and  seven  hundred  and  twenty  livres;  or  by 
forty-eight  livres  nineteen  sous  and  two 
deniers. 

A  seignorage  will,  in  many  cases,  take  away 
altogether,  and  will,  in  all  cases,  diminish  the 
profit  of  melting  down  the  new  coin.  This 

1  See  Dictionnaire  des  Monnoies,  vol.  ii.  article 
seigneurage ,  p.  489,  par  M.  Abot  de  Bazinghen, 
Conseiller-Comissaire  en  la  Cour  des  Monnoies  k 
Paris. 


profit  always  arises  from  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  quantity  of  bullion  which  the  com¬ 
mon  currency  ought  to  contain,  and  that 
which  it  actually  does  contain.  If  this  differ¬ 
ence  is  less  than  the  seignorage,  there  will  be 
loss  instead  of  profit.  If  it  is  equal  to  the 
seignorage,  there  will  neither  be  profit  nor 
loss.  If  it  is  greater  than  the  seignorage,  there 
will  indeed  be  some  profit,  but  less  than  if 
there  was  no  seignorage.  If,  before  the  late 
reformation  of  the  gold  coin,  for  example, 
there  had  been  a  seignorage  of  five  per 
cent  upon  the  coinage,  there  would  have 
been  a  loss  of  three  per  cent  upon  the 
melting  down  of  the  gold  coin.  If  the  seign¬ 
orage  had  been  two  per  cent  there  would 
have  been  neither  profit  nor  loss.  If  the  seign¬ 
orage  had  been  one  per  cent  there  would  have 
been  a  profit,  but  of  one  per  cent  only  instead 
of  two  per  cent.  Wherever  money  is  received 
by  tale,  therefore,  and  not  by  weight,  a  seign¬ 
orage  is  the  most  effectual  preventative  of  the 
melting  down  of  the  coin,  and,  for  the  same 
reason,  of  its  exportation.  It  is  the  best  and 
heaviest  pieces  that  are  commonly  either 
melted  down  or  exported;  because  it  is  upon 
such  that  the  largest  profits  are  made. 

The  law  for  encouragement  of  the  coinage, 
by  rendering  it  duty-free,  was  first  enacted 
during  the  reign  of  Charles  II  for  a  limited 
time;  and  afterwards  continued,  by  different 
prolongations,  till  1769,  when  it  was  rendered 
perpetual.  The  Bank  of  England,  in  order  to 
replenish  their  coffers  with  money,  are  fre¬ 
quently  obliged  to  carry  bullion  to  the  mint; 
and  it  was  more  for  their  interest,  they  prob¬ 
ably  imagined,  that  the  coinage  should  be  at 
the  expense  of  the  government  than  at  their 
own.  It  was  probably  out  of  complaisance  to 
this  great  company  that  the  government 
agreed  to  render  this  law  perpetual.  Should 
the  custom  of  weighing  gold,  however,  come 
to  be  disused,  as  it  is  very  likely  to  be  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  inconveniency;  should  the  gold 
coin  of  England  come  to  be  received  by  tale, 
as  it  was  before  the  late  recoinage,  this  great 
company  may,  perhaps,  find  that  they  have 
upon  this,  as  upon  some  other  occasions,  mis¬ 
taken  their  owrn  interest  not  a  little. 

Before  the  late  recoinage,  when  the  gold 
currency  of  England  was  two  per  cent  below 
its  standard  weight,  as  there  was  no  seignor¬ 
age,  it  was  two  per  cent  below  the  value  of 
that  quantity  of  standard  gold  bullion  which 
it  ought  to  have  contained.  When  this  great 
company,  therefore,  bought  gold  bullion  in 
order  to  have  it  coined,  they  were  obliged  to 
pay  for  it  two  per  cent  more  than  it  was 
worth  after  coinage.  But  if  there  had  been  a 
seignorage  of  two  per  cent  upon  the  coinage, 
the  common  gold  currency,  though  two  per 
cent  below  its  standard  weight,  would  not- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


238 

withstanding  have  been  equal  in  value  to  the 
quantity  of  standard  gold  which  it  ought  to 
have  contained;  the  value  of  the  fashion  com¬ 
pensating  in  this  case  the  diminution  of  the 
weight.  They  would  indeed  have  had  the 
seignorage  to  pay,  which  being  two  per  cent, 
their  loss  upon  the  whole  transaction  would 
have  been  two  per  cent  exactly  the  same,  but 
no  greater  than  it  actually  was. 

If  the  seignorage  had  been  five  per  cent, 
and  the  gold  currency  only  two  per  cent  be¬ 
low  its  standard  weight,  the  bank  would  in 
this  case  have  gained  three  per  cent  upon  the 
price  of  the  bullion;  but  as  they  would  have 
had  a  seignorage  of  five  per  cent  to  pay  upon 
the  coinage,  their  loss  upon  the  whole  trans¬ 
action  would,  in  the  same  manner,  have  been 
exactly  two  per  cent. 

If  the  seignorage  had  been  only  one  per 
cent  and  the  gold  currency  two  per  cent  below 
its  standard  weight,  the  bank  would  in  this 
case  have  lost  only  one  per  cent  upon  the 
price  of  the  bullion;  but  as  they  would  like¬ 
wise  have  had  a  seignorage  of  one  per  cent  to 
pay,  their  loss  upon  the  whole  transaction 
would  have  been  exactly  two  per  cent  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  all  other  cases. 

If  there  was  a  reasonable  seignorage,  while 
at  the  same  time  the  coin  contained  its  full 
standard  weight,  as  it  has  done  very  nearly 
since  the  last  recoinage,  whatever  the  bank 
might  lose  by  the  seignorage,  they  would 
gain  upon  the  price  of  the  bullion;  and  what¬ 
ever  they  might  gain  upon  the  price  of  the 
bullion,  they  would  lose  by  the  seignorage. 
They  would  neither  lose  nor  gain,  therefore, 
upon  the  whole  transaction,  and  they  would 
in  this,  as  in  all  the  foregoing  cases,  be  ex¬ 
actly  in  the  same  situation  as  if  there  was 
no  seignorage. 

When  the  tax  upon  a  commodity  is  so 
moderate  as  not  to  encourage  smuggling,  the 
merchant  who  deals  in  it,  though  he  advances, 
does  not  properly  pay  the  tax,  as  he  gets  it 
back  in  the  price  of  the  commodity.  The  tax  is 
finally  paid  by  the  last  purchaser  or  consumer. 
But  money  is  a  commodity  with  regard  to 
which  every  man  is  a  merchant.  Nobody  buys 
it  but  in  order  to  sell  it  again;  and  with  re¬ 
gard  to  it  there  is  in  ordinary  cases  no  last 
purchaser  or  consumer.  When  the  tax  upon 
coinage,  therefore,  is  so  moderate  as  not  to 
encourage  false  coining,  though  everybody 
advances  the  tax,  nobody  finally  pays  it;  be¬ 
cause  everybody  gets  it  back  in  the  advanced 
value  of  the  coin. 

A  moderate  seignorage,  therefore,  would 
not  in  any  case  augment  the  expense  of  the 
bank,  or  of  any  other  private  persons  who 
carry  their  bullion  to  the  mint  in  order  to  be 
coined,  and  the  want  of  a  moderate  seignorage 
does  not  in  any  case  diminish  it.  Whether 


there  is  or  is  not  a  seignorage,  if  the  currency 
contains  its  full  standard  weight,  the  coinage 
costs  nothing  to  anybody,  and  if  it  is  short 
of  that  weight,  the  coinage  must  always  cost 
the  difference  between  the  quantity  of  bul¬ 
lion  which  ought  to  be  contained  in  it,  and 
that  which  actually  is  contained  in  it. 

The  government,  therefore,  when  it  de¬ 
frays  the  expense  of  coinage,  not  only  incurs 
some  small  expense,  but  loses  some  small 
revenue  which  it  might  get  by  a  proper  duty; 
and  neither  the  bank  nor  any  other  private 
persons  are  in  the  smallest  degree  benefited 
by  this  useless  piece  of  public  generosity. 

The  directors  of  the  bank,  however,  would 
probably  be  unwilling  to  agree  to  the  imposi¬ 
tion  of  a  seignorage  upon  the  authority  of  a 
speculation  which  promises  them  no  gain,  but 
only  pretends  to  insure  them  from  any  loss. 
In  the  present  state  of  the  gold  coin,  and  as 
long  as  it  continues  to  be  received  by  weight, 
they  certainly  would  gain  nothing  by  such  a 
change.  But  if  the  custom  of  weighing  the 
gold  coin  should  ever  go  into  misuse,  as  it  is 
very  likely  to  do,  and  if  the  gold  coin  should 
ever  fall  into  the  same  state  of  degradation 
in  which  it  was  before  the  late  recoinage,  the 
gain,  or  more  properly  the  savings  of  the 
bank,  in  consequence  of  the  imposition  of  a 
seignorage,  would  probably  be  very  consider¬ 
able.  The  Bank  of  England  is  the  only  com¬ 
pany  which  sends  any  considerable  quantity 
of  bullion  to  the  mint,  and  the  burden  of  the 
annual  coinage  falls  entirely,  or  almost  en¬ 
tirely,  upon  it.  If  this  annual  coinage  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  repair  the  unavoidable 
losses  and  necessary  wear  and  tear  of  the 
coin,  it  could  seldom  exceed  fifty  thousand  or 
at  most  a  hundred  thousand  pounds.  But 
when  the  coin  is  degraded  below  its  standard 
weight,  the  annual  coinage  must,  besides  this, 
fill  up  the  large  vacuities  which  exportation 
and  the  melting  pot  are  continually  making 
in  the  current  coin.  It  was  upon  this  account 
that  during  the  ten  or  twelve  years  immedi¬ 
ately  preceding  the  late  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin,  the  annual  coinage  amounted  at  an 
average  to  more  than  eight  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  pounds.  But  if  there  had  been  a 
seignorage  of  four  or  five  per  cent  upon  the 
gold  coin,  it  would  probably,  even  in  the  state 
in  which  things  then  were,  have  put  an  effec¬ 
tual  stop  to  the  business  both  of  exportation 
and  of  the  melting  pot.  The  bank,  instead  of 
losing  every  year  about  two  and  a  half  per 
cent  upon  the  bullion  which  was  to  be  coined 
into  more  than  eight  hundred  and  fifty  thou¬ 
sand  pounds,  or  incurring  an  annual  loss  of 
more  than  twenty-one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  fifty  pounds,  would  not  probably  have  in¬ 
curred  the  tenth  part  of  that  loss. 

The  revenue  allotted  by  Parliament  for  de- 


Colonies 


239 


fraying  the  expense  of  the  coinage  is  but 
fourteen  thousand  pounds  a  year,  and  the 
real  expense  which  it  costs  the  government, 
or  the  fees  of  the  officers  of  the  mint,  do  not 
upon  ordinary  occasions,  I  am  assured,  ex¬ 
ceed  the  half  of  that  sum.  The  saving  of  so 
very  small  a  sum,  or  even  the  gaining  of  an¬ 
other  which  could  not  well  be  much  larger, 
are  objects  too  inconsiderable,  it  may  be 
thought,  to  deserve  the  serious  attention  of 
government.  But  the  saving  of  eighteen  or 
twenty  thousand  pounds  a  year  in  case  of 
an  event  which  is  not  improbable,  which  has 
frequently  happened  before,  and  which  is  very 
likely  to  happen  again,  is  surely  an  object 
which  well  deserves  the  serious  attention  even 
of  so  great  a  company  as  the  Bank  of  England. 


Some  of  the  foregoing  reasonings  and  ob¬ 
servations  might  perhaps  have  been  more 
properly  placed  in  those  chapters  of  the  first 
book  which  treat  of  the  origin  and  use  of 
money,  and  of  the  difference  between  the  real 
and  the  nominal  price  of  commodities.  But 
as  the  law  for  the  encouragement  of  coinage 
derives  its  origin  from  those  vulgar  prejudices 
which  have  been  introduced  by  the  mercan¬ 
tile  system,  I  judged  it  more  proper  to  re¬ 
serve  them  for  this  chapter.  Nothing  could 
be  more  agreeable  to  the  spirit  of  that  system 
than  a  sort  of  bounty  upon  the  production  of 
money,  the  very  thing  which,  it  supposes, 
constitutes  the  wealth  of  every  nation.  It  is 
one  of  its  many  admirable  expedients  for  en¬ 
riching  the  country. 


CHAPTER  VII 
Of  Colonies 

Part  1 

Of  the  Motives  for  establishing  new  Colonies 


The  interest  which  occasioned  the  first  set¬ 
tlement  of  the  different  European  colonies  in 
America  and  the  West  Indies  was  not  al¬ 
together  so  plain  and  distinct  as  that  which 
directed  the  establishment  of  those  of  ancient 
Greece  and  Rome. 

All  the  different  states  of  ancient  Greece 
possessed,  each  of  them,  but  a  very  small  ter¬ 
ritory,  and  when  the  people  in  any  one  of 
them  multiplied  beyond  what  that  territory 
could  easily  maintain,  a  part  of  them  were 
sent  in  quest  of  a  new  habitation  in  some  re¬ 
mote  and  distant  part  of  the  world;  the  war¬ 
like  neighbours  who  surrounded  them  on  all 
sides,  rendering  it  difficult  for  any  of  them 
to  enlarge  very  much  its  territory  at  home. 
The  colonies  of  the  Dorians  resorted  chiefly 
to  Italy  and  Sicily,  which,  in  the  times  pre¬ 
ceding  the  foundation  of  Rome,  were  inhab¬ 
ited  by  barbarous  and  uncivilised  nations: 
those  of  the  Ionians  and  iEolians,  the  two 
other  great  tribes  of  the  Greeks,  to  Asia 
Minor  and  the  islands  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  of 
which  the  inhabitants  seem  at  that  time  to 
have  been  pretty  much  in  the  same  state  as 
those  of  Sicily  and  Italy.  The  mother  city, 
though  she  considered  the  colony  as  a  child, 
at  all  times  entitled  to  great  favour  and  as¬ 
sistance,  and  owing  in  return  much  gratitude 
and  respect,  yet  considered  it  as  an  emanci¬ 
pated  child  over  whom  she  pretended  to  claim 
no  direct  authority  or  jurisdiction.  The  colony 
settled  its  own  form  of  government,  enacted 
its  own  laws,  elected  its  own  magistrates,  and 
made  peace  or  war  with  its  neighbours  as  an 
independent  state,  which  had  no  occasion  to 
wait  for  the  approbation  or  consent  of  the 
mother  city.  Nothing  can  be  more  plain  and 


distinct  than  the  interest  which  directed  every 
such  establishment. 

Rome,  like  most  of  the  other  ancient  re¬ 
publics,  was  originally  founded  upon  an  Agrar¬ 
ian  law  which  divided  the  public  territory  in 
a  certain  proportion  among  the  different  citi¬ 
zens  who  composed  the  state.  The  course  of 
human  affairs  by  marriage,  by  succession,  and 
by  alienation,  necessarily  deranged  this  orig¬ 
inal  division,  and  frequently  threw  the  lands, 
which  had  been  allotted  for  the  maintenance 
of  many  different  families,  into  the  possession 
of  a  single  person.  To  remedy  this  disorder, 
for  such  it  was  supposed  to  be,  a  law  was 
made  restricting  the  quantity  of  land  which 
any  citizen  could  possess  to  five  hundred 
jugera,  about  three  hundred  and  fifty  English 
acres.  This  law,  however,  though  we  read  of 
its  having  been  executed  upon  one  or  two  oc¬ 
casions,  was  either  neglected  or  evaded,  and 
the  inequality  of  fortunes  went  on  continu¬ 
ally  increasing.  The  greater  part  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  had  no  land,  and  without  it  the  manners 
and  customs  of  those  times  rendered  it  diffi¬ 
cult  for  a  freeman  to  maintain  his  independ¬ 
ency.  In  the  present  time,  though  a  poor  man 
has  no  land  of  his  own,  if  he  has  a  little  stock 
he  may  either  farm  the  lands  of  another,  or 
he  may  carry  on  some  little  retail  trade;  and 
if  he  has  no  stock,  he  may  find  employment 
either  as  a  country  labourer  or  as  an  artificer. 
But  among  the  ancient  Romans  the  lands  of 
the  rich  were  all  cultivated  by  slaves,  who 
wrought  under  an  overseer  who  was  likewise 
a  slave;  so  that  a  poor  freeman  had  little 
chance  of  being  employed  either  as  a  farmer 
or  as  a  labourer.  All  trades  and  manufactures 
too,  even  the  retail  trade,  were  carried  on  by 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


240 

the  slaves  of  the  rich  for  the  benefit  of  their 
masters,  whose  wealth,  authority,  and  protec¬ 
tion  made  it  difficult  for  a  poor  freeman  to 
maintain  the  competition  against  them.  The 
citizens,  therefore,  who  had  no  land,  had 
scarce  any  other  means  of  subsistence  but  the 
bounties  of  the  candidates  at  the  annual  elec¬ 
tions.  The  tribunes,  when  they  had  a  mind  to 
animate  the  people  against  the  rich  and  the 
great,  put  them  in  mind  of  the  ancient  division 
of  lands,  and  represented  that  law  which  re¬ 
stricted  this  sort  of  private  property  as  the 
fundamental  law  of  the  republic.  The  people 
became  clamorous  to  get  land,  and  the  rich 
and  the  great,  we  may  believe,  were  perfectly 
determined  not  to  give  them  any  part  of 
theirs.  To  satisfy  them  in  some  measure  there¬ 
fore,  they  frequently  proposed  to  send  out  a 
new  colony.  But  conquering  Rome  was,  even 
upon  such  occasions,  under  no  necessity  of 
turning  out  her  citizens  to  seek  their  fortune, 
if  one  may  say  so,  through  the  wide  world, 
without  knowing  where  they  were  to  settle. 
She  assigned  them  lands  generally  in  the  con¬ 
quered  provinces  of  Italy,  where,  being  within 
the  dominions  of  the  republic,  they  could  never 
form  an  independent  state;  but  were  at  best 
but  a  sort  of  corporation,  which,  though  it  had 
the  power  of  enacting  bye-laws  for  its  own 
government,  was  at  all  times  subject  to  the 
correction,  jurisdiction,  and  legislative  author¬ 
ity  of  the  mother  city.  The  sending  out  a 
colony  of  this  kind  not  only  gave  some  satis¬ 
faction  to  the  people,  but  often  established  a 
sort  of  garrison,  too,  in  a  newly  conquered 
province,  of  which  the  obedience  might  other¬ 
wise  have  been  doubtful.  A  Roman  colony 
therefore,  whether  we  consider  the  nature  of 
the  establishment  itself  or  the  motives  for 
making  it,  was  altogether  different  from  a 
Greek  one.  The  words  accordingly,  which  in 
the  original  languages  denote  those  different 
establismments,  have  very  different  meanings. 
The  Latin  word  (Colonia)  signifies  simply  a 
plantation.  The  Greek  word  airouda,  on  the 
contrary,  signifies  a  separation  of  dwelling,  a 
departure  from  home,  a  going  out  of  the 
house.  But,  though  the  Roman  colonies  were 
in  many  respects  different  from  the  Greek 
ones,  the  interest  which  prompted  to  estab¬ 
lish  them  was  equally  plain  and  distinct.  Both 
institutions  dervied  their  origin  either  from 
irresistible  necessity,  or  from  clear  and  evi¬ 
dent  utility. 

The  establishment  of  the  European  colonies 
in  America  and  the  West  Indies  arose  from 
no  necessity:  and  though  the  utility  which 
has  resulted  from  them  has  been  very  great,  it 
is  not  altogether  so  clear  and  evident.  It  was 
not  understood  at  their  first  establishment, 
and  was  not  the  motive  either  of  that  estab¬ 
lishment  or  of  the  discoveries  which  gave 


occasion  to  it,  and  the  nature,  extent,  and 
limits  of  that  utility  are  not,  perhaps,  well 
understood  at  this  day. 

The  Venetians,  during  the  fourteenth  and 
fifteenth  centuries,  carried  on  a  very  advan¬ 
tageous  commerce  in  spiceries,  and  other  East 
India  goods,  which  they  distributed  among 
the  other  nations  of  Europe.  They  purchased 
them  chiefly  in  Egypt,  at  that  time  under  the 
dominion  of  the  Mamelukes,  the  enemies  of 
the  Turks,  of  whom  the  Venetians  were  the 
enemies;  and  this  union  of  interest,  assisted 
by  the  money  of  Venice,  formed  such  a  con¬ 
nection  as  gave  the  Venetians  almost  a  mon¬ 
opoly  of  the  trade. 

The  great  profits  of  the  Venetians  tempted 
the  avidity  of  the  Portuguese.  They  had  been 
endeavouring,  during  the  course  of  the  fif¬ 
teenth  century,  to  find  out  by  sea  a  way  to 
the  countries  from  which  the  Moors  brought 
them  ivory  and  gold  dust  across  the  desert. 
They  discovered  the  Madeiras,  the  Canaries, 
the  Azores,  the  Cape  de  Verde  Islands,  the 
coast  of  Guinea,  that  of  Loango,  Congo,  An¬ 
gola,  and  Benguela,  and,  finally,  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope.  They  had  long  wished  to  share  in 
the  profitable  traffic  of  the  Venetians,  and  this 
last  discovery  opened  to  them  a  probable 
prospect  of  doing  so.  In  1497,  Vasco  de  Gama 
sailed  from  the  port  of  Lisbon  with  a  fleet  of 
four  ships,  and  after  a  navigation  of  eleven 
months  arrived  upon  the  coast  of  Indostan, 
and  thus  completed  a  course  of  discoveries 
which  had  been  pursued  with  great  steadiness, 
and  with  very  little  interruption,  for  nearly  a 
century  together. 

Some  years  before  this,  while  the  expecta 
tions  of  Europe  were  in  suspense  about  the 
projects  of  the  Portuguese,  of  which  the  suc¬ 
cess  appeared  yet  to  be  doubtful,  a  Genoese 
pilot  formed  the  yet  more  daring  project  of 
sailing  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  West.  The 
situation  of  those  countries  was  at  that  time 
very  imperfectly  known  in  Europe.  The  few 
European  travellers  who  had  been  there  had 
magnified  the  distance,  perhaps  through  sim¬ 
plicity  and  ignorance,  what  was  really  very 
great  appearing  almost  infinite  to  those  who 
could  not  measure  it;  or,  perhaps,  in  order  to 
increase  somewhat  more  the  marvellous  of 
their  own  adventures  in  visiting  regions  so 
immensely  remote  from  Europe.  The  longer 
the  way  was  by  the  East,  Columbus  very 
justly  concluded,  the  shorter  it  would  be  by 
the  West.  He  proposed,  therefore,  to  take 
that  way,  as  both  the  shortest  and  the  surest, 
and  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  convince 
Isabella  of  Castile  of  the  probability  of  his 
project.  He  sailed  from  the  port  of  Palos  in 
August  1492,  nearly  five  years  before  the  ex¬ 
pedition  of  Vasco  de  Gama  set  out  from  Por¬ 
tugal,  and,  after  a  voyage  of  between  two 


Colonies 


241 


and  three  months,  discovered  first  some  of  the 
small  Bahamas  or  Lucayan  islands,  and  after¬ 
wards  the  great  island  of  St.  Domingo. 

But  the  countries  which  Columbus  discov¬ 
ered,  either  in  this  or  in  any  of  his  subsequent 
voyages,  had  no  resemblance  to  those  which 
he  had  gone  in  quest  of.  Instead  of  the  wealth, 
cultivation,  and  populousness  of  China  and 
Indostan,  he  found,  in  St.  Domingo,  and  in 
all  the  other  parts  of  the  new  world  which  he 
ever  visited,  nothing  but  a  country  quite  cov¬ 
ered  with  wood,  uncultivated,  and  inhabited 
only  by  some  tribes  of  naked  and  miserable 
savages.  He  was  not  very  willing,  however,  to 
believe  that  they  were  not  the  same  with 
some  of  the  countries  described  by  Marco 
Polo,  the  first  European  who  had  visited,  or 
at  least  had  left  behind  him,  any  description 
of  China  or  the  East  Indies;  and  a  very  slight 
resemblance,  such  as  that  which  he  found 
between  the  name  of  Cibao,  a  mountain  in 
St.  Domingo,  and  that  of  Cipango  mentioned 
by  Marco  Polo,  was  frequently  sufficient  to 
make  him  return  to  this  favourite  preposses¬ 
sion,  though  contrary  to  the  clearest  evidence. 
In  his  letters  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  he 
called  the  countries  which  he  had  discovered 
the  Indies.  He  entertained  no  doubt  but  that 
they  were  the  extremity  of  those  which  had 
been  described  by  Marco  Polo,  and  that  they 
were  not  very  distant  from  the  Ganges,  or 
from  the  countries  which  had  been  conquered 
by  Alexander.  Even  when  at  last  convinced 
that  they  were  different,  he  still  flattered  him¬ 
self  that  those  rich  countries  were  at  no 
great  distance,  and,  in  a  subsequent  voyage, 
accordingly,  went  in  quest  of  them  along  the 
coast  of  Terra  Firma,  and  towards  the  Isth¬ 
mus  of  Darien. 

In  consequence  of  this  mistake  of  Colum¬ 
bus,  the  name  of  the  Indies  has  stuck  to  those 
unfortunate  countries  ever  since;  and  when  it 
was  at  last  clearly  discovered  that  the  new 
were  altogether  different  from  the  old  Indies, 
the  former  were  called  the  West,  in  contra¬ 
distinction  to  the  latter,  which  were  called 
the  East  Indies. 

It  was  of  importance  to  Columbus,  how¬ 
ever,  that  the  countries  which  he  had  discov¬ 
ered,  whatever  they  were,  should  be  repre¬ 
sented  to  the  court  of  Spain  as  of  very  great 
consequence;  and,  in  what  constitutes  the 
real  riches  of  every  country,  the  animal  and 
vegetable  productions  of  the  soil,  there  was 
at  that  time  nothing  which  could  well  justify 
such  a  representation  of  them. 

The  Cori,  something  between  a  rat  and  a 
rabbit,  and  supposed  by  Mr.  Buffon  to  be 
the  same  with  the  Aperea  of  Brazil,  was  the 
largest  viviparous  quadruped  in  St.  Domingo. 
This  species  seems  never  to  have  been  very 
numerous,  and  the  dogs  and  cats  of  the  Span¬ 


iards  are  said  to  have  long  ago  almost  entirely 
extirpated  it,  as  well  as  some  other  tribes  of 
a  still  smaller  size.  These,  however,  together 
with  a  pretty  large  lizard,  called  the  ivana,  or 
iguana,  constituted  the  principal  part  of  the 
animal  food  which  the  land  afforded. 

The  vegetable  food  of  the  inhabitants, 
though  from  their  want  of  industry  not  very 
abundant,  was  not  altogether  so  scanty.  It 
consisted  in  Indian  corn,  yams,  potatoes,  ba¬ 
nanas,  etc.,  plants  which  were  then  altogether 
unknown  in  Europe,  and  which  have  never 
since  been  very  much  esteemed  in  it,  or  sup¬ 
posed  to  yield  a  sustenance  equal  to  what  is 
drawn  from  the  common  sorts  of  grain  and 
pulse,  which  have  been  cultivated  in  this  part 
of  the  world  time  out  of  mind. 

The  cotton  plant,  indeed,  afforded  the  ma¬ 
terial  of  a  very  important  manufacture,  and 
was  at  that  time  to  Europeans  undoubtedly 
the  most  valuable  of  all  the  vegetable  produc¬ 
tions  of  those  islands.  But  though  in  the  end 
of  the  fifteenth  century  the  muslins  and  other 
cotton  goods  of  the  East  Indies  were  much 
esteemed  in  every  part  of  Europe,  the  cotton 
manufacture  itself  was  not  cultivated  in  any 
part  of  it.  Even  this  production,  therefore, 
could  not  at  that  time  appear  in  the  eyes  of 
Europeans  to  be  of  very  great  consequence. 

Finding  nothing  either  in  the  animals  or 
vegetables  of  the  newly  discovered  countries 
which  could  justify  a  very  advantageous  rep¬ 
resentation  of  them,  Columbus  turned  his 
view  towards  their  minerals;  and  in  the  rich¬ 
ness  of  the  productions  of  this  third  kingdom, 
he  flattered  himself  he  had  found  a  full  com¬ 
pensation  for  the  insignificancy  of  those  of  the 
other  two.  The  little  bits  of  gold  with  which 
the  inhabitants  ornamented  their  dress,  and 
which,  he  was  informed,  they  frequently  found 
in  the  rivulets  and  torrents  that  fell  from  the 
mountains,  were  sufficient  to  satisfy  him  that 
those  mountains  abounded  with  the  richest 
gold  mines.  St.  Domingo,  therefore,  was  repre¬ 
sented  as  a  country  abounding  with  gold,  and, 
upon  that  account,  (according  to  the  preju¬ 
dices  not  only  of  the  present  time,  but  of 
those  times)  an  inexhaustible  source  of  real 
wealth  to  the  crown  and  kingdom  of  Spain. 
When  Columbus,  upon  his  return  from  his 
first  voyage,  was  introduced  with  a  sort  of 
triumphal  honours  to  the  sovereigns  of  Castile 
and  Arragon,  the  principal  productions  of  the 
countries  which  he  had  discovered  were  car¬ 
ried  in  solemn  procession  before  him.  The 
only  valuable  part  of  them  consisted  in  some 
little  fillets,  bracelets,  and  other  ornaments  of 
gold,  and  in  some  bales  of  cotton.  The  rest 
were  mere  objects  of  vulgar  wonder  and  curi¬ 
osity;  some  reeds  of  an  extraordinary  size, 
some  birds  of  a  very  beautiful  plumage,  and 
some  stuffed  skins  of  the  huge  alligator  and 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


242 

manati;  all  of  which  were  preceded  by  six  or 
seven  of  the  wretched  natives,  whose  singular 
colour  and  appearance  added  greatly  to  the 
novelty  of  the  show. 

In  consequence  of  the  representations  of 
Columbus,  the  council  of  Castile  determined 
to  take  possession  of  countries  of  which 
the  inhabitants  were  plainly  incapable  of  de¬ 
fending  themselves.  The  pious  purpose  of 
converting  them  to  Christianity  sanctified  the 
injustice  of  the  project.  But  the  hope  of  find¬ 
ing  treasures  of  gold  there  was  the  sole  motive 
which  prompted  him  to  undertake  it;  and  to 
give  this  motive  the  greater  weight,  it  was 
proposed  by  Columbus  that  the  half  of  all 
the  gold  and  silver  that  should  be  found  there 
should  belong  to  the  crown.  This  proposal 
was  approved  of  by  the  council. 

As  long  as  the  whole  or  the  far  greater  part 
of  the  gold,  which  the  first  adventurers  im¬ 
ported  into  Europe,  was  got  by  so  very  easy 
a  method  as  the  plundering  of  the  defenceless 
natives,  it  was  not  perhaps  very  difficult  to 
pay  even  this  heavy  tax.  But  when  the  natives 
were  once  fairly  stripped  of  all  that  they  had, 
which,  in  St.  Domingo,  and  in  all  the  other 
countries  discovered  by  Columbus,  was  done 
completely  in  six  or  eight  years,  and  when  in 
order  to  find  more  it  had  become  necessary 
to  dig  for  it  in  the  mines,  there  was  no  longer 
any  possibility  of  paying  this  tax.  The  rigor¬ 
ous  exaction  of  it,  accordingly,  first  occa¬ 
sioned,  it  is  said,  the  total  abandoning  of  the 
mines  of  St.  Domingo,  which  have  never  been 
wrought  since.  It  was  soon  reduced  therefore 
to  a  third;  then  to  a  fifth;  afterwards  to  a 
tenth;  and  at  last  to  a  twentieth  part  of  the 
gross  produce  of  the  gold  mines.  The  tax 
upon  silver  continued  for  a  long  time  to  be 
a  fifth  of  the  gross  produce.  It  was  reduced 
to  a  tenth  only  in  the  course  of  the  present 
century.  But  the  first  adventurers  do  not  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  been  much  interested  about  sil¬ 
ver.  Nothing  less  precious  than  gold  seemed 
worthy  of  their  attention. 

All  the  other  enterprises  of  the  Spaniards 
in  the  new  world,  subsequent  to  those  of 
Columbus,  seem  to  have  been  prompted  by 
the  same  motive.  It  was  the  sacred  thirst  of 
gold  that  carried  Oieda,  Nicuessa,  and  Vasco 
Nugnes  de  Balboa,  to  the  Isthmus  of  Darien, 
that  carried  Cortez  to  Mexico,  and  Almagro 
and  Pizzarro  to  Chili  and  Peru.  When  those 
adventurers  arrived  upon  any  unknown  coast, 
their  first  inquiry  was  always  if  there  was  any 
gold  to  be  found  there;  and  according  to  the 
information  which  they  received  concerning 
this  particular,  they  determined  either  to  quit 
the  country  or  to  settle  in  it. 

Of  all  those  expensive  and  uncertain  pro¬ 
jects,  however,  which  bring  bankruptcy  upon 
the  greater  part  of  the  people  who  engage  in 


them,  there  is  none  perhaps  more  perfectly 
ruinous  than  the  search  after  new  silver  and 
gold  mines.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  disadvan¬ 
tageous  lottery  in  the  world,  or  the  one  in 
which  the  gain  of  those  who  draw  the  prizes 
bears  the  least  proportion  to  the  loss  of  those 
who  draw  the  blanks:  for  though  the  prizes 
are  few  and  the  blanks  many,  the  common 
price  of  a  ticket  is  the  whole  fortune  of  a  very 
rich  man.  Projects  of  mining,  instead  of  re¬ 
placing  the  capital  employed  in  them,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  com¬ 
monly  absorb  both  capital  and  profit.  They 
are  the  projects,  therefore,  to  which  of  all 
others  a  prudent  lawgiver,  who  desired  to  in¬ 
crease  the  capital  of  his  nation,  would  least 
choose  to  give  any  extraordinary  encourage¬ 
ment,  or  to  turn  towards  them  a  greater  share 
of  that  capital  than  that  would  go  to  them  of 
its  own  accord.  Such  in  reality  is  the  ab¬ 
surd  confidence  which  almost  all  men  have  in 
their  own  good  fortune  that,  wherever  there 
is  the  least  probability  of  success,  too  great 
a  share  of  it  is  apt  to  go  to  them  of  its  own 
accord. 

But  though  the  judgment  of  sober  reason 
and  experience  concerning  such  projects  has 
always  been  extremely  unfavourable,  that  of 
human  avidity  has  commonly  been  quite 
otherwise.  The  same  passion  which  has  sug¬ 
gested  to  so  many  people  the  absurd  idea 
of  the  philosopher’s  stone,  has  suggested  to 
others  the  equally  absurd  one  of  immense  rich 
mines  of  gold  and  silver.  They  did  not  con¬ 
sider  that  the  value  of  those  metals  has,  in  all 
ages  and  nations,  arisen  chiefly  from  their 
scarcity,  and  that  their  scarcity  has  arisen 
from  the  very  small  quantities  of  them  which 
nature  has  anywhere  deposited  in  one  place, 
from  the  hard  and  intractable  substances  with 
which  she  has  almost  everywhere  surrounded 
those  small  quantities,  and  consequently  from 
the  labour  and  expense  which  are  everywhere 
necessary  in  order  to  penetrate  to  and  get  at 
them.  They  flattered  themselves  that  veins  of 
those  metals  might  in  many  places  be  found 
as  large  and  as  abundant  as  those  which  are 
commonly  found  of  lead,  or  copper,  or  tin,  or 
iron.  The  dream  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  con¬ 
cerning  the  golden  city  and  country  of  El¬ 
dorado,  may  satisfy  us  that  even  wise  men  are 
not  always  exempt  from  such  strange  delu¬ 
sions.  More  than  a  hundred  years  after  the 
death  of  that  great  man,  the  Jesuit  Gumila 
was  still  convinced  of  the  reality  of  that 
wonderful  country,  and  expressed  with  great 
warmth,  and  I  dare  to  say  with  great  sincer¬ 
ity,  how  happy  he  should  be  to  carry  the 
light  of  the  gospel  to  a  people  who  could 
so  well  reward  the  pious  labours  of  their 
missionary. 

In  the  countries  first  discovered  by  the 


Colonies 


Spaniards,  no  gold  or  silver  mines  are  at  pres¬ 
ent  known  which  are  supposed  to  be  worth 
the  working.  The  quantities  of  those  metals 
which  the  first  adventurers  are  said  to  have 
found  there  had  probably  been  very  much 
magnified,  as  well  as  the  fertility  of  the  mines 
which  were  wrought  immediately  after  the 
first  discovery.  What  those  adventurers  were 
reported  to  have  found,  however,  was  suffi¬ 
cient  to  inflame  the  avidity  of  all  their  coun¬ 
trymen.  Every  Spaniard  who  sailed  to  Amer¬ 
ica  expected  to  find  an  Eldorado.  Fortune, 
too,  did  upon  this  what  she  has  done  upon 
very  few  other  occasions.  She  realized  in  some 
measure  the  extravagant  hopes  of  her  votaries, 
and  in  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  Mexico 
and  Peru  (of  which  the  one  happened  about 
thirty,  the  other  about  forty  years  after  the 
first  expedition  of  Columbus) ,  she  presented 
them  with  something  not  very  unlike  that 
profusion  of  the  precious  metals  which  they 
sought  for. 

A  project  of  commerce  to  the  East  Indies, 
therefore,  gave  occasion  to  the  first  discovery 
of  the  West.  A  project  of  conquest  gave  oc¬ 
casion  to  all  the  establishments  of  the  Span¬ 
iards  in  those  newly  discovered  countries.  The 
motive  which  excited  them  to  this  conquest 


243 

was  a  project  of  gold  and  silver  mines;  and 
a  course  of  accidents,  which  no  human  wis¬ 
dom  could  foresee,  rendered  this  project  much 
more  successful  than  the  undertakers  had  any 
reasonable  grounds  for  expecting. 

The  first  adventurers  of  all  the  other  na¬ 
tions  of  Europe  who  attempted  to  make  settle¬ 
ments  in  America  were  animated  by  the  like 
chimerical  views;  but  they  were  not  equally 
successful.  It  was  more  than  a  hundred  years 
after  the  first  settlement  of  the  Brazils  before 
any  silver,  gold,  cr  diamond  mines  were  dis¬ 
covered  there.  In  the  English,  French,  Dutch, 
and  Danish  colonies,  none  have  ever  yet  been 
discovered;  at  least  none  that  are  at  present 
supposed  to  be  worth  the  working.  The  first 
English  settlers  in  North  America,  however, 
offered  a  fifth  of  all  the  gold  and  silver  which 
should  be  found  there  to  the  king,  as  a  mo¬ 
tive  for  granting  them  their  patents.  In  the 
patents  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  to  the  London 
and  Plymouth  Companies,  to  the  Council  of 
Plymouth,  etc.,  this  fifth  was  accordingly  re¬ 
served  to  the  crown.  To  the  expectation  of 
finding  gold  and  silver  mines,  those  first  set¬ 
tlers,  too,  joined  that  of  discovering  a  north¬ 
west  passage  to  the  East  Indies.  They  have 
hitherto  been  disappointed  in  both. 


Part  2 

Causes  of  Prosperity  of  New  Colonies 


The  colony  of  a  civilised  nation  which  takes 
possession  either  of  a  waste  country,  or  of 
one  so  thinly  inhabited  that  the  natives  easily 
give  place  to  the  new  settlers,  advances  more 
rapidly  to  wealth  and  greatness  than  any 
other  human  society. 

The  colonists  carry  out  with  them  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  agriculture  and  of  other  useful  arts 
superior  to  what  can  grow  up  of  its  own  ac¬ 
cord  in  the  course  of  many  centuries  among 
savage  and  barbarous  nations.  They  carry  out 
with  them,  too,  the  habit  of  subordination, 
some  notion  of  the  regular  government  which 
takes  place  in  their  own  country,  of  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  laws  which  support  it,  and  of  a  regu¬ 
lar  administration  of  justice;  and  they  natu¬ 
rally  establish  something  of  the  same  kind  in 
the  new  settlement.  But  among  savage  and 
barbarous  nations,  the  natural  progress  of  law 
and  government  is  still  slower  than  the  natu¬ 
ral  progress  of  arts,  after  law  and  government 
have  been  so  far  established  as  is  necessary  for 
their  protection.  Every  colonist  gets  more 
land  than  he  can  possibly  cultivate.  He  has 
no  rent,  and  scarce  any  taxes  to  pay.  No  land¬ 
lord  shares  with  him  in  its  produce,  and  the 
share  of  the  sovereign  is  commonly  but  a 
trifle.  He  has  every  motive  to  render  as  great 
as  possible  a  produce,  which  is  thus  to  be 
almost  entirely  his  own.  But  his  land  is  com¬ 


monly  so  extensive  that,  with  all  his  own  in¬ 
dustry,  and  with  all  the  industry  of  other 
people  whom  he  can  get  to  employ,  he  can 
seldom  make  it  produce  the  tenth  part  of 
what  it  is  capable  of  producing.  He  is  eager, 
therefore,  to  collect  labourers  from  all  quar¬ 
ters,  and  to  reward  them  with  the  most  liberal 
wages.  But  those  liberal  wages,  joined  to  the 
plenty  and  cheapness  of  land,  soon  make 
those  labourers  leave  him,  in  order  to  become 
landlords  themselves,  and  to  reward,  with 
equal  liberality,  other  labourers,  who  soon 
leave  them  for  the  same  reason  that  they 
left  their  first  master.  The  liberal  reward  of 
labour  encourages  marriage.  The  children, 
during  the  tender  years  of  infancy,  are  well 
fed  and  properly  taken  care  of,  and  when 
they  are  grown  up,  the  value  of  their  labour 
greatly  overpays  their  maintenance.  When  ar¬ 
rived  at  maturity,  the  high  price  of  labour, 
and  the  low  price  of  land,  enable  them  to 
establish  themselves  in  the  same  manner  as 
their  fathers  did  before  them. 

In  other  countries,  rent  and  profit  eat  up 
wages,  and  the  two  superior  orders  of  people 
oppress  the  inferior  one.  But  in  new  colonies 
the  interest  of  the  two  superior  orders  obliges 
them  to  treat  the  inferior  one  with  more  gen¬ 
erosity  and  humanity;  at  least  where  that  in¬ 
ferior  one  is  not  in  a  state  of  slavery.  Waste 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


244 

lands  of  the  greatest  natural  fertility  are  to 
be  had  for  a  trifle.  The  increase  of  revenue 
which  the  proprietor,  who  is  always  the  un¬ 
dertaker,  expects  from  their  improvement, 
constitutes  his  profit  which  in  these  circum¬ 
stances  is  commonly  very  great.  But  this 
great  profit  cannot  be  made  without  employ¬ 
ing  the  labour  of  other  people  in  clearing  and 
cultivating  the  land;  and  the  disproportion  be¬ 
tween  the  great  extent  of  the  land  and  the 
small  number  of  the  people,  which  commonly 
takes  place  in  new  colonies,  makes  it  difficult 
for  him  to  get  this  labour.  He  does  not,  there¬ 
fore,  dispute  about  wages,  but  is  willing  to 
employ  labour  at  any  price.  The  high  wages 
of  labour  encourage  population.  The  cheap¬ 
ness  and  plenty  of  good  land  encourage  im¬ 
provement,  and  enable  the  proprietor  to  pay 
those  high  wages.  In  those  wages  consists  al¬ 
most  the  whole  price  of  the  land;  and  though 
they  are  high  considered  as  the  wages  of  la¬ 
bour,  they  are  low  considered  as  the  price  of 
what  is  so  very  valuable.  What  encourages 
the  progress  of  population  and  improvement 
encourages  that  of  real  wealth  and  greatness. 

The  progress  of  many  of  the  ancient  Greek 
colonies  towards  wealth  and  greatness  seems 
accordingly  to  ha^e  been  very  rapid.  In  the 
course  of  a  century  or  two,  several  of  them 
appear  to  have  rivalled,  and  even  to  have  sur¬ 
passed  their  mother  cities.  Syracuse  and  Agri- 
gentum  in  Sicily,  Tarentum  and  Locri  in  Italy, 
Ephesus  and  Miletus  in  Lesser  Asia,  appear 
by  all  accounts  to  have  been  at  least  equal 
to  any  of  the  cities  of  ancient  Greece.  Though 
posterior  in  their  establishment,  yet  all  the 
arts  of  refinement,  philosophy,  poetry,  and 
eloquence  seem  to  have  been  cultivated  as 
early,  and  to  have  been  improved  as  highly 
in  them  as  in  any  part  of  the  mother  country. 
The  schools  of  the  two  oldest  Greek  philoso¬ 
phers,  those  of  Thales  and  Pythagoras,  were 
established,  it  is  remarkable,  not  in  ancient 
Greece,  but  the  one  in  an  Asiatic,  the  other 
in  an  Italian  colony.  All  those  colonies  had 
established  themselves  in  countries  inhabited 
by  savage  and  barbarous  nations,  who  easily 
ga^  e  place  to  the  new  settlers.  They  had 
plenty  of  good  land,  and  as  they  were  alto¬ 
gether  independent  of  the  mother  city,  they 
were  at  liberty  to  manage  their  own  affairs 
in  the  way  that  they  judged  was  most  suitable 
to  their  own  interest. 

The  history  of  the  Roman  colonies  is  by 
no  means  so  brilliant.  Some  of  them,  indeed, 
such  as  Florence,  have  in  the  course  of  many 
ages,  and  after  the  fall  of  the  mother  city, 
grown  up  to  be  considerable  states.  But  the 
progress  of  no  one  of  them  seems  ever  to  have 
been  very  rapid.  They  were  all  established  in 
conquered  provinces,  which  in  most  cases 
had  been  fully  inhabited  before.  The  quan¬ 


tity  of  land  assigned  to  each  colonist  was 
seldom  very  considerable,  and  as  the  colony 
was  not  independent,  they  were  not  always  at 
liberty  to  manage  their  own  affairs  in  the 
way  they  judged  was  most  suitable  to  their 
own  interest. 

In  the  plenty  of  good  land,  the  European 
colonies  established  in  America  and  the  West 
Indies  resemble,  and  even  greatly  surpass, 
those  of  ancient  Greece.  In  their  dependency 
upon  the  mother  state,  they  resemble  those 
of  ancient  Rome;  but  their  great  distance 
from  Europe  has  in  all  of  them  alleviated 
more  or  less  the  effects  of  this  dependency. 
Their  situation  has  placed  them  less  in  the 
view  and  less  in  the  power  of  their  mother 
country.  In  pursuing  their  interest  their  own 
way,  their  conduct  has,  upon  many  occasions, 
been  overlooked,  either  because  not  known 
or  not  understood  in  Europe;  and  upon  some 
occasions  it  has  been  fairly  suffered  and  sub¬ 
mitted  to,  because  their  distance  rendered  it 
difficult  to  restrain  it.  Even  the  violent  and 
arbitrary  government  of  Spain  has,  upon 
many  occasions,  been  obliged  to  recall  or 
soften  the  orders  which  had  been  given  for 
the  government  of  her  colonies  for  fear  of  a 
general  insurrection.  The  progress  of  all  the 
European  colonies  in  wealth,  population,  and 
improvement,  has  accordingly  been  very  great. 

The  crown  of  Spain,  by  its  share  of  the  gold 
and  silver,  derived  some  revenue  from  its  col¬ 
onies  from  the  moment  of  their  first  estab¬ 
lishment.  It  was  a  revenue,  too,  of  a  nature 
to  excite  in  human  avidity  the  most  extrava¬ 
gant  expectations  of  still  greater  riches.  The 
Spanish  colonies,  therefore,  from  the  moment 
of  their  first  establishment,  attracted  very 
much  the  attention  of  their  mother  country, 
while  those  of  the  other  European  nations 
were  for  a  long  time  in  a  great  measure  neg¬ 
lected.  The  former  did  not,  perhaps,  thrive 
the  better  in  consequence  of  this  attention; 
nor  the  latter  the  worse  in  consequence  of  this 
neglect.  In  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the 
country  which  they  in  some  measure  possess, 
the  Spanish  colonies  are  considered  as  less 
populous  and  thriving  than  those  of  almost 
any  other  European  nation.  The  progress  even 
of  the  Spanish  colonies,  however,  in  popula¬ 
tion  and  improvement,  has  certainly  been 
very  rapid  and  very  great.  The  city  of  Lima, 
founded  since  the  conquest,  is  represented  by 
Ulloa  as  containing  fifty  thousand  inhabi¬ 
tants  near  thirty  years  ago.  Quito,  which  had 
been  but  a  miserable  hamlet  of  Indians,  is 
represented  by  the  same  author  as  in  his  time 
equally  populous.  Gemelli  Carreri,  a  pretend¬ 
ed  traveller,  it  is  said,  indeed,  but  who  seems 
everywhere  to  have  written  upon  extremely 
good  information,  represents  the  city  of  Mex¬ 
ico  as  containing  a  hundred  thousand  inhabi- 


Colonies 


tants;  a  number  which,  in  spite  of  all  the 
exaggerations  of  the  Spanish  writers,  is,  prob¬ 
ably,  more  than  five  times  greater  than  what 
it  contained  in  the  time  of  Montezuma.  These 
numbers  exceed  greatly  those  of  Boston,  New 
York,  and  Philadelphia,  the  three  greatest 
cities  of  the  English  colonies.  Before  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  Spaniards  there  were  no  cattle 
fit  for  draught  either  in  Mexico  or  Peru.  The 
llama  was  their  only  beast  of  burden,  and  its 
strength  seems  to  have  been  a  good  deal  in¬ 
ferior  to  that  of  a  common  ass.  The  plough 
was  unknown  among  them.  They  were  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  use  of  iron.  They  had  no  coined 
money,  nor  any  established  instrument  of 
commerce  of  any  kind.  Their  commerce  was 
carried  on  by  barter.  A  sort  of  wooden  spade 
was  their  principal  instrument  of  agriculture. 
Sharp  stones  served  them  for  knives  and 
hatchets  to  cut  with;  fish  bones  and  the  hard 
sinews  of  certain  animals  served  them  for 
needles  to  sew  with;  and  these  seem  to  have 
been  their  principal  instruments  of  trade.  In 
this  state  of  things,  it  seems  impossible  that 
either  of  those  empires  could  have  been  so 
much  improved  or  so  well  cultivated  as  at 
present,  when  they  are  plentifully  furnished 
with  all  sorts  of  European  cattle,  and  when 
the  use  of  iron,  of  the  plough,  and  of  many  of 
the  arts  of  Europe,  has  been  introduced  among 
them.  But  the  populousness  of  every  country 
must  be  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  its  im¬ 
provement  and  cultivation.  In  spite  of  the 
cruel  destruction  of  the  natives  which  fol¬ 
lowed  the  conquest,  these  two  great  empires 
are,  probably,  more  populous  now  than  they 
ever  were  before:  and  the  people  are  surely 
very  different;  for  we  must  acknowledge,  I 
apprehend,  that  the  Spanish  creoles  are  in 
many  respects  superior  to  the  ancient  Indians. 

After  the  settlements  of  the  Spaniards,  that 
of  the  Portuguese  in  Brazil  is  the  oldest  of 
any  European  nation  in  America.  But  as  for 
a  long  time  after  the  first  discovery  neither 
gold  nor  silver  mines  were  found  in  it,  and 
as  it  afforded,  upon  that  account,  little  or  no 
revenue  to  the  crown,  it  was  for  a  long  time 
in  a  great  measure  neglected;  and  during  this 
state  of  neglect  it  grew  up  to  be  a  great  and 
powerful  colony.  While  Portugal  was  under 
the  dominion  of  Spain,  Brazil  was  attacked 
by  the  Dutch,  who  got  possession  of  seven 
of  the  fourteen  provinces  into  which  it  is  di¬ 
vided.  They  expected  soon  to  conquer  the 
other  seven,  when  Portugal  recovered  its  in¬ 
dependency  by  the  elevation  of  the  family  of 
Braganza  to  the  throne.  The  Dutch  then,  as 
enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  became  friends  to 
the  Portuguese,  who  were  likewise  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  the  Spaniards.  They  agreed,  therefore, 
to  leave  that  part  of  Brazil,  which  they  had 
not  conquered,  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  who 


245 

agreed  to  leave  that  part  which  they  had  con¬ 
quered  to  them,  as  a  matter  not  worth  dis¬ 
puting  about  with  such  good  allies.  But  the 
Dutch  government  soon  began  to  oppress  the 
Portuguese  colonists,  who,  instead  of  amus¬ 
ing  themselves  with  complaints,  took  arms 
against  their  new  masters,  and  by  their  own 
valour  and  resolution,  with  the  connivance, 
indeed,  but  without  any  avowed  assistance 
from  the  mother  country,  drove  them  out  of 
Brazil.  The  Dutch,  therefore,  finding  it  im¬ 
possible  to  keep  any  part  of  the  country  to 
themselves,  were  contented  that  it  should  be 
entirely  restored  to  the  crown  of  Portugal.  In 
this  colony  there  are  said  to  be  more  than  six 
hundred  thousand  people,  either  Portuguese 
or  descended  from  Portuguese,  creoles,  mulat- 
toes,  and  a  mixed  race  between  Portuguese 
and  Brazilians.  No  one  colony  in  America  is 
supposed  to  contain  so  great  a  number  of 
people  of  European  extraction. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth,  and  dur¬ 
ing  the  greater  part  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
Spain  and  Portugal  were  the  two  great  naval 
powers  upon  the  ocean;  for  though  the  com¬ 
merce  of  Venice  extended  to  every  part  of 
Europe,  its  fleets  had  scarce  ever  sailed  be¬ 
yond  the  Mediterranean.  The  Spaniards,  in 
virtue  of  the  first  discovery,  claimed  all  Amer¬ 
ica  as  their  own;  and  though  they  could  not 
hinder  so  great  a  naval  power  as  that  of 
Portugal  from  settling  in  Brazil,  such  was,  at 
that  time,  the  terror  of  their  name,  that 
the  greater  part  of  the  other  nations  of  Eu¬ 
rope  were  afraid  to  establish  themselves  in 
any  other  part  of  that  great  continent.  The 
French,  who  attempted  to  settle  in  Florida, 
were  all  murdered  by  the  Spaniards.  But  the 
declension  of  the  naval  power  of  this  latter 
nation,  in  consequence  of  the  defeat  or  mis¬ 
carriage  of  what  they  called  their  Invincible 
Armada,  which  happened  towards  the  end  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  put  it  out  of  their 
power  to  obstruct  any  longer  the  settlements 
of  the  other  European  nations.  In  the  course 
of  the  seventeenth  century,  therefore,  the 
English,  French,  Dutch,  Danes,  and  Swedes, 
all  the  great  nations  who  had  any  ports  upon 
the  ocean,  attempted  to  make  some  settle¬ 
ments  in  the  new  world. 

The  Swedes  established  themselves  in  New 
Jersey;  and  the  number  of  Swedish  families 
still  to  be  found  there  sufficiently  demon¬ 
strates  that  this  colony  was  very  likely  to 
prosper  had  it  been  protected  by  the  mother 
country.  But  being  neglected  by  Sweden,  it 
was  soon  swallowed  up  by  the  Dutch  colony 
of  New  York,  which  again,  in  1674,  fell  under 
the  dominion  of  the  English. 

The  small  islands  of  St.  Thomas  and  Santa 
Cruz  are  the  only  countries  in  the  new  world 
that  have  ever  been  possessed  by  the  Danes. 


246  The  Wealth 

These  little  settlements,  too,  were  under  the 
government  of  an  exclusive  company,  which 
had  the  sole  right,  both  of  purchasing  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  colonists,  and  of  sup¬ 
plying  them  with  such  goods  of  other  coun¬ 
tries  as  they  wanted,  and  which,  therefore, 
both  in  its  purchases  and  sales,  had  not  only 
the  power  of  oppressing  them,  but  the  great¬ 
est  temptation  to  do  so.  The  government  of 
an  exclusive  company  of  merchants  is,  per¬ 
haps,  the  worst  of  all  governments  for  any 
country  whatever.  It  was  not,  however,  able 
to  stop  altogether  the  progress  of  these  col¬ 
onies,  though  it  rendered  it  more  slow  and 
languid.  The  late  King  of  Denmark  dissolved 
this  company,  and  since  that  time  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  these  colonies  has  been  very  great. 

The  Dutch  settlements  in  the  West,  as  well 
as  those  in  the  East  Indies,  were  originally 
put  under  the  government  of  an  exclusive 
company.  The  progress  of  some  of  them, 
therefore,  though  it  has  been  considerable,  in 
comparison  with  that  of  almost  any  country 
that  has  been  long  peopled  and  established, 
has  been  languid  and  slow  in  comparison  with 
that  of  the  greater  part  of  new  colonies.  The 
colony  of  Surinam,  though  very  considerable, 
is  still  inferior  to  the  greater  part  of  the  sugar 
colonies  of  the  other  European  nations.  The 
colony  of  Nova  Belgia,  now  divided  into  the 
two  provinces  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey, 
would  probably  have  soon  become  consider¬ 
able  too,  even  though  it  had  remained  under 
the  government  of  the  Dutch.  The  plenty  and 
cheapness  of  good  land  are  such  powerful 
causes  of  prosperity  that  the  very  worst  gov¬ 
ernment  is  scarce  capable  of  checking  alto¬ 
gether  the  efficacy  of  their  operation.  The 
great  distance,  too,  from  the  mother  country 
would  enable  the  colonists  to  evade  more  or 
less,  by  smuggling,  the  monopoly  which  the 
company  enjoyed  against  them.  At  present 
the  company  allows  all  Dutch  ships  to  trade 
to  Surinam  upon  paying  two  and  a  half  per 
cent  upon  the  value  of  their  cargo  for  a  li¬ 
cence;  and  only  reserves  to  itself  exclusively 
the  direct  trade  from  Africa  to  America, 
which  consists  almost  entirely  in  the  slave 
trade.  This  relaxation  in  the  exclusive  privi¬ 
leges  of  the  company  is  probably  the  principal 
cause  of  that  degree  of  prosperity  which  that 
colony  at  present  enjoys.  Curagoa  and  Eus- 
tatia,  the  two  principal  islands  belonging  to 
the  Dutch,  are  free  ports  open  to  the  ships 
of  all  nations;  and  this  freedom,  in  the  midst 
of  better  colonies  whose  ports  are  open  to 
those  of  one  nation  only,  has  been  the  great 
cause  of  the  prosperity  of  those  two  barren 
islands. 

The  French  colony  of  Canada  was,  during 
the  greater  part  of  the  last  century,  and  some 
part  of  the  present,  under  the  government  of 


of  Nations 

an  exclusive  company.  Under  so  unfavourable 
an  administration  its  progress  was  necessarily 
very  slow  in  comparison  with  that  of  other 
new  colonies;  but  it  became  much  more  rapid 
when  this  company  was  dissolved  after  the 
fall  of  what  is  called  the  Mississippi  scheme. 
When  the  English  got  possession  of  this  coun¬ 
try,  they  found  in  it  near  double  the  number 
of  inhabitants  which  Father  Charlevoix  had 
assigned  to  it  between  twenty  and  thirty 
years  before.  That  Jesuit  had  travelled  over 
the  whole  country,  and  had  no  inclination  to 
represent  it  as  less  considerable  than  it  really 
was. 

The  French  colony  of  St.  Domingo  was  es¬ 
tablished  by  pirates  and  freebooters,  who,  for 
a  long  time,  neither  required  the  protection, 
nor  acknowledged  the  authority  of  France; 
and  when  that  race  of  banditti  became  so  far 
citizens  as  to  acknowledge  this  authority,  it 
was  for  a  long  time  necessary  to  exercise  it 
with  very  great  gentleness.  During  this  period 
the  population  and  improvement  of  this  col¬ 
ony  increased  very  fast.  Even  the  oppression 
of  the  exclusive  company,  to  which  it  was  for 
some  time  subjected,  with  all  the  other  col¬ 
onies  of  France,  though  it  no  doubt  retarded, 
had  not  been  able  to  stop  its  progress  alto¬ 
gether.  The  course  of  its  prosperity  returned 
as  soon  as  it  was  relieved  from  that  oppres¬ 
sion.  It  is  now  the  most  important  of  the 
sugar  colonies  of  the  West  Indies,  and  its 
produce  is  said  to  be  greater  than  that  of  all 
the  English  sugar  colonies  put  together.  The 
other  sugar  colonies  of  France  are  in  general 
all  very  thriving. 

But  there  are  no  colonies  of  which  the  prog¬ 
ress  has  been  more  rapid  than  that  of  the 
English  in  North  America. 

Plenty  of  good  land,  and  liberty  to  manage 
their  own  affairs  their  own  way,  seem  to  be 
the  two  great  causes  of  the  prosperity  of  all 
new  colonies. 

In  the  plenty  of  good  land  the  English  col¬ 
onies  of  North  America,  though  no  doubt 
very  abundantly  provided,  are  however  infer¬ 
ior  to  those  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese, 
and  not  superior  to  some  of  those  possessed 
by  the  French  before  the  late  war.  But  the 
political  institutions  of  the  English  colonies 
have  been  more  favourable  to  the  improve¬ 
ment  and  cultivation  of  this  land  than  those 
of  any  of  the  other  three  nations. 

First,  the  engrossing  of  uncultivated  land, 
though  it  has  by  no  means  been  prevented 
altogether,  has  been  more  restrained  in  the 
English  colonies  than  in  any  other.  The  col¬ 
ony  law  which  imposes  upon  every  proprietor 
the  obligation  of  improving  and  cultivating, 
within  a  limited  time,  a  certain  proportion  of 
his  lands,  and  which  in  case  of  failure,  de¬ 
clares  those  neglected  lands  grantable  to  any 


Colonies 


other  person,  though  it  has  not,  perhaps,  been 
very  strictly  executed,  has,  however,  had  some 
e  fleet. 

Secondly,  in  Pennsylvania  there  is  no  right 
of  primogeniture,  and  lands,  like  movables, 
are  divided  equally  among  all  the  children  of 
the  family.  In  three  of  the  provinces  of  New 
England  the  oldest  has  only  a  double  share, 
as  in  the  Mosaical  law.  Though  in  those  prov¬ 
inces,  therefore,  too  great  a  quantity  of  land 
should  sometimes  be  engrossed  by  a  particular 
individual,  it  is  likely,  in  the  course  of  a  gen¬ 
eration  or  two,  to  be  sufficiently  divided  again. 
In  the  other  English  colonies,  indeed,  the 
right  of  primogeniture  takes  place,  as  in  the 
law  of  England.  But  in  all  the  English  col¬ 
onies  the  tenure  of  the  lands,  which  are  all 
held  by  free  socage,  facilitates  alienation,  and 
the  grantee  of  any  extensive  tract  of  land 
generally  finds  it  for  his  interest  to  alienate, 
as  fast  as  he  can,  the  greater  part  of  it,  re¬ 
serving  only  a  small  quit-rent.  In  the  Spanish 
and  Portuguese  colonies,  what  is  called  the 
right  of  Majorazzo1  takes  place  in  the  succes¬ 
sion  of  all  those  great  estates  to  which  any 
title  of  honour  is  annexed.  Such  estates  go  all 
to  one  person,  and  are  in  effect  entailed  and 
unalienable.  The  French  colonies,  indeed,  are 
subject  to  the  custom  of  Paris,  which,  in  the 
inheritance  of  land,  is  much  more  favourable 
to  the  younger  children  than  the  law  of  Eng¬ 
land.  But  in  the  French  colonies,  if  any  part 
of  an  estate,  held  by  the  noble  tenure  of 
chivalry  and  homage,  is  alienated,  it  is,  for  a 
limited  time,  subject  to  the  right  of  redemp¬ 
tion,  either  by  the  heir  of  the  superior  or  by 
the  heir  of  the  family;  and  all  the  largest  es¬ 
tates  of  the  country  are  held  by  such  noble 
tenures,  which  necessarily  embarrass  aliena¬ 
tion.  But  in  a  new  colony  a  great  uncultivated 
estate  is  likely  to  be  much  more  speedily  di¬ 
vided  by  alienation  than  by  succession.  The 
plenty  and  cheapness  of  good  land,  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  observed,  are  the  principal  causes 
of  the  rapid  prosperity  of  new  colonies.  The 
engrossing  of  land,  in  effect,  destroys  this 
plenty  and  cheapness.  The  engrossing  of  un¬ 
cultivated  land,  besides,  is  the  greatest  ob¬ 
struction  to  its  improvement.  But  the  labour 
that  is  employed  in  the  improvement  and 
cultivation  of  land  affords  the  greatest  and 
most  valuable  produce  to  the  society.  The 
produce  of  labour,  in  this  case,  pays  not  only 
its  own  wages,  and  the  profit  of  the  stock 
which  employs  it,  but  the  rent  of  the  land 
too  upon  which  it  is  employed.  The  labour  of 
the  English  colonists,  therefore,  being  more 
employed  in  the  improvement  and  cultivation 
of  land,  is  likely  to  afford  a  greater  and  more 
valuable  produce  than  that  of  any  of  the 
other  three  nations,  which,  by  the  engrossing 

1  Jus  majoratus. 


247 

of  land,  is  more  or  less  diverted  towards  other 
employments. 

Thirdly,  the  labour  of  the  English  colonists 
is  not  only  likely  to  afford  a  greater  and  more 
valuable  produce,  but,  in  consequence  of  the 
moderation  of  their  taxes,  a  greater  propor¬ 
tion  of  this  produce  belongs  to  themselves, 
which  they  may  store  up  and  employ  in  put¬ 
ting  into  motion  a  still  greater  quantity  of 
labour.  The  English  colonists  have  never  yet 
contributed  anything  towards  the  defence  of 
the  mother  country,  or  towards  the  support 
of  its  civil  government.  They  themselves,  on 
the  contrary,  have  hitherto  been  defended  al¬ 
most  entirely  at  the  expense  of  the  mother 
country.  But  the  expense  of  fleets  and  armies 
is  out  of  all  proportion  greater  than  the  neces¬ 
sary  expense  of  civil  government.  The  expense 
of  their  own  civil  government  has  always 
been  very  moderate.  It  has  generally  been 
confined  to  what  was  necessary  for  paying 
competent  salaries  to  the  governor,  to  the 
judges,  and  to  some  other  officers  of  police, 
and  for  maintaining  a  few  of  the  most  useful 
public  works.  The  expense  of  the  civil  es¬ 
tablishment  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  before  the 
commencement  of  the  present  disturbances, 
used  to  be  but  about  £18,000  a  year.  That  of 
New  Hampshire  and  Rhode  Island,  £3500 
each.  That  of  Connecticut,  £4000.  That  of 
New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  £4500  each. 
That  of  New  Jersey,  £1200.  That  of  Virginia 
and  South  Carolina,  £8000  each.  The  civil  es¬ 
tablishment  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Georgia  are 
partly  supported  by  an  annual  grant  of  Par¬ 
liament.  But  Nova  Scotia  pays,  besides,  about 
£7000  a  year  towards  the  public  expenses  of 
the  colony;  and  Georgia  about  £2500  a  year. 
All  the  different  civil  establishments  in  North 
America,  in  short,  exclusive  of  those  of  Mary¬ 
land  and  North  Carolina,  of  which  no  exact 
account  has  been  got,  did  not,  before  the 
commencement  of  the  present  disturbances, 
cost  the  inhabitants  above  £64,700  a  year;  an 
ever-memorable  example  at  how  small  an  ex¬ 
pense  three  millions  of  people  may  not  only 
be  governed,  but  well  governed.  The  most 
important  part  of  the  expense  of  government, 
indeed,  that  of  defence  and  protection,  has 
constantly  fallen  upon  the  mother  country. 
The  ceremonial,  too,  of  the  civil  government 
in  the  colonies,  upon  the  reception  of  a  new 
governor,  upon  the  opening  of  a  new  assem¬ 
bly,  etc.,  though  sufficiently  decent,  is  not 
accompanied  with  any  expensive  pomp  or 
parade.  Their  ecclesiastical  government  is 
conducted  upon  a  plan  equally  frugal.  Tithes 
are  unknown  among  them;  and  their  clergy, 
who  are  far  from  being  numerous,  are  main¬ 
tained  either  by  moderate  stipends,  or  by 
the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  people.  The 
power  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  on  the  contrary. 


248 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


derives  some  support  from  the  taxes  levied 
upon  their  colonies.  France,  indeed,  has  never 
drawn  any  considerable  revenue  from  its  col¬ 
onies,  the  taxes  which  it  levies  upon  them  be¬ 
ing  generally  spent  among  them.  But  the 
colony  government  of  all  these  three  nations 
is  conducted  upon  a  much  more  expensive 
ceremonial.  The  sums  spent  upon  the  recep¬ 
tion  of  a  new  viceroy  of  Peru,  for  example, 
have  frequently  been  enormous.  Such  cere¬ 
monials  are  not  only  real  taxes  paid  by  the 
rich  colonists  upon  those  particular  occasions, 
but  they  serve  to  introduce  among  them  the 
habit  of  vanity  and  expense  upon  all  other 
occasions.  They  are  not  only  very  grievous 
occasional  taxes,  but  they  contribute  to  estab¬ 
lish  perpetual  taxes  of  the  same  kind  still 
more  grievous;  the  ruinous  taxes  of  private 
luxury  and  extravagance.  In  the  colonies  of 
all  those  three  nations  too,  the  ecclesiastical 
government  is  extremely  oppressive.  Tithes 
take  place  in  all  of  them,  and  are  levied  with 
the  utmost  rigour  in  those  of  Spain  and  Por¬ 
tugal.  All  of  them,  besides,  are  oppressed  with 
a  numerous  race  of  mendicant  friars,  whose 
beggary  being  not  only  licensed  but  conse¬ 
crated  by  religion,  is  a  most  grievous  tax 
upon  the  poor  people,  who  are  most  carefully 
taught  that  it  is  a  duty  to  give,  and  a  very 
great  sin  to  refuse  them  their  charity.  Over 
and  above  all  this,  the  clergy  are,  in  all  of 
them,  the  greatest  engrossers  of  land. 

Fourthly,  in  the  disposal  of  their  surplus 
produce,  or  of  what  is  over  and  above  their 
own  consumption,  the  English  colonies  have 
been  more  favoured,  and  have  been  allowed  a 
more  extensive  market,  than  those  of  any 
other  European  nation.  Every  European  na¬ 
tion  has  endeavoured  more  or  less  to  mon¬ 
opolise  to  itself  the  commerce  of  its  colonies, 
and,  upon  that  account,  has  prohibited  the 
ships  of  foreign  nations  from  trading  to  them, 
and  has  prohibited  them  from  importing  Eu¬ 
ropean  goods  from  any  foreign  nation.  But 
the  manner  in  which  this  monopoly  has  been 
exercised  in  different  nations  has  been  very 
different. 

Some  nations  have  given  up  the  whole 
commerce  of  their  colonies  to  an  exclusive 
company,  of  whom  the  colonists  were  ob¬ 
liged  to  buy  all  such  European  goods  as  they 
wanted,  and  to  whom  they  were  obliged  to 
sell  the  whole  of  their  own  surplus  produce. 
It  was  the  interest  of  the  company,  therefore, 
not  only  to  sell  the  former  as  dear,  and  to  buy 
the  latter  as  cheap  as  possible,  but  to  buy  no 
more  of  the  latter,  even  at  this  low  price  than 
what  they  could  dispose  of  for  a  very  high 
price  in  Europe.  It  was  their  interest,  not 
only  to  degrade  in  all  cases  the  value  of  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  colony,  but  in  many 
cases  to  discourage  and  keep  down  the  natu¬ 


ral  increase  of  its  quantity.  Of  all  the  expedi¬ 
ents  that  can  well  be  contrived  to  stunt  the 
natural  growth  of  a  new  colony,  that  of  an 
exclusive  company  is  undoubtedly  the  most 
effectual.  This,  however,  has  been  the  policy 
of  Holland,  though  their  company,  in  the 
course  of  the  present  century,  has  given  up  in 
many  respects  the  exertion  of  their  exclusive 
privilege.  This,  too,  was  the  policy  of  Den¬ 
mark  till  the  reign  of  the  late  king.1  It  has 
occasionally  been  the  policy  of  France,  and 
of  late,  since  1755,  after  it  had  been  aban¬ 
doned  by  all  other  nations  on  account  of  its 
absurdity,  it  has  become  the  policy  of  Por¬ 
tugal  with  regard  at  least  to  two  of  the 
principal  provinces  of  Brazil,  Fernambuco  and 
Marannon. 

Other  nations,  without  establishing  an  ex¬ 
clusive  company,  have  confined  the  whole 
commerce  of  their  colonies  to  a  particular  port 
of  the  mother  country,  from  whence  no  ship 
was  allowed  to  sail,  but  either  in  a  fleet  and 
at  a  particular  season,  or,  if  single,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  particular  licence,  which  in  most 
cases  was  very  well  paid  for.  This  policy 
opened,  indeed,  the  trade  of  the  colonies  to 
all  the  natives  of  the  mother  country,  pro¬ 
vided  they  traded  from  the  proper  port,  at 
the  proper  season,  and  in  the  proper  vessels. 
But  as  all  the  different  merchants,  who  joined 
their  stocks  in  order  to  fit  out  those  licensed 
vessels,  would  find  it  for  their  interest  to  act 
in  concert,  the  trade  which  was  carried  on  in 
this  manner  would  necessarily  be  conducted 
very  nearly  upon  the  same  principles  as  that 
of  an  exclusive  company.  The  profit  of  those 
merchants  would  be  almost  equally  exorbi¬ 
tant  and  oppressive.  The  colonies  would  be  ill 
supplied,  and  would  be  obliged  both  to  buy 
very  dear,  and  to  sell  very  cheap.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  till  within  these  few  years,  had  always 
been  the  policy  of  Spain,  and  the  price  of  all 
European  goods,  accordingly,  is  said  to  have 
been  enormous  in  the  Spanish  West  Indies. 
At  Quito,  we  are  told  by  Ulloa,  a  pound  of 
iron  sold  for  about  four  and  sixpence,  and  a 
pound  of  steel  for  about  six  and  ninepence 
sterling.  But  it  is  chiefly  in  order  to  purchase 
European  goods  that  the  colonies  part  with 
their  own  produce.  The  more,  therefore, 
they  pay  for  the  one,  the  less  they  really 
get  for  the  other,  and  the  dearness  of  the 
one  is  the  same  thing  with  the  cheapness 
of  the  other.  The  policy  of  Portugal  is  in 
this  respect  the  same  as  the  ancient  policy  of 
Spain  with  regard  to  all  its  colonies,  except 
Fernambuco  and  Marannon,  and  with  regard 
to  these  it  has  lately  adopted  a  still  worse. 

Other  nations  leave  the  trade  of  their  col¬ 
onies  free  to  all  their  subjects  who  may  carry 
it  on  from  all  the  different  ports  of  the  mother 

Frederick  V, — Ed. 


Colonies 


country,  and  who  have  occasion  for  no  other 
licence  than  the  common  despatches  of  the 
custom-house.  In  this  case  the  number  and 
dispersed  situation  of  the  different  traders 
renders  it  impossible  for  them  to  enter  into 
any  general  combination,  and  their  competi¬ 
tion  is  sufficient  to  hinder  them  from  making 
very  exorbitant  profits.  Under  so  liberal  a 
policy  the  colonies  are  enabled  both  to  sell 
their  own  produce  and  to  buy  the  goods  of 
Europe  at  a  reasonable  price.  But  since  the 
dissolution  of  the  Plymouth  Company,  when 
our  colonies  were  but  in  their  infancy,  this  has 
always  been  the  policy  of  England.  It  has  gen¬ 
erally,  too,  been  that  of  France,  and  has  been 
uniformly  so  since  the  dissolution  of  what,  in 
England,  is  commonly  called  their  Mississippi 
Company.  The  profits  of  the  trade,  therefore, 
which  France  and  England  carry  on  with  their 
colonies,  though  no  doubt  somewhat  higher 
than  if  the  competition  was  free  to  all  other 
nations,  are,  however,  by  no  means  exorbi¬ 
tant;  and  the  price  of  European  goods  accord¬ 
ingly  is  not  extravagantly  high  in  the  greater 
part  of  the  colonies  of  either  of  those  nations. 

In  the  exportation  of  their  own  surplus 
produce  too,  it  is  only  with  regard  to  certain 
commodities  that  the  colonies  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  are  confined  to  the  market  of  the  mother 
country.  These  commodities  having  been  enu¬ 
merated  in  the  Act  of  Navigation  and  in  some 
other  subsequent  acts,  have  upon  that  ac¬ 
count  been  called  enumerated  commodities. 
The  rest  are  called  non-enumerated ;  and  may 
be  exported  directly  to  other  countries  pro¬ 
vided  it  is  in  British  or  Plantation  ships,  of 
which  the  owners  and  three-fourths  of  the 
mariners  are  British  subjects. 

Among  the  non-enumerated  commodities 
are  some  of  the  most  important  productions 
of  America  and  the  West  Indies;  grain  of  all 
sorts,  lumber,  salt  provisions,  fish,  sugar  and 
rum. 

Grain  is  naturally  the  first  and  principal 
object  of  the  culture  of  all  new  colonies.  By 
allowing  them  a  very  extensive  market  for  it, 
the  law  encourages  them  to  extend  this  cul¬ 
ture  much  beyond  the  consumption  of  a  thin¬ 
ly  inhabited  country,  and  thus  to  provide  be¬ 
forehand  an  ample  subsistence  for  a  continu¬ 
ally  increasing  population. 

In  a  country  quite  covered  with  wood,  where 
timber  consequently  is  of  little  or  no  value, 
the  expense  of  clearing  the  ground  is  the  prin¬ 
cipal  obstacle  to  improvement.  By  allowing 
the  colonies  a  very  extensive  market  for  their 
lumber,  the  law  endeavours  to  facilitate  im¬ 
provement  by  raising  the  price  of  a  commod¬ 
ity  which  would  otherwise  be  of  little  value, 
and  thereby  enabling  them  to  make  some  prof¬ 
it  of  what  would  otherwise  be  a  mere  expense. 

In  a  country  neither  half-peopled  nor  half- 


249 

cultivated,  cattle  naturally  multiply  beyond 
the  consumption  of  the  inhabitants,  and  are 
often  upon  that  account  of  little  or  no  value. 
But  it  is  necessary,  it  has  already  been  shown, 
that  the  price  of  cattle  should  bear  a  certain 
proportion  to  that  of  corn  before  the  greater 
part  of  the  lands  of  any  country  can  be  im¬ 
proved.  By  allowing  to  American  cattle,  in  all 
shapes,  dead  or  alive,  a  very  extensive  mar¬ 
ket,  the  law  endeavors  to  raise  the  value  of 
a  commodity  of  which  the  high  price  is  so  very 
essential  to  improvement.  The  good  effects  of 
this  liberty,  however,  must  be  somewhat  di¬ 
minished  by  the  4th  of  George  III,  c.  15, 
which  puts  hides  and  skins  among  the  enu¬ 
merated  commodities,  and  thereby  tends  to 
reduce  the  value  of  American  cattle. 

To  increase  the  shipping  and  naval  power 
of  Great  Britain,  by  the  extension  of  the  fish¬ 
eries  of  our  colonies,  is  an  object  which  the 
legislature  seems  to  have  had  almost  constant¬ 
ly  in  view.  Those  fisheries,  upon  this  account, 
have  had  all  the  encouragement  which  free¬ 
dom  can  give  them,  and  they  have  flourished 
accordingly.  The  New  England  fishery  in  par¬ 
ticular  was,  before  the  late  disturbances,  one 
of  the  most  important,  perhaps,  in  the  world. 
The  whale-fishery  which,  notwithstanding  an 
extravagant  bounty,  is  in  Great  Britain  car¬ 
ried  on  to  so  little  purpose  that  in  the  opinion 
of  many  people  (which  I  do  not,  however, 
pretend  to  warrant)  the  whole  produce  does 
not  much  exceed  the  value  of  the  bounties 
which  are  annually  paid  for  it,  is  in  New 
England  carried  on  without  any  bounty  to  a 
very  great  extent.  Fish  is  one  of  the  principal 
articles  with  which  the  North  Americans  trade 
to  Spain,  Portugal,  and  the  Mediterranean. 

Sugar  was  originally  an  enumerated  com¬ 
modity  which  could  be  exported  only  to  Great 
Britain.  But  in  1731,  upon  a  representation  of 
the  sugar-planters,  its  exportation  was  per¬ 
mitted  to  all  parts  of  the  world.  The  restric¬ 
tions,  however,  with  which  this  liberty  was 
granted,  joined  to  the  high  price  of  sugar  in 
Great  Britain,  have  rendered  it,  in  a  great 
measure,  ineffectual.  Great  Britain  and  her 
colonies  still  continue  to  be  almost  the  sole 
market  for  all  the  sugar  produced  in  the  Brit¬ 
ish  plantations.  Their  consumption  increases 
so  fast  that,  though  in  consequence  of  the  in¬ 
creasing  improvement  of  Jamaica,  as  well  as 
of  the  Ceded  Islands,  the  importation  of  sugar 
has  increased  very  greatly  within  these  twenty 
years,  the  exportation  to  foreign  countries  is 
said  to  be  not  much  greater  than  before. 

Rum  is  a  very  important  article  in  the  trade 
which  the  Americans  carry  on  to  the  coast  of 
Africa,  from  which  they  bring  back  negro 
slaves  in  return. 

If  the  whole  surplus  produce  of  America  in 
grain  of  all  sorts,  in  salt  provisions  and  in 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


250 

fish,  had  been  put  into  the  enumeration,  and 
thereby  forced  into  the  market  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain,  it  would  have  interfered  too  much  with 
the  produce  of  the  industry  of  our  own  peo¬ 
ple.  It  was  probably  not  so  much  from  any 
regard  to  the  interest  of  America  as  from  a 
jealousy  of  this  interference  that  those  im¬ 
portant  commodities  have  not  only  been  kept 
out  of  the  enumeration,  but  that  the  importa¬ 
tion  into  Great  Britain  of  all  grain,  except 
rice,  and  of  salt  provisions,  has,  in  the  ordi¬ 
nary  state  of  the  law,  been  prohibited. 

The  non-enumerated  commodities  could 
originally  be  exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world. 
Lumber  and  rice,  having  been  once  put  into 
the  enumeration,  when  they  were  afterwards 
taken  out  of  it,  were  confined,  as  to  the  Euro¬ 
pean  market,  to  the  countries  that  lie  south 
of  Cape  Finisterre.  By  the  6th  of  George  III. 
c.  52,  all  non-enumerated  commodities  were 
subjected  to  the  like  restriction.  The  parts  of 
Europe  which  lie  south  of  Cape  Finisterre  are 
not  manufacturing  countries,  and  we  were  less 
jealous  of  the  colony  ships  carrying  home 
from  them  any  manufactures  which  could 
interfere  with  our  own. 

The  enumerated  commodities  are  of  two 
sorts:  first,  such  as  are  either  the  peculiar 
produce  of  America,  or  as  cannot  be  produced, 
or  at  least  are  not  produced,  in  the  mother 
country.  Of  this  kind  are  molasses,  coffee, 
cocoa-nuts,  tobacco,  pimento,  ginger,  whale- 
fins,  raw  silk,  cotton- wool,  beaver,  and  other 
peltry  of  America,  indigo,  fustic,  and  other 
dyeing  woods;  secondly,  such  as  are  not  the 
peculiar  produce  of  America,  but  which  are 
and  may  be  produced  in  the  mother  country, 
though  not  in  such  quantities  as  to  supply 
the  greater  part  of  her  demand,  which  is  prin¬ 
cipally  supplied  from  foreign  countries.  Of 
this  kind  are  all  naval  stores,  masts,  yards, 
and  bowsprits,  tar,  pitch,  and  turpentine,  pig 
and  bar  iron,  copper  ore,  hides  and  skins,  pot 
and  pearl  ashes.  The  largest  importation  of 
commodities  of  the  first  kind  could  not  dis¬ 
courage  the  growth  or  interfere  with  the  sale 
of  any  part  of  the  produce  of  the  mother 
country.  By  confining  them  to  the  home  mar¬ 
ket,  our  merchants,  it  was  expected,  would 
not  only  be  enabled  to  buy  them  cheaper  in 
the  plantations,  and  consequently  to  sell  them 
with  a  better  profit  at  home,  but  to  establish 
between  the  plantations  and  foreign  countries 
an  advantageous  carrying  trade,  of  which 
Great  Britain  was  necessarily  to  be  the  centre 
or  emporium,  as  the  European  country  into 
which  those  commodities  were  first  to  be  im¬ 
ported.  The  importation  of  commodities  of 
the  second  kind  might  be  so  managed  too,  it 
was  supposed,  as  to  interfere,  not  with  the 
sale  of  those  of  the  same  kind  which  were  pro¬ 
duced  at  home,  but  with  that  of  those  which 


wrere  imported  from  foreign  countries;  be¬ 
cause,  by  means  of  proper  duties,  they  might 
be  rendered  always  somewhat  dearer  than  the 
former,  and  yet  a  good  deal  cheaper  than  the 
latter.  By  confining  such  commodities  to  the 
home  market,  therefore,  it  was  proposed  to 
discourage  the  produce,  not  of  Great  Britain, 
but  of  some  foreign  countries  with  which  the 
balance  of  trade  was  believed  to  be  unfavour¬ 
able  to  Great  Britain. 

The  prohibition  of  exporting  from  the  col¬ 
onies,  to  any  other  country  but  Great  Britain, 
masts,  yards,  and  bowsprits,  tar,  pitch,  and 
turpentine,  naturally  tended  to  lower  the  price 
of  timber  in  the  colonies,  and  consequently  to 
increase  the  expense  of  clearing  their  lands, 
the  principal  obstacle  to  their  improvement. 
But  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  cen¬ 
tury,  in  1703,  the  pitch  and  tar  company  of 
Sweden  endeavoured  to  raise  the  price  of  their 
commodities  to  Great  Britain,  by  prohibiting 
their  exportation,  except  in  their  own  ships, 
at  their  own  price,  and  in  such  quantities  as 
they  thought  proper.  In  order  to  counteract 
this  notable  piece  of  mercantile  policy,  and  to 
render  herself  as  much  as  possible  independ¬ 
ent,  not  only  of  Sweden,  but  of  all  the  other 
northern  powers,  Great  Britain  gave  a  bounty 
upon  the  importation  of  naval  stores  from 
America,  and  the  effect  of  this  bounty  was  to 
raise  the  price  of  timber  in  America  much 
more  than  the  confinement  to  the  home  mar¬ 
ket  could  lower  it;  and  as  both  regulations 
were  enacted  at  the  same  time,  their  joint  ef¬ 
fect  was  rather  to  encourage  than  to  discour¬ 
age  the  clearing  of  land  in  America. 

Though  pig  and  bar  iron  too  have  been  put 
among  the  enumerated  commodities,  yet  as, 
when  imported  from  America,  they  were  ex¬ 
empted  from  considerable  duties  to  which 
they  are  subject  w7hen  imported  from  any 
other  country,  the  one  part  of  the  regulation 
contributes  more  to  encourage  the  erection  of 
furnaces  in  America  than  the  other  to  dis¬ 
courage  it.  There  is  no  manufacture  which 
occasions  so  great  a  consumption  of  wood  as 
a  furnace,  or  which  can  contribute  so  much  to 
the  clearing  of  a  country  overgrown  with  it. 

The  tendency  of  some  of  these  regulations 
to  raise  the  value  of  timber  in  America,  and 
thereby  to  facilitate  the  clearing  of  the  land, 
was  neither,  perhaps,  intended  nor  understood 
by  the  legislature.  Though  their  beneficial  ef¬ 
fects,  however,  have  been  in  this  respect  acci¬ 
dental,  they  have  not  upon  that  account  been 
less  real. 

The  most  perfect  freedom  of  trade  is  per¬ 
mitted  between  the  British  colonies  of  Ameri¬ 
ca  and  the  West  Indies,  both  in  the  enumer¬ 
ated  and  in  the  non-enumerated  commodities. 
Those  colonies  are  now  become  so  populous 
and  thriving  that  each  of  them  finds  in  some 


Colonies 


251 


of  the  others  a  great  and  extensive  market  for 
every  part  of  its  produce.  All  of  them  taken 
together,  they  make  a  great  internal  market 
for  the  produce  of  one  another. 

The  liberality  of  England,  however,  towards 
the  trade  of  her  colonies  has  been  confined 
chiefly  to  what  concerns  the  market  for  their 
produce,  either  in  its  rude  state,  or  in  what 
may  be  called  the  very  first  stage  of  manu¬ 
facture.  The  more  advanced  or  more  refined 
manufactures  even  of  the  colony  produce,  the 
merchants  and  manufacturers  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  choose  to  reserve  to  themselves,  and  have 
prevailed  upon  the  legislature  to  prevent  their 
establishment  in  the  colonies,  sometimes  by 
high  duties,  and  sometimes  by  absolute  pro¬ 
hibitions. 

While,  for  example,  Muskovado  sugars  from 
the  British  plantations  pay  upon  importation 
only  6s.  4d.  the  hundredweight;  white  sugars 
pay  £1  Is.  Id.;  and  refined,  either  double  or 
single,  in  loaves  £4  2s.  5%od.  When  those  high 
duties  were  imposed,  Great  Britain  was  the 
sole,  and  she  still  continues  to  be  the  principal 
market  to  which  the  sugars  of  the  British  colo¬ 
nies  could  be  exported.  They  amounted,  there¬ 
fore,  to  a  prohibition,  at  first  of  claying  or 
refining  sugar  for  any  foreign  market,  and  at 
present  of  claying  or  refining  it  for  the  mar¬ 
ket,  which  takes  off,  perhaps,  more  than  nine- 
tenths  of  the  whole  produce.  The  manufacture 
of  claying  or  refining  sugar  accordingly,  though 
it  has  flourished  in  all  the  sugar  colonies  of 
France,  has  been  little  cultivated  in  any  of 
those  of  England  except  for  the  market  of  the 
colonies  themselves.  While  Grenada  was  in 
the  hands  of  the  French  there  was  a  refinery 
of  sugar,  by  claying  at  least,  upon  almost 
every  plantation.  Since  it  fell  into  those  of 
the  English,  almost  all  works  of  this  kind  have 
been  given  up,  and  there  are  at  present,  Oc¬ 
tober  1773,  I  am  assured  not  above  two  or 
three  remaining  in  the  island.  At  present,  how¬ 
ever,  by  an  indulgence  of  the  custom-house, 
clayed  or  refined  sugar,  if  reduced  from  loaves 
into  powder,  is  commonly  imported  as  Mus¬ 
kovado. 

While  Great  Britain  encourages  in  America 
the  manufactures  of  pig  and  bar  iron,  by  ex¬ 
empting  them  from  duties  to  which  the  like 
commodities  are  subject  when  imported  from 
any  other  country,  she  imposes  an  absolute 
prohibition  upon  the  erection  of  steel  furnaces 
and  slitmills  in  any  of  her  American  planta¬ 
tions.  She  will  not  suffer  her  colonists  to  work 
in  those  more  refined  manufactures  even  for 
their  own  consumption;  but  insists  upon  their 
purchasing  of  her  merchants  and  manufac¬ 
turers  all  goods  of  this  kind  which  they  have 
occasion  for. 

She  prohibits  the  exportation  from  one 
province  to  another  by  water,  and  even  the 


carriage  by  land  upon  horseback  or  in  a  cart, 
of  hats,  of  wools  and  woollen  goods,  of  the 
produce  of  America;  a  regulation  which  effec¬ 
tually  prevents  the  establishment  of  any  man¬ 
ufacture  of  such  commodities  for  distant  sale, 
and  confines  the  industry  of  her  colonists  in 
this  way  to  such  coarse  and  household  manu¬ 
factures  as  a  private  family  commonly  makes 
for  its  own  use  or  for  that  of  some  of  its 
neighbours  in  the  same  province. 

To  prohibit  a  great  people,  however,  from 
making  all  that  they  can  of  every  part  of 
their  own  produce,  or  from  employing  their 
stock  and  industry  in  the  way  that  they  judge 
most  advantageous  to  themselves,  is  a  mani¬ 
fest  violation  of  the  most  sacred  rights  of 
mankind.  Unjust,  however,  as  such  prohibi¬ 
tions  may  be,  they  have  not  hitherto  been 
very  hurtful  to  the  colonies.  Land  is  still  so 
cheap,  and,  consequently,  labour  so  dear 
among  them,  that  they  can  import  from  the 
mother  country  almost  all  the  more  refined 
or  more  advanced  manufactures  cheaper  than 
they  could  make  for  themselves.  Though  they 
had  not,  therefore,  been  prohibited  from  es¬ 
tablishing  such  manufactures,  yet  in  their 
present  state  of  improvement  a  regard  to  their 
own  interest  would,  probably,  have  prevented 
them  from  doing  so.  In  their  present  state  of 
improvement  those  prohibitions,  perhaps,  with¬ 
out  cramping  their  industry,  or  restraining  it 
from  any  employment  to  which  it  would  have 
gone  of  its  own  accord,  are  only  impertinent 
badges  of  slavery  imposed  upon  them,  with¬ 
out  any  sufficient  reason,  by  the  groundless 
jealousy  of  the  merchants  and  manufacturers 
of  the  mother  country.  In  a  more  advanced 
state  they  might  be  really  oppressive  and 
insupportable. 

Great  Britain  too,  as  she  confines  to  her 
own  market  some  of  the  most  important  pro¬ 
ductions  of  the  colonies,  so  in  compensation 
she  gives  to  some  of  them  an  advantage  in 
that  market,  sometimes  by  imposing  higher 
duties  upon  the  like  productions  when  im¬ 
ported  from  other  countries,  and  sometimes 
by  giving  bounties  upon  their  importation 
from  the  colonies.  In  the  first  way  she  gives 
an  advantage  in  the  home  market  to  the  sug¬ 
ar,  tobacco,  and  iron  of  her  own  colonies, 
and  in  the  second  to  their  raw  silk,  to  their 
hemp  and  flax,  to  their  indigo,  to  their  naval 
stores,  and  to  their  building  timber.  This  sec¬ 
ond  way  of  encouraging  the  colony  produce 
by  bounties  upon  importation,  is,  so  far  as  I 
have  been  able  to  learn,  peculiar  to  Great 
Britain.  The  first  is  not.  Portugal  does  not 
content  herself  with  imposing  higher  duties 
upon  the  importation  of  tobacco  from  any 
other  country,  but  prohibits  it  under  the  se¬ 
verest  penalties. 

With  regard  to  the  importation  of  goods 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


252 

from  Europe,  England  has  likewise  dealt  more 
liberally  with  her  colonies  than  any  other 
nation. 

Great  Britain  allows  a  part,  almost  always 
the  half,  generally  a  larger  portion,  and  some¬ 
times  the  whole  of  the  duty  which  is  paid  up¬ 
on  the  importation  of  foreign  goods,  to  be 
drawn  back  upon  their  exportation  to  any  for¬ 
eign  country.  No  independent  foreign  coun¬ 
try,  it  was  easy  to  foresee,  would  receive  them 
if  \hey  came  to  it  loaded  with  the  heavy  duties 
to  which  almost  all  foreign  goods  are  sub¬ 
jected  on  their  importation  into  Great  Brit¬ 
ain.  Unless,  therefore,  some  part  of  those  du¬ 
ties  was  drawn  back  upon  exportation,  there 
was  an  end  of  the  carrying  trade;  a  trade  so 
much  favoured  by  the  mercantile  system. 

Our  colonies,  however,  are  by  no  means  in¬ 
dependent  foreign  countries;  and  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  having  assumed  to  herself  the  exclusive 
right  of  supplying  them  with  all  goods  from 
Europe,  might  have  forced  them  (in  the  same 
manner  as  other  countries  have  done  their 
colonies)  to  receive  such  goods,  loaded  with 
all  the  same  duties  which  they  paid  in  the 
mother  country.  But,  on  the  contrary,  till 
1763,  the  same  drawbacks  were  paid  upon  the 
exportation  of  the  greater  part  of  foreign 
goods  to  our  colonies  as  to  any  independent 
foreign  country.  In  1763,  indeed,  by  the  4th 
of  George  III,  c.  15,  this  indulgence  was  a 
good  deal  abated,  and  it  was  enacted,  “That 
no  part  of  the  duty  called  the  Old  Subsidy 
should  be  drawn  back  for  any  goods  of  the 
growth,  production,  or  manufacture  of  Europe 
or  the  East  Indies,  which  should  be  exported 
from  this  kingdom  to  any  British  colony  or 
plantation  in  America;  wines,  white  calicoes 
and  muslins  excepted.”  Before  this  law,  many 
different  sorts  of  foreign  goods  might  have 
been  bought  cheaper  in  the  plantations  than 
in  the  mother  country;  and  some  may  still. 

Of  the  greater  part  of  the  regulations  con¬ 
cerning  the  colony  trade,  the  merchants  who 
carry  it  on,  it  must  be  observed,  have  been 
the  principal  advisers.  We  must  not  wonder, 
therefore,  if,  in  the  greater  part  of  them,  their 
interest  has  been  more  considered  than  either 
that  of  the  colonies  or  that  of  the  mother 
country.  In  their  exclusive  privilege  of  sup¬ 
plying  the  colonies  with  all  the  goods  which 
they  wanted  from  Europe,  and  of  purchasing 
all  such  parts  of  their  surplus  produce  as 
could  not  interfere  with  any  of  the  trades 
which  they  themselves  carried  on  at  home, 
the  interest  of  the  colonies  was  sacrificed  to 
the  interest  of  those  merchants.  In  allowing 
the  same  drawbacks  upon  the  re-exportation 
of  the  greater  part  of  European  and  East 
India  goods  to  the  colonies  as  upon  their  re¬ 
exportation  to  any  independent  country,  the 
interest  of  the  mother  country  was  sacrificed 


to  it,  even  according  to  the  mercantile  ideas 
of  that  interest.  It  was  for  the  interest  of  the 
merchants  to  pay  as  little  as  possible  for  the 
foreign  goods  which  they  sent  to  the  colonies, 
and,  consequently,  to  get  back  as  much  as 
possible  of  the  duties  which  they  advanced 
upon  their  importation  into  Great  Britain. 
They  might  thereby  be  enabled  to  sell  in  the 
colonies  either  the  same  quantity  of  goods 
with  a  greater  profit,  or  a  greater  quantity 
with  the  same  profit,  and,  consequently,  to 
gain  something  either  in  the  one  way  or  the 
other.  It  was  likewise  for  the  interest  of  the 
colonies  to  get  all  such  goods  as  cheap  and  in 
as  great  abundance  as  possible.  But  this 
might  not  always  be  for  the  interest  of  the 
mother  country.  She  might  frequently  suffer 
both  in  her  revenue,  by  giving  back  a  great 
part  of  the  duties  which  had  been  paid  upon 
the  importation  of  such  goods;  and  in  her 
manufactures,  by  being  undersold  in  the  col¬ 
ony  market,  in  consequence  of  the  easy  terms 
upon  which  foreign  manufactures  could  be 
carried  thither  by  means  of  those  drawbacks. 
The  progress  of  the  linen  manufacture  of 
Great  Britain,  it  is  commonly  said,  has  been 
a  good  deal  retarded  by  the  drawbacks  upon 
the  re-exportation  of  German  linen  to  the 
American  colonies. 

But  though  the  policy  of  Great  Britain 
with  regard  to  the  trade  of  her  colonies  has 
been  dictated  by  the  same  mercantile  spirit 
as  that  of  other  nations,  it  has,  however,  up¬ 
on  the  whole,  been  less  illiberal  and  oppressive 
than  that  of  any  of  them. 

In  everything,  except  their  foreign  trade, 
the  liberty  of  the  English  colonists  to  manage 
their  own  affairs  their  own  way  is  complete. 
It  is  in  every  respect  equal  to  that  of  their 
fellow-citizens  at  home,  and  is  secured  in  the 
same  manner,  by  an  assembly  of  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  the  people,  who  claim  the  sole 
right  of  imposing  taxes  for  the  support  of  the 
colony  government.  The  authority  of  this 
assembly  overawes  the  executive  power,  and 
neither  the  meanest  nor  the  most  obnoxious 
colonist,  as  long  as  he  obeys  the  law,  has  any¬ 
thing  to  fear  from  the  resentment,  either  of 
the  governor  or  of  any  other  civil  or  military 
officer  in  the  province.  The  colony  assemblies 
though,  like  the  House  of  Commons  in  Eng¬ 
land,  are  not  always  a  very  equal  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  people,  yet  they  approach  more 
nearly  to  that  character;  and  as  the  executive 
power  either  has  not  the  means  to  corrupt 
them,  or,  on  account  of  the  support  which  it 
receives  from  the  mother  country,  is  not  un¬ 
der  the  necessity  of  doing  so,  they  are  per¬ 
haps  in  general  more  influenced  by  the  incli¬ 
nations  of  their  constituents.  The  councils 
which,  in  the  colony  legislatures,  correspond 
to  the  House  of  Lords  in  Great  Britain,  are 


Colonies 


not  composed  of  an  hereditary  nobility.  In 
some  of  the  colonies,  as  in  three  of  the  govern¬ 
ments  of  New  England,  those  councils  are 
not  appointed  by  the  king,  but  chosen  by  the 
representatives  of  the  people.  In  none  of  the 
English  colonies  is  there  any  hereditary 
nobility.  In  all  of  them,  indeed,  as  in  all  other 
free  countries,  the  descendant  of  an  old  colony 
family  is  more  respected  than  an  upstart  of 
equal  merit  and  fortune;  but  he  is  only  more 
respected,  and  he  has  no  privileges  by  which 
he  can  be  troublesome  to  his  neighbours.  Be¬ 
fore  the  commencement  of  the  present  dis¬ 
turbances,  the  colony  assemblies  had  not  only 
the  legislative  but  a  part  of  the  executive 
power.  In  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island, 
they  elected  the  governor.  In  the  other 
colonies  they  appointed  the  revenue  officers 
who  collected  the  taxes  imposed  by  those  re¬ 
spective  assemblies,  to  whom  those  officers 
were  immediately  responsible.  There  is  more 
equality,  therefore,  among  the  English  col¬ 
onists  than  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
mother  country.  Their  manners  are  more  re¬ 
publican,  and  their  governments,  those  of 
three  of  the  provinces  of  New  England  in 
particular,  have  hitherto  been  more  repub¬ 
lican  too. 

The  absolute  governments  of  Spain,  Por¬ 
tugal,  and  France,  on  the  contrary,  take  place 
in  their  colonies;  and  the  discretionary  pow¬ 
ers  which  such  governments  commonly  dele¬ 
gate  to  all  their  inferior  officers  are,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  great  distance,  naturally  exer¬ 
cised  ther^  with  more  than  ordinary  violence. 
Under  all  absolute  governments  there  is  more 
liberty  in  the  capital  than  in  any  other  part 
of  the  country.  The  sovereign  himself  can 
never  have  either  interest  or  inclination  to 
pervert  the  order  of  justice,  or  to  oppress  the 
great  body  of  the  people.  In  the  capital  his 
presence  overawes  more  or  less  all  his  infer¬ 
ior  officers,  who  in  the  remoter  provinces, 
from  whence  the  complaints  of  the  people  are 
less  likely  to  reach  him,  can  exercise  their 
tyranny  with  much  more  safety.  But  the 
European  colonies  in  America  are  more  re¬ 
mote  than  the  most  distant  provinces  of  the 
greatest  empires  which  had  ever  been  known 
before.  The  government  of  the  English  col¬ 
onies  is  perhaps  the  only  one  which,  since  the 
world  began,  could  give  perfect  security  to 
the  inhabitants  of  so  very  distant  a  province. 
The  administration  of  the  French  colonies, 
however,  has  always  been  conducted  with 
more  gentleness  and  moderation  than  that  of 
the  Spanish  and  Portugese.  This  superiority 
of  conduct  is  suitable  both  to  the  character  of 
the  French  nation,  and  to  what  forms  the 
character  of  every  nation,  tne  nature  of  their 
government,  which  though  arbitrary  and 
violent  in  comparison  with  that  of  Great 


253 

Britain,  is  legal  and  free  in  comparison  with 
those  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 

It  is  in  the  progress  of  the  North  American 
colonies,  however,  that  the  superiority  of  the 
English  policy  chiefly  appears.  The  progress 
of  the  sugar  colonies  of  France  has  been  at 
least  equal,  perhaps  superior,  to  that  of  the 
greater  part  of  those  of  En gland,  and  yet  the 
sugar  colonies  of  England  enjoy  a  free  govern¬ 
ment  nearly  of  the  same  kind  with  that  which 
takes  place  in  her  colonies  of  North  America. 
But  the  sugar  colonies  of  France  are  not  dis¬ 
couraged,  like  those  of  England,  from  re¬ 
fining  their  own  sugar;  and,  what  is  of  still 
greater  importance,  the  genius  of  their  gov¬ 
ernment  naturally  introduces  a  better  man¬ 
agement  of  their  negro  slaves. 

In  all  European  colonies  the  culture  of  the 
sugar-cane  is  carried  on  by  negro  slaves.  The 
constitution  of  those  who  have  been  born  in 
the  temperate  climate  of  Europe  could  not, 
it  is  supposed,  support  the  labour  of  digging 
the  ground  under  the  burning  sun  of  the 
West  Indies;  and  the  culture  of  the  sugar¬ 
cane,  as  it  is  managed  at  present,  is  all  hand 
labour,  though,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  the 
drill  plough  might  be  introduced  into  it  with 
great  advantage.  But,  as  the  profit  and  suc¬ 
cess  of  the  cultivation  which  is  carried  on  by 
means  of  cattle,  depend  very  much  upon  the 
good  management  of  those  cattle,  so  the 
profit  and  success  of  that  which  is  carried  on 
by  slaves  must  depend  equally  upon  the  good 
management  of  those  slaves;  and  in  the  good 
management  of  their  slaves  the  French  plant¬ 
ers,  I  think  it  is  generally  allowed,  are  super¬ 
ior  to  the  English.  The  law,  so  far  as  it  gives 
some  weak  protection  to  the  slave  against 
the  violence  of  his  master,  is  likely  to  be 
better  executed  in  a  colony  where  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary  than  in 
one  where  it  is  altogether  free.  In  every  coun¬ 
try  where  the  unfortunate  law  of  slavery  is 
established,  the  magistrate,  when  he  protects 
the  slave,  intermeddles  in  some  measure  in 
the  management  of  the  private  property  of 
the  master;  and,  in  a  free  country,  where  the 
master  is  perhaps  either  a  member  of  the 
colony  assembly,  or  an  elector  of  such  a  mem¬ 
ber,  he  dare  not  do  this  but  with  the  greatest 
caution  and  circumspection.  The  respect 
which  he  is  obliged  to  pay  to  the  master  ren¬ 
ders  it  more  difficult  for  him  to  protect  the 
slave.  But  in  a  country  where  the  government 
is  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary,  where  it  is 
usual  for  the  magistrate  to  intermeddle  even 
in  the  management  of  the  private  property 
of  individuals,  and  to  send  them,  perhaps,  a 
lettre  de  cachet  if  they  do  not  manage  it  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  liking,  it  is  much  easier  for 
him  to  give  some  protection  to  the  slave;  and 
common  humanity  naturally  disposes  him  to 


254  The  Wealth 

do  so.  The  protection  of  the  magistrate  ren¬ 
ders  the  slave  less  contemptible  in  the  eyes 
of  his  master,  who  is  thereby  induced  to  con¬ 
sider  him  with  more  regard,  and  to  treat  him 
with  more  gentleness.  Gentle  usage  renders 
the  slave  not  only  more  faithful,  but  more 
intelligent,  and  therefore,  upon  a  double  ac¬ 
count,  more  useful.  He  approaches  more  to 
the  condition  of  a  free  servant,  and  may  pos¬ 
sess  some  degree  of  integrity  and  attachment 
to  his  master’s  interest,  virtues  which  fre¬ 
quently  belong  to  free  servants,  but  which 
never  can  belong  to  a  slave  who  is  treated  as 
slaves  commonly  are  in  countries  where  the 
master  is  perfectly  free  and  secure. 

That  the  condition  of  a  slave  is  better  under 
an  arbitrary  than  under  a  free  government  is, 

I  believe,  supported  by  the  history  of  all  ages 
and  nations.  In  the  Roman  history,  the  first 
time  we  read  of  the  magistrate  interposing  to 
protect  the  slave  from  the  violence  of  his 
master  is  under  the  emperors.  When  Vedius 
Pollio,  in  the  presence  of  Augustus,  ordered 
one  of  his  slaves,  who  had  committed  a 
slight  fault,  to  be  cut  into  pieces  and  thrown 
into  his  fish  pond  in  order  to  feed  his  fishes,  the 
emperor  commanded  him,  with  indignation, 
to  emancipate  immediately,  not  only  that 
slave,  but  all  the  others  that  belonged  to  him. 
Under  the  republic  no  magistrate  could  have 
had  authority  enough  to  protect  the  slave, 
much  less  to  punish  the  master. 

The  stock,  it  is  to  be  observed,  which  has 
improved  the  sugar  colonies  of  France,  par¬ 
ticularly  the  great  colony  of  St.  Domingo,  has 
been  raised  almost  entirely  from  the  gradual 
improvement  and  cultivation  of  those  col¬ 
onies.  It  has  been  almost  altogether  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  soil  and  of  the  industry  of  the 
colonies,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
the  price  of  that  produce  gradually  accumu¬ 
lated  by  good  management,  and  employed  in 
raising  a  still  greater  produce.  But  the  stock 
which  has  improved  and  cultivated  the  sugar 
colonies  of  England  has,  a  great  part  of  it, 
been  sent  out  from  England,  and  has  by  no 
means  been  altogether  the  produce  of  the 
soil  and  industry  of  the  colonists.  The  pros¬ 
perity  of  the  English  sugar  colonies  has  been, 
in  a  great  measure,  owing  to  the  great  riches 
of  England,  of  which  a  part  has  overflowed,  if 
one  may  say  so,  upon  those  colonies.  But  the 
prosperity  of  the  sugar  colonies  of  France  has 
been  entirely  owing  to  the  good  conduct  of 
the  colonists,  which  must  therefore  have  had 
some  superiority  over  that  of  the  English;  and 
this  superiority  has  been  remarked  in  noth¬ 
ing  so  much  as  in  the  good  management  of 
their  slaves. 

Such  have  been  the  general  outlines  of  the 
policy  of  the  different  European  nations  with 
regard  to  their  colonies. 


of  Nations 

The  policy  of  Europe,  therefore,  has  very 
little  to  boast  of,  either  in  the  original  estab¬ 
lishment  or,  so  far  as  concerns  their  internal 
government,  in  the  subsequent  prosperity  of 
the  colonies  of  America. 

Folly  and  injustice  seem  to  have  been  the 
principles  which  presided  over  and  directed 
the  first  project  of  establishing  those  col¬ 
onies;  the  folly  of  hunting  after  gold  and 
silver  mines,  and  the  injustice  of  coveting  the 
possession  of  a  country  whose  harmless  na¬ 
tives,  far  from  having  ever  injured  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Europe,  had  received  the  first  adven¬ 
turers  with  every  mark  of  kindness  and  hos¬ 
pitality. 

The  adventurers,  indeed,  who  formed  some 
of  the  later  establishments,  joined  to  the 
chimerical  project  of  finding  gold  and  silver 
mines  other  motives  more  reasonable  and 
more  laudable;  but  even  these  motives  do 
very  little  honour  to  the  policy  of  Europe. 

The  English  Puritans,  restrained  at  home, 
fled  for  freedom  to  America,  and  established 
there  the  four  governments  of  New  England. 
The  English  Catholics,  treated  with  much 
greater  injustice,  established  that  of  Mary¬ 
land;  the  Quakers,  that  of  Pennsylvania.  The 
Portuguese  Jews,  persecuted  by  the  Inquisi¬ 
tion,  stripped  of  their  fortunes,  and  banished 
to  Brazil,  introduced  by  their  example  some 
sort  of  order  and  industry  among  the  trans¬ 
ported  felons  and  strumpets  by  whom  that 
colony  was  originally  peopled,  and  taught 
them  the  culture  of  the  sugar-cane.  Upon  all 
these  different  occasions  it  was  not  the  wis¬ 
dom  and  policy,  but  the  disorder  and  injus¬ 
tice  of  the  European  governments  which  peo¬ 
pled  and  cultivated  America. 

In  effectuating  some  of  the  most  important 
of  these  establishments,  the  different  govern¬ 
ments  of  Europe  had  as  little  merit  as  in 
projecting  them.  The  conquest  of  Mexico  was 
the  project,  not  of  the  council  of  Spain,  but  of 
a  governor  of  Cuba;  and  it  was  effectuated  by 
the  spirit  of  the  bold  adventurer  to  whom  it 
was  entrusted,  in  spite  of  everything  which 
that  governor,  who  soon  repented  of  having 
trusted  such  a  person,  could  do  to  thwart  it. 
The  conquerors  of  Chili  and  Peru,  and  of  al¬ 
most  all  the  other  Spanish  settlements  upon 
the  continent  of  America,  carried  out  with 
them  no  other  public  encouragement,  but  a 
general  permission  to  make  settlements  and 
conquests  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  Spain. 
Those  adventures  were  all  at  the  private 
risk  and  expense  of  the  adventurers.  The  gov¬ 
ernment  of  Spain  contributed  scarce  anything 
to  any  of  them.  That  of  England  contributed 
as  little  towards  effectuating  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  some  of  its  most  important  colonies 
in  North  America. 

When  those  establishments  were  effectu- 


Colonies 


ated,  and  had  become  so  considerable  as  to 
attract  the  attention  of  the  mother  country, 
the  first  regulations  which  she  made  with  re¬ 
gard  to  them  had  always  in  view  to  secure  to 
herself  the  monopoly  of  their  commerce;  to 
confine  their  market,  and  to  enlarge  her  own 
at  their  expense,  and,  consequently,  rather 
to  damp  and  discourage  than  to  quicken  and 
forward  the  course  of  their  prosperity.  In  the 
different  ways  in  which  this  monopoly  has 
been  exercised  consists  one  of  the  most  essen¬ 
tial  differences  in  the  policy  of  the  different 
European  nations  with  regard  to  their  col¬ 
onies.  The  best  of  them  all,  that  of  England, 
is  only  somewhat  less  illiberal  and  oppressive 
than  that  of  any  of  the  rest. 

In  what  way,  therefore,  has  the  policy  of 


255 

Europe  contributed  either  to  the  first  estab¬ 
lishment,  or  to  the  present  grandeur  of  the 
colonies  of  America?  In  one  way,  and  in  one 
way  only,  it  has  contributed  a  good  deal. 
Magna  virum  Mater!  It  bred  and  formed  the 
men  who  were  capable  of  achieving  such 
great  actions,  and  of  laying  the  foundation 
of  so  great  an  empire;  and  there  is  no  other 
quarter  of  the  world  of  which  the  policy  is 
capable  of  forming,  or  has  ever  actually  and 
in  fact  formed  such  men.  The  colonies  owe  to 
the  policy  of  Europe  the  education  and  great 
views  of  their  active  and  enterprising  found¬ 
ers;  and  some  of  the  greatest  and  most  im¬ 
portant  of  them,  so  far  as  concerns  their  in¬ 
ternal  government,  owe  to  it  scarce  anything 
else. 


Part  3 

Of  the  Advantages  which  Europe  has  derived  from  the  Discovery  of  America ,  and  from  that  of  a 
Passage  to  the  East  Indies  hy  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope 


Such  are  the  advantages  which  the  colonies 
of  America  have  derived  from  the  policy  of 
Europe. 

What  are  those  which  Europe  has  derived 
from  the  discovery  and  colonization  of 
America? 

Those  advantages  may  be  divided,  first, 
into  the  general  advantages  which  Europe, 
considered  as  one  great  country,  has  derived 
from  those  great  events;  and,  secondly,  into 
the  particular  advantages  which  each  colo¬ 
nizing  country  has  derived  from  the  colonies 
which  particularly  belong  to  it,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  authority  or  dominion  which  it 
exercises  over  them. 

The  general  advantages  which  Europe,  con¬ 
sidered  as  one  great  country,  has  derived  from 
the  discovery  and  colonisation  of  America, 
consist,  first,  in  the  increase  of  its  enjoy¬ 
ments;  and,  secondly,  in  the  augmentation  of 
its  industry. 

The  surplus  produce  of  America,  imported 
into  Europe,  furnishes  the  inhabitants  of  this 
great  continent  with  a  variety  of  commodities 
which  they  could  not  otherwise  have  pos¬ 
sessed;  some  for  conveniency  and  use,  some 
for  pleasure,  and  some  for  ornament,  and 
thereby  contributes  to  increase  their  enjoy¬ 
ments. 

The  discovery  and  colonization  of  America, 
it  will  readily  be  allowed,  have  contributed 
to  augment  the  industry,  first,  of  all  the  coun¬ 
tries  which  trade  to  it  directly,  such  as  Spain, 
Portugal,  France,  and  England;  and,  secondly, 
of  all  those  which,  without  trading  to  it  di¬ 
rectly,  send,  through  the  medium  of  other 
countries,  goods  to  it  of  their  own  produce; 
such  as  Austrian  Flanders,  and  some  prov¬ 
inces  of  Germany,  which,  through  the  me¬ 
dium  of  the  countries  before  mentioned,  send 


to  it  a  considerable  quantity  of  linen  and 
other  goods.  All  such  countries  have  evidently 
gained  a  more  extensive  market  for  their 
surplus  produce,  and  must  consequently  have 
been  encouraged  to  increase  its  quantity. 

But  that  those  great  events  should  likewise 
have  contributed  tc  encourage  the  industry 
of  countries,  such  as  Hungary  and  Poland, 
which  may  never,  perhaps,  have  sent  a  single 
commodity  of  their  own  produce  to  America, 
is  not,  perhaps,  altogether  so  evident.  That 
those  events  have  done  so,  however,  cannot 
be  doubted.  Some  part  of  the  produce  of 
America  is  consumed  in  Hungary  and  Poland, 
and  there  is  some  demand  there  for  the  sugar, 
chocolate,  and  tobacco  of  that  new  quarter 
of  the  world.  But  those  commodities  must  be 
purchased  with  something  which  is  either 
the  produce  of  the  industry  of  Hungary  and 
Poland,  or  with  something  which  had  been 
purchased  with  some  part  of  that  produce. 
Those  commodities  of  America  are  new  val¬ 
ues,  new  equivalents,  introduced  into  Hun¬ 
gary  and  Poland  to  be  exchanged  there  for  the 
surplus  produce  of  those  countries.  By  being 
carried  thither  they  create  a  new  and  more 
extensive  market  for  that  surplus  produce. 
They  raise  its  value,  and  thereby  contribute 
to  encourage  its  increase.  Though  no  part  of 
it  may  ever  be  carried  to  America,  it  may  be 
carried  to  other  countries  which  purchase  it 
with  a  part  of  their  share  of  the  surplus  prod¬ 
uce  of  America;  and  it  may  find  a  market 
by  means  of  the  circulation  of  that  trade 
which  was  originally  put  into  motion  by  the 
surplus  produce  of  America. 

Those  great  events  may  even  have  con¬ 
tributed  to  increase  the  enjoyments,  and  to 
augment  the  industry  of  countries  which  not 
only  never  sent  any  commodities  to  America, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


256 

but  never  received  any  from  it.  Even  such 
countries  may  have  received  a  greater  abun¬ 
dance  of  other  commodities  from  countries 
of  which  the  surplus  produce  had  been  aug¬ 
mented  by  means  of  the  American  trade.  This 
greater  abundance,  as  it  must  necessarily  have 
increased  their  enjoyments,  so  it  must  like¬ 
wise  have  augmented  their  industry.  A  greater 
number  of  new  equivalents  of  some  kind  or 
other  must  have  been  presented  to  them  to 
be  exchanged  for  the  surplus  produce  of  that 
industry.  A  more  extensive  market  must  have 
been  created  for  that  surplus  produce  so  as  to 
raise  its  value,  and  thereby  encourage  its 
increase.  The  mass  of  commodities  annually 
thrown  into  the  great  circle  of  European  com¬ 
merce,  and  by  its  various  revolutions  annual¬ 
ly  distributed  among  all  the  different  nations 
comprehended  within  it,  must  have  been 
augmented  by  the  whole  surplus  produce  of 
America.  A  greater  share  of  this  greater  mass, 
therefore,  is  likely  to  have  fallen  to  each  of 
those  nations,  to  have  increased  their  enjoy¬ 
ments,  and  augmented  their  industry. 

The  exclusive  trade  of  the  mother  coun¬ 
tries  tends  to  diminish,  or,  at  least,  to  keep 
down  below  what  they  would  otherwise  rise 
to,  both  the  enjoyments  and  industry  of  all 
those  nations  in  general,  and  of  the  American 
colonies  in  particular.  It  is  a  dead  weight  up¬ 
on  the  action  of  one  of  the  great  springs  which 
puts  into  motion  a  great  part  of  the  business 
of  mankind.  By  rendering  the  colony  produce 
dearer  in  all  other  countries,  it  lessens  its  con¬ 
sumption,  and  thereby  cramps  the  industry 
of  the  colonies,  and  both  the  enjoyments  and 
the  industry  of  all  other  countries,  which  both 
enjoy  less  when  they  pay  more  for  what  they 
enjoy,  and  produce  less  when  they  get  less 
for  what  they  produce.  By  rendering  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  all  other  countries  dearer  in  the  col¬ 
onies,  it  cramps,  in  the  same  manner  the  in¬ 
dustry  of  all  other  countries,  and  both  the 
enjoyments  and  the  industry  of  the  colonies. 
It  is  a  clog  which,  for  the  supposed  benefit 
of  some  particular  countries,  embarrasses  the 
pleasures  and  encumbers  the  industry  of  all 
other  countries;  but  of  the  colonies  more  than 
of  any  other.  It  not  only  excludes,  as  much 
as  possible,  all  other  countries  from  one  par¬ 
ticular  market;  but  it  confines,  as  much  as 
possible,  the  colonies  to  one  particular  mar¬ 
ket;  and  the  difference  is  very  great  between 
being  excluded  from  one  particular  market, 
when  all  others  are  open,  and  being  confined 
to  one  particular  market,  when  all  others  are 
shut  up.  The  surplus  produce  of  the  colonies, 
however,  is  the  original  source  of  all  that  in¬ 
crease  of  enjoyments  and  industry  which 
Europe  derives  from  the  discovery  and  col¬ 
onization  of  America;  and  the  exclusive  trade 
of  the  mother  countries  tends  to  render  this 


source  much  less  abundant  than  it  otherwise 
would  be. 

The  particular  advantages  which  each  col¬ 
onizing  country  derives  from  the  colonies 
which  particularly  belong  to  it  are  of  two 
different  kinds;  first,  those  common  advan¬ 
tages  which  every  empire  derives  from  the 
provinces  subject  to  its  dominion;  and,  sec¬ 
ondly,  those  peculiar  advantages  which  are 
supposed  to  result  from  provinces  of  so  very 
peculiar  a  nature  as  the  European  colonies 
of  America. 

The  common  advantages  which  every  em¬ 
pire  derives  from  the  provinces  subject  to  its 
dominion  consist,  first,  in  the  military  force 
which  they  furnish  for  its  defence;  and,  sec¬ 
ondly,  in  the  revenue  which  they  furnish  for 
the  support  of  its  civil  government.  The  Ro¬ 
man  colonies  furnished  occasionally  both  the 
one  and  the  other.  The  Greek  colonies,  some¬ 
times,  furnished  a  military  force,  but  seldom 
any  revenue.  They  seldom  acknowledged 
themselves  subject  to  the  dominion  of  the 
mother  city.  They  were  generally  her  allies  in 
war,  but  very  seldom  her  subjects  in  peace. 

The  European  colonies  of  America  have 
never  yet  furnished  any  military  force  for 
the  defence  of  the  mother  country.  Their  mil¬ 
itary  force  has  never  yet  been  sufficient  for 
their  own  defence;  and  in  the  different  wars 
in  which  the  mother  countries  have  been  en¬ 
gaged,  the  defence  of  their  colonies  has  gen¬ 
erally  occasioned  a  very  considerable  distrac¬ 
tion  of  the  military  force  of  those  countries. 
In  this  respect,  therefore,  all  the  European 
colonies  have,  without  exception,  been  a  cause 
rather  of  weakness  than  of  strength  to  their 
respective  mother  countries. 

The  colonies  of  Spain  and  Portugal  only 
have  contributed  any  revenue  towards  the 
defence  of  the  mother  country,  or  the  support 
of  her  civil  government.  The  taxes  which  have 
been  levied  upon  those  of  other  European 
nations,  upon  those  of  England  in  particular, 
have  seldom  been  equal  to  the  expense  laid 
out  upon  them  in  time  of  peace,  and  never 
sufficient  to  defray  that  which  they  occasioned 
in  time  of  war.  Such  colonies,  therefore,  have 
been  a  source  of  expense  and  not  of  revenue 
to  their  respective  mother  countries. 

The  advantages  of  such  colonies  to  their 
respective  mother  countries  consist  altogether 
in  those  peculiar  advantages  which  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  result  from  provinces  of  so  very 
peculiar  a  nature  as  the  European  colonies 
of  America;  and  the  exclusive  trade,  it  is 
acknowledged,  is  the  sole  source  of  all  those 
peculiar  advantages. 

In  consequence  of  this  exclusive  trade,  all 
that  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  colonies,  for  example,  which  consists  in 
what  are  called  enumerated  commodities,  can 


Colonies 


be  sent  to  no  other  country  but  England. 
Other  countries  must  afterwards  buy  it  of  her. 
It  must  be  cheaper  therefore  in  England  than 
it  can  be  in  any  other  country,  and  must  con¬ 
tribute  more  to  increase  the  enjoyments  of 
England  than  those  of  any  other  country.  It 
must  likewise  contribute  more  to  encourage 
her  industry.  For  all  those  parts  of  her  own 
surplus  produce  which  England  exchanges 
for  those  enumerated  commodities,  she  must 
get  a  better  price  than  any  other  countries 
can  get  for  the  like  parts  of  theirs,  when  they 
exchange  them  for  the  same  commodities. 
The  manufactures  of  England,  for  example, 
will  purchase  a  greater  quantity  of  the  sugar 
and  tobacco  of  her  own  colonies  than  the  like 
manufactures  of  other  countries  can  purchase 
of  that  sugar  and  tobacco.  So  far,  therefore, 
as  the  manufactures  of  England  and  those  of 
other  countries  are  both  to  be  exchanged  for 
the  sugar  and  tobacco  of  the  English  colonies, 
this  superiority  of  price  gives  an  encourage¬ 
ment  to  the  former  beyond  what  the  latter 
can  in  these  circumstances  enjoy.  The  exclu¬ 
sive  trade  of  the  colonies,  therefore,  as  it  di¬ 
minishes,  or  at  least  keeps  down  below  what 
they  would  otherwise  rise  to,  both  the  en¬ 
joyments  and  the  industry  of  the  countries 
which  do  not  possess  it;  so  it  gives  an  evident 
advantage  to  the  countries  which  do  possess 
it  over  those  other  countries. 

This  advantage,  however,  will  perhaps  be 
found  to  be  rather  what  may  be  called  a  rel¬ 
ative  than  an  absolute  advantage;  and  to 
give  a  superiority  to  the  country  which  enjoys 
it  rather  by  depressing  the  industry  and  prod¬ 
uce  of  other  countries  than  by  raising  those 
of  that  particular  country  above  what  they 
would  naturally  rise  to  in  the  case  of  a  free 
trade. 

The  tobacco  of  Maryland  and  Virginia,  for 
example,  by  means  of  the  monopoly  which 
England  enjoys  of  it,  certainly  comes  cheaper 
to  England  than  it  can  do  to  France,  to  whom 
England  commonly  sells  a  considerable  part 
of  it.  But  had  France,  and  all  other  European 
countries  been,  at  all  times,  allowed  a  free 
trade  to  Maryland  and  Virginia,  the  tobacco  of 
those  colonies  might,  by  this  time,  have  come 
cheaper  than  it  actually  does,  not  only  to  all 
those  other  countries,  but  likewise  to  Eng¬ 
land.  The  produce  of  tobacco,  in  consequence 
of  a  market  so  much  more  extensive  than  any 
which  it  has  hitherto  enjoyed,  might,  and 
probably  would,  by  this  time,  have  been  so 
much  increased  as  to  reduce  the  profits  of 
a  tobacco  plantation  to  their  natural  level 
with  those  of  a  corn  plantation,  which,  it  is 
supposed,  they  are  still  somewhat  above.  The 
price  of  tobacco  might,  and  probably  would, 
by  this  time,  have  fallen  somewhat  lower 
than  it  is  at  present.  An  equal  quantity  of  the 


257 

commodities  either  of  England  or  of  those 
other  countries  might  have  purchased  in 
Maryland  and  Virginia  a  greater  quantity  of 
tobacco  than  it  can  do  at  present,  and  conse¬ 
quently  have  been  sold  there  for  so  much  a 
better  price.  So  far  as  that  weed,  therefore, 
can,  by  its  cheapness  and  abundance,  increase 
the  enjoyments  or  augment  the  industry 
either  of  England  or  of  any  other  country,  it 
would,  probably,  in  the  case  of  a  free  trade, 
have  produced  both  these  effects  in  somewhat 
a  greater  degree  than  it  can  do  at  present. 
England,  indeed,  would  not  in  this  case  have 
had  any  advantage  over  other  countries.  She 
might  have  bought  the  tobacco  of  her  colo¬ 
nies  somewhat  cheaper,  and  consequently 
have  sold  some  of  her  own  commodities  some¬ 
what  dearer  than  she  actually  does.  But  she 
could  neither  have  bought  the  one  cheaper 
nor  sold  the  other  dearer  than  any  other  coun¬ 
try  might  have  done.  She  might,  perhaps 
have  gained  an  absolute,  but  she  would  cer¬ 
tainly  have  lost  a  relative  advantage. 

In  order,  however,  to  obtain  this  relative 
advantage  in  the  colony  trade,  in  order  to 
execute  the  invidious  and  malignant  project 
of  excluding  as  much  as  possible  other  nations 
from  any  share  in  it,  England,  there  are  very 
probable  reasons  for  believing,  has  not  only 
sacrificed  a  part  of  the  absolute  advantage 
which  she,  as  well  as  every  other  nation, 
might  have  derived  from  that  trade,  but  has 
subjected  herself  both  to  an  absolute  and  to 
a  relative  disadvantage  in  almost  every  other 
branch  of  trade. 

When,  by  the  Act  of  Navigation,  England 
assumed  to  herself  the  monopoly  of  the  col¬ 
ony  trade,  the  foreign  capitals  which  had 
before  been  employed  in  it  were  necessarily 
withdrawn  from  it.  The  English  capital,  which 
had  before  carried  on  but  a  part  of  it,  was 
now  to  carry  on  the  whole.  The  capital  which 
had  before  supplied  the  colonies  with  but  a 
part  of  the  goods  which  they  wanted  from 
Europe  was  now  all  that  was  employed  to 
supply  them  with  the  whole.  But  it  could  not 
supply  them  with  the  whole,  and  the  goods 
with  which  it  did  supply  them  were  neces¬ 
sarily  sold  very  dear.  The  capital  which  had 
before  bought  but  a  part  of  the  surplus  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  colonies,  was  now  all  that  was  em¬ 
ployed  to  buy  the  whole.  But  it  could  not 
buy  the  whole  at  anything  near  the  old  price, 
and,  therefore,  whatever  it  did  buy  it  neces¬ 
sarily  bought  very  cheap.  But  in  an  employ¬ 
ment  of  capital  in  which  the  merchant  sold 
very  dear  and  bought  very  cheap,  the  profit 
must  have  been  very  great,  and  much  above 
the  ordinary  level  of  profit  in  other  branches 
of  trade.  This  superiority  of  profit  in  the  col¬ 
ony  trade  could  not  fail  to  draw  from  other 
branches  of  trade  a  part  of  the  capital  which 


258  The  Wealth 

had  before  been  employed  in  them.  But  this 
revulsion  of  capital,  as  it  must  have  gradual¬ 
ly  increased  the  competition  of  capitals  in  the 
colony  trade,  so  it  must  have  gradually  di¬ 
minished  that  competition  in  all  those  other 
branches  of  trade;  as  it  must  have  gradually 
lowered  the  profits  of  the  one,  so  it  must  have 
gradually  raised  those  of  the  other,  till  the 
profits  of  all  came  to  a  new  level,  different 
from  and  somewhat  higher  than  that  at  which 
they  had  been  before. 

This  double  effect  of  drawing  capital  from 
all  other  trades,  and  of  raising  the  rate  of 
profit  somewhat  higher  than  it  otherwise 
would  have  been  in  all  trades,  was  not  only 
produced  by  this  monopoly  upon  its  first 
establishment,  but  has  continued  to  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  it  ever  since. 

First,  this  monopoly  has  been  continually 
drawing  capital  from  all  other  trades  to  be 
employed  in  that  of  the  colonies. 

Though  the  wealth  of  Great  Britain  has  in¬ 
creased  very  much  since  the  establishment  of 
the  Act  of  Navigation,  it  certainly  has  not 
increased  in  the  same  proportion  as  that  of 
the  colonies.  But  the  foreign  trade  of  every 
country  naturally  increases  in  proportion  to 
its  wealth,  its  surplus  produce  in  proportion 
to  its  whole  produce;  and  Great  Britain  hav¬ 
ing  engrossed  to  herself  almost  the  whole  of 
what  may  be  called  the  foreign  trade  of  the 
colonies,  and  her  capital  not  having  increased 
in  the  same  proportion  as  the  extent  of  that 
trade,  she  could  not  carry  it  on  without  con¬ 
tinually  withdrawing  from  other  branches  of 
trade  some  part  of  the  capital  which  had  be¬ 
fore  been  employed  in  them  as  well  as  with¬ 
holding  from  them  a  great  deal  more  which 
would  otherwise  have  gone  to  them.  Since  the 
establishment  of  the  Act  of  Navigation,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  colony  trade  has  been  contin¬ 
ually  increasing,  while  many  other  branches 
of  foreign  trade,  particularly  of  that  to  other 
parts  of  Europe,  have  been  continually  de¬ 
caying.  Our  manufactures  for  foreign  sale, 
instead  of  being  suited,  as  before  the  Act  of 
Navigation,  to  the  neighbouring  market  of 
Europe,  or  to  the  more  distant  one  of  the 
countries  which  lie  round  the  Mediterranean 
Sea,  have,  the  greater  part  of  them,  been  ac¬ 
commodated  to  the  still  more  distant  one  of 
the  colonies,  to  the  market  in  which  they 
have  the  monopoly  rather  than  to  that  in 
which  they  have  many  competitors.  The 
causes  of  decay  in  other  branches  of  foreign 
trade,  which,  by  Sir  Matthew  Decker  and 
other  writers,  have  been  sought  for  in  the 
excess  and  improper  mode  of  taxation,  in  the 
high  price  of  labour,  in  the  increase  of  luxury, 
etc.,  may  all  be  found  in  the  overgrowth  of 
the  colony  trade.  The  mercantile  capital  of 
Great  Britain,  though  very  great,  yet  not 


of  Nations 

being  infinite,  and  though  greatly  increased 
since  the  Act  of  Navigation,  yet  not  being 
increased  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  col¬ 
ony  trade,  that  trade  could  not  possibly  be 
carried  on  without  withdrawing  some  part  of 
that  capital  from  other  branches  of  trade,  nor 
consequently  without  some  decay  of  those 
other  branches. 

England,  it  must  be  observed,  was  a  great 
trading  country,  her  mercantile  capital  was 
very  great  and  likely  to  become  still  greate  * 
and  greater  every  day,  not  only  before  the  Act 
of  Navigation  had  established  the  monopoly 
of  the  colony  trade,  but  before  that  trade  was 
very  considerable.  In  the  Dutch  war,  during 
the  government  of  Cromwell,  her  navy  was 
superior  to  that  of  Holland;  and  in  that  which 
broke  out  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
Charles  II,  it  was  at  last  equal,  perhaps  su¬ 
perior,  to  the  united  navies  of  France  and 
Holland.  Its  superiority,  perhaps,  would 
scarce  appear  greater  in  the  present  times;  at 
least  if  the  Dutch  navy  was  to  bear  the  same 
proportion  to  the  Dutch  commerce  now  which 
it  did  then.  But  this  great  naval  power  could 
not,  in  either  of  those  wars,  be  owing  to  the 
Act  of  Navigation.  During  the  first  of  them 
the  plan  of  that  act  had  been  but  just  formed; 
and  though  before  the  breaking  out  of  the 
second  it  had  been  fully  enacted  by  legal  au¬ 
thority,  yet  no  part  of  it  could  have  had 
time  to  produce  any  considerable  effect,  and 
least  of  all  that  part  which  established  the 
exclusive  trade  to  the  colonies.  Both  the  col¬ 
onies  and  their  trade  were  inconsiderable 
then  in  comparison  of  what  they  are  now. 
The  island  of  Jamaica  was  an  unwholesome 
desert,  little  inhabited,  and  less  cultivated. 
New  York  and  New  Jersey  were  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  the  Dutch:  the  half  of  St.  Christo¬ 
pher’s  in  that  of  the  French.  The  island  of 
Antigua,  the  two  Carolinas,  Pennsylvania, 
Georgia,  and  Nova  Scotia  were  not  planted. 
Virginia,  Maryland,  and  New  England  were 
planted;  and  though  they  were  very  thriving 
colonies,  yet  there  was  not,  perhaps,  at  that 
time,  either  in  Europe  or  America,  a  single 
person  who  foresaw  or  even  suspected  the 
rapid  progress  which  they  have  since  made  in 
wealth,  population,  and  improvement.  The 
island  of  Barbadoes,  in  short,  was  the  only 
British  colony  of  any  consequence  of  which 
the  condition  at  that  time  bore  any  resem¬ 
blance  to  what  it  is  at  present.  The  trade  of 
the  colonies,  of  which  England,  even  for  some 
time  after  the  Act  of  Navigation,  enjoyed  but 
a  part  (for  the  Act  of  Navigation  was  not 
very  strictly  executed  till  several  years  after 
it  was  enacted) ,  could  not  at  that  time  be 
the  cause  of  the  great  trade  of  England,  nor 
of  the  great  naval  power  which  was  supported 
by  that  trade.  The  trade  which  at  that  time 


Colonies 


supported  that  great  naval  power  was  the 
trade  of  Europe,  and  of  the  countries  which 
lie  round  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  But  the 
share  which  Great  Britain  at  present  enjoys 
of  that  trade  could  not  support  any  such  great 
naval  power.  Had  the  growing  trade  of  the 
colonies  been  left  free  to  all  nations,  what¬ 
ever  share  of  it  might  have  fallen  to  Great 
Britain,  and  a  very  considerable  share  would 
probably  have  fallen  to  her,  must  have  been 
all  an  addition  to  this  great  trade  of  which 
she  was  before  in  possession.  In  consequence 
of  the  monopoly,  the  increase  of  the  colony 
trade  has  not  so  much  occasioned  an  addition 
to  the  trade  which  Great  Britain  had  before 
as  a  total  change  in  its  direction. 

Secondly,  this  monopoly  has  necessarily 
contributed  to  keep  up  the  rate  of  profit  in 
all  the  different  branches  of  British  trade 
higher  than  it  naturally  would  have  been  had 
all  nations  been  allowed  a  free  trade  to  the 
British  colonies. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  as  it 
necessarily  drew  towards  that  trade  a  greater 
proportion  of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain 
than  what  would  have  gone  to  it  of  its  own 
accord;  so  by  the  expulsion  of  all  foreign  cap¬ 
itals  it  necessarily  reduced  the  whole  quantity 
of  capital  employed  in  that  trade  below  what 
it  naturally  would  have  been  in  the  case  of 
a  free  trade.  But,  by  lessening  the  competi¬ 
tion  of  capitals  in  that  branch  of  trade,  it 
necessarily  raised  the  rate  of  profit  in  that 
branch.  By  lessening,  too,  the  competition 
of  British  capitals  in  all  other  branches  of 
trade,  it  necessarily  raised  the  rate  of  British 
profit  in  all  those  other  branches.  Whatever 
may  have  been,  at  any  particular  period, 
since  the  establishment  of  the  Act  of  Naviga¬ 
tion,  the  state  or  extent  of  the  mercantile 
capital  of  Great  Britain,  the  monopoly  of 
the  colony  trade  must,  during  the  continuance 
of  that  state,  have  raised  the  ordinary  rate  of 
British  profit  higher  than  it  otherwise  would 
have  been  both  in  that  and  in  all  the  other 
branches  of  British  trade.  If,  since  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  the  Act  of  Navigation,  the  ordi¬ 
nary  rate  of  British  profit  has  fallen  consider¬ 
ably,  as  it  certainly  has,  it  must  have  fallen 
still  lower,  had  not  the  monopoly  established 
by  that  act  contributed  to  keep  it  up. 

But  whatever  raises  in  any  country  the 
ordinary  rate  of  profit  higher  than  it  other¬ 
wise  would  be,  necessarily  subjects  that  coun¬ 
try  both  to  an  absolute  and  to  a  relative  dis¬ 
advantage  in  every  branch  of  trade  of  which 
she  has  not  the  monopoly. 

It  subjects  her  to  an  absolute  disadvan¬ 
tage;  because  in  such  branches  of  trade  her 
merchants  cannot  get  this  greater  profit  with¬ 
out  selling  dearer  than  they  otherwise  would 
do  both  the  goods  of  foreign  countries  which 


259 

they  import  into  their  own,  and  the  goods 
of  their  own  country  which  they  export  to 
foreign  countries.  Their  own  country  must 
both  buy  dearer  and  sell  dearer;  must  both 
buy  less  and  sell  less;  must  both  enjoy  less 
and  produce  less,  than  she  otherwise  would 
do. 

It  subjects  her  to  a  relative  disadvantage; 
because  in  such  branches  of  trade  it  sets 
other  countries  which  are  not  subject  to  the 
same  absolute  disadvantage  either  more  above 
her  or  less  below  her  than  they  otherwise 
would  be.  It  enables  them  both  to  enjoy  more 
and  to  produce  more  in  proportion  to  what 
she  enjoys  and  produces.  It  renders  their 
superiority  greater  or  their  inferiority  less 
than  it  otherwise  would  be.  By  raising  the 
price  of  her  produce  above  what  it  otherwise 
would  be,  it  enables  the  merchants  of  other 
countries  to  undersell  her  in  foreign  markets, 
and  thereby  to  jostle  her  out  of  almost  all 
those  branches  of  trade,  of  which  she  has  not 
the  monopoly. 

Our  merchants  frequently  complain  of  the 
high  wages  of  British  labour  as  the  cause  of 
their  manufactures  being  undersold  in  for¬ 
eign  markets,  but  they  are  silent  about  the 
high  profits  of  stock.  They  complain  of  the 
extravagant  gain  of  other  people,  but  they 
say  nothing  of  their  own.  The  high  profits  of 
British  stock,  however,  may  contribute  to¬ 
wards  raising  the  price  of  British  manufac¬ 
tures  in  many  cases  as  much,  and  in  some 
perhaps  more,  than  the  high  wages  of  British 
labour. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  capital  of 
Great  Britain,  one  may  justly  say,  has  partly 
been  drawn  and  partly  been  driven  from  the 
greater  part  of  the  different  branches  of  trade 
of  which  she  has  not  the  monopoly;  from  the 
trade  of  Europe  in  particular,  and  from  that 
of  the  countries  which  lie  round  the  Mediter¬ 
ranean  Sea. 

It  has  partly  been  drawn  from  those 
branches  of  trade  by  the  attraction  of  superior 
profit  in  the  colony  trade  in  consequence  of 
the  continual  increase  of  that  trade,  and  of 
the  continual  insufficiency  of  the  capital  which 
had  carried  it  on  one  year  to  carry  it  on  the 
next. 

It  has  partly  been  driven  from  them  by  the 
advantage  which  the  high  rate  of  profit,  es¬ 
tablished  in  Great  Britain,  gives  to  other 
countries  in  all  the  different  branches  of  trade 
of  which  Great  Britain  has  not  the  monopoly. 

As  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  has 
drawn  from  those  other  branches  a  part  of  the 
British  capital  which  would  otherwise  have 
been  employed  in  them,  so  it  has  forced  into 
them  many  foreign  capitals  which  would  never 
have  gone  to  them  had  they  not  been  ex¬ 
pelled  from  the  colony  trade.  In  those  other 


2(50 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


branches  of  trade  it  has  diminished  the  com¬ 
petition  of  British  capital,  and  thereby  raised 
the  rate  of  British  profit  higher  than  it  other¬ 
wise  would  have  been.  On  the  contrary,  it 
has  increased  the  competition  of  foreign  capi¬ 
tals,  and  thereby  sunk  the  rate  of  foreign 
profit  lower  than  it  otherwise  would  have 
been.  Both  in  the  one  way  and  in  the  other 
it  must  evidently  have  subjected  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  to  a  relative  disadvantage  in  all  those 
other  branches  of  trade. 

The  colony  trade,  however,  it  may  perhaps 
be  said,  is  more  advantageous  to  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  than  any  other;  and  the  monopoly,  by 
forcing  into  that  trade  a  greater  proportion 
of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain  than  what 
would  otherwise  have  gone  to  it,  has  turned 
that  capital  into  an  employment  more  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  country  than  any  other 
which  it  could  have  found. 

The  most  advantageous  employment  of  any 
capital  to  the  country  to  which  it  belongs  is 
that  which  maintains  there  the  greatest  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  labour,  and  increases  the 
most  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  la¬ 
bour  of  that  country.  But  the  quantity  of  pro¬ 
ductive  labour  which  any  capital  employed  in 
the  foreign  trade  of  consumption  can  main¬ 
tain  is  exactly  in  proportion,  it  has  been 
shown  in  the  second  book,  to  the  frequency 
of  its  returns.  A  capital  of  a  thousand  pounds, 
for  example,  employed  in  a  foreign  trade  of 
consumption,  of  which  the  returns  are  made 
regularly  once  in  the  year,  can  keep  in  con¬ 
stant  employment,  in  the  country  to  which 
it  belongs,  a  quantity  of  productive  labour 
equal  to  what  a  thousand  pounds  can  main¬ 
tain  there  for  a  year.  If  the  returns  are  made 
twice  or  thrice  in  the  year,  it  can  keep  in  con¬ 
stant  employment  a  quantity  of  productive 
labour  equal  to  what  two  or  three  thousand 
pounds  can  maintain  there  for  a  year.  A  for¬ 
eign  trade  of  consumption  carried  on  with  a 
neighbouring  country  is,  upon  this  account,  in 
general  more  advantageous  than  one  carried 
on  with  a  distant  country;  and  for  the  same 
reason  a  direct  foreign  trade  of  consumption, 
as  it  has  likewise  been  shown  in  the  second 
book,  is  in  general  more  advantageous  than 
a  round-about  one. 

But  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  so  far 
as  it  has  operated  upon  the  employment  of 
the  capital  of  Great  Britain,  has  in  all  cases 
forced  some  part  of  it  from  a  foreign  trade 
of  consumption  carried  on  with  a  neighbour¬ 
ing,  to  one  carried  on  with  a  more  distant 
country,  and  in  many  cases  from  a  direct 
foreign  trade  of  consumption  to  a  round-about 
one. 

First,  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  has 
in  all  cases  forced  some  part  of  the  capital  of 
Great  Britain  from  a  foreign  trade  of  con¬ 


sumption  carried  on  with  a  neighbouring  to 
one  carried  on  with  a  more  distant  country. 

It  has,  in  all  cases,  forced  some  part  of  that 
capital  from  the  trade  with  Europe,  and  with 
the  countries  which  lie  round  the  Mediter¬ 
ranean  Sea,  to  that  with  the  more  distant 
regions  of  America  and  the  West  Indies,  from 
which  the  returns  are  necessarily  less  fre¬ 
quent,  not  only  on  account  of  the  greater 
distance,  but  on  account  of  the  peculiar  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  those  countries.  New  colonies, 
it  has  already  been  observed,  are  always 
understocked.  Their  capital  is  always  much 
less  than  what  they  could  employ  with  great 
profit  and  advantage  in  the  improvement  and 
cultivation  of  their  land.  They  have  a  con¬ 
stant  demand,  therefore,  for  more  capital 
than  they  have  of  their  own;  and,  in  order  to 
supply  the  deficiency  of  their  own,  they  en¬ 
deavour  to  borrow  as  much  as  they  can  of  the 
mother  country,  to  whom  they  are,  therefore, 
always  in  debt.  The  most  common  way  in 
which  the  colonists  contract  this  debt  is  not 
by  borrowing  upon  bond  of  the  rich  people 
of  the  mother  country,  though  they  some¬ 
times  do  this  too,  but  by  running  as  much 
in  arrear  to  their  correspondents,  who  supply 
them  with  goods  from  Europe,  as  those  cor¬ 
respondents  will  allow  them.  Their  annual 
returns  frequently  do  not  amount  to  more 
than  a  third,  and  sometimes  not  to  so  great 
a  proportion  of  what  they  owe.  The  whole 
capital,  therefore,  which  their  correspondents 
advance  to  them  is  seldom  returned  to  Britain 
in  less  than  three,  and  sometimes  not  in  less 
than  four  or  five  years.  But  a  British  capital 
of  a  thousand  pounds,  for  example,  which  is 
returned  to  Great  Britain  only  once  in  five 
years,  can  keep  in  constant  employment  only 
one-fifth  part  of  the  British  industry  which 
it  could  maintain  if  the  whole  was  returned 
once  in  the  year;  and,  instead  of  the  quantity 
of  industry  which  a  thousand  pounds  could 
maintain  for  a  year,  can  keep  in  constant  em¬ 
ployment  the  quantity  only  which  two  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  can  maintain  for  a  year.  The 
planter,  no  doubt,  by  the  high  price  which  he 
pays  for  the  goods  from  Europe,  by  the  in¬ 
terest  upon  the  bills  which  he  grants  at  dis¬ 
tant  dates,  and  by  the  commission  upon  the 
renewal  of  those  which  he  grants  at  near 
dates,  makes  up,  and  probably  more  than 
makes  up,  all  the  loss  which  his  correspondent 
can  sustain  by  this  delay.  But  though  he  may 
make  up  the  loss  of  his  correspondent,  he 
cannot  make  up  that  of  Great  Britain.  In  a 
trade  of  which  the  returns  are  very  distant, 
the  profit  of  the  merchant  may  be  as  great 
or  greater  than  in  one  in  which  they  are  very 
frequent  and  near;  but  the  advantage  of  the 
country  in  which  he  resides,  the  quantity 
of  productive  labour  constantly  maintained 


Colonies 


there,  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  la¬ 
bour  must  always  be  much  less.  That  the 
returns  of  the  trade  to  America,  and  still 
more  those  of  that  to  the  West  Indies  are,  in 
general,  not  only  more  distant  but  more  ir¬ 
regular,  and  more  uncertain  too,  than  those 
of  the  trade  to  any  part  of  Europe,  or  even  of 
the  countries  which  lie  round  the  Mediter¬ 
ranean  Sea,  will  readily  be  allowed,  I  imagine, 
by  everybody  who  has  any  experience  of 
those  different  branches  of  trade. 

Secondly,  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade 
has,  in  many  cases,  forced  some  part  of  the 
capital  of  Great  Britain  from  a  direct  foreign 
trade  of  consumption  into  a  round-about  one. 

Among  the  enumerated  commodities  which 
can  be  sent  to  no  other  market  but  Great 
Britain,  there  are  several  of  which  the  quan¬ 
tity  exceeds  very  much  the  consumption  of 
Great  Britain,  and  of  which  a  part,  therefore, 
must  be  exported  to  other  countries.  But 
this  cannot  be  done  without  forcing  some 
part  of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain  into  a 
round-about  foreign  trade  of  consumption. 
Maryland  and  Virginia,  for  example,  send 
annually  to  Great  Britain  upwards  of  ninety- 
six  thousand  hogsheads  of  tobacco,  and  the 
consumption  of  Great  Britain  is  said  not  to 
exceed  fourteen  thousand.  Upwards  of  eighty- 
two  thousand  hogsheads,  therefore,  must  he 
exported  to  other  countries,  to  France,  to 
Holland,  and  to  the  countries  which  lie  round 
the  Baltic  and  Mediterranean  Seas.  But  that 
part  of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain  which 
brings  those  eighty-two  thousand  hogsheads 
to  Great  Britain,  which  re-exports  them  from 
thence  to  those  other  countries,  and  which 
brings  back  from  those  other  countries  to 
Great  Britain  either  goods  or  money  in  return, 
is  employed  in  a  round-about  foreign  trade 
of  consumption;  and  is  necessarily  forced  into 
this  employment  in  order  to  dispose  of  this 
great  surplus.  If  we  would  compute  in  how 
many  years  the  whole  of  this  capital  is  likely 
to  come  back  to  Great  Britain,  we  must  add 
to  the  distance  of  the  American  returns  that 
of  the  returns  from  those  other  countries.  If, 
in  the  direct  foreign  trade  of  consumption 
which  we  carry  on  with  America,  the  whole 
capital  employed  frequently  does  not  come 
back  in  less  than  three  or  four  years,  the 
whole  capital  employed  in  this  round-about 
one  is  not  likely  to  come  back  in  less  than 
four  or  five.  If  the  one  can  keep  in  constant 
employment  but  a  third  or  a  fourth  part  of 
the  domestic  industry  which  could  be  main¬ 
tained  by  a  capital  returned  once  in  the  year, 
the  other  can  keep  in  constant  employment 
but  a  fourth  or  fifth  part  of  that  industry. 
At  some  of  the  out-ports  a  credit  is  common¬ 
ly  given  to  those  foreign  correspondents  to 
whom  they  export  their  tobacco.  At  the  port 


261 

of  London,  indeed,  it  is  commonly  sold  for 
ready  money.  The  rule  is,  Weigh  and  pay.  At 
the  port  of  London,  therefore,  the  final  re¬ 
turns  of  the  whole  round-about  trade  are 
more  distant  than  the  returns  from  America 
by  the  time  only  which  the  goods  may  lie  un¬ 
sold  in  the  warehouse;  where,  however,  they 
may  sometimes  lie  long  enough.  But  had  not 
the  colonies  been  confined  to  the  market  of 
Great  Britain  for  the  sale  of  their  tobacco, 
very  little  more  of  it  would  probably  have 
come  to  us  than  what  was  necessary  for  the 
home  consumption.  The  goods  which  Great 
Britain  purchases  at  present  for  her  own  con¬ 
sumption  with  the  great  surplus  of  tobacco 
which  she  exports  to  other  countries,  she 
would  in  this  case  probably  have  purchased 
with  the  immediate  produce  of  her  own 
industry,  or  with  some  part  of  her  own 
manufactures.  That  produce,  those  manufac¬ 
tures,  instead  of  being  almost  entirely  suited 
to  one  great  market,  as  at  present,  would 
probably  have  been  fitted  to  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  smaller  markets.  Instead  of  one  great 
round-about  foreign  trade  of  consumption, 
Great  Britain  would  probably  have  carried  on 
a  great  number  of  small  direct  foreign  trades 
of  the  same  kind.  On  account  of  the  frequen¬ 
cy  of  the  returns,  a  part,  and  probably  but  a 
small  part;  perhaps  not  above  a  third  or  a 
fourth  of  the  capital  which  at  present  carries 
on  this  great  round-about  trade  might  have 
been  sufficient  to  carry  on  all  those  small  direct 
ones,  might  have  kept  in  constant  employ¬ 
ment  an  equal  quantity  of  British  industry, 
and  have  equally  supported  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  Great  Britain. 
All  the  purposes  of  this  trade  being,  in  this 
manner,  answered  by  a  much  smaller  capital, 
there  would  have  been  a  large  spare  capital 
to  apply  to  other  purposes:  to  improve  the 
lands,  to  increase  the  manufactures,  and  to 
extend  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain;  to 
come  into  competition  at  least  with  the  other 
British  capitals  employed  in  all  those  different 
ways,  to  reduce  the  rate  of  profit  in  them  all, 
and  thereby  to  give  to  Great  Britain,  in  all 
of  them,  a  superiority  over  other  countries 
still  greater  than  what  she  at  present  enjoys. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  too,  has 
forced  some  part  of  the  capital  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  from  all  foreign  trade  of  consumption  to 
a  carrying  trade;  and  consequently,  from  sup¬ 
porting  more  or  less  the  industry  of  Great 
Britain,  to  be  employed  altogether  in  sup¬ 
porting  partly  that  of  the  colonies  and  partly 
that  of  some  other  countries. 

The  goods,  for  example,  which  are  annu¬ 
ally  purchased  with  the  great  surplus  of 
eighty- two  thousand  hogsheads  of  tobacco 
annually  re-exported  from  Great  Britain  are 
not  all  consumed  in  Great  Britain.  Part  of 


262 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


them,  linen  from  Germany  and  Holland,  for 
example,  is  returned  to  the  colonies  for  their 
particular  consumption.  But  that  part  of  the 
capital  of  Great  Britain  which  buys  the  to¬ 
bacco  with  which  this  linen  is  afterwards 
bought  is  necessarily  withdrawn  from  sup¬ 
porting  the  industry  of  Great  Britain,  to  be 
employed  altogether  in  supporting,  partly  that 
of  the  colonies,  and  partly  that  of  the  particu¬ 
lar  countries  who  pay  for  this  tobacco  with 
the  produce  of  their  own  industry. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  besides, 
by  forcing  towards  it  a  much  greater  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain  than  what 
would  naturally  have  gone  to  it,  seems 
to  have  broken  altogether  that  natural  bal¬ 
ance  which  would  otherwise  have  taken  place 
among  all  the  different  branches  of  British 
industry.  The  industry  of  Great  Britain,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  accommodated  to  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  small  markets,  has  been  principally 
suited  to  one  great  market.  Her  commerce, 
instead  of  running  in  a  great  number  of  small 
channels,  has  been  taught  to  run  principally 
in  one  great  channel.  But  the  whole  system 
of  her  industry  and  commerce  has  thereby 
been  rendered  less  secure,  the  whole  state  of 
her  body  politic  less  healthful  than  it  other¬ 
wise  would  have  been.  In  her  present  con¬ 
dition,  Great  Britain  resembles  one  of  those 
unwholesome  bodies  in  which  some  of  the 
vital  parts  are  overgrown,  and  which,  upon 
that  account,  are  liable  to  many  dangerous 
disorders  scarce  incident  to  those  in  which  all 
the  parts  are  more  properly  proportioned.  A 
small  stop  in  that  great  blood-vessel,  which 
has  been  artificially  swelled  beyond  its  natural 
dimensions,  and  through  which  an  unnatural 
proportion  of  the  industry  and  commerce  of 
the  country  has  been  forced  to  circulate,  is 
very  likely  to  bring  on  the  most  dangerous 
disorders  upon  the  whole  body  politic.  The 
expectation  of  a  rupture  with  the  colonies, 
accordingly,  has  struck  the  people  of  Great 
Britain  with  more  terror  than  they  ever  felt, 
for  a  Spanish  armada,  or  a  French  invasion. 
It  was  this  terror,  whether  well  or  ill  ground¬ 
ed,  which  rendered  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp 
Act,  among  the  merchants  at  least,  a  popu¬ 
lar  measure.  In  the  total  exclusion  from  the 
colony  market,  was  it  to  last  only  for  a  few 
years,  the  greater  part  of  our  merchants  used 
to  fancy  that  they  foresaw  an  entire  stop  to 
their  trade;  the  greater  part  of  our  master 
manufacturers,  the  entire  ruin  of  their  busi¬ 
ness;  and  the  greater  part  of  our  workmen,  an 
end  of  their  employment.  A  rupture  with  any 
of  our  neighbours  upon  the  continent,  though 
likely,  too,  to  occasion  some  stop  or  interrup¬ 
tion  in  the  employments  of  some  of  all  these 
different  orders  of  people,  is  foreseen,  how¬ 
ever,  without  any  such  general  emotion.  The 


blood,  of  which  the  circulation  is  stopped  in 
some  of  the  smaller  vessels,  easily  disgorges 
itself  into  the  greater  without  occasioning  any 
dangerous  disorder;  but,  when  it  is  stopped 
in  any  of  the  greater  vessels,  convulsions, 
apoplexy,  or  death,  are  the  immediate  and 
unavoidable  consequences.  If  but  one  of  those 
overgrown  manufactures,  which,  by  means 
either  of  bounties  or  of  the  monopoly  of  the 
home  and  colony  markets,  have  been  artifi¬ 
cially  raised  up  to  an  unnatural  height,  finds 
some  small  stop  or  interruption  in  its  employ¬ 
ment,  it  frequently  occasions  a  mutiny  and 
disorder  alarming  to  government,  and  embar¬ 
rassing  even  to  the  deliberations  of  the  legis¬ 
lature.  How  great,  therefore,  would  be  the 
disorder  and  confusion,  it  was  thought,  which 
must  necessarily  be  occasioned  by  a  sudden 
and  entire  stop  in  the  employment  of  so  great 
a  proportion  of  our  principal  manufacturers. 

Some  moderate  and  gradual  relaxation  of 
the  laws  which  give  to  Great  Britain  the 
exclusive  trade  to  the  colonies,  till  it  is  ren¬ 
dered  in  a  great  measure  free,  seems  to  be 
the  only  expedient  which  can,  in  all  future 
times,  deliver  her  from  this  danger,  which 
can  enable  her  or  even  force  her  to  withdraw 
some  part  of  her  capital  from  this  overgrown 
employment,  and  to  turn  it,  though  with 
less  profit,  towards  other  employments;  and 
which,  by  gradually  diminishing  one  branch 
of  her  industry  and  gradually  increasing  all 
the  rest,  can  by  degrees  restore  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  branches  of  it  to  that  natural,  healthful, 
and  proper  proportion  which  perfect  liberty 
necessarily  establishes,  and  which  perfect  lib¬ 
erty  can  alone  preserve.  To  open  the  colony 
trade  all  at  once  to  all  nations  might  not  only 
occasion  some  transitory  inconveniency,  but 
a  great  permanent  loss  to  the  greater  part  of 
those  whose  industry  or  capital  is  at  present 
engaged  in  it.  The  sudden  loss  of  the  employ¬ 
ment  even  of  the  ships  which  import  the 
eighty-two  thousand  hogsheads  of  tobacco, 
which  are  over  and  above  the  consumption  of 
Great  Britain,  might  alone  be  felt  very  sensi¬ 
bly.  Such  are  the  unfortunate  effects  of  all  the 
regulations  of  the  mercantile  system!  They  not 
only  introduce  very  dangerous  disorders  into 
the  state  of  the  body  politic,  but  disorders 
which  it  is  often  difficult  to  remedy,  without 
occasioning  for  a  time  at  least,  still  greater 
disorders.  In  what  manner,  therefore,  the  col¬ 
ony  trade  ought  gradually  to  be  opened;  what 
are  the  restraints  ^’hich  ought  first,  and  what 
are  those  which  ought  last  to  be  taken  away; 
or  in  what  manner  the  natural  system  of  per¬ 
fect  liberty  and  justice  ought  gradually  to  be 
restored,  we  must  leave  to  the  wisdom  of  fu¬ 
ture  statesmen  and  legislators  to  determine. 

Five  different  events,  unforeseen  and  un¬ 
thought  of,  have  very  fortunately  concurred 


Colonies 


to  hinder  Great  Britain  from  feeling,  so  sensi¬ 
bly  as  it  was  generally  expected  she  would, 
the  total  exclusion  which  has  now  taken  place 
for  more  than  a  year  (from  the  first  of  De¬ 
cember,  1774)  from  a  very  important  branch 
of  the  colony  trade,  that  of  the  twelve 
associated  provinces  of  North  America. 
First,  those  colonies,  in  preparing  themselves 
for  their  non-importation  agreement,  drained 
Great  Britain  completely  of  all  the  commodi¬ 
ties  which  were  fit  for  their  market;  second¬ 
ly,  the  extraordinary  demand  of  the  Spanish 
Flota  has,  this  year,  drained  Germany  and 
the  North  of  many  commodities,  linen  in  par¬ 
ticular,  which  used  to  come  into  competition, 
even  in  the  British  market,  with  the  manufac¬ 
tures  of  Great  Britain;  thirdly,  the  peace  be¬ 
tween  Russia  and  Turkey  has  occasioned  an 
extraordinary  demand  from  the  Turkey  mar¬ 
ket,  which,  during  the  distress  of  the  country, 
and  while  a  Russian  fleet  was  cruising  in  the 
Archipelago,  had  been  very  poorly  supplied; 
fourthly,  the  demand  of  the  North  of  Europe 
for  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain  has 
been  increasing  from  year  to  year  for  some 
time  past;  and  fifthly,  the  late  partition  and 
consequential  pacification  of  Poland,  by  open¬ 
ing  the  market  of  that  great  country,  have 
this  year  added  an  extraordinary  demand 
from  thence  to  the  increasing  demand  of  the 
North.  These  events  are  all,  except  the  fourth, 
in  their  nature  transitory  and  accidental,  and 
the  exclusion  from  so  important  a  branch  of 
the  colony  trade,  if  unfortunately  it  should 
continue  much  longer,  may  still  occasion  some 
degree  of  distress.  This  distress,  however,  as 
it  will  come  on  gradually,  will  be  felt  much 
less  severely  than  if  it  had  come  on  all  at 
once;  and,  in  the  meantime,  the  industry  and 
capital  of  the  country  may  find  a  new  em¬ 
ployment  and  direction,  so  as  to  prevent  this 
distress  from  ever  rising  to  any  considerable 
height. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  there¬ 
fore,  so  far  as  it  has  turned  towards  that 
trade  a  greater  proportion  of  the  capital  of 
Great  Britain  than  what  would  otherwise 
have  gone  to  it,  has  in  all  cases  turned  it, 
from  a  foreign  trade  of  consumption  with  a 
neighbouring  into  one  with  a  more  distant 
country;  in  many  cases,  from  a  direct  foreign 
trade  of  consumption  into  a  round-about  one; 
and  in  some  cases,  from  all  foreign  trade  of 
consumption  into  a  carrying  trade.  It  has  in 
all  cases,  therefore,  turned  it  from  a  direction 
in  which  it  would  have  maintained  a  greater 
quantity  of  productive  labour  into  one  in 
which  it  can  maintain  a  much  smaller  quan¬ 
tity.  By  suiting,  besides,  to  one  particular 
market  only  so  great  a  part  of  the  industry 
and  commerce  of  Great  Britain,  it  has  ren¬ 
dered  the  whole  state  of  that  industry  and 


263 

commerce  more  precarious  and  less  secure 
than  if  their  produce  had  been  accommodated 
to  a  greater  variety  of  markets. 

We  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the 
effects  of  the  colony  trade  and  those  of  the 
monopoly  of  that  trade.  The  former  are  al¬ 
ways  and  necessarily  beneficial;  the  latter 
always  and  necessarily  hurtful.  But  the  for¬ 
mer  are  so  beneficial  that  the  colony  trade, 
though  subject  to  a  monopoly,  and  notwith¬ 
standing  the  hurtful  effects  of  that  monopoly, 
is  still  upon  the  whole  beneficial,  and  greatly 
beneficial;  though  a  good  deal  less  so  than 
it  otherwise  would  be. 

The  effect  of  the  colony  trade  in  its  natu¬ 
ral  and  free  state  is  to  open  a  great,  though 
distant,  market  for  such  parts  of  the  produce 
of  British  industry  as  may  exceed  the  demand 
of  the  markets  nearer  home,  of  those  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  and  of  the  countries  which  lie  round  the 
Mediterranean  Sea.  In  its  natural  and  free 
state,  the  colony  trade,  without  drawing  from 
those  markets  any  part  of  the  produce  which 
had  ever  been  sent  to  them,  encourages  Great 
Britain  to  increase  the  surplus  continually  by 
continually  presenting  new  equivalents  to  be 
exchanged  for  it.  In  its  natural  and  free  state, 
the  colony  trade  tends  to  increase  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  labour  in  Great  Britain, 
but  without  altering  in  any  respect  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  that  which  had  been  employed  there 
before.  In  the  natural  and  free  state  of  the 
colony  trade,  the  competition  of  all  other  na¬ 
tions  would  hinder  the  rate  of  profit  from 
rising  above  the  common  level  either  in  the 
new  market  or  in  the  new  employment.  The 
new  market,  without  drawing  anything  from 
the  old  one,  would  create,  if  one  may  say  so, 
a  new  produce  for  its  own  supply;  and  that 
new  produce  would  constitute  a  new  capital 
for  carrying  on  the  new  employment,  which 
in  the  same  manner  would  draw  nothing  from 
the  old  one. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  on  the 
contrary,  by  excluding  the  competition  of 
other  nations,  and  thereby  raising  the  rate 
of  profit  both  in  the  new  market  and  in  the 
new  employment,  draws  produce  from  the  old 
market  and  capital  from  the  old  employment. 
To  augment  our  share  of  the  colony  trade 
beyond  what  it  otherwise  would  be  is  the 
avowed  purpose  of  the  monopoly.  If  our  share 
of  that  trade  were  to  be  no  greater  with  than 
it  would  have  been  without  the  monopoly, 
there  could  have  been  no  reason  for  establish¬ 
ing  the  monopoly.  But  whatever  forces  into 
a  branch  of  trade  of  which  the  returns  are 
slower  and  more  distant  than  those  of  the 
greater  part  of  other  trades,  a  greater  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  capital  of  any  country  than 
what  of  its  own  accord  would  go  to  that 
branch,  necessarily  renders  the  whole  quantity 


264 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


of  productive  labour  annually  maintained 
there,  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the  land 
and  labour  of  that  country,  less  than  they 
otherwise  would  be.  It  keeps  down  the  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  below 
what  it  would  naturally  rise  to,  and  thereby 
diminishes  their  power  of  accumulation.  It 
not  only  hinders,  at  all  times,  their  capital 
from  maintaining  so  great  a  quantity  of  pro¬ 
ductive  labour  as  it  would  otherwise  main¬ 
tain,  but  it  hinders  it  from  increasing  so  fast 
as  it  would  otherwise  increase,  and  conse¬ 
quently  from  maintaining  a  still  greater 
quantity  of  productive  labour. 

The  natural  good  effects  of  the  colony 
trade,  however,  more  than  counterbalance  to 
Great  Britain  the  bad  effects  of  the  monop¬ 
oly,  so  that,  monopoly  and  all  together,  that 
trade,  even  as  it  carried  on  at  present,  is 
not  only  advantageous,  but  greatly  advan¬ 
tageous.  The  new  market  and  the  new  em¬ 
ployment  which  are  opened  by  the  colony 
trade  are  of  much  greater  extent  than  that 
portion  of  the  old  market  and  of  the  old  em¬ 
ployment  which  is  lost  by  the  monopoly.  The 
new  produce  and  the  new  capital  which  has 
been  created,  if  one  may  say  so,  by  the  colony 
trade,  maintain  in  Great  Britain  a  greater 
quantity  of  productive  labour  than  what  can 
have  been  thrown  out  of  employment  by  the 
revulsion  of  capital  from  other  trades  of  which 
the  returns  are  more  frequent.  If  the  colony 
trade,  however,  even  as  it  is  carried  on  at 
present,  is  advantageous  to  Great  Britain,  it 
is  not  by  means  of  the  monopoly,  but  in  spite 
of  the  monopoly. 

It  is  rather  for  the  manufactured  than  for 
the  rude  produce  of  Europe  that  the  colony 
trade  opens  a  new  market.  Agriculture  is  the 
proper  business  of  all  new  colonies;  a  business 
which  the  cheapness  of  land  renders  more  ad¬ 
vantageous  than  any  other.  They  abound, 
therefore,  in  the  rude  produce  of  land,  and 
instead  of  importing  it  from  other  countries, 
they  have  generally  a  large  surplus  to  ex¬ 
port.  In  new  colonies,  agriculture  either  draws 
hands  from  all  other  employments,  or  keeps 
them  from  going  to  any  other  employment. 
There  are  few  hands  to  spare  for  the  neces¬ 
sary,  and  none  for  the  ornamental  manufac¬ 
tures.  The  greater  part  of  the  manufactures 
of  both  kinds  they  find  it  cheaper  to  pur¬ 
chase  of  other  countries  than  to  make  for 
themselves.  It  is  chiefly  by  encouraging  the 
manufactures  of  Europe  that  the  colony 
trade  indirectly  encourages  its  agriculture. 
The  manufactures  of  Europe,  to  whom  that 
trade  gives  employment,  constitute  a  new 
market  for  the  produce  of  the  land;  and  the 
most  advantageous  of  all  markets,  the  home 
market  for  the  corn  and  cattle,  for  the  bread 
and  butcher’s  meat  of  Europe,  is  thus  greatly 


extended  by  means  of  the  trade  to  America. 

But  that  the  monopoly  of  the  trade  of 
populous  and  thriving  colonies  is  not  alone 
sufficient  to  establish,  or  even  to  maintain 
manufactures  in  any  country,  the  examples 
of  Spain  and  Portugal  sufficiently  demon¬ 
strate.  Spain  and  Portugal  were  manufactur¬ 
ing  countries  before  they  had  any  considerable 
colonies.  Since  they  had  the  richest  and  most 
fertile  in  the  world,  they  have  both  ceased  to 
be  so. 

In  Spain  and  Portugal  the  bad  effects  of 
the  monopoly,  aggravated  by  other  causes, 
have  perhaps  nearly  overbalanced  the  natural 
good  effects  of  the  colony  trade.  These  causes 
seem  to  be  other  monopolies  of  different 
kinds;  the  degradation  of  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver  below  what  it  is  in  most  other 
countries;  the  exclusion  from  foreign  markets 
by  improper  taxes  upon  exportation,  and  the 
narrowing  of  the  home  market,  by  still  more 
improper  taxes  upon  the  transportation  of 
goods  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  an¬ 
other;  but  above  all,  that  irregular  and  partial 
administration  of  justice,  which  often  protects 
the  rich  and  powerful  debtor  from  the  pur¬ 
suit  of  his  injured  creditor,  and  which  makes 
the  industrious  part  of  the  nation  afraid  to 
prepare  goods  for  the  consumption  of  those 
haughty  and  great  men  to  whom  they  dare 
not  refuse  to  sell  upon  credit,  and  from  whom 
they  are  altogether  uncertain  of  repayment. 

In  England,  on  the  contrary,  the  natural 
good  effects  of  the  colony  trade,  assisted  by 
other  causes,  have  in  a  great  measure  con¬ 
quered  the  bad  effects  of  the  monopoly.  These 
causes  seem  to  be:  the  general  liberty  of 
trade,  which,  notwithstanding  some  restraints, 
is  at  least  equal,  perhaps  superior,  to  what  it 
is  in  any  other  country;  the  liberty  of  ex¬ 
porting,  duty  free,  almost  all  sorts  of  goods 
which  are  the  produce  of  domestic  industry 
to  almost  any  foreign  country;  and  what  per¬ 
haps  is  of  still  greater  importance,  the  un¬ 
bounded  liberty  of  transporting  them  from 
any  one  part  of  our  own  country  to  any  other 
without  being  obliged  to  give  any  account  to 
any  public  office,  without  being  liable  to 
question  or  examination  of  any  kind;  but 
above  all,  that  equal  and  impartial  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice  which  renders  the  rights  of 
the  meanest  British  subject  respectable  to 
the  greatest,  and  which,  by  securing  to  every 
man  the  fruits  of  his  own  industry,  gives  the 
greatest  and  most  effectual  encouragement  to 
every  sort  of  industry. 

If  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain,  how¬ 
ever,  have  been  advanced,  as  they  certainly 
have,  by  the  colony  trade,  it  has  not  been  by 
means  of  the  monopoly  of  that  trade  but  in 
spite  of  the  monopoly.  The  effect  of  the  mo¬ 
nopoly  has  been,  not  to  augment  the  quantity, 


Colonies 


265 


but  to  alter  the  quality  and  shape  of  a  part 
of  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain,  and  to 
accommodate  to  a  market,  from  which  the 
returns  are  slow  and  distant,  what  would 
otherwise  have  been  accommodated  to  one 
from  which  the  returns  are  frequent  and  near. 
Its  effect  has  consequently  been  to  turn  a 
part  of  the  capital  of  Great  Britain  from  an 
employment  in  which  it  would  have  main¬ 
tained  a  greater  quantity  of  manufacturing 
industry  to  one  in  which  it  maintains  a  much 
smaller,  and  thereby  to  diminish,  instead  of 
increasing,  the  whole  quantity  of  manufac¬ 
turing  industry  maintained  in  Great  Britain. 

The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  there¬ 
fore,  like  all  the  other  mean  and  malignant 
expedients  of  the  mercantile  system,  depresses 
the  industry  of  all  other  countries,  but  chiefly 
that  of  the  colonies,  without  in  the  least 
increasing,  but  on  the  contrary  diminishing 
that  of  the  country  in  whose  favour  it  is 
established. 

The  monopoly  hinders  the  capital  of  that 
country,  whatever  may  at  any  particular  time 
be  the  extent  of  that  capital,  from  maintain¬ 
ing  so  great  a  quantity  of  productive  labour 
as  it  would  otherwise  maintain,  and  from  af¬ 
fording  so  great  a  revenue  to  the  industrious 
inhabitants  as  it  would  otherwise  afford.  But 
as  capital  can  be  increased  only  by  savings 
from  revenue,  the  monopoly,  by  hindering  it 
from  affording  so  great  a  revenue  as  it  would 
otherwise  afford,  necessarily  hinders  it  from 
increasing  so  fast  as  it  would  otherwise  in¬ 
crease,  and  consequently  from  maintaining  a 
still  greater  quantity  of  productive  labour, 
and  affording  a  still  greater  revenue  to  the 
industrious  inhabitants  of  that  country.  One 
great  original  source  of  revenue,  therefore,  the 
wages  of  labour,  the  monopoly  must  necessar¬ 
ily  have  rendered  at  all  times  less  abundant 
than  it  otherwise  would  have  been. 

By  raising  the  rate  of  mercantile  profit, 
the  monopoly  discourages  the  improvement 
of  land.  The  profit  of  improvement  depends 
upon  the  difference  between  what  the  land 
actually  produces,  and  what,  by  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  a  certain  capital,  it  can  be  made  to 
produce.  If  this  difference  affords  a  greater 
profit  than  what  can  be  drawn  from  an  equal 
capital  in  any  mercantile  employment,  the 
improvement  of  land  will  draw  capital  from 
all  mercantile  employments.  If  the  profit  is 
less,  mercantile  employments  will  draw  capi¬ 
tal  from  the  improvement  of  land.  Whatever, 
therefore,  raises  the  rate  of  mercantile  profit, 
either  lessens  the  superiority  or  increases  the 
inferiority  of  the  profit  of  improvement;  and 
in  the  one  case  hinders  capital  from  going  to 
improvement,  and  in  the  other  draws  capital 
from  it.  But  by  discouraging  improvement, 
the  monopoly  necessarily  retards  the  natural 


increase  of  another  great  original  source  of 
revenue,  the  rent  of  land.  By  raising  the  rate 
of  profit,  too,  the  monopoly  necessarily  keeps 
up  the  market  rate  of  interest  higher  than  it 
otherwise  would  be.  But  the  price  of  land  in 
proportion  to  the  rent  which  it  affords,  the 
number  of  years  purchase  which  is  commonly 
paid  for  it,  necessarily  falls  as  the  rate  of 
interest  rises,  and  rises  as  the  rate  of  interest 
falls.  The  monopoly,  therefore,  hurts  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  landlord  two  different  ways,  by 
retarding  the  natural  increase,  first,  of  his 
rent,  and  secondly,  of  the  price  which  he 
would  get  for  his  land  in  proportion  to  the 
rent  which  it  affords. 

The  monopoly  indeed  raises  the  rate  of 
mercantile  profit,  and  thereby  augments  some¬ 
what  the  gain  of  our  merchants.  But  as  it 
obstructs  the  natural  increase  of  capital,  it 
tends  rather  to  diminish  than  to  increase  the 
sum  total  of  the  revenue  which  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  country  derive  from  the  profits 
of  stock;  a  small  profit  upon  a  great  capital 
generally  affording  a  greater  revenue  than  a 
great  profit  upon  a  small  one.  The  monopoly 
raises  the  rate  of  profit,  but  it  hinders  the 
sum  of  profit  from  rising  so  high  as  it  other¬ 
wise  would  do. 

All  the  original  sources  of  revenue,  the 
wages  of  labour,  the  rent  of  land,  and  the 
profits  of  stock,  the  monopoly  renders  much 
less  abundant  than  they  otherwise  would  be. 
To  promote  the  little  interest  of  one  little 
order  of  men  in  one  country,  it  hurts  the  in¬ 
terest  of  all  other  orders  of  men  in  that 
country,  and  of  all  men  in  all  other  countries. 

It  is  solely  by  raising  the  ordinary  rate  of 
profit  that  the  monopoly  either  has  proved  or 
could  prove  advantageous  to  any  one  particu¬ 
lar  order  of  men.  But  besides  all  the  bad  ef¬ 
fects  to  the  country  in  general,  which  have 
already  been  mentioned  as  necessarily  result¬ 
ing  from  a  high  rate  of  profit,  there  is  one 
more  fatal,  perhaps,  than  all  these  put  to¬ 
gether,  but  which,  if  we  may  judge  from  ex¬ 
perience,  is  inseparably  connected  with  it. 
The  high  rate  of  profit  seems  everywhere  to 
destroy  that  parsimony  which  in  other  cir¬ 
cumstances  is  natural  to  the  character  of  the 
merchant.  When  profits  are  high  that  sober 
virtue  seems  to  be  superfluous  and  expensive 
luxury  to  suit  better  the  affluence  of  his  situ¬ 
ation.  But  the  owners  of  the  great  mercantile 
capitals  are  necessarily  the  leaders  and  con¬ 
ductors  of  the  whole  industry  of  every  nation, 
and  their  example  has  a  much  greater  influ¬ 
ence  upon  the  manners  of  the  whole  industri¬ 
ous  part  of  it  than  that  of  any  other  order  of 
men.  If  his  employer  is  attentive  and  parsi¬ 
monious,  the  workman  is  very  likely  to  be 
so  too;  but  if  the  master  is  dissolute  and 
disorderly,  the  servant  who  shapes  his  work 


266 


The  Wealth 

according  to  the  pattern  which  his  master 
prescribes  to  him  will  shape  his  life  too  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  example  which  he  sets  him. 
Accumulation  is  thus  prevented  in  the  hands 
of  all  those  who  are  naturally  the  most  dis¬ 
posed  to  accumulate,  and  the  funds  destined 
for  the  maintenance  of  productive  labour  re¬ 
ceive  no  augmentation  from  the  revenue  of 
those  who  ought  naturally  to  augment  them 
the  most.  The  capital  of  the  country,  instead 
of  increasing,  gradually  dwindles  away,  and 
the  quantity  of  productive  labour  maintained 
in  it  grows  every  day  less  and  less.  Have  the 
exorbitant  profits  of  the  merchants  of  Cadiz 
and  Lisbon  augmented  the  capital  of  Spain 
and  Portugal?  Have  they  alleviated  the  pov¬ 
erty,  have  they  promoted  the  industry  of 
those  two  beggarly  countries?  Such  has  been 
the  tone  of  mercantile  expense  in  those  two 
trading  cities  that  those  exorbitant  profits, 
far  from  augmenting  the  general  capital  of 
the  country,  seem  scarce  to  have  been  suffi¬ 
cient  to  keep  up  the  capitals  upon  which  they 
were  made.  Foreign  capitals  are  every  day  in¬ 
truding  themselves,  if  I  may  say  so,  more 
and  more  into  the  trade  of  Cadiz  and  Lisbon. 
It  is  to  expel  those  foreign  capitals  from  a 
trade  which  their  own  grows  every  day  more 
and  more  insufficient  for  carrying  on  that  the 
Spaniards  and  Portuguese  endeavour  every 
day  to  straighten  more  and  more  the  galling 
bands  of  their  absurd  monopoly.  Compare  the 
mercantile  manners  of  Cadiz  and  Lisbon  with 
those  of  Amsterdam,  and  you  will  be  sensible 
how  differently  the  conduct  and  character  of 
merchants  are  affected  by  the  high  and  by  the 
low  profits  of  stock.  The  merchants  of  Lon¬ 
don,  indeed,  have  not  yet  generally  become 
such  magnificent  lords  as  those  of  Cadiz  and 
Lisbon,  but  neither  are  they  in  general  such 
attentive  and  parsimonious  burghers  as  those 
of  Amsterdam.  They  are  supposed,  however, 
many  of  them,  to  be  a  good  deal  richer  than 
the  greater  part  of  the  former,  and  not  quite 
so  rich  as  many  of  the  latter.  But  the  rate 
of  their  profit  is  commonly  much  lower  than 
that  of  the  former,  and  a  good  deal  higher 
than  that  of  the  latter.  Light  come,  light  go, 
says  the  proverb;  and  the  ordinary  tone  of 
expense  seems  everywhere  to  be  regulated, 
not  so  much  according  to  the  real  ability  of 
spending,  as  to  the  supposed  facility  of  get¬ 
ting  money  to  spend. 

It  is  thus  that  the  single  advantage  which 
the  monopoly  procures  to  a  single  order  of 
men  is  in  many  different  ways  hurtful  to  the 
general  interest  of  the  country. 

To  found  a  great  empire  for  the  sole  pur¬ 
pose  of  raising  up  a  people  of  customers  may 
at  first  sight  appear  a  project  fit  only  for  a 
nation  of  shopkeepers.  It  is,  however,  a  proj¬ 
ect  altogether  unfit  for  a  nation  of  shopkeep¬ 


of  Nations 

ers;  but  extremely  fit  for  a  nation  whose  gov¬ 
ernment  is  influenced  by  shopkeepers.  Such 
statesmen,  and  such  statesmen  only,  are  capa¬ 
ble  of  fancying  that  they  will  find  some  ad¬ 
vantage  in  employing  the  blood  and  treasure 
of  their  fellow-citizens  to  found  and  maintain 
such  an  empire.  Say  to  a  shopkeeper,  “Buy 
me  a  good  estate,  and  I  shall  always  buy  my 
clothes  at  your  shop,  even  though  I  should 
pay  somewhat  dearer  than  what  I  can  have 
them  for  at  other  shops”;  and  you  will  not 
find  him  very  forward  to  embrace  your  pro¬ 
posal.  But  should  any  other  person  buy  you 
such  an  estate,  the  shopkeeper  would  be  much 
obliged  to  your  benefactor  if  he  would  enjoin 
you  to  buy  all  your  clothes  at  his  shop.  Eng¬ 
land  purchased  for  some  of  her  subjects,  who 
found  themselves  uneasy  at  home,  a  great 
estate  in  a  distant  country.  The  price,  indeed, 
was  very  small,  and  instead  of  thirty  years' 
purchase,  the  ordinary  price  of  land  in  the 
present  times,  it  amounted  to  little  more  than 
the  expense  of  the  different  equipments  which 
made  the  first  discovery,  reconnoitred  the 
coast,  and  took  a  fictitious  possession  of  the 
country.  The  land  was  good  and  of  great  ex¬ 
tent,  and  the  cultivators  having  plenty  of 
good  ground  to  work  upon,  and  being  for 
some  time  at  liberty  to  sell  their  produce 
where  they  pleased,  became  in  the  course  of 
little  more  than  thirty  or  forty  years  (be¬ 
tween  1620  and  1660)  so  numerous  and  thriv¬ 
ing  a  people  that  the  shopkeepers  and  other 
traders  of  England  wished  to  secure  to  them¬ 
selves  the  monopoly  of  their  custom.  Without 
pretending,  therefore,  that  they  had  paid  any 
part,  either  of  the  original  purchase-money, 
or  of  the  subsequent  expense  of  improvement, 
they  petitioned  the  Parliament  that  the  cul¬ 
tivators  of  America  might  for  the  future  be 
confined  to  their  shop;  first,  for  buying  all 
the  goods  which  they  wanted  from  Europe; 
and,  secondly,  for  selling  all  such  parts  of 
their  own  produce  as  those  traders  might  find 
it  convenient  to  buy.  For  they  did  not  find 
it  convenient  to  buy  every  part  of  it.  Some 
parts  of  it  imported  into  England  might  have 
interfered  with  some  of  the  trades  which  they 
themselves  carried  on  at  home.  Those  particu¬ 
lar  parts  of  it,  therefore,  they  were  willing 
that  the  colonists  should  sell  where  they  could 
— the  farther  off  the  better;  and  upon  that 
account  purposed  that  their  market  should 
be  confined  to  the  countries  south  of  Cape 
Finisterre.  A  clause  in  the  famous  Act  of 
Navigation  established  this  truly  shopkeeper 
proposal  into  a  law. 

The  maintenance  of  this  monopoly  has 
hitherto  been  the  principal,  or  more  properly 
perhaps  the  sole  end  and  purpose  of  the 
dominion  which  Great  Britain  assumes  over 
her  colonies.  In  the  exclusive  trade,  it  is  sup- 


Colonies 


posed,  consists  the  great  advantage  of  prov¬ 
inces,  which  have  never  yet  afforded  either 
revenue  or  military  force  for  the  support  of 
the  civil  government,  or  the  defence  of  the 
mother  country.  The  monopoly  is  the  princi¬ 
pal  badge  of  their  dependency,  and  it  is 
the  sole  fruit  which  has  hitherto  been  gath¬ 
ered  from  that  dependency.  Whatever  ex¬ 
pense  Great  Britain  has  hitherto  laid  out  in 
maintaining  this  dependency  has  really  been 
laid  out  in  order  to  support  this  monopoly. 
The  expense  of  the  ordinary  peace  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  colonies  amounted,  before  the 
commencement  of  the  present  disturbances, 
to  the  pay  of  twenty  regiments  of  foot;  to  the 
expense  of  the  artillery,  stores,  and  extraor¬ 
dinary  provisions  with  which  it  was  necessary 
to  supply  them;  and  to  the  expense  of  a  very 
considerable  naval  force  which  was  constantly 
kept  up,  in  order  to  guard,  from  the  smug¬ 
gling  vessels  of  other  nations,  the  immense 
coast  of  North  America,  and  that  of  our  West 
Indian  islands.  The  whole  expense  of  this 
peace  establishment  was  a  charge  upon  the 
revenue  of  Great  Britain,  and  was,  at  the 
same  time,  the  smallest  part  of  what  the  do¬ 
minion  of  the  colonies  has  cost  the  mother 
country.  If  we  would  know  the  amount  of  the 
whole,  we  must  add  to  the  annual  expense  of 
this  peace  establishment  the  interest  of  the 
sums  which,  in  consequence  of  her  consider¬ 
ing  her  colonies  as  provinces  subject  to  her 
dominion,  Great  Britain  has  upon  different 
occasions  laid  out  upon  their  defence.  We 
must  add  to  it,  in  particular,  the  whole  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  late  war,  and  a  great  part  of  that 
of  the  war  which  preceded  it.  The  late  war 
was  altogether  a  colony  quarrel,  and  the 
whole  expense  of  it,  in  whatever  part  of  the 
world  it  may  have  been  laid  out,  whether  in 
Germany  or  the  East  Indies,  ought  justly  to 
be  stated  to  the  account  of  the  colonies.  It 
amounted  to  more  than  ninety  millions  ster¬ 
ling,  including  not  only  the  new  debt  which 
was  contracted,  but  the  two  shillings  in  the 
pound  additional  land  tax,  and  the  sums 
which  were  every  year  borrowed  from  the 
sinking  fund.  The  Spanish  war,  which  began 
in  1739,  was  principally  a  colony  quarrel.  Its 
principal  object  was  to  prevent  the  search  of 
the  colony  ships  which  carried  on  a  contra¬ 
band  trade  with  the  Spanish  Main.  This 
whole  expense  is,  in  reality,  a  bounty  which 
has  been  given  in  order  to  support  a  mo¬ 
nopoly.  The  pretended  purpose  of  it  was  to 
encourage  the  manufactures,  and  to  increase 
the  commerce  of  Great  Britain.  But  its  real 
effect  has  been  to  raise  the  rate  of  mercantile 
profit,  and  to  enable  our  merchants  to  turn 
into  a  branch  of  trade,  of  which  the  returns 
are  more  slow  and  distant  than  those  of  the 
greater  part  of  other  trades,  a  greater  pro¬ 


267 

portion  of  their  capital  than  they  otherwise 
would  have  done;  two  events  which,  if  a 
bounty  could  have  prevented,  it  might  per¬ 
haps  have  been  very  well  worth  while  to  give 
such  a  bounty. 

Under  the  present  system  of  management, 
therefore,  Great  Britain  derives  nothing  but 
loss  from  the  dominion  which  she  assumes 
over  her  colonies. 

To  propose  that  Great  Britain  should  volun¬ 
tarily  give  up  all  authority  over  her  colonies, 
and  leave  them  to  elect  their  own  magistrates, 
to  enact  their  own  laws,  and  to  make  peace 
and  war  as  they  might  think  proper,  would 
be  to  propose  such  a  measure  as  never  was, 
and  never  will  be  adopted,  by  any  nation  in 
the  world.  No  nation  ever  voluntarily  gave 
up  the  dominion  of  any  province,  how  trou¬ 
blesome  soever  it  might  be  to  govern  it,  and 
how  small  soever  the  revenue  which  it  afford¬ 
ed  might  be  in  proportion  to  the  expense 
which  it  occasioned.  Such  sacrifices,  though 
they  might  frequently  be  agreeable  to  the  in¬ 
terest,  are  always  mortifying  to  the  pride  of 
every  nation,  and  what  is  perhaps  of  still 
greater  consequence,  they  are  always  con¬ 
trary  to  the  private  interest  of  the  governing 
part  of  it,  who  would  thereby  be  deprived  of 
the  disposal  of  many  places  of  trust  and 
profit,  of  many  opportunities  of  acquiring 
wealth  and  distinction,  which  the  possession 
of  the  most  turbulent,  and,  to  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  the  most  unprofitable  province 
seldom  fails  to  afford.  The  most  visionary  en¬ 
thusiast  would  scarce  be  capable  of  proposing 
such  a  measure  with  any  serious  hopes  at 
least  of  its  ever  being  adopted.  If  it  was 
adopted,  however,  Great  Britain  would  not 
only  be  immediately  freed  from  the  whole  an¬ 
nual  expense  of  the  peace  establishment  of 
the  colonies,  but  might  settle  with  them  such 
a  treaty  of  commerce  as  would  effectually  se¬ 
cure  to  her  a  free  trade,  more  advantageous 
to  the  great  body  of  the  people,  though  less 
so  to  the  merchants,  than  the  monopoly  which 
she  at  present  enjoys.  By  thus  parting  good 
friends,  the  natural  affection  of  the  colonies 
to  the  mother  country  which,  perhaps,  our 
late  dissensions  have  well  nigh  extinguished, 
would  quickly  revive.  It  might  dispose  them 
not  only  to  respect,  for  whole  centuries  to¬ 
gether,  that  treaty  of  commerce  which  they 
had  concluded  with  us  at  parting,  but  to  fa¬ 
vour  us  in  war  as  well  as  in  trade,  and,  instead 
of  turbulent  and  factious  subjects,  to  become 
our  most  faithful,  affectionate,  and  generous 
allies;  and  the  same  sort  of  parental  affection 
on  the  one  side,  and  filial  respect  on  the  other, 
might  revive  between  Great  Britain  and  her 
colonies,  which  used  to  subsist  between  those 
of  ancient  Greece  and  the  mother  city  from 
which  they  descended. 


268 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


In  order  to  render  any  province  advanta¬ 
geous  to  the  empire  to  which  it  belongs,  it 
ought  to  afford,  in  time  of  peace,  a  revenue 
to  the  public  sufficient  not  only  for  defraying 
the  whole  expense  of  its  own  peace  establish¬ 
ment,  but  for  contributing  its  proportion  to 
the  support  of  the  general  government  of  the 
empire.  Every  province  necessarily  contrib¬ 
utes,  more  or  less,  to  increase  the  expense  of 
that  general  government.  If  any  particular 
province,  therefore,  does  not  contribute  its 
share  towards  defraying  this  expense,  an  un¬ 
equal  burden  must  be  thrown  upon  some 
other  part  of  the  empire.  The  extraordinary 
revenue,  too,  which  every  province  affords  to 
the  public  in  time  of  war,  ought,  from  parity 
of  reason,  to  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the 
extraordinary  revenue  of  the  whole  empire 
which  its  ordinary  revenue  does  in  time  of 
peace.  That  neither  the  ordinary  nor  extraor¬ 
dinary  revenue  which  Great  Britain  derives 
from  her  colonies,  bears  this  proportion  to 
the  whole  revenue  of  the  British  empire,  will 
readily  be  allowed.  The  monopoly,  it  has  been 
supposed,  indeed,  by  increasing  the  private 
revenue  of  the  people  of  Great  Britain,  and 
thereby  enabling  them  to  pay  greater  taxes, 
compensates  the  deficiency  of  the  public  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  colonies.  But  this  monopoly,  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show,  though  a  very  grievous 
tax  upon  the  colonies,  and  though  it  may  in¬ 
crease  the  revenue  of  a  particular  order  of 
men  in  Great  Britain,  diminishes  instead  of 
increasing  that  of  the  great  body  of  the  people; 
and  consequently  diminishes  instead  of  in¬ 
creasing  the  ability  of  the  great  body  of  the 
people  to  pay  taxes.  The  men,  too,  whose 
revenue  the  monopoly  increases,  constitute 
a  particular  order,  which  it  is  both  absolutely 
impossible  to  tax  beyond  the  proportion  of 
other  orders,  and  extremely  impolitic  even  to 
attempt  to  tax  beyond  that  proportion,  as  I 
shall  endeavour  to  show  in  the  following  book. 
No  particular  resource,  therefore,  can  be 
drawn  from  this  particular  order. 

The  colonies  may  be  taxed  either  by  their 
own  assemblies,  or  by  the  Parliament  of 
Great  Britain. 

That  the  colony  assemblies  can  ever  be  so 
managed  as  to  levy  upon  their  constituents 
a  public  revenue  sufficient  not  only  to  main¬ 
tain  at  all  times  their  own  civil  and  military 
establishment,  but  to  pay  their  proper  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  expense  of  the  general  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  British  empire  seems  not  very 
probable.  It  was  a  long  time  before  even  the 
Parliament  of  England,  though  placed  im¬ 
mediately  under  the  eye  of  the  sovereign, 
could  be  brought  under  such  a  system  of  man¬ 
agement,  or  couid  be  rendered  sufficiently 
liberal  in  their  grants  for  supporting  the  civil 
and  military  establishments  even  of  their  own 


country.  It  was  only  by  distributing  among 
the  particular  Members  of  Parliament  a  great 
part  either  of  the  offices,  or  of  the  disposal  of 
the  offices  arising  from  this  civil  and  military 
establishment,  that  such  a  system  of  manage¬ 
ment  could  be  established  even  with  regard 
to  the  Parliament  of  England.  But  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  colony  assemblies  from  the  eye 
of  the  sovereign,  their  number,  their  dispersed 
situation,  and  their  various  constitutions, 
would  render  it  very  difficult  to  manage  them 
in  the  same  manner,  even  though  the  sover¬ 
eign  had  the  same  means  of  doing  it;  and 
those  means  are  wanting.  It  would  be  abso¬ 
lutely  impossible  to  distribute  among  all  the 
leading  members  of  all  the  colony  assemblies 
such  a  share,  either  of  the  offices  or  of  the 
disposal  of  the  offices  arising  from  the  general 
government  of  the  British  empire,  as  to  dis¬ 
pose  them  to  give  up  their  popularity  at 
home,  and  to  tax  their  constituents  for  the 
support  of  that  general  government,  of  which 
almost  the  whole  emoluments  were  to  be  di¬ 
vided  among  people  who  were  strangers  to 
them.  The  unavoidable  ignorance  of  adminis¬ 
tration,  besides,  concerning  the  relative  im¬ 
portance  of  the  different  members  of  those 
different  assemblies,  the  offences  which  must 
frequently  be  given,  the  blunders  which  must 
constantly  be  committed  in  attempting  to 
manage  them  in  this  manner,  seems  to  render 
such  a  system  of  management  altogether  im¬ 
practicable  with  regard  to  them. 

The  colony  assemblies,  besides,  cannot  be 
supposed  the  proper  judges  of  what  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  defence  and  support  of  the  whole 
empire.  The  care  of  that  defence  and  support 
is  not  entrusted  to  them.  It  is  not  their  busi¬ 
ness,  and  they  have  no  regular  means  of  in¬ 
formation  concerning  it.  The  assembly  of  a 
province,  like  the  vestry  of  a  parish,  may 
judge  very  properly  concerning  the  affairs  of 
its  own  particular  district;  but  can  have  no 
proper  means  of  judging  concerning  those  of 
the  whole  empire.  It  cannot  even  judge  prop¬ 
erly  concerning  the  proportion  which  its  own 
province  bears  to  the  whole  empire;  or  con¬ 
cerning  the  relative  degree  of  its  wealth  and 
importance  compared  with  the  other  prov¬ 
inces;  because  those  other  provinces  are  not 
under  the  inspection  and  superintendency  of 
the  assembly  of  a  particular  province.  What 
is  necessary  for  the  defence  and  support  of 
the  whole  empire,  and  in  what  proportion  each 
part  ought  to  contribute,  can  be  judged  of 
only  by  that  assembly  which  inspects  and 
superintends  the  affairs  of  the  whole  empire. 

It  has  been  proposed,  accordingly,  that 
the  colonies  should  be  taxed  by  requisition, 
the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  determining 
the  sum  which  each  colony  ought  to  pay, 
and  the  provincial  assembly  assessing  and 


Colonies 


levying  it  in  the  way  that  suited  best  the 
circumstances  of  the  province.  What  con¬ 
cerned  the  whole  empire  would  in  this  way 
be  determined  by  the  assembly  which  inspects 
and  superintends  the  affairs  of  the  whole  em¬ 
pire;  and  the  provincial  affairs  of  each  colony 
might  still  be  regulated  by  its  own  assembly. 
Though  the  colonies  should  in  this  case  have 
no  representatives  in  the  British  Parliament, 
yet,  if  we  may  judge  by  experience,  there  is 
no  probability  that  the  Parliamentary  requisi¬ 
tion  would  be  unreasonable.  The  Parliament 
of  England  has  not  upon  any  occasion  shown 
the  smallest  disposition  to  overburden  those 
parts  of  the  empire  which  are  not  represented 
in  Parliament.  The  islands  of  Guernsey  and 
Jersey,  without  any  means  of  resisting  the  au¬ 
thority  of  Parliament,  are  more  lightly  taxed 
than  any  part  of  Great  Britain.  Parliament 
in  attempting  to  exercise  its  supposed  right, 
whether  well  or  ill  grounded,  of  taxing  the 
colonies,  has  never  hitherto  demanded  of  them 
anything  which  even  approached  to  a  just 
proportion  to  what  was  paid  by  their  fellow- 
subjects  at  home.  If  the  contribution  of  the 
colonies,  besides,  was  to  rise  or  fall  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  rise  or  fall  of  the  land  tax,  Parlia¬ 
ment  could  not  tax  them  without  taxing  at 
the  same  time  its  own  constituents,  and  the 
colonies  might  in  this  case  be  considered  as 
virtually  represented  in  Parliament. 

Examples  are  not  wanting  of  empires  in 
which  all  the  different  provinces  are  not  taxed, 
if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression,  in  one 
mass;  but  in  which  the  sovereign  regulates  the 
sum  which  each  province  ought  to  pay,  and 
in  some  provinces  assesses  and  levies  it  as  he 
thinks  proper;  while  in  others,  he  leaves  it  to 
be  assessed  and  levied  as  the  respective  states 
of  each  province  shall  determine.  In  some 
provinces  of  France,  the  king  not  only  im¬ 
poses  what  taxes  he  thinks  proper,  but  as¬ 
sesses  and  levies  them  in  the  way  he  thinks 
proper.  From  others  he  demands  a  certain 
sum,  but  leaves  it  to  the  states  of  each  prov¬ 
ince  to  assess  and  levy  that  sum  as  they  think 
proper.  According  to  the  scheme  of  taxing  by 
requisition,  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain 
would  stand  nearly  in  the  same  situation  to¬ 
wards  the  colony  assemblies  as  the  King  of 
France  does  towards  the  states  of  those  prov¬ 
inces  which  still  enjoy  the  privilege  of  having 
states  of  their  own,  the  provinces  of  France 
which  are  supposed  to  be  the  best  governed. 

But  though,  according  to  this  scheme,  the 
colonies  could  have  no  just  reason  to  fear  that 
their  share  of  the  public  burdens  should  ever 
exceed  the  proper  proportion  to  that  of  their 
fellow-citizens  at  home;  Great  Britain  might 
have  just  reason  to  fear  that  it  never  would 
amount  to  that  proper  proportion.  The  Par¬ 
liament  of  Great  Britain  has  not  for  some 


269 

time  past  had  the  same  established  authority 
in  the  colonies,  which  the  French  king  has  in 
those  provinces  of  France  which  still  enjoy 
the  privilege  of  having  states  of  their  own. 
The  colony  assemblies,  if  they  were  not  very 
favourably  disposed  (and  unless  more  skil¬ 
fully  managed  than  they  ever  have  been 
hitherto,  they  are  not  very  likely  to  be  so) 
might  still  find  many  pretences  for  evading 
or  rejecting  the  most  reasonable  requisitions 
of  Parliament.  A  French  war  breaks  out,  we 
shall  suppose;  ten  millions  must  immediately 
be  raised  in  order  to  defend  the  seat  of  the 
empire.  This  sum  must  be  borrowed  upon  the 
credit  of  some  Parliamentary  fund  mortgaged 
for  paying  the  interest.  Part  of  this  fund 
Parliament  proposes  to  raise  by  a  tax  to  be 
levied  in  Great  Britain,  and  part  of  it  by  a 
requisition  to  all  the  different  colony  assem¬ 
blies  of  America  and  the  West  Indies.  Would 
people  readily  advance  their  money  upon  the 
credit  of  a  fund,  which  partly  depended  upon 
the  good  humour  of  all  those  assemblies,  far 
distant  from  the  seat  of  the  war,  and  some¬ 
times,  perhaps,  thinking  themselves  not  much 
concerned  in  the  event  of  it?  Upon  such  a 
fund  no  more  money  would  probably  be  ad¬ 
vanced  than  what  the  tax  to  be  levied  in 
Great  Britain  might  be  supposed  to  answer 
for.  The  whole  burden  of  the  debt  contracted 
on  account  of  the  war  would  in  this  manner 
fall,  as  it  always  has  done  hitherto,  upon 
Great  Britain;  upon  a  part  of  the  empire,  and 
not  upon  the  whole  empire.  Great  Britain  is, 
perhaps,  since  the  world  began,  the  only  state 
which,  as  it  has  extended  its  empire,  has  only 
increased  its  expense  without  once  augment¬ 
ing  its  resources.  Other  states  have  generally 
disburdened  themselves  upon  their  subject 
and  subordinate  provinces  of  the  most  con¬ 
siderable  part  of  the  expense  of  defending  the 
empire.  Great  Britain  has  hitherto  suffered 
her  subject  and  subordinate  provinces  to  dis¬ 
burden  themselves  upon  her  of  almost  this 
whole  expense.  In  order  to  put  Great  Britain 
upon  a  footing  of  equality  with  her  own  col¬ 
onies,  which  the  law  has  hitherto  supposed  to 
be  subject  and  subordinate,  it  seems  neces¬ 
sary,  upon  the  scheme  of  taxing  them  by 
Parliamentary  requisition,  that  Parliament 
should  have  some  means  of  rendering  its 
requisitions  immediately  effectual,  in  case  the 
colony  assemblies  should  attempt  to  evade  or 
reject  them;  and  what  those  means  are,  it  is 
not  very  easy  to  conceive,  and  it  has  not  yet 
been  explained. 

Should  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  at 
the  same  time,  be  ever  fully  established  in 
the  right  of  taxing  the  colonies,  even  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  consent  of  their  own  assem¬ 
blies,  the  importance  of  those  assemblies 
would  from  that  moment  be  at  an  end,  and 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


270 

with  it,  that  of  all  the  leading  men  of  British 
America.  Men  desire  to  have  some  share  in 
the  management  of  public  affairs  chiefly  on 
account  of  the  importance  which  it  gives 
them.  Upon  the  power  which  the  greater  part 
of  the  leading  men,  the  natural  aristocracy  of 
every  country,  have  of  preserving  or  defend¬ 
ing  their  respective  importance,  depends  the 
stability  and  duration  of  every  system  of  free 
government.  In  the  attacks  which  those  lead¬ 
ing  men  are  continually  making  upon  the 
importance  of  one  another,  and  in  the  de¬ 
fence  of  their  own,  consists  the  whole  play 
of  domestic  faction  and  ambition.  The  lead¬ 
ing  men  of  America,  like  those  of  all  other 
countries,  desire  to  preserve  their  own  impor¬ 
tance.  They  feel,  or  imagine,  that  if  their 
assemblies,  which  they  are  fond  of  calling 
parliaments,  and  of  considering  as  equal  in 
authority  to  the  Parliament  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain,  should  be  so  far  degraded  as  to  become 
the  humble  ministers  and  executive  officers 
of  that  Parliament,  the  greater  part  of  their 
own  importance  would  be  at  end.  They  have 
rejected,  therefore,  the  proposal  of  being 
taxed  by  Parliamentary  requisition,  and  like 
other  ambitious  and  high-spirited  men,  have 
rather  chosen  to  draw  the  sword  in  defence 
of  their  own  importance. 

Towards  the  declension  of  the  Roman  re¬ 
public,  the  allies  of  Rome,  who  had  borne 
the  principal  burden  of  defending  the  state 
and  extending  the  empire,  demanded  to  be 
admitted  to  all  the  privileges  of  Roman  citi¬ 
zens.  Upon  being  refused,  the  social  war 
broke  out.  During  the  course  of  that  war, 
Rome  granted  those  privileges  to  the  greater 
part  of  them  one  by  one,  and  in  proportion 
as  they  detached  themselves  from  the  gen¬ 
eral  confederacy.  The  Parliament  of  Great 
Britain  insists  upon  taxing  the  colonies;  and 
they  refuse  to  be  taxed  by  a  Parliament  in 
which  they  are  not  represented.  If  to  each 
colony,  which  should  detach  itself  from  the 
general  confederacy,  Great  Britain  should 
allow  such  a  number  of  representatives  as 
suited  the  proportion  of  what  is  contributed 
to  the  public  revenue  of  the  empire,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  being  subjected  to  the  same 
taxes,  and  in  compensation  admitted  to  the 
same  freedom  of  trade  with  its  fellow-subjects 
at  home;  the  number  of  its  representatives  to 
be  augmented  as  the  proportion  of  its  con¬ 
tribution  might  afterwards  augment;  a  new 
method  of  acquiring  importance,  a  new  and 
more  dazzling  object  of  ambition  would  be 
presented  to  the  leading  men  of  each  col¬ 
ony.  Instead  of  piddling  for  the  little  prizes 
which  are  to  be  found  in  what  may  be  called 
the  paltry  raffle  of  colony  faction;  they  might 
then  hope,  from  the  presumption  which  men 
naturally  have  in  their  own  ability  and  good 


fortune,  to  draw  some  of  the  great  prizes 
which  sometimes  come  from  the  wheel  of  the 
great  state  lottery  of  British  politics.  Unless 
this  or  some  other  method  is  fallen  upon,  and 
there  seems  to  be  none  more  obvious  than 
this,  of  preserving  the  importance  and  of 
gratifying  the  ambition  of  the  leading  men  of 
America,  it  is  not  very  probable  that  they 
will  ever  voluntarily  submit  to  us;  and  we 
ought  to  consider  that  the  blood  which  must 
be  shed  in  forcing  them  to  do  so  is,  every 
drop  of  it,  blood  either  of  those  who  are,  or 
of  those  whom  we  wish  to  have  for  our  fellow- 
citizens.  They  are  very  weak  who  flatter 
themselves  that,  in  the  state  to  which  things 
have  come,  our  colonies  will  be  easily  con¬ 
quered  by  force  alone.  The  persons  who  now 
govern  the  resolutions  of  what  they  call  their 
Continental  Congress,  feel  in  themselves  at 
this  moment  a  degree  of  importance  which, 
perhaps,  the  greatest  subjects  in  Europe 
scarce  feel.  From  shopkeepers,  tradesmen,  and 
attornies,  they  are  become  statesmen  and 
legislators,  and  are  employed  in  contriving 
a  new  form  of  government  for  an  extensive 
empire,  which,  they  flatter  themselves,  will 
become,  and  which,  indeed,  seems  very  likely 
to  become,  one  of  the  greatest  and  most 
formidable  that  ever  was  in  the  world.  Five 
hundred  different  people,  perhaps,  who  in 
different  ways  act  immediately  under  the 
Continental  Congress;  and  five  hundred  thou¬ 
sand,  perhaps,  who  act  under  those  five 
hundred,  all  feel  in  the  same  manner  a  pro¬ 
portionable  rise  in  their  own  importance. 
Almost  every  individual  of  the  governing 
party  in  America  fills,  at  present  in  his  own 
fancy,  a  station  superior,  not  only  to  what  he 
had  ever  filled  before,  but  to  what  he  had 
ever  expected  to  fill;  and  unless  some  new  ob¬ 
ject  of  ambition  is  presented  either  to  him 
or  to  his  leaders,  if  he  has  the  ordinary  spirit 
of  a  man,  he  will  die  in  defence  of  that 
station. 

It  is  a  remark  of  the  president  Henaut,  that 
we  now  read  with  pleasure  the  account  of 
many  little  transactions  of  the  Ligue,  which 
when  they  happened  were  not  perhaps  con¬ 
sidered  as  very  important  pieces  of  news.  But 
every  man  then,  says  he,  fancied  himself  of 
some  importance;  and  the  innumerable  mem¬ 
oirs  which  have  come  down  to  us  from  those 
times,  were,  the  greater  part  of  them,  written 
by  people  who  took  pleasure  in  recording  and 
magnifying  events  in  which,  they  flattered 
themselves,  they  had  been  considerable  actors. 
How  obstinately  the  city  of  Paris  upon  that 
occasion  defended  itself,  what  a  dreadful 
famine  it  supported  rather  than  submit  to 
the  best  and  afterwards  to  the  most  beloved 
of  all  the  French  kings,  is  well  known.  The 
greater  part  of  the  citizens,  or  those  who 


Colonies 


271 


governed  the  greater  part  of  them,  fought 
in  defence  of  their  own  importance,  which 
they  foresaw  was  to  be  at  an  end  whenever 
the  ancient  government  should  be  re-estab¬ 
lished.  Our  colonies,  unless  they  can  be  in¬ 
duced  to  consent  to  a  union,  are  very  likely 
to  defend  themselves  against  the  best  of  all 
mother  countries  as  obstinately  as  the  city 
of  Paris  did  against  one  of  the  best  of  kings. 

The  idea  of  representation  was  unknown 
in  ancient  times.  When  the  people  of  one 
state  were  admitted  to  the  right  of  citizen¬ 
ship  in  another,  they  had  no  other  means  of 
exercising  that  right  but  by  coming  in  a  body 
to  vote  and  deliberate  with  the  people  of 
that  other  state.  The  admission  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Italy  to  the  privi¬ 
leges  of  Roman  citizens  completely  ruined 
the  Roman  republic.  It  was  no  longer  possible 
to  distinguish  between  who  was  and  who  was 
not  a  Roman  citizen.  No  tribe  could  know 
its  own  members.  A  rabble  of  any  kind  could 
be  introduced  into  the  assemblies  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  could  drive  out  the  real  citizens,  and  de¬ 
cide  upon  the  affairs  of  the  republic  as  if  they 
themselves  had  been  such.  But  though  Amer¬ 
ica  were  to  send  fifty  or  sixty  new  repre¬ 
sentatives  to  Parliament,  the  doorkeeper  of 
the  House  of  Commons  could  not  find  any 
great  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between 
who  was  and  who  was  not  a  member.  Though 
the  Roman  constitution,  therefore,  was  nec¬ 
essarily  ruined  by  the  union  of  Rome  with  the 
allied  states  of  Italy,  there  is  not  the  least 
probability  that  the  British  constitution 
would  be  hurt  by  the  union  of  Great  Britain 
with  her  colonies.  That  constitution,  on  the 
contrary,  would  be  completed  by  it,  and  seems 
to  be  imperfect  without  it.  The  assembly 
which  deliberates  and  decides  concerning  the 
affairs  of  every  part  of  the  empire,  in  order 
to  be  properly  informed,  ought  certainly  to 
have  representatives  from  every  part  of  it 
That  this  union,  however,  could  be  easily 
effectuated,  or  that  difficulties  and  great 
difficulties  might  not  occur  in  the  execution, 
I  do  not  pretend.  I  have  yet  heard  of  none, 
however,  which  appear  insurmountable.  The 
principal  perhaps  arise,  not  from  the  nature 
of  things,  but  from  the  prejudices  and  opin¬ 
ions  of  the  people  both  on  this  and  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Atlantic. 

We,  on  this  side  of  the  water,  are  afraid 
lest  the  multitude  of  American  representatives 
should  overturn  the  balance  of  the  consti¬ 
tution,  and  increase  too  much  either  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  crown  on  the  one  hand,  or  the 
force  of  the  democracy  on  the  other.  But  if  the 
number  of  American  representatives  were  to 
be  in  proportion  to  the  produce  of  American 
taxation,  the  number  of  people  to  be  man¬ 
aged  would  increase  exactly  in  proportion 


to  the  means  of  managing  them;  and  the 
means  of  managing  to  the  number  of  people 
to  be  managed.  The  monarchical  and  demo- 
cratical  parts  of  the  constitution  would,  after 
the  union,  stand  exactly  in  the  same  degree 
of  relative  force  with  regard  to  one  another 
as  they  had  done  before. 

The  people  on  the  other  side  of  the  water 
are  afraid  lest  their  distance  from  the  seat  of 
government  might  expose  them  to  many  op¬ 
pressions.  But  their  representatives  in  Parlia¬ 
ment,  of  which  the  number  ought  from  the 
first  to  be  considerable,  would  easily  be  able 
to  protect  them  from  all  oppression.  The  dis¬ 
tance  could  not  much  weaken  the  depend¬ 
ency  of  the  representative  upon  the  con¬ 
stituent,  and  the  former  would  still  feel  that 
he  owed  his  seat  in  Parliament,  and  all  the 
consequences  which  he  derived  from  it,  to 
the  good  will  of  the  latter.  It  would  be  the 
interest  of  the  former,  therefore,  to  cultivate 
that  good  will  by  complaining,  with  all  the 
authority  of  a  member  of  the  legislature,  of 
every  outrage  which  any  civil  or  military 
officer  might  be  guilty  of  in  those  remote 
parts  of  the  empire.  The  distance  of  America 
from  the  seat  of  government,  besides,  the 
natives  of  that  country  might  flatter  them¬ 
selves,  with  some  appearance  of  reason  too, 
would  not  be  of  very  long  continuance.  Such 
has  hitherto  been  the  rapid  progress  of  that 
country  in  wealth,  population,  and  improve¬ 
ment,  that  in  the  course  of  little  more  than  a 
century,  perhaps,  the  produce  of  American 
might  exceed  that  of  British  taxation.  The 
seat  of  the  empire  would  then  naturally  re¬ 
move  itself  to  that  part  of  the  empire  which 
contributed  most  to  the  general  defence  and 
support  of  the  whole. 

The  discovery  of  America,  and  that  of  a 
passage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  are  the  two  greatest  and  most 
important  events  recorded  in  the  history  of 
mankind.  Their  consequences  have  already 
been  very  great;  but,  in  the  short  period  of 
between  two  and  three  centuries  which  has 
elapsed  since  these  discoveries  were  made,  it 
is  impossible  that  the  whole  extent  of  their 
consequences  can  have  been  seen.  What  bene¬ 
fits  or  what  misfortunes  to  mankind  may 
hereafter  result  from  those  great  events,  no 
human  wisdom  can  foresee.  By  uniting,  in 
some  measure,  the  most  distant  parts  of  the 
world,  by  enabling  them  to  relieve  one  an¬ 
other’s  wants,  to  increase  one  another’s  enjoy¬ 
ments,  and  to  encourage  one  another’s  indus¬ 
try,  their  general  tendency  would  seem  to  be 
beneficial.  To  the  natives  however,  both  of 
the  East  and  West  Indies,  all  the  commercial 
benefits  which  can  have  resulted  from  those 
events  have  been  sunk  and  lost  in  the  dread¬ 
ful  misfortunes  which  they  have  occasioned. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


272 

These  misfortunes,  however,  seem  to  have 
arisen  rather  from  accident  than  from  any¬ 
thing  in  the  nature  of  those  events  themselves. 
At  the  particular  time  when  these  discoveries 
were  made,  the  superiority  of  force  happened 
to  be  so  great  on  the  side  of  the  Europeans 
that  they  were  enabled  to  commit  with  im¬ 
punity  every  sort  of  injustice  in  those  remote 
countries.  Hereafter,  perhaps,  the  natives  of 
those  countries  may  grow  stronger,  or  those 
of  Europe  may  grow  weaker,  and  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  all  the  different  quarters  of  the  world 
may  arrive  at  that  equality  of  courage  and 
force  which,  by  inspiring  mutual  fear,  can 
alone  overawe  the  injustice  of  independent 
nations  into  some  sort  of  respect  for  the 
rights  of  one  another.  But  nothing  seems  more 
likely  to  establish  this  equality  of  force  than 
that  mutual  communication  of  knowledge  and 
of  all  sorts  of  improvements  which  an  exten¬ 
sive  commerce  from  all  countries  to  all  coun¬ 
tries  naturally,  or  rather  necessarily,  carries 
along  with  it. 

In  the  meantime  one  of  the  principal  effects 
of  those  discoveries  has  been  to  raise  the  mer¬ 
cantile  system  to  a  degree  of  splendour  and 
glory  which  it  could  never  otherwise  have  at¬ 
tained  to.  It  is  the  object  of  that  system  to 
enrich  a  great  nation  rather  by  trade  and 
manufactures  than  by  the  improvement  and 
cultivation  of  land,  rather  by  the  industry 
of  the  towns  than  by  that  of  the  country. 
But,  in  consequence  of  those  discoveries,  the 
commercial  towns  of  Europe,  instead  of  being 
the  manufacturers  and  carriers  for  but  a  very 
small  part  of  the  world  (that  part  of  Europe 
which  is  washed  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and 
the  countries  which  lie  round  the  Baltic  and 
Mediterranean  seas) ,  have  now  become  the 
manufacturers  for  the  numerous  and  thriving 
cultivators  of  America,  and  the  carriers,  and 
in  some  respects  the  manufacturers  too,  for 
almost  all  the  different  nations  of  Asia, 
Africa,  and  America.  Two  new  worlds  have 
been  opened  to  their  industry,  each  of  them 
much  greater  and  more  extensive  than  the 
old  one,  and  the  market  of  one  of  them  grow¬ 
ing  still  greater  and  greater  every  day. 

The  countries  which  possess  the  colonies  of 
America,  and  which  trade  directly  to  the 
East  Indies,  enjoy,  indeed,  the  whole  show 
and  splendour  of  this  great  commerce.  Other 
countries,  however,  notwithstanding  all  the 
invidious  restraints  by  which  it  is  meant  to 
exclude  them,  frequently  enjoy  a  greater 
share  of  the  real  benefit  of  it.  The  colonies  of 
Spain  and  Portugal,  for  example,  give  more 
real  encouragement  to  the  industry  of  other 
countries  than  to  that  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 
In  the  single  article  of  linen  alone  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  those  colonies  amounts,  it  is  said, 
but  I  do  not  pretend  to  warrant  the  quantity, 


to  more  than  three  millions  sterling  a  year. 
But  this  great  consumption  is  almost  entirely 
supplied  by  France,  Flanders,  Holland,  and 
Germany.  Spain  and  Portugal  furnish  but  a 
small  part  of  it.  The  capital  which  supplies 
the  colonies  with  this  great  quantity  of  linen 
is  annually  distributed  among,  and  furnishes 
a  revenue  to  the  inhabitants  of,  those  other 
countries.  The  profits  of  it  only  are  spent  in 
Spain  and  Portugal,  where  they  help  to  sup¬ 
port  the  sumptuous  profusion  of  the  mer¬ 
chants  of  Cadiz  and  Lisbon. 

Even  the  regulations  by  which  each  na¬ 
tion  endeavours  to  secure  to  itself  the  exclu¬ 
sive  trade  of  its  own  colonies  are  frequently 
more  hurtful  to  the  countries  in  favour  of 
which  they  are  established  than  to  those 
against  which  they  are  established.  The  un¬ 
just  oppression  of  the  industry  of  other  coun¬ 
tries  falls  back,  if  I  may  say  so,  upon  the 
heads  of  the  oppressors,  and  crushes  their 
industry  more  than  it  does  that  of  those 
other  countries.  By  those  regulations  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  merchant  of  Hamburg  must  send 
the  linen  which  he  destines  for  the  American 
market  to  London,  and  he  must  bring  back 
from  thence  the  tobacco  which  he  destines 
for  the  German  market,  because  he  can 
neither  send  the  one  directly  to  America  nor 
bring  back  the  other  directly  from  thence.  By 
this  restraint  he  is  probably  obliged  to  sell 
the  one  somewhat  cheaper,  and  to  buy  the 
other  somewhat  dearer  than  he  otherwise 
might  have  done;  and  his  profits  are  probably 
somewhat  abridged  by  means  of  it.  In  this 
trade,  however,  between  Hamburg  and  Lon¬ 
don,  he  certainly  receives  the  returns  of  his 
capital  much  more  quickly  than  he  could  pos¬ 
sibly  have  done  in  the  direct  trade  to  Amer¬ 
ica,  even  though  we  should  suppose,  what 
is  by  no  means  the  case,  that  the  payments 
of  America  were  as  punctual  as  those  of  Lon¬ 
don.  In  the  trade,  therefore,  to  which  those 
regulations  confine  the  merchant  of  Hamburg, 
his  capital  can  keep  in  constant  employment 
a  much  greater  quantity  of  German  industry 
than  it  possibly  could  have  done  in  the  trade 
from  which  he  is  excluded.  Though  the  one 
employment,  therefore,  may  to  him  perhaps 
be  less  profitable  than  the  other,  it  cannot  be 
less  advantageous  to  his  country.  It  is  quite 
otherwise  with  the  employment  into  which 
the  monopoly  naturally  attracts,  if  I  may  say 
so,  the  capital  of  the  London  merchant.  That 
employment  may,  perhaps,  be  more  profitable 
to  him  than  the  greater  part  of  other  em¬ 
ployments,  but,  on  account  of  the  slowness 
of  the  returns,  it  cannot  be  more  advanta¬ 
geous  to  his  country. 

After  all  the  unjust  attempts,  therefore,  of 
every  country  in  Europe  to  engross  to  itself 
the  whole  advantage  of  the  trade  of  its  own 


Colonies 


colonies,  no  country  has  yet  been  able  to  en¬ 
gross  itself  anything  but  the  expense  of  sup¬ 
porting  in  time  of  peace  and  of  defending  in 
time  of  war  the  oppressive  authority  which 
it  assumes  over  them.  The  inconveniencies 
resulting  from  the  possession  of  its  colonies, 
every  country  has  engrossed  to  itself  com¬ 
pletely.  The  advantages  resulting  from  their 
trade  it  has  been  obliged  to  share  with  many 
other  countries. 

At  first  sight,  no  doubt,  the  monopoly  of 
the  great  commerce  of  America  naturally 
seems  to  be  an  acquisition  of  the  highest 
value.  To  the  undiscerning  eye  of  giddy  am¬ 
bition,  it  naturally  presents  itself  amidst  the 
confused  scramble  of  politics  and  war  as  a 
very  dazzling  object  to  fight  for.  The  daz¬ 
zling  splendour  of  the  object,  however,  the 
immense  greatness  of  the  commerce,  is  the 
very  quality  which  renders  the  monopoly  of 
it  hurtful,  or  which  makes  one  employment, 
in  its  own  nature  necessarily  less  advanta¬ 
geous  to  the  country  than  the  greater  part  of 
other  employments,  absorb  a  much  greater 
proportion  of  the  capital  of  the  country  than 
what  would  otherwise  have  gone  to  it. 

The  mercantile  stock  of  every  country,  it 
has  been  shown  in  the  second  book,  naturally 
seeks,  if  one  may  say  so,  the  employment 
most  advantageous  to  that  country.  If  it  is 
employed  in  the  carrying  trade,  the  country 
to  which  it  belongs  becomes  the  emporium 
of  the  goods  of  all  the  countries  whose  trade 
that  stock  carries  on.  But  the  owner  of  that 
stock  necessarily  wishes  to  dispose  of  as  great 
a  part  of  those  goods  as  he  can  at  home.  He 
thereby  saves  himself  the  trouble,  risk,  and 
expense  of  exportation,  and  he  will  upon  that 
account  be  glad  to  sell  them  at  home,  not 
only  for  a  much  smaller  price,  but  with  some¬ 
what  a  smaller  profit  than  he  might  expect 
to  make  by  sending  them  abroad.  He  natu¬ 
rally,  therefore,  endeavours  as  much  as  he  can 
to  turn  his  carrying  trade  into  a  foreign  trade 
of  consumption.  If  his  stock,  again,  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  a  foreign  trade  of  consumption,  he 
will,  for  the  same  reason,  be  glad  to  dispose 
of  at  home  as  great  a  part  as  he  can  of  the 
home  goods,  which  he  collects  in  order  to  ex¬ 
port  to  some  foreign  market,  and  he  will  thus 
endeavour,  as  much  as  he  can,  to  turn  his 
foreign  trade  of  consumption  into  a  home 
trade.  The  mercantile  stock  of  every  country 
naturally  courts  in  this  manner  the  near,  and 
shuns  the  distant  employment;  naturally 
courts  the  employment  in  which  the  returns 
are  frequent,  and  shuns  that  in  which  they  are 
distant  and  slow;  naturally  courts  the  em¬ 
ployment  in  which  it  can  maintain  the  great¬ 
est  quantity  of  productive  labour  in  the 
country  to  which  it  belongs,  or  in  which  its 
owner  resides,  and  shuns  that  in  which  it  can 


273 

maintain  there  the  smallest  quantity.  It  nat¬ 
urally  courts  the  employment  which  in  ordi¬ 
nary  cases  is  most  advantageous,  and  shuns 
that  which  in  ordinary  cases  is  least  advan¬ 
tageous  to  that  country. 

But  if  in  any  of  those  distant  employments, 
which  in  ordinary  cases  are  less  advantageous 
to  the  country,  the  profit  should  happen  to 
rise  somewhat  higher  than  what  is  sufficient 
to  balance  the  natural  preference  which  is 
given  to  nearer  employments,  this  superiority 
of  profit  will  draw  stock  from  those  nearer 
employments,  till  the  profits  of  ali  return  to 
their  proper  level.  This  superiority  of  profit, 
however,  is  a  proof  that,  in  the  actual  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  society,  those  distant  employ¬ 
ments  are  somewhat  understocked  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  other  employments,  and  that  the 
stock  of  the  society  is  not  distributed  in  the 
properest  manner  among  all  the  different  em¬ 
ployments  carried  on  in  it.  It  is  a  proof  that 
something  is  either  bought  cheaper  or  sold 
dearer  than  it  ought  to  be,  and  that  some  par¬ 
ticular  class  of  citizens  is  more  or  less  op¬ 
pressed  either  by  paying  more  or  by  getting 
less  than  what  is  suitable  to  that  equality 
which  ought  to  take  place,  and  which  natu¬ 
rally  does  take  place  among  all  the  different 
classes  of  them.  Though  the  same  capital 
never  will  maintain  the  same  quantity  of  pro¬ 
ductive  labour  in  a  distant  as  in  a  near  em¬ 
ployment,  yet  a  distant  employment  may  be 
as  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the  society  as 
a  near  one;  the  goods  which  the  distant  em¬ 
ployment  deals  in  being  necessary,  perhaps, 
for  carrying  on  many  of  the  nearer  employ¬ 
ments.  But  if  the  profits  of  those  who  deal  in 
such  goods  are  above  their  proper  level,  those 
goods  will  be  sold  dearer  than  they  ought  to 
be,  or  somewhat  above  their  natural  price, 
and  all  those  engaged  in  the  nearer  employ¬ 
ments  will  be  more  or  less  oppressed  by  this 
high  price.  Their  interest,  therefore,  in  this 
case  requires  that  some  stock  should  be  with¬ 
drawn  from  those  nearer  employments,  and 
turned  towards  that  distant  one,  in  order  to 
reduce  its  profits  to  their  proper  level,  and 
the  price  of  the  goods  which  it  deals  in  to 
their  natural  price.  In  this  extraordinary  case, 
the  public  interest  requires  that  some  stock 
should  be  withdrawn  from  those  employments 
which  in  ordinary  cases  are  more  advanta¬ 
geous,  and  turned  towards  one  which  in  ordi¬ 
nary  cases  is  less  advantageous  to  the  public; 
and  in  this  extraordinary  case  the  natural  in¬ 
terests  and  inclinations  of  men  coincide  as  ex¬ 
actly  with  the  public  interest  as  in  all  other 
ordinary  cases,  and  lead  them  to  withdraw 
stock  from  the  near,  and  to  turn  it  towards 
the  distant  employment. 

It  is  thus  that  the  private  interests  and 
passions  of  individuals  naturally  dispose  them 


274  The  Wealth 

to  turn  their  stocks  towards  the  employments 
which  in  ordinary  cases  are  most  advanta¬ 
geous  to  the  society.  But  if  from  this  natural 
preference  they  should  turn  too  much  of  it 
towards  those  employments,  the  fall  of  profit 
in  them  and  the  rise  of  it  in  all  others  im¬ 
mediately  dispose  them  to  alter  this  faulty 
distribution.  Without  any  intervention  of  law, 
therefore,  the  private  interests  and  passions 
of  men  naturally  lead  them  to  divide  and  dis¬ 
tribute  the  stock  of  every  society  among  all 
the  different  employments  carried  on  in  it 
as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  proportion  which 
is  most  agreeable  to  the  interest  of  the  whole 
society. 

All  the  different  regulations  of  the  mercan¬ 
tile  system  necessarily  derange  more  or  less 
this  natural  and  most  advantageous  distri¬ 
bution  of  stock.  But  those  which  concern  the 
trade  to  America  and  the  East  Indies  derange 
it  perhaps  more  than  any  other,  because  the 
trade  to  those  two  great  continents  absorbs 
a  greater  quantity  of  stock  than  any  two 
other  branches  of  trade.  The  regulations,  how¬ 
ever,  by  which  this  derangement  is  effected 
in  those  two  different  branches  of  trade  are 
not  altogether  the  same.  Monopoly  is  the 
great  engine  of  both;  but  it  is  a  different  sort 
of  monopoly.  Monopoly  of  one  kind  or  an¬ 
other,  indeed,  seems  to  be  the  sole  engine  of 
the  mercantile  system. 

In  the  trade  to  America  every  nation  en¬ 
deavours  to  engross  as  much  as  possible  the 
whole  market  of  its  own  colonies  by  fairly 
excluding  all  other  nations  from  any  direct 
trade  to  them.  During  the  greater  part  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  the  Portuguese  endeav¬ 
oured  to  manage  the  trade  to  the  East  Indies 
in  the  same  manner,  by  claiming  the  sole 
right  of  sailing  in  the  Indian  seas,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  merit  of  having  first  found  out 
the  road  to  them.  The  Dutch  still  continue 
to  exclude  all  other  European  nations  from 
any  direct  trade  to  their  spice  islands.  Monop¬ 
olies  of  this  kind  are  evidently  established 
against  all  other  European  nations,  who  are 
thereby  not  only  excluded  from  a  trade  to 
which  it  might  be  convenient  for  them  to 
turn  some  part  of  their  stock,  but  are  obliged 
to  buy  the  goods  which  that  trade  deals  in 
somewhat  dearer  than  if  they  could  import 
them  themselves  directly  from  the  countries 
which  produce  them. 

But  since  the  fall  of  the  power  of  Portugal, 
no  European  nation  has  claimed  the  exclusive 
right  of  sailing  in  the  Indian  seas,  of  which 
the  principal  ports  are  now  open  to  the  ships 
of  all  European  nations.  Except  in  Portugal, 
however,  and  within  these  few  years  in 
France,  the  trade  to  the  East  Indies  has  in 
every  European  country  been  subjected  to  an 
exclusive  company.  Monopolies  of  this  kind 


of  Nations 

are  properly  established  against  the  very  na¬ 
tion  which  erects  them.  The  greater  part  of 
that  nation  are  thereby  not  only  excluded 
from  a  trade  to  which  it  might  be  convenient 
for  them  to  turn  some  part  of  their  stock,  but 
are  obliged  to  buy  the  goods  which  that  trade 
deals  somewhat  dearer  than  if  it  was  open 
and  free  to  all  their  countrymen.  Since  the 
establishment  of  the  English  East  India  Com¬ 
pany,  for  example,  the  other  inhabitants  of 
England,  over  and  above  being  excluded  from 
the  trade,  must  have  paid  in  the  price  of  the 
East  India  goods  which  they  have  consumed, 
not  only  for  all  the  extraordinary  profits 
which  the  company  may  have  made  upon 
those  goods  in  consequence  of  their  monop-  i 
oly,  but  for  all  the  extraordinary  waste  which 
the  fraud  and  abuse,  inseparable  from  the 
management  of  the  affairs  of  so  great  a  com¬ 
pany,  must  necessarily  have  occasioned.  The 
absurdity  of  this  second  kind  of  monopoly, 
therefore,  is  much  more  manifest  than  that 
of  the  first. 

Both  these  kinds  of  monopolies  derange 
more  or  less  the  natural  distribution  of  the 
stock  of  the  society;  but  they  do  not  always 
derange  it  in  the  same  way. 

Monopolies  of  the  first  kind  always  at¬ 
tract  to  the  particular  trade  in  which  they 
are  established  a  greater  proportion  of  the 
stock  of  the  society  than  what  would  go  to 
that  trade  of  its  own  accord. 

Monopolies  of  the  second  kind  may  some¬ 
times  attract  stock  towards  the  particular 
trade  in  which  they  are  established,  and  some¬ 
times  repel  it  from  that  trade  according  to 
different  circumstances.  In  poor  countries  they 
naturally  attract  towards  that  trade  more 
stock  than  would  otherwise  go  to  it.  In  rich 
countries  they  naturally  repel  from  it  a  good 
deal  of  stock  which  would  otherwise  go  to  it. 

Such  poor  countries  as  Sweden  and  Den¬ 
mark,  for  example,  would  probably  have 
never  sent  a  single  ship  to  the  East  Indies 
had  not  the  trade  been  subjected  to  an  ex¬ 
clusive  company.  The  establishment  of  such 
a  company  necessarily  encourages  adven¬ 
turers.  Their  monopoly  secures  them  against 
all  competitors  in  the  home  market,  and  they 
have  the  same  chance  for  foreign  markets 
with  the  traders  of  other  nations.  Their  g 

monopoly  shows  them  the  certainty  of  a 
great  profit  upon  a  considerable  quantity  of 
goods,  and  the  chance  of  a  considerable  profit 
upon  a  great  quantity.  Without  such  extraor-  S( 
dinary  encouragement,  the  poor  traders  of  b 

such  poor  countries  would  probably  never  a' 

have  thought  of  hazarding  their  small  capitals 
in  so  very  distant  and  uncertain  an  adven¬ 
ture  as  the  trade  to  the  East  Indies  must  nat¬ 
urally  have  appeared  to  them. 

Such  a  rich  country  as  Holland,  on  the  con- 


Colonies 


trary,  would  probably,  in  the  case  of  a  free 
trade,  send  many  more  ships  to  the  East 
Indies  than  it  actually  does.  The  limited  stock 
of  the  Dutch  East  India  Company  probably 
repels  from  that  trade  many  great  mercantile 
capitals  which  would  otherwise  go  to  it.  The 
mercantile  capital  of  Holland  is  so  great  that 
it  is,  as  it  were,  continually  overflowing,  some¬ 
times  into  the  public  funds  of  foreign  coun¬ 
tries,  sometimes  into  loans  to  private  traders 
and  adventurers  of  foreign  countries,  some¬ 
times  into  the  most  round-about  foreign  trades 
of  consumption,  and  sometimes  into  the 
carrying  trade.  All  near  employments  being 
completely  filled  up,  all  the  capital  which 
can  be  placed  in  them  with  any  tolerable 
profit  being  already  placed  in  them,  the  capi¬ 
tal  of  Holland  necessarily  flows  towards  the 
most  distant  employments.  The  trade  to  the 
East  Indies,  if  it  were  altogether  free,  would 
probably  absorb  the  greater  part  of  this  re¬ 
dundant  capital.  The  East  Indies  offer  a 
market  for  the  manufactures  of  Europe  and 
for  the  gold  and  silver  as  well  as  for  several 
other  productions  of  America  greater  and 
more  extensive  than  both  Europe  and  Amer¬ 
ica  put  together. 

Every  derangement  of  the  natural  distribu¬ 
tion  of  stock  is  necessarily  hurtful  to  the 
society  in  which  it  takes  place;  whether  it  be 
by  repelling  from  a  particular  trade  the  stock 
which  would  otherwise  go  to  it,  or  by  attract¬ 
ing  towards  a  particular  trade  that  which 
would  not  otherwise  come  to  it.  If,  without 
any  exclusive  company,  the  trade  of  Holland 
to  the  East  Indies  would  be  greater  than  it 
actually  is,  that  country  must  suffer  a  con¬ 
siderable  loss  by  part  of  its  capital  being 
excluded  from  the  employment  most  conven¬ 
ient  for  that  part.  And  in  the  same  manner, 
if,  without  an  exclusive  company,  the  trade 
of  Sweden  and  Denmark  to  the  East  Indies 
would  be  less  than  it  actually  is,  or,  what  per¬ 
haps  is  more  probable,  would  not  exist  at  all, 
those  two  countries  must  likewise  suffer  a 
considerable  loss  by  part  of  their  capital 
being  drawn  into  an  employment  which  must 
be  more  or  less  unsuitable  to  their  present 
circumstances.  Better  for  them,  perhaps,  in 
their  present  circumstances,  to  buy  East  India 
goods  of  other  nations,  even  though  they 
should  pay  somewhat  dearer,  than  to  turn 
so  great  a  part  of  their  small  capital  to  so 
very  distant  a  trade,  in  which  the  returns  are 
so  very  slow,  in  which  that  capital  can  main¬ 
tain  so  small  a  quantity  of  productive  labour 
at  home,  where  productive  labour  is  so  much 
wanted,  where  so  little  is  done,  and  where 
so  much  is  to  do. 

Though  without  an  exclusive  company, 
therefore,  a  particular  country  should  not  be 
able  to  carry  on  any  direct  trade  to  the  East 


275 

Indies,  it  will  not  from  thence  follow  that 
such  a  company  ought  to  be  established  there, 
but  only  that  such  a  country  ought  not  in 
these  circumstances  to  trade  directly  to  the 
East  Indies.  That  such  companies  are  not  in 
general  necessary  for  carrying  on  the  East 
India  trade  is  sufficiently  demonstrated  by  the 
experience  of  the  Portuguese,  who  enjoyed 
almost  the  whole  of  it  for  more  than  a  cen¬ 
tury  together  without  any  exclusive  company. 

No  private  merchant,  it  has  been  said, 
could  well  have  capital  sufficient  to  maintain 
factors  and  agents  in  the  different  ports  of 
the  East  Indies,  in  order  to  provide  goods  for 
the  ships  which  he  might  occasionally  send 
thither;  and  yet,  unless  he  was  able  to  do  this, 
the  difficulty  of  finding  a  cargo  might  fre¬ 
quently  make  his  ships  lose  the  season  for 
returning,  and  the  expense  of  so  long  a  delay 
would  not  only  eat  up  the  whole  profit  of  the 
adventure,  but  frequently  occasion  a  very 
considerable  loss.  This  argument,  however,  if 
it  proved  anything  at  all,  would  prove  that 
no  one  great  branch  of  trade  could  be  carried 
on  without  an  exclusive  company,  which  is 
contrary  to  the  experience  of  all  nations. 
There  is  no  great  branch  of  trade  in  which 
the  capital  of  any  one  private  merchant  is 
sufficient  for  carrying  on  all  the  subordinate 
branches  which  must  be  carried  on,  in  order 
to  carry  on  the  principal  one.  But  when  a 
nation  is  ripe  for  any  great  branch  of  trade, 
some  merchants  naturally  turn  their  capitals 
towards  the  principal,  and  some  towards  the 
subordinate  branches  of  it;  and  though  all  the 
different  branches  of  it  are  in  this  manner 
carried  on,  yet  it  very  seldom  happens  that 
they  are  all  carried  on  by  the  capital  of  one 
private  merchant.  If  a  nation,  therefore,  is 
ripe  for  the  East  India  trade,  a  certain  por¬ 
tion  of  its  capital  will  naturally  divide  itself 
among  all  the  different  branches  of  that  trade. 
Some  of  its  merchants  will  find  it  for  their 
interest  to  reside  in  the  East  Indies,  and  to 
employ  their  capitals  there  in  providing  goods 
for  the  ships  which  are  to  be  sent  out  by 
other  merchants  who  reside  in  Europe.  The 
settlements  which  different  European  nations 
have  obtained  in  the  East  Indies,  if  they  were 
taken  from  the  exclusive  companies  to  which 
they  at  present  belong  and  put  under  the 
immediate  protection  of  the  sovereign,  would 
render  this  residence  both  safe  and  easy,  at 
least  to  the  merchants  of  the  particular  na¬ 
tions  to  whom  those  settlements  belong.  If  at 
any  particular  time  that  part  of  the  capital 
of  any  country  which  of  its  own  accord 
tended  and  inclined,  if  I  may  say  so,  towards 
the  East  India  trade,  was  not  sufficient  for 
carrying  on  all  those  different  branches  of  it, 
it  would  be  a  proof  that,  at  that  particular 
time,  that  country  was  not  ripe  for  that  trade, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


276 

and  that  it  would  do  better  to  buy  for  some 
time,  even  at  a  higher  price,  from  other 
European  nations,  the  East  India  goods  it 
had  occasion  for,  than  to  import  them  itself 
directly  from  the  East  Indies.  What  it  might 
lose  by  the  high  price  of  those  goods  could 
seldom  be  equal  to  the  loss  which  it  would 
sustain  by  the  distraction  of  a  large  portion 
of  its  capital  from  other  employments  more 
necessary,  or  more  useful,  or  more  suitable 
to  its  circumstances  and  situation,  than  a 
direct  trade  to  the  East  Indies. 

Though  the  Europeans  possess  many  con¬ 
siderable  settlements  both  upon  the  coast  of 
Africa  and  in  the  East  Indies,  they  have  not 
yet  established  in  either  of  those  countries 
such  numerous  and  thriving  colonies  as  those 
in  the  islands  and  continent  of  America. 
Africa,  however,  as  well  as  several  of  the 
countries  comprehended  under  the  general 
name  of  the  East  Indies,  are  inhabited  by 
barbarous  nations.  But  those  nations  were  by 
no  means  so  weak  and  defenceless  as  the 
miserable  and  helpless  Americans;  and  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  natural  fertility  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  which  they  inhabited,  they  were  besides 
much  more  populous.  The  most  barbarous 
nations  either  of  Africa  or  of  the  East  Indies 
were  shepherds;  even  the  Hottentots  were  so. 
But  the  natives  of  every  part  of  America, 
except  Mexico  and  Peru,  were  only  hunters; 
and  the  difference  is  very  great  between  the 
number  of  shepherds  and  that  of  hunters 
whom  the  same  extent  of  equally  fertile  terri¬ 
tory  can  maintain.  In  Africa  and  the  East 
Indies,  therefore,  it  was  more  difficult  to 
displace  the  natives,  and  to  extend  the  Euro¬ 
pean  plantations  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
lands  of  the  original  inhabitants.  The  genius 
of  exclusive  companies,  besides,  is  unfavour¬ 
able,  it  has  already  been  observed,  to  the 
growth  of  new  colonies,  and  has  probably  been 
the  principal  cause  of  the  little  progress  which 
they  have  made  in  the  East  Indies.  The 
Portuguese  carried  on  the  trade  both  to 
Africa  and  the  East  Indies  without  any  ex¬ 
clusive  companies,  and  their  settlements  at 
Congo,  Angola,  and  Benguela  on  the  coast  of 
Africa,  and  at  Goa  in  the  East  Indies,  though 
much  depressed  by  superstition  and  every 
sort  of  bad  government,  yet  bear  some  faint 
resemblance  to  the  colonies  of  America,  and 
are  partly  inhabited  by  Portuguese  who  have 
been  established  there  for  several  genera¬ 
tions.  The  Dutch  settlements  at  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  and  at  Batavia  are  at  present  the 
most  considerable  colonies  which  the  Euro¬ 
peans  have  established  either  in  Africa  or  in 
the  East  Indies,  and  both  these  settlements 
are  peculiarly  fortunate  in  their  situation.  The 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  inhabited  by  a  race 
®f  people  almost  as  barbarous  and  quite  as 


incapable  of  defending  themselves  as  the 
natives  of  America.  It  is  besides  the  halfway 
house,  if  one  may  say  so,  between  Europe  and 
the  East  Indies,  at  which  almost  every  Euro¬ 
pean  ship  makes  some  stay,  both  in  going 
and  returning.  The  supplying  of  those  ships 
with  every  sort  of  fresh  provisions,  with  fruit 
and  sometimes  with  wine,  affords  alone  a 
very  extensive  market  for  the  surplus  produce 
of  the  colonists.  What  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  is  between  Europe  and  every  part 
of  the  East  Indies,  Batavia  is  between  the 
principal  countries  of  the  East  Indies.  It  lies 
upon  the  most  frequented  road  from  Indostan 
to  China  and  Japan,  and  is  nearly  about  mid¬ 
way  upon  that  road.  Almost  all  the  ships, 
too,  that  sail  between  Europe  and  China 
touch  at  Batavia;  and  it  is,  over  and  above  all 
this,  the  centre  and  principal  mart  of  what  is 
called  the  country  trade  of  the  East  Indies, 
not  only  of  that  part  of  it  which  is  carried  on 
by  Europeans,  but  of  that  which  is  carried  on 
by  the  native  Indians;  and  vessels  navigated 
by  the  inhabitants  of  China  and  Japan,  of 
Tonquin,  Malacca,  Cochin  China,  and  the 
island  of  Celebes,  are  frequently  to  be  seen 
in  its  port.  Such  advantageous  situations  have 
enabled  those  two  colonies  to  surmount  all 
the  obstacles  which  the  oppressive  genius 
of  an  exclusive  company  may  have  occasion¬ 
ally  opposed  to  their  growth.  They  have  en¬ 
abled  Batavia  to  surmount  the  additional  dis¬ 
advantage  of  perhaps  the  most  unwholesome 
climate  in  the  world. 

The  English  and  Dutch  companies,  though 
they  have  established  no  considerable  col¬ 
onies,  except  the  two  above  mentioned,  have 
both  made  considerable  conquests  in  the 
East  Indies.  But  in  the  manner  in  which 
they  both  govern  their  new  subjects,  the 
natural  genius  of  an  exclusive  company  has 
shown  itself  most  distinctly.  In  the  spice 
islands  the  Dutch  are  said  to  burn  all  the 
spiceries  which  a  fertile  season  produces  be¬ 
yond  what  they  expect  to  dispose  of  in  Eu¬ 
rope  with  such  a  profit  as  they  think  suffi¬ 
cient.  In  the  islands  where  they  have  no  set¬ 
tlements,  they  give  a  premium  to  those  who 
collect  the  young  blossoms  and  green  leaves 
of  the  clove  and  nutmeg  trees  which  natural¬ 
ly  grow  there,  but  which  the  savage  policy 
has  now,  it  is  said,  almost  completely  extir¬ 
pated.  Even  in  the  islands  where  they  have 
settlements  they  have  very  much  reduced,  it 
is  said,  the  number  of  those  trees.  If  the 
produce  even  of  their  own  islands  was  much 
greater  than  what  suited  their  market,  the 
natives,  they  suspect,  might  find  means  to 
convey  some  part  of  it  to  other  nations;  and 
the  best  way,  they  imagine,  to  secure  their 
own  monopoly  is  to  take  care  that  no  more 
shall  grow  than  what  they  themselves  carry 


Colonies 


to  market.  By  different  arts  of  oppression 
they  have  reduced  the  population  of  several 
of  the  Moluccas  nearly  to  the  number  which 
is  sufficient  to  supply  with  fresh  provisions 
and  other  necessaries  of  life  their  own  insig¬ 
nificant  garrisons,  and  such  of  their  ships  as 
occasionally  come  there  for  a  cargo  of  spices. 
Under  the  government  even  of  the  Portu¬ 
guese,  however,  those  islands  are  said  to  have 
been  tolerably  well  inhabited.  The  English 
company  have  not  yet  had  time  to  establish 
in  Bengal  so  perfectly  destructive  a  system. 
The  plan  of  their  government,  however,  has 
had  exactly  the  same  tendency.  It  has  not 
been  uncommon,  I  am  well  assured,  for  the 
chief,  that  is,  the  first  clerk  of  a  factory,  to 
order  a  peasant  to  plough  up  a  rich  field  of 
poppies  and  sow  it  with  rice  or  some  other 
grain.  The  pretence  was,  to  prevent  a  scarcity 
of  provisions;  but  the  real  reason,  to  give  the 
chief  an  opportunity  of  selling  at  a  better 
price  a  large  quantity  of  opium,  which  he 
happened  then  to  have  upon  hand.  Upon 
other  occasions  the  order  has  been  reversed; 
and  a  rich  field  of  rice  or  other  grain  has  been 
ploughed  up,  in  order  to  make  room  for  a 
plantation  of  poppies;  when  the  chief  foresaw 
that  extraordinary  profit  was  likely  to  be 
made  by  opium.  The  servants  of  the  company 
have  upon  several  occasions  attempted  to 
establish  in  their  own  favour  the  monopoly 
of  some  of  the  most  important  branches,  not 
only  of  the  foreign,  but  of  the  inland  trade 
of  the  country.  Had  they  been  allowed  to  go 
on,  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  not  at 
some  time  or  another  have  attempted  to  re¬ 
strain  the  production  of  the  particular  articles 
of  which  they  had  thus  usurped  the  monop¬ 
oly,  not  only  to  the  quantity  which  they 
themselves  could  purchase,  but  to  that  which 
they  could  expect  to  sell  with  such  a  profit 
as  they  might  think  sufficient.  In  the  course 
of  a  century  or  two,  the  policy  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  company  would  in  this  manner  have 
probably  proved  as  completely  destructive  as 
that  of  the  Dutch. 

Nothing,  however,  can  be  more  directly 
contrary  to  the  real  interest  of  those  com¬ 
panies,  considered  as  the  sovereigns  of  the 
countries  which  they  have  conquered,  than 
this  destructive  plan.  In  almost  all  countries 
the  revenue  of  the  sovereign  is  drawn  from 
that  of  the  people.  The  greater  the  revenue 
of  the  people,  therefore,  the  greater  the  an¬ 
nual  produce  of  their  land  and  labour,  the 
more  they  can  afford  to  the  sovereign.  It  is 
his  interest,  therefore,  to  increase  as  much  as 
possible  that  annual  produce.  But  if  this  is 
the  interest  of  every  sovereign,  it  is  peculiarly 
so  of  one  whose  revenue,  like  that  of  the 
sovereign  of  Bengal,  arises  chiefly  from  a  land- 
rent.  That  rent  must  necessarily  be  in  propor¬ 


277 

tion  to  the  quantity  and  value  of  the  produce, 
and  both  the  one  and  the  other  must  depend 
upon  the  extent  of  the  market.  The  quantity 
will  always  be  suited  with  more  or  less  exact¬ 
ness  to  the  consumption  of  those  who  can 
afford  to  pay  for  it,  and  the  price  which  they 
will  pay  will  always  be  in  proportion  to  the 
eagerness  of  their  competition.  It  is  the  in¬ 
terest  of  such  a  sovereign,  therefore,  to  open 
the  most  extensive  market  for  the  produce  of 
his  country,  to  allow  the  most  perfect  free¬ 
dom  of  commerce,  in  order  to  increase  as 
much  as  possible  the  number  and  the  com¬ 
petition  of  buyers;  and  upon  this  account  to 
abolish,  not  only  all  monopolies,  but  all  re¬ 
straints  upon  the  transportation  of  the  home 
produce  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  an¬ 
other,  upon  its  exportation  to  foreign  coun¬ 
tries,  or  upon  the  importation  of  goods  of  any 
kind  for  which  it  can  be  exchanged.  It  is  in 
this  manner  most  likely  to  increase  both  the 
quantity  and  value  of  that  produce,  and  con¬ 
sequently  of  his  own  share  of  it,  or  of  his  own 
revenue. 

But  a  company  of  merchants  are,  it  seems, 
incapable  of  considering  themselves  as  sover¬ 
eigns,  even  after  they  have  become  such. 
Trade,  or  buying  in  order  to  sell  again,  they 
still  consider  as  their  principal  business,  and 
by  a  strange  absurdity  regard  the  character 
of  the  sovereign  as  but  an  appendix  to  that 
of  the  merchant,  as  something  which  ought 
to  be  made  subservient  to  it,  or  by  means  of 
which  they  may  be  enabled  to  buy  cheaper 
in  India,  and  thereby  to  sell  with  a  better 
profit  in  Europe.  They  endeavour  for  this 
purpose  to  keep  out  as  much  as  possible  all 
competitors  from  the  market  of  the  countries 
which  are  subject  to  their  government,  and 
consequently  to  reduce,  at  least,  some  part  of 
the  surplus  produce  of  those  countries  to  what 
is  barely  sufficient  for  supplying  their  own 
demand,  or  to  what  they  can  expect  to  sell 
in  Europe  with  such  a  profit  as  they  may 
think  reasonable.  Their  mercantile  habits 
draw  them  in  this  manner,  almost  necessarily, 
though  perhaps  insensibly,  to  prefer  upon  all 
ordinary  occasions  the  little  and  transitory 
profit  of  the  monopolist  to  the  great  and 
permanent  revenue  of  the  sovereign,  and 
would  gradually  lead  them  to  treat  the  coun¬ 
tries  subject  to  their  government  nearly  as 
the  Dutch  treat  the  Moluccas.  It  is  the  inter¬ 
est  of  the  East  India  Company,  considered 
as  sovereigns,  that  the  European  goods  which 
are  carried  to  their  Indian  dominions  should 
be  sold  there  as  cheap  as  possible;  and  that 
the  Indian  goods  which  are  brought  from 
thence  should  bring  there  as  good  a  price,  or 
should  be  sold  there  as  dear  as  possible.  But 
the  reverse  of  this  is  their  interest  as  mer¬ 
chants.  As  sovereigns,  their  interest  is  exactly 


The  Wealth  of  Xations 


278 

the  same  with  that  of  the  country  which  they 
govern.  As  merchants  their  interest  is  directly 
opposite  to  that  interest. 

But  if  the  genius  of  such  a  government, 
even  as  to  what  concerns  its  direction  in 
Europe,  is  in  this  manner  essentially  and  per¬ 
haps  incurably  faulty,  that  of  its  administra¬ 
tion  in  India  is  still  more  so.  That  administra¬ 
tion  is  necessarily  composed  of  a  council  of 
merchants,  a  profession  no  doubt  extremely 
respectable,  but  which  in  no  country  in  the 
world  carries  along  with  it  that  sort  of  au¬ 
thority  which  naturally  overawes  the  people, 
and  without  force  commands  their  willing 
obedience.  Such  a  council  can  command 
obedience  only  by  the  military  force  with 
which  they  are  accompanied,  and  their  gov¬ 
ernment  is  therefore  necessarily  military  and 
despotical.  Their  proper  business,  however,  is 
that  of  merchants.  It  is  to  sell,  upon  their 
masters’  account,  the  European  goods  con¬ 
signed  to  them,  and  to  buy  in  return  Indian 
goods  for  the  European  market.  It  is  to  sell 
the  one  as  dear  and  to  buy  the  other  as  cheap 
as  possible,  and  consequently  to  exclude  as 
much  as  possible  all  rivals  from  the  particular 
market  where  they  keep  their  shop.  The 
genius  of  the  administration  therefore,  so  far 
as  concerns  the  trade  of  the  company,  is  the 
same  as  that  of  the  direction.  It  tends  to  make 
government  subservient  to  the  interest  of 
monopoly,  and  consequently  to  stunt  the 
natural  growth  of  some  parts  at  least  of  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  country  to  what  is 
barely  sufficient  for  answering  the  demand 
of  the  company. 

All  the  members  of  the  administration,  be¬ 
sides,  trade  more  or  less  upon  their  own  ac¬ 
count,  and  it  is  in  vain  to  prohibit  them  from 
doing  so.  Nothing  can  be  more  completely 
foolish  than  to  expect  that  the  clerks  of  a 
great  counting-house  at  ten  thousand  miles 
distance,  and  consequently  almost  quite  out 
of  sight,  should,  upon  a  simple  order  from 
their  masters,  give  up  at  once  doing  any  sort 
of  business  upon  their  own  account,  abandon 
for  ever  all  hopes  of  making  a  fortune,  of 
which  they  have  the  means  in  their  hands, 
and  content  themselves  with  the  moderate 
salaries  which  those  masters  allow  them,  and 
which,  moderate  as  they  are,  can  seldom  be 
augmented,  being  commonly  as  large  as  the 
real  profits  of  the  company  trade  can  afford. 
In  such  circumstances,  to  prohibit  the  serv¬ 
ants  of  the  company  from  trading  upon  their 
own  account  can  have  scarce  any  other  effect 
than  to  enable  the  superior  servants,  under 
pretence  of  executing  their  masters’  order,  to 
oppress  such  of  the  inferior  ones  as  have  had 
the  misfortune  to  fall  under  their  displeasure. 
The  servants  naturally  endeavour  to  establish 
the  same  monopoly  in  favour  of  their  own 


private  trade  as  of  the  public  trade  of  the 
company.  If  they  are  suffered  to  act  as  they 
could  wish,  they  will  establish  this  monopoly 
openly  and  directly,  by  fairly  prohibiting  all 
other  people  from  trading  in  the  articles  in 
which  they  choose  to  deal;  and  this,  perhaps, 
is  the  best  and  least  oppressive  way  of  estab¬ 
lishing  it.  But  if  by  an  order  from  Europe 
they  are  prohibited  from  doing  this,  they  will, 
notwithstanding,  endeavour  to  establish  a 
monopoly  of  the  same  kind,  secretly  and  indi¬ 
rectly,  in  a  way  that  is  much  more  destructive 
to  the  country.  They  will  employ  the  whole 
authority  of  government,  and  pervert  the 
administration  of  justice,  in  order  to  harass 
and  ruin  those  who  interfere  with  them  in 
any  branch  of  commerce,  which  by  means  of 
agents,  either  concealed,  or  at  least  not  pub¬ 
licly  avowed,  they  may  choose  to  carry  on. 
But  the  private  trade  of  the  servants  will 
naturally  extend  to  a  much  greater  variety 
of  articles  than  the  public  trade  of  the  com¬ 
pany.  The  public  trade  of  the  company  ex¬ 
tends  no  further  than  the  trade  with  Europe, 
and  comprehends  a  part  only  of  the  foreign 
trade  of  the  country.  But  the  private  trade 
of  the  servants  may  extend  to  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  branches  both  of  its  inland  and  foreign 
trade.  The  monopoly  of  the  company  can 
tend  only  to  stunt  the  natural  growth  of  that 
part  of  the  surplus  produce  which,  in  the  case 
of  a  free  trade,  would  be  exported  to  Europe. 
That  of  the  servants  tends  to  stunt  the  natu¬ 
ral  growth  of  every  part  of  the  produce  in 
which  they  choose  to  deal,  of  what  is  des¬ 
tined  for  home  consumption,  as  well  as  of 
what  is  destined  for  exportation;  and  conse¬ 
quently  to  degrade  the  cultivation  of  the 
whole  country,  and  to  reduce  the  number  of 
its  inhabitants.  It  tends  to  reduce  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  every  sort  of  produce,  even  that  of  the 
necessaries  of  life,  whenever  the  servants  of 
the  company  choose  to  deal  in  them,  to  what 
those  servants  can  both  afford  to  buy  and  ex¬ 
pect  to  sell  with  such  a  profit  as  pleases  them. 

From  the  nature  of  their  situation,  too, 
the  servants  must  be  more  disposed  to  sup¬ 
port  with  rigorous  severity  their  own  interest 
against  that  of  the  country  which  they  gov¬ 
ern  than  their  masters  can  be  to  support 
theirs.  The  country  belongs  to  their  masters, 
who  cannot  avoid  having  some  regard  for  the 
interest  of  what  belongs  to  them.  But  it  does 
not  belong  to  the  servants.  The  real  interest 
of  their  masters,  if  they  were  capable  of  under¬ 
standing  it,  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  coun¬ 
try,1  and  it  is  from  ignorance  chiefly,  and  the 
meanness  of  mercantile  prejudice,  that  they 

'The  interest  of  every  proprietor  of  India  stock, 
however,  is  by  no  means  the  same  with  that  of 
the  country  in  the  government  of  which  his  vote 
gives  him  some  influence.  See  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  iii. 


279 


Conclusion  of  the  Mercantile  System 


ever  oppress  it.  But  the  real  interest  of  the 
servants  is  by  no  means  the  same  with  that 
of  the  country,  and  the  most  perfect  infor¬ 
mation  would  not  necessarily  put  an  end  to 
their  oppressions.  The  regulations  according¬ 
ly  which  have  been  sent  out  from  Europe, 
though  they  have  been  frequently  weak,  have 
upon  most  occasions  been  well-meaning.  More 
intelligence  and  perhaps  less  good-meaning 
has  sometimes  appeared  in  those  established 
by  the  servants  in  India.  It  is  a  very  singular 
government  in  which  every  member  of  the 
administration  wishes  to  get  out  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  consequently  to  have  done  with  the 
government  as  soon  as  he  can,  and  to  whose 
interest,  the  day  after  he  has  left  it  and  car¬ 
ried  his  whole  fortune  with  him,  it  is  perfectly 
indifferent  though  the  whole  country  was 
swallowed  up  by  an  earthquake. 

I  mean  not,  however,  by  anything  which 
I  have  here  said,  to  throw  any  odious  im¬ 
putation  upon  the  general  character  of  the 
servants  of  the  East  India  Company,  and 
much  less  upon  that  of  any  particular  per¬ 
sons.  It  is  the  system  of  government,  the  situ¬ 
ation  in  which  they  are  placed,  that  I  mean 
to  censure,  not  the  character  of  those  who 
have  acted  in  it.  They  acted  as  their  situation 
naturally  directed,  and  they  who  have  clam¬ 
oured  the  loudest  against  them  would  prob¬ 
ably  not  have  acted  better  themselves.  In 
war  and  negotiation,  the  councils  of  Madras 
and  Calcutta  have  upon  several  occasions 
conducted  themselves  with  a  resolution  and 
decisive  wisdom  which  would  have  done  hon¬ 
our  to  the  senate  of  Home  in  the  best  days  of 
that  republic.  The  members  of  those  councils, 
however,  had  been  bred  to  professions  very 
different  from  war  and  politics.  But  their  situ¬ 
ation  alone,  without  education,  experience, 
or  even  example,  seems  to  have  formed  in 
them  all  at  once  the  great  qualities  which  it 
required,  and  to  have  inspired  them  both 
with  abilities  and  virtues  which  they  them¬ 
selves  could  not  well  know  that  they  pos¬ 
sessed.  If  upon  some  occasions,  therefore,  it 
has  animated  them  to  actions  of  magnanimity 
which  could  not  well  have  been  expected 
from  them,  we  should  not  wonder  if  upon 
others  it  has  prompted  them  to  exploits  of 
somewhat  a  different  nature. 

Such  exclusive  companies,  therefore,  are 
nuisances  in  every  respect;  always  more  or 
less  inconvenient  to  the  countries  in  which 
they  are  established,  and  destructive  to  those 
which  have  the  misfortune  to  fall  under  their 
government. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Conclusion  of  the  Mercantile  System 

Though  the  encouragement  of  exportation 
and  the  discouragement  of  importation  are 


the  two  great  engines  by  which  the  mercan¬ 
tile  system  proposes  to  enrich  every  country, 
yet  with  regard  to  some  particular  commodi¬ 
ties  it  seems  to  follow  an  opposite  plan:  to 
discourage  exportation  and  to  encourage  im¬ 
portation.  Its  ultimate  object,  however,  it 
pretends,  is  always  the  same,  to  enrich  the 
country  by  an  advantageous  balance  of  trade. 
It  discourages  the  exportation  of  the  materi¬ 
als  of  manufacture,  and  of  the  instruments  of 
trade,  in  order  to  give  our  own  workmen  an 
advantage,  and  to  enable  them  to  undersell 
those  of  other  nations  in  all  foreign  markets; 
and  by  restraining,  in  this  manner,  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  a  few  commodities,  of  no  great 
price,  it  proposes  to  occasion  a  much  greater 
and  more  valuable  exportation  of  others.  It 
encourages  the  importation  of  the  materials 
of  manufacture  in  order  that  our  own  people 
may  be  enabled  to  work  them  up  more  cheap¬ 
ly,  and  thereby  prevent  a  greater  and  more 
valuable  importation  of  the  manufactured 
commodities.  I  do  not  observe,  at  least  in 
our  Statute  Book,  any  encouragement  given 
to  the  importation  of  the  instruments  of 
trade.  When  manufactures  have  advanced  to 
a  certain  pitch  of  greatness,  the  fabrication 
of  the  instruments  of  trade  becomes  itself 
the  object  of  a  great  number  of  very  im¬ 
portant  manufactures.  To  give  any  particular 
encouragement  to  the  importation  of  such  in¬ 
struments  would  interfere  too  much  with  the 
interest  of  those  manufactures.  Such  im¬ 
portation,  therefore,  instead  of  being  encour¬ 
aged,  has  frequently  been  prohibited.  Thus 
the  importation  of  wool  cards,  except  from 
Ireland,  or  when  brought  in  as  wreck  or 
prize  goods,  was  prohibited  by  the  3rd  of 
Edward  IV;  which  prohibition  was  renewed 
by  the  39th  of  Elizabeth,  and  has  been  con¬ 
tinued  and  rendered  perpetual  by  subsequent 
laws. 

The  importation  of  the  materials  of  manu¬ 
facture  has  sometimes  been  encouraged  by 
an  exemption  from  the  duties  to  which  other 
goods  are  subject,  and  sometimes  by  bounties. 

The  importation  of  sheep’s  wool  from  sev¬ 
eral  different  countries,  of  cotton  wool  from 
all  countries,  of  undressed  flax,  of  the  greater 
part  of  dyeing  drugs,  of  the  greater  part  of 
undressed  hides  from  Ireland  or  the  British 
colonies,  of  sealskins  from  the  British  Green¬ 
land  fishery,  of  pig  and  bar  iron  from  the 
British  colonies,  as  well  as  of  several  other 
materials  of  manufacture,  has  been  encour¬ 
aged  by  an  exemption  from  all  duties,  if  prop¬ 
erly  entered  at  the  custom  house.  The  private 
interest  of  our  merchants  and  manufacturers 
may,  perhaps,  have  extorted  from  the  legis¬ 
lature  these  exemptions  as  well  as  the  greater 
part  of  our  other  commercial  regulations. 
They  are,  however,  perfectly  just  and  reason- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


280 

able,  and  if,  consistently  with  the  necessities 
of  the  state,  they  could  be  extended  to  all  the 
other  materials  of  manufacture,  the  public 
would  certainly  be  a  gainer. 

The  avidity  of  our  great  manufacturers, 
however,  has  in  some  cases  extended  these 
exemptions  a  good  deal  beyond  what  can 
justly  be  considered  as  the  rude  materials  of 
their  work.  By  the  24th  George  II,  c.  46,  a 
small  duty  of  only  one  penny  the  pound  was 
imposed  upon  the  importation  of  foreign 
brown  linen  yarn,  instead  of  much  higher  du¬ 
ties  to  which  it  had  been  subjected  before, 
viz.  of  sixpence  the  pound  upon  sail  yarn,  of 
one  shilling  the  pound  upon  all  French  and 
Dutch  yarn,  and  of  two  pounds  thirteen  shil¬ 
lings  and  fourpence  upon  the  hundredweight 
of  all  spruce  or  Muscovia  yarn.  But  our  man¬ 
ufacturers  were  not  long  satisfied  with  this 
reduction.  By  the  29th  of  the  same  king,  c. 
15,  the  same  law  which  gave  a  bounty  upon 
the  exportation  of  British  and  Irish  linen  of 
which  the  price  did  not  exceed  eighteenpence 
the  yard,  even  this  small  duty  upon  the 
importation  of  brown  linen  yarn  was  taken 
away.  In  the  different  operations,  however, 
which  are  necessary  for  the  preparation  of 
linen  yarn,  a  good  deal  more  industry  is  em¬ 
ployed  than  in  the  subsequent  operation  of 
preparing  linen  cloth  from  linen  yarn.  To  say 
nothing  of  the  industry  of  the  flax-growers 
and  flax-dressers,  three  or  four  spinners,  at 
least,  are  necessary  in  order  to  keep  one 
weaver  in  constant  employment;  and  more 
than  four-fifths  of  the  whole  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  necessary  for  the  preparation  of  linen 
cloth  is  employed  in  that  of  linen  yarn;  but 
our  spinners  are  poor  people,  women  com¬ 
monly  scattered  about  in  all  different  parts 
of  the  country,  without  support  or  protec¬ 
tion.  It  is  not  by  the  sale  of  their  work,  but 
by  that  of  the  complete  work  of  the  weavers, 
that  our  great  master  manufacturers  make 
their  profits.  As  it  is  their  interest  to  sell  the 
complete  manufacture  as  dear,  so  is  it  to  buy 
the  materials  as  cheap  as  possible.  By  ex¬ 
torting  from  the  legislature  bounties  upon  the 
exportation  of  their  own  linen,  high  duties 
upon  the  importation  of  all  foreign  linen,  and 
a  total  prohibition  of  the  home  consumption 
of  some  sorts  of  French  linen,  they  endeav¬ 
our  to  sell  their  own  goods  as  dear  as  possible. 
By  encouraging  the  importation  of  foreign 
linen  yarn,  and  thereby  bringing  it  into  com¬ 
petition  with  that  which  is  made  by  our  own 
people,  they  endeavour  to  buy  the  work  of 
the  poor  spinners  as  cheap  as  possible.  They 
are  as  intent  to  keep  down  the  wages  of  their 
own  weavers  as  the  earnings  of  the  poor  spin¬ 
ners,  and  it  is  by  no  means  for  the  benefit  of 
the  workman  that  they  endeavour  either  to 
raise  the  price  of  the  complete  work  or  to  lower 


that  of  the  rude  materials.  It  is  the  industry 
which  is  carried  on  for  the  benefit  of  the  rich 
and  the  powerful  that  is  principally  encour¬ 
aged  by  our  mercantile  system.  That  which 
is  carried  on  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  and 
the  indigent  is  too  often  either  neglected  or 
oppressed. 

Both  the  bounty  upon  the  exportation  of 
linen,  and  the  exemption  from  duty  upon 
the  importation  of  foreign  yarn,  which  were 
granted  only  for  fifteen  years,  but  continued 
by  two  different  prolongations,  expire  with  the 
end  of  the  session  of  Parliament  which  shall 
immediately  follow  the  24th  of  June  1786. 

The  encouragement  given  to  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  the  materials  of  manufacture  by 
bounties  has  been  principally  confined  to 
such  as  were  imported  from  our  American 
plantations. 

The  first  bounties  of  this  kind  were  those 
granted  about  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century  upon  the  importation  of  naval  stores 
from  America.  Under  this  denomination  were 
comprehended  timber  fit  for  masts,  yards, 
and  bowsprits;  hemp;  tar,  pitch,  and  turpen¬ 
tine.  The  bounty,  however,  of  one  pound  the 
ton  upon  masting-timber,  and  that  of  six 
pounds  the  ton  upon  hemp,  were  extended  to 
such  as  should  be  imported  into  England  from 
Scotland.  Both  these  bounties  continued  with¬ 
out  any  variation,  at  the  same  rate,  till  they 
were  severally  allowed  to  expire;  that  upon 
hemp  on  the  1st  of  January  1741,  and  that 
upon  masting-timber  at  the  end  of  the  ses¬ 
sion  of  Parliament  immediately  following  the 
24th  June  1781. 

The  bounties  upon  the  importation  of  tar, 
pitch,  and  turpentine  underwent,  during  their 
continuance,  several  alterations.  Originally 
that  upon  tar  was  four  pounds  the  ton;  that 
upon  pitch  the  same;  and  that  upon  turpen¬ 
tine,  three  pounds  the  ton.  The  bounty  of 
four  pounds  the  ton  upon  tar  was  afterwards 
confined  to  such  as  had  been  prepared  in  a 
particular  manner;  that  upon  other  good, 
clean,  and  merchantable  tar  was  reduced  to 
two  pounds  four  shillings  the  ton.  The  boun¬ 
ty  upon  pitch  was  likewise  reduced  to  one 
pound;  and  that  upon  turpentine  to  one 
pound  ten  shillings  the  ton. 

The  second  bounty  upon  the  importation 
of  any  of  the  materials  of  manufacture,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  order  of  time,  was  that  granted 
by  the  21st  George  II,  c.  30,  upon  the  importa¬ 
tion  of  indigo  from  the  British  plantations. 
When  the  plantation  indigo  was  worth  three- 
fourths  of  the  price  of  the  best  French  indigo, 
it  was  by  this  act  entitled  to  a  bounty  of  six¬ 
pence  the  pound.  This  bounty,  which,  like 
most  others,  was  granted  only  for  a  limited 
time,  was  continued  by  several  prolongations, 
but  was  reduced  to  fourpence  the  pound.  It 


Conclusion  of  the 

was  allowed  to  expire  with  the  end  of  the 
session  of  Parliament  which  followed  the  25th 
March  1781. 

The  third  bounty  of  this  kind  was  that 
granted  (much  about  the  time  that  we  were 
beginning  sometimes  to  court  and  sometimes 
to  quarrel  with  our  American  colonies)  by 
the  4th  George  III,  c.  26,  upon  the  importa¬ 
tion  of  hemp,  or  undressed  flax,  from  the 
British  plantations.  This  bounty  was  granted 
for  twenty-one  years,  from  the  24th  June 
1764  to  the  24th  June  1785.  For  the  first 
seven  years  it  was  to  be  at  the  rate  of  eight 
pounds  the  ton,  for  the  second  at  six  pounds, 
and  for  the  third  at  four  pounds.  It  was  not 
extended  to  Scotland,  of  which  the  climate 
(although  hemp  is  sometimes  raised  there  in 
small  quantities  and  of  an  inferior  quality) 
is  not  very  fit  for  that  produce.  Such  a  boun¬ 
ty  upon  the  importation  of  Scotch  flax  into 
England  would  have  been  too  great  a  dis¬ 
couragement  to  the  native  produce  of  the 
southern  part  of  the  United  Kingdom. 

The  fourth  bounty  of  this  kind  was  that 
granted  by  the  5th  George  III,  c.  45,  upon 
the  importation  of  wood  from  America.  It 
was  granted  for  nine  years,  from  the  1st  Jan¬ 
uary  1766  to  the  1st  January  1775.  During 
the  first  three  years,  it  was  to  be  for  every 
hundred  and  twenty  good  deals,  at  the  rate 
of  one  pound,  and  for  every  load  containing 
fifty  cubic  feet  of  other  squared  timber  at 
the  rate  of  twelve  shillings.  For  the  second 
three  years,  it  was  for  deals  to  be  at  the  rate 
of  fifteen  shillings,  and  for  other  squared  tim¬ 
ber  at  the  rate  of  eight  shillings;  and  for  the 
third  three  years,  it  was  for  deals  to  be  at 
the  rate  of  ten  shillings,  and  for  other  squared 
timber  at  the  rate  of  five  shillings. 

The  fifth  bounty  of  this  kind  was  that 
granted  by  the  9th  George  III,  c.  38,  upon 
the  importation  of  raw  silk  from  the  British 
plantations.  It  was  granted  for  twenty-one 
years,  from  the  1st  January  1770  to  the  1st 
January  1791.  For  the  first  seven  years  it  was 
to  be  at  the  rate  of  twenty-five  pounds  for 
every  hundred  pounds  value;  for  the  second 
at  twenty  pounds;  and  for  the  third  at  fifteen 
pounds.  The  management  of  the  silk  worm, 
and  the  preparation  of  silk,  requires  so  much 
hand  labour,  and  labour  is  so  very  dear  in 
America  that  even  this  great  bounty,  I  have 
been  informed,  was  not  likely  to  produce  any 
considerable  effect. 

The  sixth  bounty  of  this  kind  was  that 
granted  by  2nd  George  III,  c.  50,  for  the  im¬ 
portation  of  pipe,  hogshead,  and  barrel  staves 
and  heading  from  the  British  plantations.  It 
was  granted  for  nine  years,  from  1st  January 
1772  to  the  1st  January  1781.  For  the  first 
three  years  it  was  for  a  certain  quantity  of 
each  to  be  at  the  rate  of  six  pounds;  for  the 


Mercantile  System  281 

second  three  years  at  four  pounds;  and  for 
the  third  three  years  at  two  pounds. 

The  seventh  and  last  bounty  of  this  kind 
was  that  granted  by  the  19th  George  III,  c. 
37,  upon  the  importation  of  hemp  from  Ire¬ 
land.  It  was  granted  in  the  same  manner  as 
that  for  the  importation  of  hemp  and  un¬ 
dressed  flax  from  America,  for  twenty-one 
years,  from  the  24th  June  1779  to  the  24th 
June  1800.  This  term  is  divided,  likewise,  into 
three  periods  of  seven  years  each;  and  in  each 
of  those  periods  the  rate  of  the  Irish  bounty 
is  the  same  with  that  of  the  American.  It 
does  not,  however,  like  the  American  bounty, 
extend  to  the  importation  of  undressed  flax. 
It  would  have  been  too  great  a  discourage¬ 
ment  to  the  cultivation  of  that  plant  in 
Great  Britain.  When  this  last  bounty  was 
granted,  the  British  and  Irish  legislatures 
were  not  in  much  better  humour  with  one 
another  than  the  British  and  American  had 
been  before.  But  this  boon  to  Ireland,  it  is 
to  be  hoped,  has  been  granted  under  more 
fortunate  auspices  than  all  those  to  America. 

The  same  commodities  upon  which  we  thus 
gave  bounties  when  imported  from  America 
were  subjected  to  considerable  duties  when 
imported  from  any  other  country.  The  inter¬ 
est  of  our  American  colonies  was  regarded  as 
the  same  with  that  of  the  mother  country. 
Their  wealth  was  considered  as  our  wealth. 
Whatever  money  was  sent  out  to  them,  it 
was  said,  came  all  back  to  us  by  the  balance 
of  trade,  and  we  could  never  become  a  far¬ 
thing  the  poorer  by  any  expense  which  we 
could  lay  out  upon  them.  They  were  our  own 
in  every  respect,  and  it  was  an  expense  laid 
out  upon  the  improvement  of  our  own  prop¬ 
erty  and  for  the  profitable  employment  of  our 
own  people.  It  is  unnecessary,  I  apprehend, 
at  present  to  say  anything  further  in  order  to 
expose  the  folly  of  a  system  which  fatal  ex¬ 
perience  has  now  sufficiently  exposed.  Had 
our  American  colonies  really  been  a  part  of 
Great  Britain,  those  bounties  might  have 
been  considered  as  bounties  upon  production, 
and  would  still  have  been  liable  to  all  the  ob¬ 
jections  to  which  such  bounties  are  liable,  but 
to  no  other. 

The  exportation  of  the  materials  of  manu¬ 
facture  is  sometimes  discouraged  by  absolute 
prohibitions,  and  sometimes  by  high  duties. 

Our  woollen  manufacturers  have  been  more 
successful  than  any  other  class  of  workmen 
in  persuading  the  legislature  that  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  the  nation  depended  upon  the"  suc¬ 
cess  and  extension  of  their  particular  busi¬ 
ness.  They  have  not  only  obtained  a  mon¬ 
opoly  against  the  consumers  by  an  absolute 
prohibition  of  importing  woollen  cloths  from 
any  foreign  country,  but  they  have  likewise 
obtained  another  monopoly  against  the  sheep 


282  The  Wealth 

farmers  and  growers  of  wool  by  a  similar  pro¬ 
hibition  of  the  exportation  of  live  sheep  and 
wool.  The  severity  of  many  of  the  laws  which 
have  been  enacted  for  the  security  of  the  rev¬ 
enue  is  very  justly  complained  of,  as  imposing 
heavy  penalties  upon  actions  which,  anteced¬ 
ent  to  the  statutes  that  declared  them  to  be 
crimes,  had  always  been  understood  to  be  in¬ 
nocent.  But  the  cruellest  of  our  revenue  laws, 

I  will  venture  to  affirm,  are  mild  and  gentle 
in  comparison  of  some  of  those  which  the 
clamour  of  our  merchants  and  manufacturers 
has  extorted  from  the  legislature  for  the  sup¬ 
port  of  their  own  absurd  and  oppressive  mo¬ 
nopolies.  Like  the  laws  of  Draco,  these  laws 
may  be  said  to  be  all  written  in  blood. 

By  the  Bth  of  Elizabeth,  c.  3,  the  exporter 
of  sheep,  lambs,  or  rams  was  for  the  first  of¬ 
fence  to  forfeit  all  his  goods  for  ever,  to  suffer 
a  year’s  imprisonment,  and  then  to  have  his 
left  hand  cut  off  in  a  market  town  upon  a 
market  day,  to  be  there  nailed  up;  and  for 
the  second  offence  to  be  adjudged  a  felon, 
and  to  suffer  death  accordingly.  To  prevent 
the  breed  of  our  sheep  from  being  propagated 
in  foreign  countries  seems  to  have  been  the 
object  of  this  law.  By  the  13th  and  14th  of 
Charles  II,  c.  18,  the  exportation  of  wool  was 
made  felony,  and  the  exporter  subjected  to 
the  same  penalties  and  forfeitures  as  a  felon. 

For  the  honour  of  the  national  humanity, 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  neither  of  these  statutes 
were  ever  executed.  The  first  of  them,  how¬ 
ever,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  never  been  directly 
repealed,  and  Serjeant  Hawkins  seems  to  con¬ 
sider  it  as  still  in  force.  It  may  however,  per¬ 
haps,  be  considered  as  virtually  repealed  by 
the  12th  of  Charles  II,  c.  32,  sect.  3,  which, 
without  expressly  taking  away  the  penalties 
imposed  by  former  statutes,  imposes  a  new 
penalty,  viz.,  that  of  twenty  shillings  for  every 
sheep  exported,  or  attempted  to  be  exported, 
together  with  the  forfeiture  of  the  sheep  and 
of  the  owner’s  share  of  the  ship.  The  second 
of  them  was  expressly  repealed  by  the  7th 
and  8th  of  William  III,  c.  28,  sect.  4.  By 
which  it  is  declared  that,  “Whereas  the  stat¬ 
ute  of  the  13th  and  14th  of  King  Charles  II, 
made  against  the  exportation  of  wool,  among 
other  things  in  the  said  act  mentioned,  doth 
enact  the  same  to  be  deemed  felony;  by  the 
severity  of  which  penalty  the  prosecution  of 
offenders  hath  not  been  so  effectually  put  in 
execution:  Be  it,  therefore,  enacted  by  the  au¬ 
thority  aforesaid,  that  so  much  of  the  said 
act,  which  relates  to  the  making  the  said  of¬ 
fence  felony,  be  repealed  and  made  void.” 

The  penalties,  however,  which  are  either 
imposed  by  this  milder  statute,  or  which, 
though  imposed  by  former  statutes,  are  not 
repealed  by  this  one,  are  still  sufficiently  se¬ 
vere.  Besides  the  forfeiture  of  the  goods,  the 


of  Nations 

exporter  incurs  the  penalty  of  three  shillings 
for  every  pound  weight  of  wool  either  ex¬ 
ported  or  attempted  to  be  exported,  that  is 
about  four  or  five  times  the  value.  Any  mer¬ 
chant  or  other  person  convicted  of  this  offence 
is  disabled  from  requiring  any  debt  or  ac¬ 
count  belonging  to  him  from  any  factor  or 
other  person.  Let  his  fortune  be  what  it  will, 
whether  he  is  or  is  not  able. to  pay  those  heavy 
penalties,  the  law  means  to  ruin  him  com¬ 
pletely.  But  as  the  morals  of  the  great  body 
of  the  people  are  not  yet  so  corrupt  as  those 
of  the  contrivers  of  this  statute,  I  have  not 
heard  that  any  advantage  has  ever  been 
taken  of  this  clause.  If  the  person  convicted 
of  this  offence  is  not  able  to  pay  the  penalties 
within  three  months  after  judgment,  he  is 
to  be  transported  for  seven  years,  and  if  he 
returns  before  the  expiration  of  that  term,  he 
is  liable  to  the  pains  of  felony,  without  bene¬ 
fit  of  clergy.  The  owner  of  the  ship,  knowing 
this  offence,  forfeits  all  his  interest  in  the 
ship  and  furniture.  The  master  and  mariners, 
knowing  this  offence,  forfeit  all  their  goods 
and  chattels,  and  suffer  three  months’  im¬ 
prisonment.  By  a  subsequent  statute  the  mas¬ 
ter  suffers  six  months’  imprisonment. 

In  order  to  prevent  exportation,  the  whole 
inland  commerce  of  wool  is  laid  under  very 
burdensome  and  oppressive  restrictions.  It 
cannot  be  packed  in  any  box,  barrel,  cask, 
case,  chest,  or  any  other  package,  but  only  in 
packs  of  leather  or  pack-cloth,  on  which  must 
be  marked  on  the  outside  the  words  wool 
or  yarn ,  in  large  letters  not  less  than  three 
inches  long,  on  pain  of  forfeiting  the  same 
and  the  package,  and  three  shillings  for  every 
pound  weight,  to  be  paid  by  the  owner  or 
packer.  It  cannot  be  loaden  on  any  horse  or 
cart,  or  carried  by  land  within  five  miles  of 
the  coast,  but  between  sun-rising  and  sun¬ 
setting,  on  pain  of  forfeiting  the  same,  the 
horses  and  carriages.  The  hundred  next  ad¬ 
joining  to  the  sea-coast,  out  of  or  through 
which  the  wool  is  carried  or  exported,  forfeits 
twenty  pounds,  if  the  wool  is  under  the  value 
of  ten  pounds;  and  if  of  greater  value,  then 
treble  that  value,  together  with  treble  costs, 
to  be  sued  for  within  the  year.  The  execution 
to  be  against  any  two  of  the  inhabitants, 
whom  the  sessions  must  reimburse,  by  an  as¬ 
sessment  on  the  other  inhabitants,  as  in  the 
cases  of  robbery.  And  if  any  person  com¬ 
pounds  with  the  hundred  for  less  than  this 
penalty,  he  is  to  be  imprisoned  for  five  years; 
and  any  other  person  may  prosecute.  These 
regulations  take  place  through  the  whole 
kingdom. 

But  in  the  particular  counties  of  Kent  and 
Sussex,  the  restrictions  are  still  more  trouble¬ 
some.  Every  owner  of  wool  within  ten  miles 
of  the  sea-coast  must  given  an  account  in 


Conclusion  of  the 

writing,  three  days  after  shearing  to  the  next 
officer  of  the  customs,  of  the  number  of  his 
fleeces,  and  of  the  places  where  they  are 
lodged.  And  before  he  removes  any  part  of 
them  he  must  give  the  like  notice  of  the  num¬ 
ber  and  weight  of  the  fleeces,  and  of  the  name 
and  abode  of  the  person  to  whom  they  are 
sold,  and  of  the  place  to  which  it  is  intended 
they  should  be  carried.  No  person  within  fif¬ 
teen  miles  of  the  sea,  in  the  said  counties,  can 
buy  any  wool  before  he  enters  into  bond  to 
the  king  that  no  part  of  the  wool  which  he 
shall  so  buy  shall  be  sold  by  him  to  any  other 
person  within  fifteen  miles  of  the  sea.  If  any 
wool  is  found  carrying  towards  the  sea-side 
in  the  said  counties,  unless  it  has  been  en¬ 
tered  and  security  given  as  aforesaid,  it  is 
forfeited,  and  the  offender  also  forfeits  three 
shillings  for  every  pound  weight.  If  any  per¬ 
son  lays  any  wool  not  entered  as  aforesaid 
within  fifteen  miles  of  the  sea,  it  must  be 
seized  and  forfeited;  and  if,  after  such  seizure, 
any  person  claim  the  same,  he  must  give  se¬ 
curity  to  the  Exchequer  that  if  he  is  cast 
upon  trial  he  shall  pay  treble  costs,  besides 
all  other  penalties. 

When  such  restrictions  are  imposed  upon 
the  inland  trade,  the  coasting  trade,  we  may 
believe,  cannot  be  left  very  free.  Every  owner 
of  wool  who  carries  or  causes  to  be  carried 
any  wool  to  any  port  or  place  on  the  sea- 
coast,  in  order  to  be  from  thence  transported 
by  sea  to  any  other  place  or  port  on  the 
coast,  must  first  cause  an  entry  thereof  to  be 
made  at  the  port  from  whence  it  is  intended 
to  be  conveyed,  containing  the  weight,  marks, 
and  number  of  the  packages,  before  he  brings 
the  same  within  five  miles  of  that  port,  on 
pain  of  forfeiting  the  same,  and  also  the 
horses,  carts,  and  other  carriages;  and  also  of 
suffering  and  forfeiting  as  by  the  other  laws 
in  force  against  the  exportation  of  wool.  This 
law,  however  (1st  William  III,  c.  32),  is  so 
very  indulgent  as  to  declare  that,  “This  shall 
not  hinder  any  person  from  carrying  his  wool 
home  from  the  place  of  shearing,  though  it 
be  within  five  miles  of  the  sea,  provided  that 
in  ten  days  after  shearing,  and  before  he  re¬ 
move  the  wool,  he  do  under  his  hand  certify 
to  the  next  officer  of  the  customs,  the  true 
number  of  fleeces,  and  where  it  is  housed; 
and  do  not  remove  the  same,  without  certify¬ 
ing  to  such  officer,  under  his  hand,  his  inten¬ 
tion  so  to  do,  three  days  before.”  Bond  must 
be  given  that  the  wool  to  be  carried  coast- 
ways  is  to  be  landed  at  the  particular  port 
for  which  it  is  entered  outwards;  and  if  any 
part  of  it  is  landed  without  the  presence  of 
an  officer,  not  only  the  forfeiture  of  the  wool 
is  incurred  as  in  other  goods,  but  the  usual 
additional  penalty  of  three  shillings  for  every 
pound  weight  is  likewise  incurred. 


Mercantile  System  283 

Our  woollen  manufactures,  in  order  to  jus¬ 
tify  their  demand  of  such  extraordinary  re¬ 
strictions  and  regulations,  confidently  asserted 
that  English  wool  was  of  a  peculiar  quality, 
superior  to  that  of  any  other  country:  that 
the  wool  of  other  countries  could  not,  without 
some  mixture  of  it,  be  wrought  up  into  any 
tolerable  manufacture;  that  fine  cloth  could 
not  be  made  without  it;  that  England,  there¬ 
fore,  if  the  exportation  of  it  could  be  totally 
prevented,  could  monopolize  to  herself  almost 
the  whole  woollen  trade  of  the  world;  and 
thus,  having  no  rivals,  could  sell  at  what 
price  she  pleased,  and  in  a  short  time  acquire 
the  most  incredible  degree  of  wealth  by  the 
most  advantageous  balance  of  trade.  This  doc¬ 
trine,  like  most  other  doctrines  which  are 
confidently  asserted  by  any  considerable  num¬ 
ber  of  people,  was,  and  still  continues  to  be, 
most  implicitly  believed  by  a  much  greater 
number — by  almost  all  those  who  are  either 
unacquainted  with  the  woollen  trade,  or  who 
have  not  made  particular  inquiries.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  so  perfectly  false  that  English  wool  is 
in  any  respect  necessary  for  the  making  of 
fine  cloth  that  it  is  altogether  unfit  for  it. 
Fine  cloth  is  made  altogether  of  Spanish  wool. 
English  wool  cannot  be  even  so  mixed  with 
Spanish  wool  as  to  enter  into  the  composition 
without  spoiling  and  degrading,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  the  fabric  of  the  cloth. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  foregoing  part  of 
this  work  that  the  effect  of  these  regulations 
has  been  to  depress  the  price  of  English  wool, 
not  only  below  what  it  naturally  would  be  in 
the  present  times,  but  very  much  below  what 
it  actually  was  in  the  time  of  Edward  III. 
The  price  of  Scots  wool,  when  in  consequence 
of  the  union  it  became  subject  to  the  same 
regulations,  is  said  to  have  fallen  about  one 
half.  It  is  observed  by  the  very  accurate  and 
intelligent  author  of  the  Memoirs  of  Wool , 
the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Smith,  that  the  price 
of  the  best  English  wool  in  England  is  gen¬ 
erally  below  what  wool  of  a  very  inferior 
quality  commonly  sells  for  in  the  market  of 
Amsterdam.  To  depress  the  price  of  this  com¬ 
modity  below  what  may  be  called  its  natural 
and  proper  price  was  the  avowed  purpose  of 
those  regulations;  and  there  seems  to  be  no 
doubt  of  their  having  produced  the  effect  that 
was  expected  from  them. 

This  reduction  of  price,  it  may  perhaps  be 
thought,  by  discouraging  the  growing  of  wool, 
must  have  reduced  very  much  the  annual 
produce  of  that  commodity,  though  not  be¬ 
low  what  it  formerly  was,  yet  below  what,  in 
the  present  state  of  things,  it  probably  would 
have  been,  had  it,  in  consequence  of  an  open 
and  free  market,  been  allowed  to  rise  to  the 
natural  and  proper  price.  I  am,  however,  dis¬ 
posed  to  believe  that  the  quantity  of  the 


284  The  Wealth 

annual  produce  cannot  have  been  much, 
though  it  may  perhaps  have  been  a  little, 
affected  by  these  regulations.  The  growing 
of  wool  is  not  the  chief  purpose  for  which  the 
sheep  farmer  employs  his  industry  and  stock. 
He  expects  his  profit  not  so  much  from  the 
price  of  the  fleece  as  from  that  of  the  carcass; 
and  the  average  or  ordinary  price  of  the  latter 
must  even,  in  many  cases,  make  up  to  him 
whatever  deficiency  there  may  be  in  the 
average  or  ordinary  price  of  the  former.  It 
has  been  observed  in  the  foregoing  part  of 
this  work  that,  “Whatever  regulations  tend  to 
sink  the  price,  either  of  wool  or  of  raw  hides, 
below  what  it  naturally  would  be,  must,  in  an 
improved  and  cultivated  country,  have  some 
tendency  to  raise  the  price  of  butcher’s  meat. 
The  price  both  of  the  great  and  small  cattle 
which  are  fed  on  improved  and  cultivated 
land  must  be  sufficient  to  pay  the  rent  which 
the  landlord,  and  the  profit  which  the  farmer 
has  reason  to  expect  from  improved  and  cul¬ 
tivated  land.  If  it  is  not,  they  will  soon  cease 
to  feed  them.  Whatever  part  of  this  price, 
therefore,  is  not  paid  by  the  wool  and  the  hide 
must  be  paid  by  the  carcass.  The  less  there  is 
paid  for  the  one,  the  more  must  be  paid  for 
the  other.  In  what  manner  this  price  is  to  be 
divided  upon  the  different  parts  of  the  beast 
is  indifferent  to  the  landlords  and  farmers, 
provided  it  is  all  paid  to  them.  In  an  improved 
and  cultivated  country,  therefore,  their  inter¬ 
est  as  landlords  and  farmers  cannot  be  much 
affected  by  such  regulations,  though  their 
interest  as  consumers  may  by  the  rise  in  the 
price  of  provisions.”  According  to  this  reason¬ 
ing,  therefore,  this  degradation  in  the  price  of 
wool  is  not  likely,  in  an  improved  and  cul¬ 
tivated  country,  to  occasion  any  diminution 
in  the  annual  produce  of  that  commodity, 
except  so  far  as,  by  raising  the  price  of 
mutton,  it  may  somewhat  diminish  the  de¬ 
mand  for,  and  consequently  the  production 
of,  that  particular  species  of  butcher’s  meat. 
Its  effect,  however,  even  in  this  way,  it  is 
probable,  is  not  very  considerable. 

But  though  its  effect  upon  the  quantity  of 
the  annual  produce  may  not  have  been  very 
considerable,  its  effect  upon  the  quality,  it 
may  perhaps  be  thought,  must  necessarily 
have  been  very  great.  The  degradation  in  the 
quality  of  English  wool,  if  not  below  what  it 
was  in  former  times,  yet  below  what  it  natu¬ 
rally  would  have  been  in  the  present  state 
of  improvement  and  cultivation,  must  have 
been,  it  may  perhaps  be  supposed,  very  nearly 
in  proportion  to  the  degradation  of  price.  As 
the  quality  depends  upon  the  breed,  upon  the 
pasture,  and  upon  the  management  and  clean¬ 
liness  of  the  sheep,  during  the  whole  progress 
of  the  growth  of  the  fleece,  the  attention  to 
these  circumstances,  it  may  naturally  enough 


of  Nations 

be  imagined,  can  never  be  greater  than  in 
proportion  to  the  recompense  which  the  price 
of  the  fleece  is  likely  to  make  for  the  labour 
and  expense  which  that  attention  requires. 
It  happens,  however,  that  the  goodness  of  the 
fleece  depends,  in  a  great  measure,  upon  the 
health,  growth,  and  bulk  of  the  animal;  the 
same  attention  which  is  necessary  for  the  im¬ 
provement  of  the  carcase  is,  in  some  respects, 
sufficient  for  that  of  the  fleece.  Notwithstand¬ 
ing  the  degradation  of  price,  English  wool  is 
said  to  have  been  improved  considerably  dur¬ 
ing  the  course  even  of  the  present  century. 
The  improvement  might  perhaps  have  been 
greater  if  the  price  had  been  better;  but 
the  lowness  of  price,  though  it  may  have  ob¬ 
structed,  yet  certainly  it  has  not  altogether 
prevented  that  improvement. 

The  violence  of  these  regulations,  therefore, 
seems  to  have  affected  neither  the  quantity 
nor  the  quality  of  the  annual  produce  of  wool 
so  much  as  it  might  have  been  expected  to 
do  (though  I  think  it  probable  that  it  may 
have  affected  the  latter  a  good  deal  more  than 
the  former) ;  and  the  interest  of  the  growers 
of  wool,  though  it  must  have  been  hurt  in 
some  degree,  seems,  upon  the  whole,  to  have 
been  much  less  hurt  than  could  well  have 
been  imagined. 

These  considerations,  however,  will  not  jus¬ 
tify  the  absolute  prohibition  of  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  wool.  But  they  will  fully  justify  the 
imposition  of  a  considerable  tax  upon  that 
exportation. 

To  hurt  in  any  degree  the  interest  of  any 
one  order  of  citizens,  for  no  other  purpose 
but  to  promote  that  of  some  other,  is  evi¬ 
dently  contrary  to  that  justice  and  equality 
of  treatment  which  the  sovereign  owes  to  all 
the  different  orders  of  his  subjects.  But  the 
prohibition  certainly  hurts,  in  some  degree, 
the  interest  of  the  growers  of  wool,  for  no 
other  purpose  but  to  promote  that  of  the 
manufacturers. 

Every  different  order  of  citizens  is  bound 
to  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  sovereign 
or  commonwealth.  A  tax  of  five,  or  even  of 
ten  shillings  upon  the  exportation  of  every 
ton  of  wool  would  produce  a  very  considerable 
revenue  to  the  sovereign.  It  would  hurt  the 
interest  of  the  growers  somewhat  less  than 
the  prohibition,  because  it  would  not  prob¬ 
ably  lower  the  price  of  wool  quite  so  much. 
It  would  afford  a  sufficient  advantage  to  the 
manufacturer,  because,  though  he  might  not 
buy  his  wool  altogether  so  cheap  as  under  the 
prohibition,  he  would  still  buy  it,  at  least,  five 
or  ten  shillings  cheaper  than  any  foreign  man¬ 
ufacturer  could  buy  it,  besides  saving  the 
freight  and  insurance,  which  the  other  would 
be  obliged  to  pay.  It  is  scarce  possible  to  de¬ 
vise  a  tax  which  could  produce  any  consider- 


285 


Conclusion  of  the  Mercantile  System 


able  revenue  to  the  sovereign,  and  at  the  same 
time  occasion  so  little  inconveniency  to  any¬ 
body. 

The  prohibition,  notwithstanding  all  the 
penalties  which  guard  it,  does  not  prevent  the 
exportation  of  wool.  It  is  exported,  it  is  well 
known,  in  great  quantities.  The  great  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  price  in  the  home  and  that 
in  the  foreign  market  presents  such  a  tempta¬ 
tion  to  smuggling  that  all  the  rigour  of  the 
law  cannot  prevent  it.  This  illegal  exporta¬ 
tion  is  advantageous  to  nobody  but  the  smug¬ 
gler.  A  legal  exportation  subject  to  a  tax,  by 
affording  a  revenue  to  the  sovereign,  and 
thereby  saving  the  imposition  of  some  other, 
perhaps,  more  burdensome  and  inconvenient 
taxes  might  prove  advantageous  to  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  subjects  of  the  state. 

The  exportation  of  fuller's  earth  or  fuller’s 
clay,  supposed  to  be  necessary  for  preparing 
and  cleansing  the  woolen  manufactures,  has 
been  subjected  to  nearly  the  same  penalties 
as  the  exportation  of  wool.  Even  tobacco-pipe 
clay,  though  acknowledged  to  be  different 
from  fuller’s  clay,  yet,  on  account  of  their  re¬ 
semblance,  and  because  fuller’s  clay  might 
sometimes  be  exported  as  tobacco-pipe  clay, 
has  been  laid  under  the  same  prohibitions 
and  penalties. 

By  the  13th  and  14th  of  Charles  II,  c.  7, 
the  exportation,  not  only  of  raw  hides,  but  of 
tanned  leather,  except  in  the  shape  of  boots, 
shoes,  or  slippers,  was  prohibited;  and  the  law 
gave  a  monopoly  to  our  bootmakers  and  shoe¬ 
makers,  not  only  against  our  graziers,  but 
against  our  tanners.  By  subsequent  statutes 
our  tanners  have  got  themselves  exempted 
from  this  monopoly  upon  paying  a  small  tax 
of  only  one  shilling  on  the  hundred-weight 
of  tanned  leather,  weighing  one  hundred  and 
twelve  pounds.  They  have  obtained  likewise 
the  drawback  of  two-thirds  of  the  excise 
duties  imposed  upon  their  commodity  even 
when  exported  without  further  manufacture. 
All  manufactures  of  leather  may  be  exported 
duty  free;  and  the  exporter  is  besides  en¬ 
titled  to  the  drawback  of  the  whole  duties  of 
excise.  Our  graziers  still  continue  subject  to 
the  old  monopoly.  Graziers  separated  from 
one  another,  and  dispersed  through  all  the 
different  corners  of  the  country,  cannot,  with¬ 
out  great  difficulty,  combine  together  for  the 
purpose  either  of  imposing  monopolies  upon 
their  fellow  citizens,  or  of  exempting  them¬ 
selves  from  such  as  may  have  been  imposed 
upon  them  by  other  people.  Manufacturers  of 
all  kinds,  collected  together  in  numerous 
bodies  in  all  great  cities,  easily  can.  Even  the 
horns  of  cattle  are  prohibited  to  be  exported; 
and  the  two  insignificant  trades  of  the  horner 
and  combmaker  enjoy,  in  this  respect,  a 
monopoly  against  the  graziers. 


Restraints,  either  by  prohibitions  or  by 
taxes,  upon  the  exportation  of  goods  which 
are  partially,  but  not  completely  manufac¬ 
tured,  are  not  peculiar  to  the  manufacture  of 
leather.  As  long  as  anything  remains  to  be 
done,  in  order  to  fit  any  commodity  for  im¬ 
mediate  use  and  consumption,  our  manufac¬ 
turers  think  that  they  themselves  ought  to 
have  the  doing  of  it.  Woolen  yarn  and  worsted 
are  prohibited  to  be  exported  under  the  same 
penalties  as  wool.  Even  white  cloths  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  a  duty  upon  exportation,  and  our 
dyers  have  so  far  obtained  a  monopoly 
against  our  clothiers.  Our  clothiers  would 
probably  have  been  able  to  defend  them¬ 
selves  against  it,  but  it  happens  that  the 
greater  part  of  our  principal  clothiers  are 
themselves  likewise  dyers.  Watch-cases,  clock- 
cases,  and  dial-plates  for  clocks  and  watches 
have  been  prohibited  to  be  exported.  Our 
clock-makers  and  watch-makers  are,  it  seems, 
unwilling  that  the  price  of  this  sort  of  work¬ 
manship  should  be  raised  upon  them  by  the 
competition  of  foreigners. 

By  some  old  statutes  of  Edward  III,  Hen¬ 
ry  VIII,  and  Edward  VI,  the  exportation  of 
all  metals  was  prohibited.  Lead  and  tin  were 
alone  excepted  probably  on  account  of  the 
great  abundance  of  those  metals,  in  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  which  a  considerable  part  of  the 
trade  of  the  kingdom  in  those  days  consisted. 
For  the  encouragement  of  the  mining  trade, 
the  5th  of  William  and  Mary,  c.  17,  exempted 
from  the  prohibition  iron,  copper,  and  mundic 
metal  made  from  British  ore.  The  exportation 
of  all  sorts  of  copper  bars,  foreign  as  well  as 
British,  was  afterwards  permitted  by  the 
9th  and  10th  of  William  III,  c.  26.  The  ex¬ 
portation  of  unmanufactured  brass,  of  what 
is  called  gun-metal,  bell-metal,  and  shroff- 
metal,  still  continues  to  be  prohibited.  Brass 
manufactures  of  all  sorts  may  be  exported 
duty  free. 

The  exportation  of  the  materials  of  manu¬ 
facture,  where  it  is  not  altogether  prohibited, 
is  in  many  cases  subjected  to  considerable 
duties. 

By  the  8th  George  I,  c.  15,  the  exportation 
of  all  goods,  the  produce  or  manufacture  of 
Great  Britain,  upon  which  any  duties  had 
been  imposed  by  former  statutes,  was  ren¬ 
dered  duty  free.  The  following  goods,  how¬ 
ever,  were  excepted:  alum,  lead,  lead  ore,  tin, 
tanned  leather,  copperas,  coals,  wool  cards, 
white  woolen  cloths,  lapis  calaminaris,  skins 
of  all  sorts,  glue,  coney  hair  or  wool,  hares’ 
wool,  hair  of  all  sorts,  horses,  and  litharge  of 
lead.  If  you  expect  horses,  all  these  are 
either  materials  of  manufacture,  or  incomplete 
manufactures  (which  may  be  considered  as 
materials  for  still  further  manufacture) , 
or  instruments  of  trade.  This  statute  leaves 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


286 

them  subject  to  all  the  old  duties  which  had 
ever  been  imposed  upon  them,  the  old  sub¬ 
sidy  and  one  per  cent  outwards. 

By  the  same  statute  a  great  number  of 
foreign  drugs  for  dyers’  use  are  exempted 
from  all  duties  upon  importation.  Each  of 
them,  however,  is  afterwards  subjected  to  a 
certain  duty,  not  indeed  a  very  heavy  one, 
upon  exportation.  Our  dyers,  it  seems,  while 
they  thought  it  for  their  interest  to  encourage 
the  importation  of  those  drugs,  by  an  exemp¬ 
tion  from  all  duties,  thought  it  likewise  for 
their  interest  to  throw  some  small  discourage¬ 
ment  upon  their  exportation.  The  avidity, 
however,  which  suggested  this  notable  piece 
of  mercantile  ingenuity,  most  probably  dis¬ 
appointed  itself  of  its  object.  It  necessarily 
taught  the  importers  to  be  more  careful  than 
they  might  otherwise  have  been  that  their 
importation  should  not  exceed  what  was  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  supply  of  the  home  market. 
The  home  market  was  at  all  times  likely  to 
be  more  scantily  supplied;  the  commodities 
were  at  all  times  likely  to  be  somewhat 
dearer  there  than  they  would  have  been  had 
the  exportation  been  rendered  as  free  as  the 
importation. 

By  the  above-mentioned  statute,  gum  sene¬ 
ga,  or  gum  arabic,  being  among  the  enumer¬ 
ated  dyeing  drugs,  might  be  imported  duty 
free.  They  were  subjected,  indeed,  to  a  small 
poundage  duty,  amounting  only  to  threepence 
in  the  hundredweight  upon  their  re-exporta¬ 
tion.  France  enjoyed,  at  that  time,  an  exclu¬ 
sive  trade  to  the  country  most  productive  of 
those  drugs,  that  which  lies  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  the  Senegal;  and  the  British  market 
could  not  easily  be  supplied  by  the  immediate 
importation  of  them  from  the  place  of 
growth.  By  the  25th  George  II,  therefore,  gum 
senega  was  allowed  to  be  imported  (contrary 
to  the  general  dispositions  of  the  Act  of  Nav¬ 
igation)  from  any  part  of  Europe.  As  the 
law,  however,  did  not  mean  to  encourage 
this  species  of  trade,  so  contrary  to  the  gen¬ 
eral  principles  of  the  mercantile  policy  of 
England,  it  imposed  a  duty  of  ten  shillings 
the  hundredweight  upon  such  importation, 
and  no  part  of  this  duty  was  to  be  after¬ 
wards  drawn  back  upon  its  exportation.  The 
successful  war  which  began  in  1755  gave 
Great  Britain  the  same  exclusive  trade  to 
those  countries  which  France  had  enjoyed 
before.  Our  manufacturers,  as  soon  as  the 
peace  was  made,  endeavoured  to  avail  them¬ 
selves  of  this  advantage,  and  to  establish  a 
monopoly  in  their  own  favour  both  against 
the  growers  and  against  the  importers  of  this 
commodity.  By  the  5th  George  III,  therefore, 
c.  37,  the  exportation  of  gum  senega  from 
his  Majesty’s  dominions  in  Africa  was  con¬ 
fined  to  Great  Britain,  and  was  subjected  to 


all  the  same  restrictions,  regulations,  forfei¬ 
tures,  and  penalties  as  that  of  the  enumer¬ 
ated  commodities  of  the  British  colonies  in 
America  and  the  West  Indies.  Its  importation, 
indeed,  was  subjected  to  a  small  duty  of  six¬ 
pence  the  hundredweight,  but  its  re-exporta¬ 
tion  was  subjected  to  the  enormous  duty  of 
one  pound  ten  shillings  the  hundredweight. 
It  was  the  intention  of  our  manufacturers 
that  the  whole  produce  of  those  countries 
should  be  imported  into  Great  Britain,  and, 
in  order  that  they  themselves  might  be  en¬ 
abled  to  buy  it  at  their  own  price,  that  no 
part  of  it  should  be  exported  again  but  at 
such  an  expense  as  would  sufficiently  discour¬ 
age  that  exportation.  Their  avidity,  however, 
upon  this,  as  well  as  upon  many  other  occa¬ 
sions,  disappointed  itself  of  its  object.  This 
enormous  duty  presented  such  a  temptation 
to  smuggling  that  great  quantities  of  this 
commodity  were  clandestinely  exported,  prob¬ 
ably  to  all  the  manufacturing  countries  of 
Europe,  put  particularly  to  Holland,  not  only 
from  Great  Britain  but  from  Africa.  Upon 
this  account,  by  the  14th  George  III,  c.  10, 
this  duty  upon  exportation  was  reduced  to 
five  shillings  the  hundredweight. 

In  the  book  of  rates,  according  to  which 
the  Old  Subsidy  was  levied,  beaver  skins  were 
estimated  at  six  shillings  and  eightpence  a 
piece,  and  the  different  subsidies  and  imposts, 
which  before  the  year  1722  had  been  laid 
upon  their  importation,  amounted  to  one- 
fifth  part  of  the  rate,  or  to  sixteenpence  upon 
each  skin;  all  of  which,  except  half  the  Old 
Subsidy,  amounting  only  to  twopence,  was 
drawn  back  upon  exportation.  This  duty  upon 
the  importation  of  so  important  a  material 
of  manufacture  had  been  thought  too  high, 
and  in  the  year  1722  the  rate  was  reduced  to 
two  shillings  and  sixpence,  which  reduced  the 
duty  upon  importation  to  sixpence,  and  of 
this  only  one  half  was  to  be  drawn  back  upon 
exportation.  The  same  successful  war  put  the 
country  most  productive  of  beaver  under  the 
dominion  of  Great  Britain,  and  beaver  skins 
being  among  the  enumerated  commodities, 
their  exportation  from  America  was  conse¬ 
quently  confined  to  the  market  of  Great 
Britain.  Our  manufacturers  soon  bethought 
themselves  of  the  advantage  which  they 
might  make  of  this  circumstance,  and  in  the 
year  1764  the  duty  upon  the  importation  of 
beaver-skin  was  reduced  to  one  penny,  but 
the  duty  upon  exportation  was  raised  to 
sevenpence  each  skin,  without  any  drawback 
of  the  duty  upon  importation.  By  the  same 
law,  a  duty  of  eighteenpence  the  pound  was 
imposed  upon  the  exportation  of  beaver- 
wool  or  wombs,  without  making  any  alter¬ 
ation  in  the  duty  upon  the  importation  of 
that  commodity,  which,  when  imported  by 


Conclusion  of  the 

Britain  and  in  British  shipping,  amounted  at 
that  time  to  between  fourpence  and  fivepence 
the  piece. 

Coals  may  be  considered  both  as  a  material 
of  manufacture  and  as  an  instrument  of  trade. 
Heavy  duties,  accordingly,  have  been  im¬ 
posed  upon  their  exportation,  amounting  at 
present  (1783)  to  more  than  five  shillings 
the  ton,  or  to  more  than  fifteen  shillings  the 
chaldron,  Newcastle  measures,  which  is  in 
most  cases  more  than  the  original  value  of 
the  commodity  at  the  coal  pit,  or  even  at  the 
shipping  port  for  exportation. 

The  exportation,  however,  of  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  trade,  properly  so  called,  is  com¬ 
monly  restrained,  not  by  high  duties,  but  by 
absolute  prohibitions.  Thus  by  the  7th  and 
8th  of  William  III,  c.  20,  sect.  8,  the  expor¬ 
tation  of  frames  or  engines  for  knitting 
gloves  or  stockings  is  prohibited  under  the 
penalty,  not  only  of  the  forfeiture  of  such 
frames  or  engines  so  exported,  or  attempted 
to  be  exported,  but  of  forty  pounds,  one  half 
to  the  king,  the  other  to  the  person  who 
shall  inform  or  sue  for  the  same.  In  the  same 
manner,  by  the  14th  George  III,  c.  71,  the 
exportation  to  foreign  parts  of  any  utensils 
made  use  of  in  the  cotton,  linen,  woollen,  and 
silk  manufactures  is  prohibited  under  the 
penalty,  not  only  of  the  forfeiture  of  such 
utensils,  but  of  two  hundred  pounds,  to  be 
paid  by  the  person  who  shall  offend  in  this 
manner,  and  likewise  of  two  hundred  pounds 
to  be  paid  by  the  master  of  the  ship  who 
shall  knowingly  suffer  such  utensils  to  be 
loaded  on  board  his  ship. 

When  such  heavy  penalties  were  imposed 
upon  the  exportation  of  the  dead  instruments 
of  trade,  it  could  not  well  be  expected  that 
the  living  instrument,  the  artificer,  should  be 
allowed  to  go  free.  Accordingly,  by  the  5th 
George  I,  c.  27,  the  person  who  shall  be  con¬ 
victed  of  enticing  any  artificer  of,  or  in  any 
of  the  manufactures  of  Great  Britain,  to  go 
into  any  foreign  parts  in  order  to  practise  or 
teach  his  trade,  is  liable  for  the  first  offence 
to  be  fined  in  any  sum  not  exceeding  one 
hundred  pounds,  and  to  three  months’  im¬ 
prisonment,  and  until  the  fine  shall  be  paid; 
and  for  the  second  offence,  to  be  fined  in  any 
sum  at  the  discretion  of  the  court,  and  to  im¬ 
prisonment  for  twelve  months,  and  until  the 
fine  shall  be  paid.  By  the  23rd  George  II,  c. 
13,  this  penalty  is  increased  for  the  first 
offence  to  five  hundred  pounds  for  every  ar¬ 
tificer  so  enticed,  and  to  twelve  months’  im¬ 
prisonment,  and  until  the  fine  shall  be  paid; 
and  for  the  second  offence,  to  one  thousand 
pounds,  and  to  two  years’  imprisonment,  and 
until  the  fine  shall  be  paid. 

By  the  former  of  those  two  statutes,  upon 
proof  that  any  person  has  been  enticing  any 


Mercantile  System  287 

artificer,  or  that  any  artificer  has  promised 
or  contracted  to  go  into  foreign  parts  for  the 
purposes  aforesaid,  such  artificer  may  be 
obliged  to  give  security  at  the  discretion  of 
the  court  that  he  shall  not  go  beyond  the 
seas,  and  may  be  committed  to  prison  until 
he  give  such  security. 

If  any  artificer  has  gone  beyond  the  seas, 
and  is  exercising  or  teaching  his  trade  in  any 
foreign  country,  upon  warning  being  given  to 
him  by  any  of  his  Majesty’s  ministers  or  con¬ 
suls  abroad,  or  by  one  of  his  Majesty’s  Sec¬ 
retaries  of  State  for  the  time  being,  if  he  does 
not,  within  six  months  after  such  warning, 
return  into  this  realm,  and  from  thenceforth 
abide  and  inhabit  continually  within  the 
same,  he  is  from  thenceforth  declared  inca¬ 
pable  of  taking  any  legacy  devised  to  him 
within  this  kingdom,  or  of  being  executor  or 
administrator  to  any  person,  or  of  taking  any 
lands  within  this  kingdom  by  descent,  device, 
or  purchase.  He  likewise  forfeits  to  the  king 
all  his  lands,  goods,  and  chattels,  is  declared 
an  alien  in  every  respect,  and  is  put  out  of 
the  king’s  protection. 

It  is  unnecessary,  I  imagine,  to  observe 
how  contrary  such  regulations  are  to  the 
boasted  liberty  of  the  subject,  of  which  we 
affect  to  be  so  very  jealous;  but  which,  in  this 
case,  is  so  plainly  sacrificed  to  the  futile 
interests  of  our  merchants  and  manufacturers. 

The  laudable  motive  of  all  these  regula¬ 
tions  is  to  extend  our  own  manufactures,  not 
by  their  own  improvement,  but  by  the  de¬ 
pression  of  those  of  all  our  neighbours,  and 
by  putting  an  end,  as  much  as  possible,  to 
the  troublesome  competition  of  such  odious 
and  disagreeable  rivals.  Our  master  manufac¬ 
turers  think  it  reasonable  that  they  them¬ 
selves  should  have  the  monopoly  of  the  in¬ 
genuity  of  all  their  countrymen.  Though  by 
restraining,  in  some  trades,  the  number  of 
apprentices  which  can  be  employed  at  one 
time,  and  by  imposing  the  necessity  of  a  long 
apprenticeship  in  all  trades,  they  endeavour, 
all  of  them,  to  confine  the  knowledge  of  their 
respective  employments  to  as  small  a  number 
as  possible;  they  are  unwilling,  however,  that 
any  part  of  this  small  number  should  go 
abroad  to  instruct  foreigners. 

Consumption  is  the  sole  end  and  purpose  of 
all  production;  and  the  interest  of  the  pro¬ 
ducer  ought  to  be  attended  to  only  so  far  as 
it  may  be  necessary  for  promoting  that  of  the 
consumer.  The  maxim  is  so  perfectly  self- 
evident  that  it  would  be  absurd  to  attempt 
to  prove  it.  But  in  the  mercantile  system  the 
interest  of  the  consumer  is  almost  constantly 
sacrificed  to  that  of  the  producer;  and  it 
seems  to  consider  production,  and  not  con¬ 
sumption,  as  the  ultimate  end  and  object  of 
all  industry  and  commerce. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


288 

In  the  restraints  upon  the  importation  of 
all  foreign  commodities  which  can  come  into 
competition  with  those  of  our  own  growth  or 
manufacture,  the  interest  of  the  home  con¬ 
sumer  is  evidently  sacrificed  to  that  of  the 
producer.  It  is  altogether  for  the  benefit  of 
the  latter  that  the  former  is  obliged  to  pay 
that  enhancement  of  price  which  this  monop¬ 
oly  almost  always  occasions. 

It  is  altogether  for  the  benefit  of  the  pro¬ 
ducer  that  bounties  are  granted  upon  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  some  of  his  productions.  The 
home  consumer  is  obliged  to  pay,  first,  the 
tax  which  is  necessary  for  paying  the  bounty, 
and  secondly,  the  still  greater  tax  which  nec¬ 
essarily  arises  from  the  enhancement  of  the 
price  of  the  commodity  in  the  home  market. 

By  the  famous  treaty  of  commerce  with 
Portugal,  the  consumer  is  prevented  by  high 
duties  from  purchasing  of  a  neighbouring 
country  a  commodity  which  our  own  climate 
does  not  produce,  but  is  obliged  to  purchase 
it  of  a  distant  country,  though  it  is  acknowl¬ 
edged  that  the  commodity  of  the  distant 
country  is  of  a  worse  quality  than  that  of  the 
near  one.  The  home  consumer  is  obliged  to 
submit  to  this  inconveniency  in  order  that 
the  producer  may  import  into  the  distant 
country  some  of  his  productions  upon  more 
advantageous  terms  than  he  would  otherwise 
have  been  allowed  to  do.  The  consumer,  too, 
is  obliged  to  pay  whatever  enhancement  in 
the  price  if  those  very  productions  this  forced 
exportation  may  occasion  in  the  home  market. 

But  in  the  system  of  laws  which  has  been 
established  for  the  management  of  our  Amer¬ 
ican  and  West  Indian  colonies,  the  interest 
of  the  home  consumer  has  been  sacrificed  to 
that  of  the  producer  with  a  more  extravagant 
profusion  than  in  all  our  other  commercial 
regulations.  A  great  empire  has  been  estab¬ 
lished  for  the  sole  purpose  of  raising  up  a 
nation  of  customers  who  should  be  obliged 
to  buy  from  the  shops  of  our  different  pro¬ 
ducers  all  the  goods  with  which  these  could 
supply  them.  For  the  sake  of  that  little  en¬ 
hancement  of  price  which  this  monopoly 
might  afford  our  producers,  the  home  con¬ 
sumers  have  been  burdened  with  the  whole 
expense  of  maintaining  and  defending  that 
empire.  For  this  purpose,  and  for  this  purpose 
only,  in  the  two  last  wars,  more  than  two 
hundred  millions  have  been  spent,  and  a  new 
debt  of  more  than  a  hundred  and  seventy 
millions  has  been  contracted  over  and  above 
all  that  had  been  expended  for  the  same  pur¬ 
pose  in  former  wars.  The  interest  of  this  debt 
alone  is  not  only  greater  than  the  whole  ex¬ 
traordinary  profit  which  it  ever  could  be  pre¬ 
tended  was  made  by  the  monopoly  of  the 
colony  trade,  but  than  the  whole  value  of  that 
trade,  or  than  the  whole  value  of  the  goods 


which  at  an  average  have  been  annually  ex¬ 
ported  to  the  colonies. 

It  cannot  be  very  difficult  to  determine 
who  have  been  the  contrivers  of  this  whole 
mercantile  system;  not  the  consumers,  we 
may  believe,  whose  interest  has  been  entirely 
neglected;  but  the  producers,  whose  interest 
has  been  so  carefully  attended  to;  and  among 
this  latter  class  our  merchants  and  manufac¬ 
turers  have  been  by  far  the  principal  archi¬ 
tects.  In  the  mercantile  regulations,  which 
have  been  taken  notice  of  in  this  chapter, 
the  interest  of  our  manufacturers  has  been 
most  peculiarly  attended  to;  and  the  interest, 
not  so  much  of  the  consumers,  as  that  of  some 
other  sets  of  producers,  has  been  sacrificed 
to  it. 

Chapter  IX 

Of  the  Agricultural  Systems ,  or  of  those  Sys¬ 
tems  of  Political  Economy  which  represent 
the  Produce  of  Land  as  either  the  sole  or  the 
principal  Source  of  the  Revenue  and  Wealth 
of  every  Country 

The  agricultural  systems  of  political  econ¬ 
omy  will  not  require  so  long  an  explanation 
as  that  which  I  have  thought  it  necessary  to 
bestow  upon  the  mercantile  or  commercial 
system. 

That  system  which  represents  the  produce 
of  land  as  the  sole  source  of  the  revenue  and 
wealth  of  every  country  has,  so  far  as  I 
know,  never  been  adopted  by  any  nation,  and 
it  at  present  exists  only  in  the  speculations 
of  a  few  men  of  great  learning  and  ingenuity 
in  France.  It  would  not,  surely,  be  worth 
while  to  examine  at  great  length  the  errors 
of  a  system  which  never  has  done,  and  prob¬ 
ably  never  will  do,  any  harm  in  any  part  of 
the  world.  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain,  how¬ 
ever,  as  distinctly  as  I  can,  the  great  out¬ 
lines  of  this  very  ingenious  system. 

Mr.  Colbert,  the  famous  minister  of  Louis 
XIV,  was  a  man  of  probity,  of  great  industry 
and  knowledge  of  detail,  of  great  experience 
and  acuteness  in  the  examination  of  public 
accounts,  and  of  abilities,  in  short,  every  way 
fitted  for  introducing  method  and  good  order 
into  the  collection  and  expenditure  of  the 
public  revenue.  That  minister  had  unfortu¬ 
nately  embraced  all  the  prejudices  of  the  mer¬ 
cantile  system,  in  its  nature  and  essence  a 
system  of  restraint  and  regulation,  and  such 
as  could  scarce  fail  to  be  agreeable  to  a  la¬ 
borious  and  plodding  man  of  business,  who 
had  been  accustomed  to  regulate  the  differ¬ 
ent  departments  of  public  offices,  and  to 
establish  the  necessary  checks  and  controls 
for  confining  each  to  its  proper  sphere.  The 
industry  and  commerce  of  a  great  country 
he  endeavoured  to  regulate  upon  the  same 
model  as  the  departments  of  a  public  office; 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


and  instead  of  allowing  every  man  to  pursue 
his  own  interest  in  his  own  way,  upon 
the  liberal  plan  of  equality,  liberty,  and 
justice,  he  bestowed  upon  certain  branches 
of  industry  extraordinary  privileges,  while  he 
laid  others  under  as  extraordinary  restraints. 
He  was  not  only  disposed,  like  other  Euro¬ 
pean  ministers,  to  encourage  more  the  indus¬ 
try  of  the  towns  than  that  of  the  country; 
but,  in  order  to  support  the  industry  of  the 
towns,  he  was  willing  even  to  depress  and 
keep  down  that  of  the  country.  In  order  to 
render  provisions  cheap  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  towns,  and  thereby  to  encourage  manu¬ 
factures  and  foreign  commerce,  he  prohibited 
altogether  the  exportation  of  corn,  and  thus 
excluded  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  from 
every  foreign  market  for  by  far  the  most  im¬ 
portant  part  of  the  produce  of  their  industry. 
This  prohibition,  joined  to  the  restraints 
imposed  by  the  ancient  provincial  laws  of 
France  upon  the  transportation  of  corn  from 
one  province  to  another,  and  to  the  arbi¬ 
trary  and  degrading  taxes  which  are  levied 
upon  the  cultivators  in  almost  all  the  prov¬ 
inces,  discouraged  and  kept  down  the  agri¬ 
culture  of  that  country  very  much  below  the 
state  to  which  it  would  naturally  have  risen 
in  so  very  fertile  a  soil  and  so  very  happy  a 
climate.  This  state  of  discouragement  and  de¬ 
pression  was  felt  more  or  less  in  every  differ¬ 
ent  part  of  the  country,  and  many  different 
inquiries  were  set  on  foot  concerning  the 
causes  of  it.  One  of  those  causes  appeared  to 
be  the  preference  given,  by  the  institutions 
of  Mr.  Colbert,  to  the  industry  of  the  towns 
above  that  of  the  country. 

If  the  rod  be  bent  too  much  one  way,  says 
the  proverb,  in  order  to  make  it  straight  you 
must  bend  it  as  much  the  other.  The  French 
philosophers,  who  have  proposed  the  system 
which  represents  agriculture  as  the  sole  source 
of  the  revenue  and  wealth  of  every  country, 
seem  to  have  adopted  this  proverbial  maxim; 
and  as  in  the  plan  of  Mr.  Colbert  the  indus¬ 
try  of  the  towns  was  certainly  overvalued 
in  comparison  with  that  of  the  country;  so 
in  their  system  it  seems  to  be  as  certainly 
undervalued. 

The  different  orders  of  people  who  have 
ever  been  supposed  to  contribute  in  any  re¬ 
spect  towards  the  annual  produce  of  the  land 
and  labour  of  the  country,  they  divide  into 
three  classes.  The  first  is  the  class  of  the 
proprietors  of  land.  The  second  is  the  class  of 
the  cultivators,  of  farmers  and  country  la¬ 
bourers,  whom  they  honour  with  the  peculiar 
appellation  of  the  productive  class.  The  third 
is  the  class  of  artificers,  manufacturers,  and 
merchants,  whom  they  endeavour  to  degrade 
by  the  humiliating  appellation  of  the  barren 
or  unproductive  class. 


289 

The  class  of  proprietors  contributes  to  the 
annual  produce  by  the  expense  which  they 
may  occasionally  lay  out  upon  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  land,  upon  the  buildings,  drains, 
enclosures,  and  other  ameliorations,  which 
they  may  either  make  or  maintain  upon  it, 
and  by  means  of  which  the  cultivators  are 
enabled,  with  the  same  capital,  to  raise  a 
greater  produce,  and  consequently  to  pay  a 
greater  rent.  This  advanced  rent  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  interest  or  profit  due  to  the 
proprietor  upon  the  expense  or  capital  which 
he  thus  employs  in  the  improvement  of  his 
land.  Such  expenses  are  in  this  system  called 
ground  expenses  (depenses  foncieres.) 

The  cultivators  or  farmers  contribute  to 
the  annual  produce  by  what  are  in  this  sys¬ 
tem  called  the  original  and  annual  expenses 
(i depenses  primitives  et  depenses  annuelles) 
which  they  lay  out  upon  the  cultivation  of 
the  land.  The  original  expenses  consist  in  the 
instruments  of  husbandry,  in  the  stock  of 
cattle,  in  the  seed,  and  in  the  maintenance 
of  the  farmer’s  family,  servants,  and  cattle 
during  at  least  a  great  part  of  the  first  year 
of  his  occupancy,  or  till  he  can  receive  some 
return  from  the  land.  The  annual  expenses 
consist  in  the  seed,  in  the  wear  and  tear  of 
the  instruments  of  husbandry,  and  in  the  an¬ 
nual  maintenance  of  the  farmer’s  servants  and 
cattle,  and  of  his  family  too,  so  far  as  any 
part  of  them  can  be  considered  as  servants 
employed  in  cultivation.  That  part  of  the 
produce  of  the  land  which  remains  to  him 
after  paying  the  rent  ought  to  be  sufficient, 
first,  to  replace  to  him  within  a  reasonable 
time,  at  least  during  the  term  of  his  occu¬ 
pancy,  the  whole  of  his  original  expenses,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock;  and, 
secondly,  to  replace  to  him  annually  the 
whole  of  his  annual  expenses,  together  like¬ 
wise  with  the  ordering  profits  of  stock. 
Those  two  sorts  of  expenses  are  two  cap¬ 
itals  which  the  farmer  employs  in  culti¬ 
vation;  and  unless  they  are  regularly  restored 
to  him,  together  with  a  reasonable  profit,  he 
cannot  carry  on  his  employment  upon  a  level 
with  other  employments;  but,  from  a  regard 
to  his  own  interest,  must  desert  it  as  soon  as 
possible  and  seek  some  other.  That  part  of 
the  produce  of  the  land  which  is  thus  neces¬ 
sary  for  enabling  the  farmer  to  continue  his 
business  ought  to  be  considered  as  a  fund 
sacred  to  cultivation,  which,  if  the  landlord 
violates,  he  necessarily  reduces  the  produce 
of  his  own  land,  and  in  a  few  years  not  only 
disables  the  farmer  from  paying  this  racked 
rent,  but  from  paying  the  reasonable  rent 
which  he  might  otherwise  have  got  for  his 
land.  The  rent  which  properly  belongs  to  the 
landlord  is  no  more  than  the  net  produce 
which  remains  after  paying  in  the  completest 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


290 

manner  all  the  necessary  expenses  which  must 
be  previously  laid  out  in  order  to  raise  the 
gross  or  the  whole  produce.  It  is  because  the 
labour  of  the  cultivators,  over  and  above  pay¬ 
ing  completely  all  those  necessary  expenses, 
affords  a  net  produce  of  this  kind  that  this 
class  of  people  are  in  this  system  peculiarly 
distinguished  by  the  honourable  appellation 
of  the  productive  class.  Their  original  and 
annual  expenses  are  for  the  same  reason 
called,  in  this  system,  productive  expenses, 
because,  over  and  above  replacing  their  own 
value,  they  occasion  the  annual  reproduction 
of  this  net  produce. 

The  ground  expenses,  as  they  are  called,  or 
what  the  landlord  lays  out  upon  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  his  land,  are  in  this  system,  too,  hon¬ 
oured  with  the  appellation  of  productive  ex¬ 
penses.  Till  the  whole  of  those  expenses,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  have 
been  completely  repaid  to  him  by  the  ad¬ 
vanced  rent  which  he  gets  from  his  land,  that 
advanced  rent  ought  to  be  regarded  as  sacred 
and  inviolable,  both  by  the  church  and  by 
the  king;  ought  to  be  subject  neither  to  tithe 
nor  to  taxation.  If  it  is  otherwise,  by  dis¬ 
couraging  the  improvement  of  land  the  church 
discourages  the  future  increase  of  her  own 
tithes,  and  the  king  the  future  increase  of 
his  own  taxes.  As  in  a  well-ordered  state 
of  things,  therefore,  those  ground  expenses, 
over  and  above  reproducing  in  the  completest 
manner  their  own  value,  occasion  likewise 
after  a  certain  time  a  reproduction  of  a  net 
produce,  they  are  in  this  system  considered  as 
productive  expenses. 

The  ground  expenses  of  the  landlord,  how¬ 
ever,  together  with  the  original  and  the  an¬ 
nual  expenses  of  the  farmer,  are  the  only 
three  sorts  of  expenses  which  in  this  system 
are  considered  as  productive.  All  other  ex¬ 
penses  and  all  other  orders  of  people,  even 
those  who  in  the  common  apprehensions  of 
men  are  regarded  as  the  most  productive,  are 
in  this  account  of  things  represented  as  al¬ 
together  barren  and  unproductive. 

Artificers  and  manufacturers  in  particular, 
whose  industry,  in  the  common  apprehen¬ 
sions  of  men,  increases  so  much  the  value  of 
the  rude  produce  of  land,  are  in  this  system 
represented  as  a  class  of  people  altogether 
barren  and  unproductive.  Their  labour,  it  is 
said,  replaces  only  the  stock  which  employs 
them,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits.  That 
stock  consists  in  the  materials,  tools,  and 
wages  advanced  to  them  by  their  employer; 
and  is  the  fund  destined  for  their  employ¬ 
ment  and  maintenance.  Its  profits  are  the 
fund  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  their 
employer.  Their  employer,  as  he  advances  to 
them  the  stock  of  materials,  tools,  and  wages 
necessary  for  their  employment,  so  he  ad¬ 


vances  to  himself  what  is  necessary  for  his 
own  maintenance,  and  this  maintenance  he 
generally  proportions  to  the  profit  which  he 
expects  to  make  by  the  price  of  their  work. 
Unless  its  price  repays  to  him  the  mainte¬ 
nance  which  he  advances  to  himself,  as  well 
as  the  materials,  tools,  and  wages  which  he 
advances  to  his  workmen,  it  evidently  does 
not  repay  to  him  the  whole  expense  which  he 
lays  out  upon  it.  The  profits  of  manufactur¬ 
ing  stock  therefore  are  not,  like  the  rent  of 
land,  a  net  produce  which  remains  after 
completely  repaying  the  whole  expense  which 
must  be  laid  out  in  order  to  obtain  them.  The 
stock  of  the  farmer  yields  him  a  profit  as  well 
as  that  of  the  master  manufacturer;  and  it 
yields  a  rent  likewise  to  another  person,  which 
that  of  the  master  manufacturer  does  not. 
The  expense,  therefore,  laid  out  in  employ¬ 
ing  and  maintaining  artificers  and  manufac¬ 
turers  does  no  more  than  continue,  if  one  may 
say  so,  the  existence  of  its  own  value,  and 
does  not  produce  any  new  value.  It  is  there¬ 
fore  altogether  a  barren  and  unproductive 
expense.  The  expense,  on  the  contrary,  laid 
out  in  employing  farmers  and  country  la¬ 
bourers,  over  and  above  continuing  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  its  own  value,  produces  a  new  val¬ 
ue,  the  rent  of  the  landlord.  It  is  therefore 
a  productive  expense. 

Mercantile  stock  is  equally  barren  and  un¬ 
productive  with  manufacturing  stock.  It  only 
continues  the  existence  of  its  own  value,  with¬ 
out  producing  any  new  value.  Its  profits  are 
only  the  repayment  of  the  maintenance  which 
its  employer  advances  to  himself  during  the 
time  that  he  employs  it,  or  till  he  receives  the 
returns  of  it.  They  are  only  the  repayment  of 
a  part  of  the  expense  which  must  be  laid  out 
in  employing  it. 

The  labour  of  artificers  and  manufacturers 
never  adds  anything  to  the  value  of  the 
whole  annual  amount  of  the  rude  produce  of 
the  land.  It  adds,  indeed,  greatly  to  the  value 
of  some  particular  parts  of  it.  But  the  con¬ 
sumption  which  in  the  meantime  it  occasions 
of  other  parts  is  precisely  equal  to  the  value 
which  it  adds  to  those  parts;  so  that  the  value 
of  the  whole  amount  is  not,  at  any  one  mo¬ 
ment  of  time,  in  the  least  augmented  by  it. 
The  person  who  works  the  lace  of  a  pair  of 
fine  ruffles,  for  example,  will  sometimes  raise 
the  value  of  perhaps  a  pennyworth  of  flax 
to  thirty  pounds  sterling.  But  though  at  first 
sight  he  appears  thereby  to  multiply  the  value 
of  a  part  of  the  rude  produce  about  seven 
thousand  and  two  hundred  times,  he  in  re¬ 
ality  adds  nothing  to  the  value  of  the  whole 
annual  amount  of  the  rude  produce.  The 
working  of  that  lace  costs  him  perhaps  two 
years*  labour.  The  thirty  pounds  which  he 
gets  for  it  when  it  is  finished  is  no  more  than 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


the  repayment  of  the  subsistence  which  he 
advances  to  himself  during  the  two  years 
that  he  is  employed  about  it.  The  value 
which,  by  every  day’s,  month’s,  or  year’s  la¬ 
bour,  he  adds  to  the  flax  does  no  more  than 
replace  the  value  of  his  own  consumption 
during  that  day,  month,  or  year.  At  no  mo¬ 
ment  of  time,  therefore,  does  he  add  anything 
to  the  value  of  the  whole  annual  amount  of 
the  rude  produce  of  the  land:  the  portion  of 
that  produce  which  he  is  continually  consum¬ 
ing  being  always  equal  to  the  value  which  he 
is  continually  producing.  The  extreme  pov¬ 
erty  of  the  greater  part  of  the  persons  em¬ 
ployed  in  this  expensive  though  trifling  man¬ 
ufacture  may  satisfy  us  that  the  price  of  their 
work  does  not  in  ordinary  cases  exceed  the 
value  of  their  subsistence.  It  is  otherwise  with 
the  work  of  farmers  and  country  labourers. 
The  rent  of  the  landlord  is  a  value  which,  in 
ordinary  cases,  it  is  continually  producing, 
over  and  above  replacing,  in  the  most  com¬ 
plete  manner,  the  whole  consumption,  the 
whole  expense  laid  out  upon  the  employment 
and  maintenance  both  of  the  workmen  and 
of  their  employer. 

Artificers,  manufacturers,  and  merchants 
can  augment  the  revenue  and  wealth  of  their 
society  by  parsimony  only;  or,  as  it  is  ex¬ 
pressed  in  this  system,  by  privation,  that  is, 
by  depriving  themselves  of  a  part  of  the  funds 
destined  for  their  own  subsistence.  They  an¬ 
nually  reproduce  nothing  but  those  funds. 
Unless,  therefore,  they  annually  save  some 
part  of  them,  unless  they  annually  deprive 
themselves  of  the  enjoyment  of  some  part  of 
them,  the  revenue  and  wealth  of  their  society 
can  never  be  in  the  smallest  degree  augmented 
by  means  of  their  industry.  Farmers  and 
country  labourers,  on  the  contrary,  may  en¬ 
joy  completely  the  whole  funds  destined  for 
their  own  subsistence,  and  yet  augment  at 
the  same  time  the  revenue  and  wealth  of  their 
society.  Over  and  above  what  is  destined  for 
their  own  subsistence,  their  industry  annu¬ 
ally  affords  a  net  produce,  of  which  the  aug¬ 
mentation  necessarily  augments  the  revenue 
and  wealth  of  their  society.  Nations  therefore 
which,  like  France  or  England,  consist  in  a 
great  measure  of  proprietors  and  cultivators 
can  be  enriched  by  industry  and  enjoyment. 
Nations,  on  the  contrary,  which,  like  Holland 
and  Hamburg,  are  composed  chiefly  of  mer¬ 
chants,  artificers,  and  manufacturers  can  grow 
rich  only  through  parsimony  and  privation. 
As  the  interest  of  nations  so  differently 
circumstanced  is  very  different,  so  is  like¬ 
wise  the  common  character  of  the  people: 
in  those  of  the  former  kind,  liberality,  frank¬ 
ness  and  good  fellowship  naturally  make  a 
part  of  that  common  character:  in  the  latter, 
narrowness,  meanness,  and  a  selfish  disposi¬ 


291 

tion,  averse  to  all  social  pleasure  and  enjoy¬ 
ment. 

The  unproductive  class,  that  of  merchants, 
artificers,  and  manufacturers,  is  maintained 
and  employed  altogether  at  the  expense  of 
the  two  other  classes,  of  that  of  proprietors, 
and  of  that  of  cultivators.  They  furnish  it 
both  with  the  materials  of  its  work  and  with 
the  fund  of  its  subsistence,  with  the  corn  and 
cattle  which  it  consumes  while  it  is  employed 
about  that  work.  The  proprietors  and  cultiva¬ 
tors  finally  pay  both  the  wages  of  all  the 
workmen  of  the  unproductive  class,  and  of 
the  profits  of  all  their  employers.  Those  work¬ 
men  and  their  employers  are  properly  the 
servants  of  the  proprietors  and  cultivators. 
They  are  only  servants  who  work  without 
doors,  as  menial  servants  work  within.  Both 
the  one  and  the  other,  however,  are  equally 
maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  same  mas¬ 
ters.  The  labour  of  both  is  equally  unproduc¬ 
tive.  It  adds  nothing  to  the  value  of  the  sum 
total  of  the  rude  produce  of  the  land.  Instead 
of  increasing  the  value  of  that  sum  total,  it 
is  a  charge  and  expense  which  must  be  paid 
out  of  it. 

The  unproductive  class,  however,  is  not 
only  useful,  but  greatly  useful  to  the  other 
two  classes.  By  means  of  the  industry  of  mer¬ 
chants,  artificers,  and  manufacturers,  the  pro¬ 
prietors  and  cultivators  can  purchase  both 
the  foreign  goods  and  the  manufactured  prod¬ 
uce  of  their  own  country  which  they  have  oc¬ 
casion  for  with  the  produce  of  a  much  smaller 
quantity  of  their  own  labour  than  what  they 
would  be  obliged  to  employ  if  they  were  to 
attempt,  in  an  awkward  and  unskilful  man¬ 
ner,  either  to  import  the  one  or  to  make  the 
other  for  their  own  use.  By  means  of  the  un¬ 
productive  class,  the  cultivators  are  delivered 
from  many  cares  which  would  otherwise  dis¬ 
tract  their  attention  from  the  cultivation  of 
land.  The  superiority  of  produce,  which,  in 
consequence  of  this  undivided  attention,  they 
are  enabled  to  raise,  is  fully  sufficient  to  pay 
the  whole  expense  which  the  maintenance 
and  employment  of  the  unproductive  class 
costs  either  the  proprietors  or  themselves. 
The  industry  of  merchants,  artificers,  and 
manufacturers,  though  in  its  own  nature  alto¬ 
gether  unproductive,  yet  contributes  in  this 
manner  indirectly  to  increase  the  produce  of 
the  land.  It  increases  the  productive  powers 
of  productive  labour  by  leaving  it  at  liberty 
to  confine  itself  to  its  proper  employment, 
the  cultivation  of  land;  and  the  plough  goes 
frequently  the  easier  and  the  better  by  means 
of  the  labour  of  the  man  whose  business  is 
most  remote  from  the  plough. 

It  can  never  be  the  interest  of  the  proprie¬ 
tors  and  cultivators  to  restrain  or  to  discour¬ 
age  in  any  respect  the  industry  of  merchants, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


292 

artificers,  and  manufacturers.  The  greater  the 
liberty  which  this  unproductive  class  enjoys, 
the  greater  will  be  the  competition  in  all  the 
different  trades  which  compose  it,  and  the 
cheaper  will  the  other  two  classes  be  supplied, 
both  with  foreign  goods  and  with  the  manu¬ 
factured  produce  of  their  own  country. 

It  can  never  be  the  interest  of  the  unpro¬ 
ductive  class  to  oppress  the  other  two  classes. 
It  is  the  surplus  produce  of  the  land,  or  what 
remains  after  deducting  the  maintenance, 
first,  of  the  cultivators,  and  afterwards  of  the 
proprietors,  that  maintains  and  employs  the 
unproductive  class.  The  greater  this  surplus 
the  greater  must  likewise  be  the  maintenance 
and  employment  of  that  class.  The  establish¬ 
ment  of  perfect  justice,  of  perfect  liberty,  and 
of  perfect  equality  is  the  very  simple  secret 
which  most  effectually  secures  the  highest 
degree  of  prosperity  to  all  the  three  classes. 

The  merchants,  artificers,  and  manufactur¬ 
ers  of  those  mercantile  states  which,  like  Hol¬ 
land  and  Hamburg,  consist  chiefly  of  this 
unproductive  class,  are  in  the  same  manner 
maintained  and  employed  altogether  at  the 
expense  of  the  proprietors  and  cultivators  of 
land.  The  only  difference  is,  that  those  pro¬ 
prietors  and  cultivators  are,  the  greater  part 
of  them,  placed  at  a  most  inconvenient  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  merchants,  artificers,  and 
manufacturers  whom  they  supply  with  the 
materials  of  their  work  and  the  fund  of  their 
subsistence, — the  inhabitants  of  other  coun¬ 
tries  and  the  subjects  of  other  governments. 

Such  mercantile  states,  however,  are  not 
only  useful,  but  greatly  useful  to  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  those  other  countries.  They  fill  up, 
in  some  measure,  a  very  important  void,  and 
supply  the  place  of  the  merchants,  artificers, 
and  manufacturers  whom  the  inhabitants  of 
those  countries  ought  to  find  at  home,  but 
whom,  from  some  defect  in  their  policy,  they 
do  not  find  at  home. 

It  can  never  be  the  interest  of  those  landed 
nations,  if  I  may  call  them  so,  to  discourage 
or  distress  the  industry  of  such  mercantile 
states  by  imposing  high  duties  upon  their 
trade  or  upon  the  commodities  which  they 
furnish.  Such  duties,  by  rendering  those  com¬ 
modities  dearer,  could  serve  only  to  sink  the 
real  value  of  the  surplus  produce  of  their 
own  land,  with  which,  or,  what  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  with  the  price  of  which  those 
commodities  are  purchased.  Such  duties  could 
serve  only  to  discourage  the  increase  of  that 
surplus  produce,  and  consequently  the  im¬ 
provement  and  cultivation  of  their  own  land. 
The  most  effectual  expedient,  on  the  contrary, 
for  raising  the  value  of  that  surplus  produce, 
for  encouraging  its  increase,  and  consequently 
the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  their  own 
land,  would  be  to  allow  the  most  perfect 


freedom  to  the  trade  of  all  such  mercantile 
nations. 

This  perfect  freedom  of  trade  would  even 
be  the  most  effectual  expedient  for  supply¬ 
ing  them,  in  due  time,  with  all  the  artificers, 
manufacturers,  and  merchants  whom  they 
wanted  at  home,  and  for  filling  up  in  the 
properest  and  most  advantageous  manner  that 
very  important  void  which  they  felt  there. 

The  continual  increase  of  the  surplus  prod¬ 
uce  of  their  land  would,  in  due  time,  create 
a  greater  capital  than  what  could  be  em¬ 
ployed  with  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  in 
the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  land;  and 
the  surplus  part  of  it  would  naturally  turn 
itself  to  the  employment  of  artificers  and 
manufacturers  at  home.  But  those  artificers 
and  manufacturers,  finding  at  home  both  the 
materials  of  their  work  and  the  fund  of  their 
subsistence,  might  immediately  even  with 
much  less  art  and  skill  be  able  to  work  as 
cheap  as  the  like  artificers  and  manufacturers 
of  such  mercantile  states  who  had  both  to 
bring  from  a  great  distance.  Even  though, 
from  want  of  art  and  skill,  they  might  not 
for  some  time  be  able  to  work  as  cheap,  yet, 
finding  a  market  at  home,  they  might  be  able 
to  sell  their  work  there  as  cheap  as  that  of 
the  artificers  and  manufacturers  of  such  mer¬ 
cantile  states,  which  could  not  be  brought  to 
that  market  but  from  so  great  a  distance;  and 
as  their  art  and  skill  improved,  they  would 
soon  be  able  to  sell  it  cheaper.  The  artificers 
and  manufacturers  of  such  mercantile  states, 
therefore,  would  immediately  be  rivalled  in 
the  market  of  those  landed  nations,  and  soon 
after  undersold  and  jostled  out  of  it  alto¬ 
gether.  The  cheapness  of  the  manufactures  of 
those  landed  nations,  in  consequence  of  the 
gradual  improvements  of  art  and  skill,  would, 
in  due  time,  extend  their  sale  beyond  the 
home  market,  and  carry  them  to  many  for¬ 
eign  markets,  from  which  they  would  in  the 
same  manner  gradually  jostle  out  many  of 
the  manufacturers  of  such  mercantile  nations. 

This  continual  increase  both  of  the  rude 
and  manufactured  produce  of  those  landed 
nations  would  in  due  time  create  a  greater 
capital  than  could,  with  the  ordinary  rate  of 
profit,  be  employed  either  in  agriculture  or 
in  manufactures.  The  surplus  of  this  capital 
would  naturally  turn  itself  to  foreign  trade, 
and  be  employed  in  exporting  to  foreign  coun¬ 
tries  such  parts  of  the  rude  and  manufactured 
produce  of  its  own  country  as  exceeded  the 
demand  of  the  home  market.  In  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of  the  produce  of  their  own  country,  the 
merchants  of  a  landed  nation  would  have  an 
advantage  of  the  same  kind  over  those  of 
mercantile  nations  which  its  artificers  and 
manufacturers  had  over  the  artificers  and 
manufacturers  of  such  nations;  the  advantage 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


of  finding  at  home  that  cargo  and  those  stores 
and  provisions  which  the  others  were  obliged 
to  seek  for  at  a  distance.  With  inferior  art 
and  skill  in  navigation,  therefore,  they  would 
be  able  to  sell  that  cargo  as  cheap  in  foreign 
markets  as  the  merchants  of  such  mercantile 
nations;  and  with  equal  art  and  skill  they 
would  be  able  to  sell  it  cheaper.  They  would 
soon,  therefore,  rival  those  mercantile  nations 
in  this  branch  of  foreign  trade,  and  in  due 
time  would  jostle  them  out  of  it  altogether. 

According  to  this  liberal  and  generous  sys¬ 
tem,  therefore,  the  most  advantageous  method 
in  which  a  landed  nation  can  raise  up  artif¬ 
icers,  manufacturers,  and  merchants  of  its 
own  is  to  grant  the  most  perfect  freedom  of 
trade  to  the  artificers,  manufacturers,  and 
merchants  of  all  other  nations.  It  thereby 
raises  the  value  of  the  surplus  produce  of  its 
own  land,  of  which  the  continual  increase 
gradually  establishes  a  fund,  which  in  due 
time  necessarily  raises  up  all  the  artificers, 
manufacturers,  and  merchants  whom  it  has 
occasion  for. 

When  a  landed  nation,  on  the  contrary, 
oppresses  either  by  high  duties  or  by  pro¬ 
hibitions  the  trade  of  foreign  nations,  it  nec¬ 
essarily  hurts  its  own  interest  in  two  different 
ways.  First,  by  raising  the  price  of  all  foreign 
goods  and  of  all  sorts  of  manufactures,  it 
necessarily  sinks  the  real  value  of  the  surplus 
produce  of  its  own  land,  with  which,  or,  what 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  with  the  price  of 
which  it  purchases  those  foreign  goods  and 
manufactures.  Secondly,  by  giving  a  sort  of 
monopoly  of  the  home  market  to  its  own 
merchants,  artificers,  and  manufacturers,  it 
raises  the  rate  of  mercantile  and  manufactur¬ 
ing  profit  in  proportion  to  that  of  agricultural 
profit,  and  consequently  either  draws  from 
agriculture  a  part  of  the  capital  which  had 
before  been  employed  in  it,  or  hinders  from 
going  to  it  a  part  of  what  would  otherwise 
have  gone  to  it.  This  policy,  therefore,  dis¬ 
courages  agriculture  in  two  different  ways; 
first,  by  sinking  the  real  value  of  its  produce, 
and  thereby  lowering  the  rate  of  its  profit; 
and,  secondly,  by  raising  the  rate  of  profit  in 
all  other  employments.  Agriculture  is  ren¬ 
dered  less  advantageous,  and  trade  and  man¬ 
ufactures  more  advantageous  than  they  other¬ 
wise  would  be;  and  every  man  is  tempted  by 
his  own  interest  to  turn,  as  much  as  he  can, 
both  his  capital  and  his  industry  from  the 
former  to  the  latter  employments. 

Though,  by  this  oppressive  policy,  a  landed 
nation  should  be  able  to  raise  up  artificers, 
manufacturers,  and  merchants  of  its  own 
somewhat  sooner  than  it  could  do  by  the  free¬ 
dom  of  trade — a  matter,  however,  which  is 
not  a  little  doubtful — yet  it  would  raise  them 
up,  if  one  may  say  so,  prematurely,  and  be¬ 


293 

fore  it  was  perfectly  ripe  for  them.  By  rais¬ 
ing  up  too  hastily  one  species  of  industry,  it 
would  depress  another  more  valuable  species 
of  industry.  By  raising  up  too  hastily  a  spe¬ 
cies  of  industry  which  only  replaces  the  stock 
which  employs  it,  together  with  the  ordinary 
profit,  it  would  depress  a  species  of  industry 
which,  over  and  above  replacing  that  stock 
with  its  profit,  affords  likewise  a  net  produce, 
a  free  rent  to  the  landlord.  It  would  depress 
productive  labour,  by  encouraging  too  hastily 
that  labour  which  is  altogether  barren  and 
unproductive. 

In  what  manner,  according  to  this  system, 
the  sum  total  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  is  distributed  among  the  three  classes 
above  mentioned,  and  in  what  manner  the 
labour  of  the  unproductive  class  does  no  more 
than  replace  the  value  of  its  own  consump¬ 
tion,  without  increasing  in  any  respect  the 
value  of  that  sum  total,  is  represented  by  Mr. 
Quesnai,  the  very  ingenious  and  profound  au¬ 
thor  of  this  system,  in  some  arithmetical 
formularies.  The  first  of  these  formularies, 
which  by  way  of  eminence  he  peculiarly  dis¬ 
tinguishes  by  the  name  of  the  Economical 
Table,  represents  the  manner  in  which  he 
supposes  the  distribution  takes  place  in  a 
state  of  the  most  perfect  liberty  and  therefore 
of  the  highest  prosperity — in  a  state  where 
the  annual  produce  is  such  as  to  afford  the 
greatest  possible  net  produce,  and  where  each 
class  enjoys  its  proper  share  of  the  whole  an¬ 
nual  produce.  Some  subsequent  formularies 
represent  the  manner  in  which  he  supposes 
this  distribution  is  made  in  different  states  of 
restraint  and  regulation;  in  which  either  the 
class  of  proprietors  or  the  barren  and  unpro¬ 
ductive  class  is  more  favoured  than  the  class 
of  cultivators,  and  in  which  either  the  one  or 
the  other  encroaches  more  or  less  upon  the 
share  which  ought  properly  to  belong  to  this 
productive  class.  Every  such  encroachment, 
every  violation  of  that  natural  distribution, 
which  the  most  perfect  liberty  would  estab¬ 
lish,  must,  according  to  this  system,  neces¬ 
sarily  degrade  more  or  less,  from  one  year  to 
another,  the  value  and  sum  total  of  the  an¬ 
nual  produce,  and  must  necessarily  occasion 
a  gradual  declension  in  the  real  wealth  and 
revenue  of  the  society;  a  declension  of  which 
the  progress  must  be  quicker  or  slower,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  degree  of  this  encroachment, 
according  as  that  natural  distribution  which 
the  most  perfect  liberty  would  establish  is 
more  or  less  violated.  Those  subsequent  for¬ 
mularies  represent  the  different  degrees  of  de¬ 
clension  which,  according  to  this  system, 
correspond  to  the  different  degrees  in  which 
this  natural  distribution  is  violated. 

Some  speculative  physicians  seem  to  have 
imagined  that  the  health  of  the  human  body 


294 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


could  be  preserved  only  by  a  certain  precise 
regimen  of  diet  and  exercise,  of  which  every, 
the  smallest,  violation  necessarily  occasioned 
some  degree  of  disease  or  disorder  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  degree  of  the  violation.  Experi¬ 
ence,  however,  would  seem  to  show  that  the 
human  body  frequently  preserves,  to  all  ap¬ 
pearances  at  least,  the  most  perfect  state  of 
health  under  a  vast  variety  of  different  regi¬ 
mens;  even  under  some  which  are  generally 
believed  to  be  very  far  from  being  perfectly 
wholesome.  But  the  healthful  state  of  the  hu¬ 
man  body,  it  would  seem,  contains  in  itself 
some  unknown  principle  of  preservation,  capa¬ 
ble  either  of  preventing  or  of  correcting,  in 
many  respects,  the  bad  effects  even  of  a  very 
faulty  regimen.  Mr.  Quesnai,  who  was  him¬ 
self  a  physician,  and  a  very  speculative  phy¬ 
sician,  seems  to  have  entertained  a  notion  of 
the  same  kind  concerning  the  political  body, 
and  to  have  imagined  that  it  would  thrive 
and  prosper  only  under  a  certain  precise  regi¬ 
men,  the  exact  regimen  of  perfect  liberty  and 
perfect  justice.  He  seems  not  to  have  consid¬ 
ered  that,  in  the  political  body,  the  natural 
effort  which  every  man  is  continually  making 
to  better  his  own  condition  is  a  principle  of 
preservation  capable  of  preventing  and  cor¬ 
recting,  in  many  respects,  the  bad  effects  of 
a  political  economy,  in  some  degree,  both  par¬ 
tial  and  oppressive.  Such  a  political  economy, 
though  it  no  doubt  retards  more  or  less,  is 
not  always  capable  of  stopping  altogether  the 
natural  progress  of  a  nation  towards  wealth 
and  prosperity,  and  still  less  of  making  it  go 
backwards.  If  a  nation  could  not  prosper  with¬ 
out  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  liberty  and  per¬ 
fect  justice,  there  is  not  in  the  world  a  nation 
which  could  ever  have  prospered.  In  the  po¬ 
litical  body,  however,  the  wisdom  of  nature 
has  fortunately  made  ample  provision  for 
remedying  many  of  the  bad  effects  of  the 
folly  and  injustice  of  man,  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  it  has  done  in  the  natural  body  for 
remedying  those  of  his  sloth  and  intemper¬ 
ance. 

The  capital  error  of  this  system,  however, 
seems  to  lie  in  its  representing  the  class  of 
artificers,  manufacturers,  and  merchants  as 
altogether  barren  and  unproductive.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  observations  may  serve  to  show  the 
impropriety  of  this  representation. 

First,  this  class,  it  is  acknowledged,  repro¬ 
duces  annually  the  value  of  its  own  annual 
consumption,  and  continues,  at  least,  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  stock  or  capital  which  main¬ 
tains  and  employs  it.  But  upon  this  account 
alone  the  denomination  of  barren  or  unpro¬ 
ductive  should  seem  to  be  very  improperly 
applied  to  it.  We  should  not  call  a  marriage 
barren  or  unproductive  though  it  produced 
only  a  son  and  a  daughter,  to  replace  the 


father  and  mother,  and  though  it  did  not  in¬ 
crease  the  number  of  the  human  species,  but 
only  continued  it  as  it  was  before.  Farmers 
and  country  labourers,  indeed,  over  and  above 
the  stock  which  maintains  and  employs  them, 
reproduce  annually  a  net  produce,  a  free  rent 
to  the  landlord.  As  a  marriage  which  affords 
three  children  is  certainly  more  productive 
than  one  which  affords  only  two;  so  the  la¬ 
bour  of  farmers  and  country  labourers  is 
certainly  more  productive  than  that  of  mer¬ 
chants,  artificers,  and  manufacturers.  The  su¬ 
perior  produce  of  the  one  class,  however,  does 
not  render  the  other  barren  or  unproductive. 

Secondly,  it  seems,  upon  this  account,  alto¬ 
gether  improper  to  consider  artificers,  manu¬ 
facturers,  and  merchants  in  the  same  light  as 
menial  servants.  The  labour  of  menial  serv¬ 
ants  does  not  continue  the  existence  of  the 
fund  which  maintains  and  employs  them. 
Their  maintenance  and  employment  is  alto¬ 
gether  at  the  expense  of  their  masters,  and 
the  work  which  they  perform  is  not  of  a  na¬ 
ture  to  repay  that  expense.  That  work  con¬ 
sists  in  services  which  perish  generally  in  the 
very  instant  of  their  performance,  and  does 
not  fix  or  realize  itself  in  any  vendible  com¬ 
modity  which  can  replace  the  value  of  their 
wages  and  maintenance.  The  labour,  on  the 
contrary,  of  artificers,  manufacturers,  and 
merchants  naturally  does  fix  and  realize  itself 
in  some  such  vendible  commodity.  It  is  upon 
this  account  that,  in  the  chapter  in  which  I 
treat  of  productive  and  unproductive  labour, 
I  have  classed  artificers,  manufacturers,  and 
merchants  among  the  productive  labourers, 
and  menial  servants  among  the  barren  or  un¬ 
productive. 

Thirdly,  it  seems  upon  every  supposition 
improper  to  say  that  the  labour  of  artificers, 
manufacturers,  and  merchants  does  not  in¬ 
crease  the  real  revenue  of  the  society.  Though 
we  should  suppose,  for  example,  as  it  seems 
to  be  supposed  in  this  system,  that  the  value 
of  the  daily,  monthly,  and  yearly  consump¬ 
tion  of  this  class  was  exactly  equal  to  that  of 
its  daily,  monthly,  and  yearly  production,  yet 
it  would  not  from  thence  follow  that  its  la¬ 
bour  added  nothing  to  the  real  revenue,  to 
the  real  value  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  society.  An  artificer, 
for  example,  who,  in  the  first  six  months  after 
harvest,  executes  ten  pounds’  wrorth  of  work, 
though  he  should  in  the  same  time  consume 
ten  pounds’  worth  of  corn  and  other  neces¬ 
saries,  yet  really  adds  the  value  of  ten  pounds 
to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  society.  While  he  has  been  consuming 
a  half-yearly  revenue  of  ten  pounds’  worth  of 
corn  and  other  necessaries,  he  has  produced 
an  equal  value  of  work  capable  of  purchasing, 
either  to  himself  or  some  other  person,  an 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


equal  half-yearly  revenue.  The  value,  there¬ 
fore,  of  what  has  been  consumed  and  pro¬ 
duced  during  these  six  months  is  equal,  not 
to  ten,  but  to  twenty  pounds.  It  is  possible, 
indeed,  that  no  more  than  ten  pounds’  worth 
of  this  value  may  ever  have  existed  at  any 
one  moment  of  time.  But  if  the  ten  pounds’ 
worth  of  corn  and  other  necessaries,  which 
were  consumed  by  the  artificer,  had  been  con¬ 
sumed  by  a  soldier  or  by  a  menial  servant, 
the  value  of  that  part  of  the  annual  produce 
which  existed  at  the  end  of  the  six  months 
would  have  been  ten  pounds  less  than  it  ac¬ 
tually  is  in  consequence  of  the  labour  of  the 
artificer.  Though  the  value  of  what  the  artif¬ 
icer  produces,  therefore,  should  not  at  any 
one  moment  of  time  be  supposed  greater  than 
the  value  he  consumes,  yet  at  every  moment 
of  time  the  actually  existing  value  of  goods  in 
the  market  is,  in  consequence  of  what  he  pro¬ 
duces,  greater  than  it  otherwise  would  be. 

When  the  patrons  of  this  system  assert 
that  the  consumption  of  artificers,  manufac¬ 
turers,  and  merchants  is  equal  to  the  value 
of  what  they  produce,  they  probably  mean 
no  more  than  that  their  revenue,  or  the  fund 
destined  for  their  consumption,  is  equal  to 
it.  But  if  they  had  expressed  themselves  more 
accurately,  and  only  asserted  that  the  reve¬ 
nue  of  this  class  was  equal  to  the  value  of 
what  they  produced,  it  might  readily  have 
occurred  to  the  reader  that  what  would  natu¬ 
rally  be  saved  out  of  this  revenue  must  neces¬ 
sarily  increase  more  or  less  the  real  wealth  of 
the  society.  In  order,  therefore,  to  make  out 
something  like  an  argument,  it  was  necessary 
that  they  should  express  themselves  as  they 
have  done;  and  this  argument,  even  suppos¬ 
ing  things  actually  were  as  it  seems  to  pre¬ 
sume  them  to  be,  turns  out  to  be  a  very 
inconclusive  one. 

Fourthly,  farmers  and  country  labourers 
can  no  more  augment,  without  parsimony, 
the  real  revenue,  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  their  society,  than  artif¬ 
icers,  manufacturers,  and  merchants.  The  an¬ 
nual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  any 
society  can  be  augmented  only  in  two  ways; 
either,  first,  by  some  improvement  in  the  pro¬ 
ductive  powers  of  the  useful  labour  actually 
maintained  within  it;  or,  secondly,  by  some 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  that  labour. 

The  improvement  in  the  productive  powers 
of  useful  labour  depend,  first,  upon  the  im¬ 
provement  in  the  ability  of  the  workman; 
and,  secondly,  upon  that  of  the  machinery 
with  which  he  works.  But  the  labour  of  artif¬ 
icers  and  manufacturers,  as  it  is  capable  of 
being  more  subdivided,  and  the  labour  of 
each  workman  reduced  to  a  greater  simplicity 
of  operation  than  that  of  farmers  and  coun¬ 
try  labourers,  so  it  is  likewise  capable  of  both 


*295 

these  sorts  of  improvements  in  a  much  higher 
degree.1  In  this  respect,  therefore,  the  class  of 
cultivators  can  have  no  sort  of  advantage 
over  that  of  artificers  and  manufacturers. 

The  increase  in  the  quantity  of  useful  la¬ 
bour  actually  employed  within  any  society 
must  depend  altogether  upon  the  increase  of 
the  capital  which  employs  it;  and  the  increase 
of  that  capital  again  must  be  exactly  equal 
to  the  amount  of  the  savings  from  the  reve¬ 
nue,  either  of  the  particular  persons  who 
manage  and  direct  the  employment  of  that 
capital,  or  of  some  other  persons  who  lend  it 
to  them.  If  merchants,  artificers,  and  manu¬ 
facturers  are,  as  this  system  seems  to  suppose, 
naturally  more  inclined  to  parsimony  and 
saving  than  proprietors  and  cultivators,  they 
are,  so  far,  more  likely  to  augment  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  useful  labour  employed  within  their 
society,  and  consequently  to  increase  its  real 
revenue,  the  annual  produce  of  its  land  and 
labour. 

Fifthly  and  lastly,  though  the  revenue  of 
the  inhabitants  of  every  country  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  consist  altogether,  as  this  system 
seems  to  suppose,  in  the  quantity  of  subsist¬ 
ence  which  their  industry  could  procure  to 
them;  yet,  even  upon  this  supposition,  the 
revenue  of  a  trading  and  manufacturing  coun¬ 
try  must,  other  things  being  equal,  always  be 
much  greater  than  that  of  one  without  trade 
or  manufactures.  By  means  of  trade  and  man¬ 
ufactures,  a  greater  quantity  of  subsistence 
can  be  annually  imported  into  a  particular 
country  than  what  its  own  lands,  in  the  ac¬ 
tual  state  of  their  cultivation,  could  afford. 
The  inhabitants  of  a  town,  though  they  fre¬ 
quently  possess  no  lands  of  their  own,  yet 
draw  to  themselves  by  their  industry  such  a 
quantity  of  the  rude  produce  of  the  lands  of 
other  people  as  supplies  them,  not  only  with 
the  materials  of  their  work,  but  with  the 
fund  of  their  subsistence.  What  a  town  always 
is  with  regard  to  the  country  in  its  neighbour¬ 
hood,  one  independent  state  or  country  may 
frequently  be  with  regard  to  other  independ¬ 
ent  states  or  countries.  It  is  thus  that  Hol¬ 
land  draws  a  great  part  of  its  subsistence  from 
other  countries;  live  cattle  from  Holstein  and 
Jutland,  and  corn  from  almost  all  the  differ¬ 
ent  countries  of  Europe.  A  small  quantity 
of  manufactured  produce  purchases  a  great 
quantity  of  rude  produce.  A  trading  and  man¬ 
ufacturing  country,  therefore,  naturally  pur¬ 
chases  with  a  small  part  of  its  manufactured 
produce  a  great  part  of  the  rude  produce  of 
other  countries;  while,  on  the  contrary,  a 
country  without  trade  and  manufactures  is 
generally  obliged  to  purchase,  at  the  expense 
of  a  great  part  of  its  rude  produce,  a  very 
small  part  of  the  manufactured  produce  of 

1  See  Bk.  i,  ch.  i. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


296 

other  countries.  The  one  exports  what  can 
subsist  and  accommodate  but  a  very  few, 
and  imports  the  subsistence  and  accommoda¬ 
tion  of  a  great  number.  The  other  exports  the 
accommodation  and  subsistence  of  a  great 
number,  and  imports  that  of  a  very  few  only. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  one  must  always  en¬ 
joy  a  much  greater  quantity  of  subsistence 
than  what  their  own  lands,  in  the  actual  state 
of  their  cultivation,  could  afford.  The  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  other  must  always  enjoy  a  much 
smaller  quantity. 

This  system,  however,  with  all  its  imper¬ 
fections  is,  perhaps,  the  nearest  approxima¬ 
tion  to  the  truth  that  has  yet  been  published 
upon  the  subject  of  political  economy,  and  is 
upon  that  account  well  worth  the  considera¬ 
tion  of  every  man  who  wishes  to  examine 
with  attention  the  principles  of  that  very  im¬ 
portant  science.  Though  in  representing  the 
labour  which  is  employed  upon  land  as  the 
only  productive  labour,  the  notions  which  it 
inculcates  are  perhaps  too  narrow  and  con¬ 
fined;  yet  in  representing  the  wealth  of  na¬ 
tions  as  consisting,  not  in  the  unconsumable 
riches  of  money,  but  in  the  consumable  goods 
annually  reproduced  by  the  labour  of  the  so¬ 
ciety,  and  in  representing  perfect  liberty  as 
the  only  effectual  expedient  for  rendering  this 
annual  reproduction  the  greatest  possible,  its 
doctrine  seems  to  be  in  every  respect  as  just 
as  it  is  generous  and  liberal.  Its  followers  are 
very  numerous;  and  as  men  are  fond  of  para¬ 
doxes,  and  of  appearing  to  understand  what 
surpasses  the  comprehension  of  ordinary  peo¬ 
ple,  the  paradox  which  it  maintains,  concern¬ 
ing  the  unproductive  nature  of  manufactur¬ 
ing  labour,  has  not  perhaps  contributed  a 
little  to  increase  the  number  of  its  admirers. 
They  have  for  some  years  past  made  a  pretty 
considerable  sect,  distinguished  in  the  French 
republic  of  letters  by  the  name  of  The  Econ¬ 
omists.  Their  works  have  certainly  been  of 
some  service  to  their  country;  not  only  by 
bringing  into  general  discussion  many  sub¬ 
jects  which  had  never  been  well  examined 
before,  but  by  influencing  in  some  measure 
the  public  administration  in  favour  of  agri¬ 
culture.  It  has  been  in  consequence  of  their 
representations,  accordingly,  that  the  agri¬ 
culture  of  France  has  been  delivered  from 
several  of  the  oppressions  which  it  before 
laboured  under.  The  term  during  which  such 
a  lease  can  be  granted,  as  will  be  valid 
against  every  future  purchaser  or  proprietor 
of  the  land,  has  been  prolonged  from  nine  to 
twenty-seven  years.  The  ancient  provincial 
restraints  upon  the  transportation  of  corn 
from  one  province  of  the  kingdom  to  another 
have  been  entirely  taken  away,  and  the 
liberty  of  exporting  it  to  all  foreign  countries 
has  been  established  as  the  common  law  of 


the  kingdom  in  all  ordinary  cases.  This  sect, 
in  their  works,  which  are  very  numerous,  and 
which  treat  not  only  of  what  is  properly 
called  Political  Economy,  or  of  the  nature 
and  causes  of  the  wealth  of  nations,  but  of 
every  other  branch  of  the  system  of  civil  gov¬ 
ernment,  all  follow  implicitly  and  without 
any  sensible  variation,  the  doctrine  of  Mr. 
Quesnai.  There  is  upon  this  account  little 
variety  in  the  greater  part  of  their  works. 
The  most  distinct  and  best  connected  account 
of  this  doctrine  is  to  be  found  in  a  little  book 
written  by  Mr.  Mercier  de  la  Riviere,  some 
time  intendant  of  Martinico,  entitled,  The 
Natural  and  Essential  Order  of  Political  So¬ 
cieties.  The  admiration  of  this  whole  sect  for 
their  master,  who  was  himself  a  man  of  the 
greatest  modesty  and  simplicity,  is  not  in¬ 
ferior  to  that  of  any  of  the  ancient  philoso¬ 
phers  for  the  founders  of  their  respective 
systems.  “There  have  been,  since  the  world 
began,”  says  a  very  diligent  and  respectable 
author,  the  Marquis  de  Mirabeau,  “three 
great  inventions  which  have  principally 
given  stability  to  political  societies,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  many  other  inventions  which 
have  enriched  and  adorned  them.  The  first 
is  the  invention  of  writing,  which  alone  gives 
human  nature  the  power  of  transmitting, 
without  alteration,  its  laws,  its  contracts,  its 
annals,  and  its  discoveries.  The  second  is  the 
invention  of  money,  which  binds  together  all 
the  relations  between  civilised  societies.  The 
third  is  the  Economical  Table,  the  result  of 
the  other  two,  which  completes  them  both  by 
perfecting  their  object;  the  great  discovery 
of  our  age,  but  of  which  our  posterity  will 
reap  the  benefit.” 

As  the  political  economy  of  the  nations  of 
modern  Europe  has  been  more  favourable  to 
manufactures  and  foreign  trade,  the  industry 
of  the  towns,  than  to  agriculture,  the  indus¬ 
try  of  the  country;  so  that  of  other  nations 
has  followed  a  different  plan,  and  has  been 
more  favourable  to  agriculture  than  to  manu¬ 
factures  and  foreign  trade. 

The  policy  of  China  favours  agriculture 
more  than  all  other  employments.  In  China 
the  condition  of  a  labourer  is  said  to  be  as 
much  superior  to  that  of  an  artificer  as  in 
most  parts  of  Europe  that  of  an  artificer  is  to 
that  of  a  labourer.  In  China,  the  great  ambi¬ 
tion  of  every  man  is  to  get  possession  of  some 
little  bit  of  land,  either  in  property  or  in 
lease;  and  leases  are  there  said  to  be  granted 
upon  very  moderate  terms,  and  to  be  suffi¬ 
ciently  secured  to  the  lessees.  The  Chinese 
have  little  respect  for  foreign  trade.  Your 
beggarly  commerce!  was  the  language  in 
which  the  Mandarins  of  Pekin  used  to  talk  to 
Mr.  de  Lange,  the  Russian  envoy,  concern- 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


ing  it.1  Except  with  Japan,  the  Chinese  carry 
on,  themselves,  and  in  their  own  bottoms, 
little  or  no  foreign  trade;  and  it  is  only  into 
one  or  two  ports  of  their  kingdom  that  they 
even  admit  the  ships  of  foreign  nations.  For¬ 
eign  trade  therefore  is,  in  China,  every  way 
confined  within  a  much  narrower  circle  than 
that  to  which  it  would  naturally  extend  itself, 
if  more  freedom  was  allowed  to  it,  either  in 
their  own  ships,  or  in  those  of  foreign  nations. 

Manufactures,  as  in  a  small  bulk  they  fre¬ 
quently  contain  a  great  value,  and  can  upon 
that  account  be  transported  at  less  expense 
from  one  country  to  another  than  most  parts 
of  rude  produce,  are,  in  almost  all  countries, 
the  principal  support  of  foreign  trade.  In 
countries,  besides,  less  extensive  and  less 
favourably  circumstanced  for  inferior  com¬ 
merce  than  China,  they  generally  require 
the  support  of  foreign  trade.  Without  an  ex¬ 
tensive  foreign  market  they  could  not  well 
flourish,  either  in  countries  so  moderately 
extensive  as  to  afford  but  a  narrow  home 
market  or  in  countries  where  the  communica¬ 
tion  between  one  province  and  another  was 
so  difficult  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  the 
goods  of  any  particular  place  to  enjoy  the 
whole  of  that  home  market  which  the  country 
could  afford.  The  perfection  of  manufacturing 
industry,  it  must  be  remembered,  depends 
altogether  upon  the  division  of  labour;  and 
the  degree  to  which  the  division  of  labour 
can  be  introduced  into  any  manufacture  is 
necessarily  regulated,  it  has  already  been 
shown,  by  the  extent  of  the  market.  But  the 
great  extent  of  the  empire  of  China,  the  vast 
multitude  of  its  inhabitants,  the  variety  of 
climate,  and  consequently  of  productions  in 
its  different  provinces,  and  the  easy  com¬ 
munication  by  means  of  water  carriage  be¬ 
tween  the  greater  part  of  them,  render  the 
home  market  of  that  country  of  so  great  ex¬ 
tent  as  to  be  alone  sufficient  to  support  very 
great  manufactures,  and  to  admit  of  very 
considerable  subdivisions  of  labour.  The 
home  market  of  China  is,  perhaps,  in  extent, 
not  much  inferior  to  the  market  of  all  the 
different  countries  of  Europe  put  together. 
A  more  extensive  foreign  trade,  however, 
which  to  this  great  home  market  added  the 
foreign  market  of  all  the  rest  of  the  world-— 
especially  if  any  considerable  part  of  this 
trade  was  carried  on  in  Chinese  ships — could 
scarce  fail  to  increase  very  much  the  manu¬ 
factures  of  China,  and  to  improve  very  much 
the  productive  powers  of  its  manufacturing 
industry.  By  a  more  extensive  navigation, 
the  Chinese  would  naturally  learn  the  art  of 
using  and  constructing  themselves  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  machines  made  use  of  in  other  coun- 
1  See  the  journal  of  Mr.  de  Lange  in  Bell’s 
Travels,  vol.  ii,  pp.  258,  276,  and  293. 


297 

tries,  as  well  as  the  other  improvements  of 
art  and  industry  which  are  practised  in  all 
the  different  parts  of  the  world.  Upon  their 
present  plan  they  have  little  opportunity  ex¬ 
cept  that  of  the  Japanese. 

The  policy  of  ancient  Egypt  too,  and  that 
of  the  Gentoo  government  of  Indostan,  seem 
to  have  favoured  agriculture  more  than  all 
other  employments. 

Both  in  ancient  Egypt  and  Indostan  the 
whole  body  of  the  people  was  divided  into 
different  castes  or  tribes,  each  of  which  was 
confined,  from  father  to  son,  to  a  particular 
employment  or  class  of  employments.  The 
son  of  a  priest  was  necessarily  a  priest;  the 
son  of  a  soldier,  a  soldier;  the  son  of  a  la¬ 
bourer,  a  labourer;  the  son  of  a  weaver,  a 
weaver;  the  son  of  a  tailor,  a  tailor,  etc.  In 
both  countries,  the  caste  of  the  priests  held 
the  highest  rank,  and  that  of  the  soldiers  the 
next;  and  in  both  countries,  the  caste  of  the 
farmers  and  labourers  was  superior  to  the 
castes  of  merchants  and  manufacturers. 

The  government  of  both  countries  was  par¬ 
ticularly  attentive  to  the  interest  of  agricul¬ 
ture.  The  works  constructed  by  the  ancient 
sovereigns  of  Egypt  for  the  proper  distribu¬ 
tion  of  the  waters  of  the  Nile  were  famous  in 
antiquity;  and  the  ruined  remains  of  some 
of  them  are  still  the  admiration  of  travellers. 
Those  of  the  same  kind  which  were  con¬ 
structed  by  the  ancient  sovereigns  of  Indo¬ 
stan  for  the  proper  distribution  of  the  waters 
of  the  Ganges  as  well  as  of  many  other 
rivers,  though  they  have  been  less  celebrated, 
seem  to  have  been  equally  great.  Both  coun¬ 
tries,  accordingly,  though  subject  occasion¬ 
ally  to  dearths,  have  been  famous  for  their 
great  fertility.  Though  both  were  extremely 
populous,  yet,  in  years  of  moderate  plenty, 
they  were  both  able  to  export  great  quan¬ 
tities  of  grain  to  their  neighbours. 

The  ancient  Egyptians  had  a  superstitious 
aversion  to  the  sea;  and  as  the  Gentoo  re¬ 
ligion  does  not  permit  its  followers  to  light 
a  fire,  nor  consequently  to  dress  any  victuals 
upon  the  water,  it  in  effect  prohibits  them 
from  all  distant  sea  voyages.  Both  the  Egyp¬ 
tians  and  Indians  must  have  depended  almost 
altogether  upon  the  navigation  of  other  na¬ 
tions  for  the  exportation  of  their  surplus 
produce;  and  this  dependency,  as  it  must 
have  confined  the  market,  so  it  must  have 
discouraged  the  increase  of  this  surplus  pro¬ 
duce.  It  must  have  discouraged,  too,  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  manufactured  produce  more 
than  that  of  the  rude  produce.  Manufactures 
require  a  much  more  extensive  market  than 
the  most  important  parts  of  the  rude  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land.  A  single  shoemaker  will  make 
more  than  three  hundred  pairs  of  shoes  in  the 
year;  and  his  own  family  will  not,  perhaps, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


298 

wear  out  six  pairs.  Unless  therefore  he  has  the 
custom  of  at  least  fifty  such  families  as  his 
own,  he  cannot  dispose  of  the  whole  produce 
of  his  own  labour.  The  most  numerous  class 
of  artificers  will  seldom,  in  a  large  country, 
make  more  than  one  in  fifty  or  one  in  a  hun¬ 
dred  of  the  whole  number  of  families  con¬ 
tained  in  it.  But  in  such  large  countries  as 
France  and  England,  the  number  of  people 
employed  in  agriculture  has  by  some  authors 
been  computed  at  a  half,  by  others  at  a  third, 
and  by  no  author  that  I  know  of,  at  less  than 
a  fifth  of  the  whole  inhabitants  of  the  coun¬ 
try.  But  as  the  produce  of  the  agriculture  of 
both  France  and  England  is,  the  far  greater 
part  of  it,  consumed  at  home,  each  person 
employed  in  it  must,  according  to  these  com¬ 
putations,  require  little  more  than  the  cus¬ 
tom  of  one,  two,  or  at  most,  of  four  such 
families  as  his  own  in  order  to  dispose  of  the 
whole  produce  of  his  own  labour.  Agriculture, 
therefore,  can  support  itself  under  the  dis¬ 
couragement  of  a  confined  market  much  bet¬ 
ter  than  manufactures.  In  both  ancient  Egypt 
and  Indostan,  indeed,  the  confinement  of 
the  foreign  market  was  in  some  measure 
compensated  by  the  conveniency  of  many  in¬ 
land  navigations,  which  opened,  in  the  most 
advantageous  manner,  the  whole  extent  of 
the  home  market  to  every  part  of  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  every  different  district  of  those  coun¬ 
tries.  The  great  extent  of  Indostan,  too, 
rendered  the  home  market  of  that  country 
very  great,  and  sufficient  to  support  a  great 
variety  of  manufactures.  But  the  small  ex¬ 
tent  of  ancient  Egypt,  which  was  never  equal 
to  England,  must  at  all  times  have  rendered 
the  home  market  of  that  country  too  narrow 
for  supporting  any  great  variety  of  manufac¬ 
tures.  Bengal,  accordingly,  the  province  of 
Indostan,  which  commonly  exports  the  great¬ 
est  quantity  of  rice,  has  always  been  more 
remarkable  for  the  exportation  of  a  great 
variety  of  manufactures  than  for  that  of  its 
grain.  Ancient  Egypt,  on  the  contrary,  though 
it  exported  some  manufactures,  fine  linen  in 
particular,  as  well  as  some  other  goods,  was 
always  most  distinguished  for  its  great  expor¬ 
tation  of  grain.  It  was  long  the  granary  of  the 
Roman  empire. 

The  sovereigns  of  China,  of  ancient  Egypt, 
and  of  the  different  kingdoms  into  which 
Indostan  has  at  different  times  been  divided, 
have  always  derived  the  whole,  or  by  far  the 
most  considerable  part,  of  their  revenue  from 
some  sort  of  land  tax  or  land  rent.  This  land 
tax  or  land  rent,  like  the  tithe  in  Europe, 
consisted  in  a  certain  proportion,  a  fifth,  it  is 
said,  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  which  was 
either  delivered  in  kind,  or  paid  in  money, 
according  to  a  certain  valuation,  and  which 
therefore  varied  from  year  to  year  accord¬ 


ing  to  all  the  variations  of  the  produce.  It  was 
natural  therefore  that  the  sovereigns  of  those 
countries  should  be  particularly  attentive  to 
the  interests  of  agriculture,  upon  the  pros¬ 
perity  or  declension  of  which  immediately 
depended  the  yearly  increase  or  diminution 
of  their  own  revenue. 

The  policy  of  the  ancient  republics  of 
Greece,  and  that  of  Rome,  though  it  honoured 
agriculture  more  than  manufactures  or  foreign 
trade,  yet  seems  rather  to  have  discouraged 
the  latter  employments  than  to  have  given 
any  direct  or  intentional  encouragement  to 
the  former.  In  several  of  the  ancient  states 
of  Greece,  foreign  trade  was  prohibited  al¬ 
together;  and  in  several  others  the  employ¬ 
ments  of  artificers  and  manufacturers  were 
considered  as  hurtful  to  the  strength  and 
agility  of  the  human  body,  as  rendering  it 
incapable  of  those  habits  which  their  military 
and  gymnastic  exercises  endeavoured  to  form 
in  it,  and  as  thereby  disqualifying  it  more 
or  less  for  undergoing  the  fatigues  and  en¬ 
countering  the  dangers  of  war.  Such  occupa¬ 
tions  were  considered  as  fit  only  for  slaves, 
and  the  free  citizens  of  the  state  were  pro¬ 
hibited  from  exercising  them.  Even  in  those 
states  where  no  such  prohibition  took  place, 
as  in  Rome  and  Athens,  the  great  body  of 
the  people  were  in  effect  excluded  from  all  the 
trades  which  are  now  commonly  exercised  by 
the  lower  sort  of  the  inhabitants  of  towns. 
Such  trades  were,  at  Athens  and  Rome,  all 
occupied  by  the  slaves  of  the  rich,  who  exer¬ 
cised  them  for  the  benefit  of  their  masters, 
whose  wealth,  power,  and  protection  made  it 
almost  impossible  for  a  poor  freeman  to  find 
a  market  for  his  work,  when  it  came  into 
competition  with  that  of  the  slaves  of  the 
rich.  Slaves,  however,  are  very  seldom  in¬ 
ventive;  and  all  the  most  important  improve¬ 
ments,  either  in  machinery,  or  in  the  arrange¬ 
ment  and  distribution  of  work  which  facilitate 
and  abridge  labour,  have  been  the  discover¬ 
ies  of  freemen.  Should  a  slave  propose  any 
improvement  of  this  kind,  his  master  would 
be  very  apt  to  consider  the  proposal  as  the 
suggestion  of  laziness,  and  a  desire  to  save 
his  own  labour  at  the  master’s  expense.  The 
poor  slave,  instead  of  reward,  would  probably 
meet  with  much  abuse,  perhaps  with  some 
punishment.  In  the  manufactures  carried  on 
by  slaves,  therefore,  more  labour  must  gen¬ 
erally  have  been  employed  to  execute  the 
same  quantity  of  work  than  in  those  carried 
on  by  freemen.  The  work  of  the  former  must, 
upon  that  account,  generally  have  been  dearer 
than  that  of  the  latter.  The  Hungarian  mines, 
it  is  remarked  by  Mr.  Montesquieu,  though 
not  richer,  have  always  been  wrought  with 
less  expense,  and  therefore  with  more  profit, 
than  the  Turkish  mines  in  their  neighbour- 


299 


The  Agricultural  Systems 


hood.  The  Turkish  mines  are  wrought  by 
slaves;  and  the  arms  of  those  slaves  are  the 
only  machines  which  the  Turks  have  ever 
thought  of  employing.  The  Hungarian  mines 
are  wrought  by  freemen,  who  employ  a  great 
deal  of  machinery,  by  which  they  facilitate 
and  abridge  their  own  labour.  From  the  very 
little  that  is  known  about  the  price  of  manu¬ 
factures  in  the  times  of  the  Greeks  and  Ro¬ 
mans,  it  would  appear  that  those  of  the 
finer  sort  were  excessively  dear.  Silk  sold  for 
its  weight  in  gold.  It  was  not,  indeed,  in  those 
times  a  European  manufacture;  and  as  it  was 
all  brought  from  the  East  Indies,  the  distance 
of  the  carriage  may  in  some  measure  account 
for  the  greatness  of  price.  The  price,  however, 
which  a  lady,  it  is  said,  would  sometimes  pay 
for  a  piece  of  very  fine  linen,  seems  to  have 
been  equally  extravagant;  and  as  linen  was 
always  either  a  European,  or  at  farthest,  an 
Egyptian  manufacture,  this  high  price  can 
be  accounted  for  only  by  the  great  expense  of 
the  labour  which  must  have  been  employed 
about  it,  and  the  expense  of  this  labour  again 
could  arise  from  nothing  but  the  awkward¬ 
ness  of  the  machinery  which  it  made  use  of. 
The  price  of  fine  woollens  too,  though  not 
quite  so  extravagant,  seems  however  to  have 
been  much  above  that  of  the  present  times. 
Some  cloths,  we  are  told  by  Pliny,  dyed  in  a 
particular  manner,  cost  a  hundred  denarii,  or 
three  pounds  six  shillings  and  eightpence  the 
pound  weight.1  Others  dyed  in  another  man¬ 
ner  cost  a  thousand  denarii  the  pound  weight, 
or  thirty-three  pounds  six  shillings  and  eight- 
pence.  The  Roman  pound,  it  must  be  remem¬ 
bered,  contained  only  twelve  of  our  avoir¬ 
dupois  ounces.  This  high  price,  indeed,  seems 
to  have  been  principally  owing  to  the  dye. 
But  had  not  the  cloths  themselves  been  much 
dearer  than  any  which  are  made  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  times,  so  very  expensive  a  dye  would  not 
probably  have  been  bestowed  upon  them.  The 
disproportion  would  have  been  too  great  be¬ 
tween  the  value  of  the  accessory  and  that  of 
the  principal.  The  price  mentioned  by  the 
same2  author  of  some  Triclinaria,  a  sort  of 
woollen  pillows  or  cushions  made  use  of  to 
lean  upon  as  they  reclined  upon  their  couches 
at  table,  passes  all  credibility;  some  of  them 
being  said  to  have  cost  more  than  thirty 
thousand,  others  more  than  three  hundred 
thousand  pounds.  This  high  price,  too,  is  not 
said  to  have  arisen  from  the  dye.  In  the  dress 
of  the  people  of  fashion  of  both  sexes  there 
seems  to  have  been  much  less  variety,  it  is 
observed  by  Doctor  Arbuthnot,  in  ancient 
than  in  modern  times;  and  the  very  little 
variety  which  we  find  in  that  of  the  ancient 
statues  confirms  his  observation.  He  infers 
from  this  that  their  dress  must  upon  the 
Tliny,  ix,  39.  "Pliny,  viii,  48. 


whole  have  been  cheaper  than  ours;  but  the 
conclusion  does  not  seem  to  follow.  When  the 
expense  of  fashionable  dress  is  very  great, 
the  variety  must  be  very  small.  But  when,  by 
the  improvements  in  the  productive  powers 
of  manufacturing  art  and  industry,  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  any  one  dress  comes  to  be  very 
moderate,  the  variety  will  naturally  be  very 
great.  The  rich,  not  being  able  to  distinguish 
themselves  by  the  expense  of  any  one  dress, 
will  naturally  endeavour  to  do  so  by  the 
multitude  and  variety  of  their  dresses. 

The  greatest  and  most  important  branch 
of  the  commerce  of  every  nation,  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  observed,  is  that  which  is  carried 
on  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and 
those  of  the  country.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
town  draw  from  the  country  the  rude  prod¬ 
uce  which  constitutes  both  the  materials  of 
their  work  and  the  fund  of  their  subsistence; 
and  they  pay  for  this  rude  produce  by  send¬ 
ing  back  to  the  country  a  certain  portion 
of  it  manufactured  and  prepared  for  im¬ 
mediate  use.  The  trade  which  is  carried  on 
between  these  two  different  sets  of  people 
consists  ultimately  in  a  certain  quantity  of 
rude  produce  exchanged  for  a  certain  quan¬ 
tity  of  manufactured  produce.  The  dearer 
the  latter,  therefore,  the  cheaper  the  former; 
and  whatever  tends  in  any  country  to  raise 
the  price  of  manufactured  produce  tends  to 
lower  that  of  the  rude  produce  of  the  land, 
and  thereby  to  discourage  agriculture.  The 
smaller  the  quantity  of  manufactured  produce 
which  in  any  given  quantity  of  rude  produce, 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  which  the 
price  of  any  given  quantity  of  rude  produce 
is  capable  of  purchasing,  the  smaller  the  ex¬ 
changeable  value  of  that  given  quantity  of 
rude  produce,  the  smaller  the  encourage¬ 
ment  which  either  the  landlord  has  to  in¬ 
crease  its  quantity  by  improving  or  the 
farmer  by  cultivating  the  land.  Whatever, 
besides,  tends  to  diminish  in  any  country  the 
number  of  artificers  and  manufacturers, 
tends  to  diminish  the  home  market,  the  most 
important  of  all  markets  for  the  rude  produce 
of  the  land,  and  thereby  still  further  to 
discourage  agriculture. 

Those  systems,  therefore,  which,  preferring 
agriculture  to  all  other  employments,  in  order 
to  promote  it,  impose  restraints  upon  manu¬ 
factures  and  foreign  trade,  act  contrary  to 
the  very  end  which  they  propose,  and  indi¬ 
rectly  discourage  that  very  species  of  industry 
which  they  mean  to  promote.  They  are  so 
far,  perhaps,  more  inconsistent  than  even  the 
mercantile  system.  That  system,  by  encour¬ 
aging  manufactures  and  foreign  trade  more 
than  agriculture,  turns  a  certain  portion  of 
the  capital  of  the  society  from  supporting  a 
more  advantageous,  to  support  a  less  ad  van- 


300 


The  Wealth 

tageous  species  of  industry.  But  still  it  really 
and  in  the  end  encourages  that  species  of 
industry  which  it  means  to  promote.  Those 
agricultural  systems,  on  the  contrary,  really 
and  in  the  end  discourage  their  own  favour¬ 
ite  species  of  industry. 

It  is  thus  that  every  system  which  en¬ 
deavours,  either  by  extraordinary  encourage¬ 
ments  to  draw  towards  a  particular  species 
of  industry  a  greater  share  of  the  capital  of 
the  society  than  what  would  naturally  go  to 
it,  or,  by  extraordinary  restraints,  force  from 
a  particular  species  of  industry  some  share  of 
the  capital  which  would  otherwise  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  it,  is  in  reality  subversive  of  the 
great  purpose  which  it  means  to  promote. 
It  retards,  instead  of  accelerating,  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  the  society  towards  real  wealth  and 
greatness;  and  diminishes,  instead  of  increas¬ 
ing,  the  real  value  of  the  annual  produce  of 
its  land  and  labour. 

All  systems  either  of  preference  or  of  re¬ 
straint,  therefore,  being  thus  completely  taken 
away,  the  obvious  and  simple  system  of 
natural  liberty  establishes  itself  of  its  own 
accord.  Every  man,  as  long  as  he  does  not 
violate  the  laws  of  justice,  is  left  perfectly 
free  to  pursue  his  own  interest  his  own  way, 
and  to  bring  both  his  industry  and  capital 
into  competition  with  those  of  any  other 
man,  or  order  of  men.  The  sovereign  is  com¬ 
pletely  discharged  from  a  duty,  in  the  at¬ 
tempting  to  perform  which  he  must  always 
be  exposed  to  innumerable  delusions,  and  for 
the  proper  performance  of  which  no  human 
wisdom  or  knowledge  could  ever  be  sufficient; 
the  duty  of  superintending  the  industry  of 
private  people,  and  of  directing  it  towards 
the  employments  most  suitable  to  the  interest 
of  the  society.  According  to  the  system  of 
natural  liberty,  the  sovereign  has  only  three 
duties  to  attend  to;  three  duties  of  great  im¬ 
portance,  indeed,  but  plain  and  intelligible  to 


of  Nations 

common  understandings:  first,  the  duty  of 
protecting  the  society  from  violence  and  in¬ 
vasion  of  other  independent  societies;  second¬ 
ly,  the  duty  of  protecting,  as  far  as  possible, 
every  member  of  the  society  from  the  in¬ 
justice  or  oppression  of  every  other  member 
of  it,  or  the  duty  of  establishing  an  exact 
administration  of  justice;  and,  thirdly,  the 
duty  of  erecting  and  maintaining  certain  pub¬ 
lic  works  and  certain  public  institutions  which 
it  can  never  be  for  the  interest  of  any  indi¬ 
vidual,  or  small  number  of  individuals,  to 
erect  and  maintain;  because  the  profit  could 
never  repay  the  expense  to  any  individual 
or  small  number  of  individuals,  though  it 
may  frequently  do  much  more  than  repay  it 
to  a  great  society. 

The  proper  performance  of  those  several 
duties  of  the  sovereign  necessarily  supposes 
a  certain  expense;  and  this  expense  again 
necessarily  requires  a  certain  revenue  to 
support  it.  In  the  following  book,  therefore, 
I  shall  endeavour  to  explain,  first,  what  are 
the  necessary  expenses  of  the  sovereign  or 
commonwealth;  and  which  of  those  expenses 
ought  to  be  defrayed  by  the  general  contri¬ 
bution  of  the  whole  society;  and  which  of 
them  by  that  of  some  particular  part  only, 
or  of  some  particular  members  of  the  society; 
secondly,  what  are  the  different  methods  in 
which  the  whole  society  may  be  made  to  con¬ 
tribute  towards  defraying  the  expenses  in¬ 
cumbent  on  the  whole  society,  and  what  are 
the  principal  advantages  and  inconveniences 
of  each  of  those  methods;  and  thirdly,  what 
are  the  reasons  and  causes  which  have  induced 
almost  all  modern  governments  to  mortgage 
some  part  of  this  revenue,  or  to  contract 
debts,  and  what  have  been  the  effects  of  those 
debts  upon  the  real  wealth,  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  society. 
The  following  book,  therefore,  will  naturally 
be  divided  into  three  chapters. 


Book  Five 


OF  THE  REVENUE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN  OR  COMMONWEALTH 

Part  1 

Of  the  Expense  of  Defence 


CHAPTER  I 

Of  the  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  or  Common¬ 
wealth 

The  first  duty  of  the  sovereign,  that  of 
protecting  the  society  from  the  violence  and 
invasion  of  other  independent  societies,  can 
be  performed  only  by  means  of  a  military 
force.  But  the  expense  both  of  preparing  this 
military  force  in  time  of  peace,  and  of  employ¬ 
ing  it  in  time  of  war,  is  very  different  in  the 
different  states  of  society,  in  the  different 
periods  of  improvement. 

Among  nations  of  hunters,  the  lowest  and 
rudest  state  of  society,  such  as  we  find  it 
among  the  native  tribes  of  North  America, 
every  man  is  a  warrior  as  well  as  a  hunter. 
When  he  goes  to  war,  either  to  defend  his  so¬ 
ciety  or  to  revenge  the  injuries  which  have 
been  done  to  it  by  other  societies,  he  main¬ 
tains  himself  by  his  own  labour  in  the  same 
manner  as  when  he  lives  at  home.  His  society, 
for  in  this  state  of  things  there  is  properly 
neither  sovereign  nor  commonwealth,  is  at  no 
sort  of  expense,  either  to  prepare  him  for  the 
field,  or  to  maintain  him  while  he  is  in  it. 

Among  nations  of  shepherds,  a  more  ad¬ 
vanced  state  of  society,  such  as  we  find  it 
among  the  Tartars  and  Arabs,  every  man  is, 
in  the  same  manner,  a  warrior.  Such  nations 
have  commonly  no  fixed  habitation,  but  live 
either  in  tents  or  in  a  sort  of  covered  wag¬ 
gons  which  are  easily  transported  from  place 
to  place.  The  whole  tribe  or  nation  changes 
its  situation  according  to  the  different  seasons 
of  the  year,  as  well  as  according  to  other 
accidents.  When  its  herds  and  flocks  have 
consumed  the  forage  of  one  part  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  it  removes  to  another,  and  from  that  to 
a  third.  In  the  dry  season  it  comes  down  to 
the  banks  of  the  rivers;  in  the  wet  season  it 
retires  to  the  upper  country.  When  such  a 
nation  goes  to  war,  the  warriors  will  not  trust 
their  herds  and  flocks  to  the  feeble  defence 
of  their  old  men,  their  women  and  children; 
and  their  old  men,  their  women  and  chil¬ 
dren,  will  not  be  left  behind  without  defence 
and  without  subsistence.  The  whole  nation, 
besides,  being  accustomed  to  a  wandering  life. 


even  in  time  of  peace,  easily  takes  the  field 
in  time  of  war.  Whether  it  marches  as  an 
army,  or  moves  about  as  a  company  of 
herdsmen,  the  way  of  life  is  nearly  the  same, 
though  the  object  proposed  by  it  be  very 
different.  They  all  go  to  war  together,  there¬ 
fore,  and  every  one  does  as  well  as  he  can. 
Among  the  Tartars,  even  the  women  have 
been  frequently  known  to  engage  in  battle. 
If  they  conquer,  whatever  belongs  to  the 
hostile  tribe  is  the  recompense  of  the  vic¬ 
tory.  But  if  they  are  vanquished,  all  is  lost, 
and  not  only  their  herds  and  flocks,  but  their 
women  and  children,  become  the  booty  of  the 
conqueror.  Even  the  greater  part  of  those 
who  survive  the  action  are  obliged  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  him  for  the  sake  of  immediate  sub¬ 
sistence.  The  rest  are  commonly  dissipated 
and  dispersed  in  the  desert. 

The  ordinary  life,  the  ordinary  exercises 
of  a  Tartar  or  Arab,  prepare  him  sufficiently 
for  war.  Running,  wrestling,  cudgel -playing, 
throwing  the  javelin,  drawing  the  bow,  etc., 
are  the  common  pastimes  of  those  who  live 
in  the  open  air,  and  are  all  of  them  the  images 
of  war.  When  a  Tartar  or  Arab  actually  goes 
to  war,  he  is  maintained  by  his  own  herds 
and  flocks  which  he  carries  with  him  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  peace.  His  chief  or  sov¬ 
ereign,  for  those  nations  have  all  chiefs  or 
sovereigns,  is  at  no  sort  of  expense  in  pre¬ 
paring  him  for  the  field;  and  when  he  is  in  it 
the  chance  of  plunder  is  the  only  pay  which 
he  either  expects  or  requires. 

An  army  of  hunters  can  seldom  exceed 
two  or  three  hundred  men.  The  precarious 
subsistence  which  the  chase  affords  could 
seldom  allow  a  greater  number  to  keep  to¬ 
gether  for  any  considerable  time.  An  army 
of  shepherds,  on  the  contrary,  may  some¬ 
times  amount  to  two  or  three  hundred  thou¬ 
sand.  As  long  as  nothing  stops  their  progress, 
as  long  as  they  can  go  on  from  one  district, 
of  which  they  have  consumed  the  forage,  to 
another  which  is  yet  entire,  there  seems  to  be 
scarce  any  limit  to  the  number  who  can  march 
on  together.  A  nation  of  hunters  can  never  be 
formidable  to  the  civilised  nations  in  their 
neighbourhood.  A  nation  of  shepherds  may. 
Nothing  can  be  more  contemptible  than  an 


301 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


302 

Indian  war  in  North  America.  Nothing,  on 
the  contrary,  can  be  more  dreadful  than  a 
Tartar  invasion  has  frequently  been  in  Asia. 
The  judgment  of  Thucydides,  that  both  Eu¬ 
rope  and  Asia  could  not  resist  the  Scythians 
united,  has  been  verified  by  the  experience 
of  all  ages.  The  inhabitants  of  the  extensive 
but  defenceless  plains  of  Scythia  or  Tartary 
have  been  frequently  united  under  the  do¬ 
minion  of  the  chief  of  some  conquering 
horde  or  clan,  and  the  havoc  and  devastation 
of  Asia  have  always  signalized  their  union. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  inhospitable  deserts 
of  Arabia,  the  other  great  nation  of  shep¬ 
herds,  have  never  been  united  but  once; 
under  Mahomet  and  his  immediate  suc¬ 
cessors.  Their  union,  wThich  was  more  the 
effect  of  religious  enthusiasm  than  of  con¬ 
quest,  was  signalized  in  the  same  manner.  If 
the  hunting  nations  of  America  should  ever 
become  shepherds,  their  neighbourhood 
would  be  much  more  dangerous  to  the  Euro¬ 
pean  colonies  than  it  is  at  present. 

In  a  yet  more  advanced  state  of  society, 
among  those  nations  of  husbandmen  who 
have  little  foreign  commerce,  and  no  other 
manufactures  but  those  coarse  and  house¬ 
hold  ones  which  almost  every  private  family 
prepares  for  its  own  use,  every  man,  in  the 
same  manner,  either  is  a  warrior  or  easily 
becomes  such.  They  who  live  by  agriculture 
generally  pass  the  whole  day  in  the  open  air, 
exposed  to  all  the  inclemencies  of  the  seasons. 
The  hardiness  of  their  ordinary  life  prepares 
them  for  the  fatigues  of  war,  to  some  of  which 
their  necessary  occupations  bear  a  great  anal¬ 
ogy.  The  necessary  occupation  of  a  ditcher 
prepares  him  to  work  in  the  trenches,  and  to 
fortify  a  camp  as  well  as  to  enclose  a  field. 
The  ordinary  pastimes  of  such  husbandmen 
are  the  same  as  those  of  shepherds,  and  are 
in  the  same  manner  the  images  of  war.  But 
as  husbandmen  have  less  leisure  than  shep¬ 
herds,  they  are  not  so  frequently  employed 
in  those  pastimes.  They  are  soldiers,  but 
soldiers  not  quite  so  much  masters  of  their 
exercise.  Such  as  they  are,  however,  it  sel¬ 
dom  costs  the  sovereign  or  commonwealth 
any  expense  to  prepare  them  for  the  field. 

Agriculture,  even  in  its  rudest  and  lowest 
state,  supposes  a  settlement:  some  sort  of 
fixed  habitation  which  cannot  be  abandoned 
without  great  loss.  When  a  nation  of  mere 
husbandmen,  therefore,  goes  to  war,  the 
whole  people  cannot  take  the  field  together. 
The  old  men,  the  women  and  children,  at 
least,  must  remain  at  home  to  take  care  of  the 
habitation.  All  the  men  of  the  military  age, 
however,  may  take  the  field,  and,  in  small 
nations  of  this  kind,  have  frequently  done 
so.  In  every  nation  the  men  of  the  military 
age  are  supposed  to  amount  to  about  a  fourth 


or  a  fifth  part  of  the  whole  body  of  the 
people.  If  the  campaign,  too,  should  begin 
after  seed-time,  and  end  before  harvest,  both 
the  husbandman  and  his  principal  labourers 
can  be  spared  from  the  farm  without  much 
loss.  He  trusts  that  the  work  which  must  be 
done  in  the  meantime  can  be  well  enough 
executed  by  the  old  men,  the  women,  and  the 
children.  He  is  not  unwilling,  therefore,  to 
serve  without  pay  during  a  short  campaign, 
and  it  frequently  costs  the  sovereign  or  com¬ 
monwealth  as  little  to  maintain  him  in  the 
field  as  to  prepare  him  for  it.  The  citizens  of 
all  the  different  states  of  ancient  Greece 
seem  to  have  served  in  this  manner  till  after 
the  second  Persian  war;  and  the  people  of 
Peloponnesus  till  after  the  Peloponnesian 
war.  The  Peloponnesians,  Thucydides  ob¬ 
serves,  generally  left  the  field  in  the  sum¬ 
mer,  and  returned  home  to  reap  the  harvest. 
The  Roman  people  under  their  kings,  and 
during  the  first  ages  of  the  republic,  served 
in  the  same  manner.  It  was  not  till  the  siege 
of  Veii  that  they  who  stayed  at  home  began 
to  contribute  something  towards  maintaining 
those  who  went  to  war.  In  the  European  mon¬ 
archies,  which  were  founded  upon  the  ruins 
of  the  Roman  empire,  both  before  and  for 
some  time  after  the  establishment  of  what 
is  properly  called  the  feudal  law,  the  great 
lords,  with  all  their  immediate  dependents, 
used  to  serve  the  crown  at  their  own  expense. 
In  the  field,  in  the  same  manner  as  at  home, 
they  maintained  themselves  by  their  own 
revenue,  and  not  by  any  stipend  or  pay 
which  they  received  from  the  king  upon  that 
particular  occasion. 

In  a  more  advanced  state  of  society,  two 
different  causes  contribute  to  render  it  al¬ 
together  impossible  that  they  who  take  the 
field  should  maintain  themselves  at  their  own 
expense.  Those  two  causes  are,  the  progress 
of  manufactures,  and  the  improvement  in  the 
art  of  war. 

Though  a  husbandman  should  be  employed 
in  an  expedition,  provided  it  begins  after 
seed-time  and  ends  before  harvest,  the 
interruption  of  his  business  will  not  always 
occasion  any  considerable  diminution  of  his 
revenue.  Without  the  intervention  of  his 
labour,  nature  does  herself  the  greater  part 
of  the  work  which  remains  to  be  done.  But 
the  moment  that  an  artificer,  a  smith,  a  car¬ 
penter,  or  a  weaver,  for  example,  quits  his 
workhouse,  the  sole  source  of  his  revenue  is 
completely  dried  up.  Nature  does  nothing 
for  him,  he  does  all  for  himself.  When  he 
takes  the  field,  therefore,  in  defence  of  the 
public,  as  he  has  no  revenue  to  maintain  him¬ 
self,  he  must  necessarily  be  maintained  by 
the  public.  But  in  a  country  of  which  a  great 
part  of  the  inhabitants  are  artificers  and  man- 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


ufacturers,  a  great  part  of  the  people  who  go 
to  war  must  be  drawn  from  those  classes,  and 
must  therefore  be  maintained  by  the  public 
as  long  as  they  are  employed  in  its  service. 

When  the  art  of  war,  too,  has  gradually 
grown  up  to  be  a  very  intricate  and  com¬ 
plicated  science,  when  the  event  of  war 
ceases  to  be  determined,  as  in  the  first  ages 
of  society,  by  a  single  irregular  skirmish  or 
battle,  but  when  the  contest  is  generally 
spun  out  through  several  different  campaigns, 
each  of  which  lasts  during  the  greater  part 
of  the  year,  it  becomes  universally  necessary 
that  the  public  should  maintain  those  who 
serve  the  public  in  war,  at  least  while  they 
are  employed  in  that  service.  Whatever  in 
time  of  peace  might  be  the  ordinary  occu¬ 
pation  of  those  who  go  to  war,  so  very  tedious 
and  expensive  a  service  would  otherwise 
be  far  too  heavy  a  burden  upon  them.  After 
the  second  Persian  war,  accordingly,  the 
armies  of  Athens  seem  to  have  been  generally 
composed  of  mercenary  troops,  consisting, 
indeed,  partly  of  citizens,  but  partly  too  of 
foreigners,  and  all  of  them  equally  hired  and 
paid  at  the  expense  of  the  state.  From  the 
time  of  the  siege  of  Veii,  the  armies  of  Rome 
received  pay  for  their  service  during  the  time 
which  they  remained  in  the  field.  Under  the 
feudal  governments  the  military  service  both 
of  the  great  lords  and  of  their  immediate 
dependants  was,  after  a  certain  period,  uni¬ 
versally  exchanged  for  a  payment  in  money, 
which  was  employed  to  maintain  those  who 
served  in  their  stead. 

The  number  of  those  who  can  go  to  war, 
in  proportion  to  the  whole  number  of  the 
people,  is  necessarily  much  smaller  in  a  civil¬ 
ised  than  in  a  rude  state  of  society.  In  a  civil¬ 
ised  society,  as  the  soldiers  are  maintained 
altogether  by  the  labour  of  those  who  are 
not  soldiers,  the  number  of  the  former  can 
never  exceed  what  the  latter  can  maintain, 
over  and  above  maintaining,  in  a  manner 
suitable  to  their  respective  stations,  both 
themselves  and  the  other  officers  of  govern¬ 
ment  and  law  whom  they  are  obliged  to 
maintain.  In  the  little  agrarian  states  of  an¬ 
cient  Greece,  a  fourth  or  a  fifth  part  of  the 
whole  body  of  the  people  considered  them¬ 
selves  as  soldiers,  and  would  sometimes,  it  is 
said,  take  a  field.  Among  the  civilised  nations 
of  modern  Europe,  it  is  commonly  computed 
that  not  more  than  one-hundredth  part  of 
the  inhabitants  in  any  country  can  be  em¬ 
ployed  as  soldiers  without  ruin  to  the  coun¬ 
try  which  pays  the  expenses  of  their  service. 

The  expense  of  preparing  the  army  for  the 
field  seems  not  to  have  become  considerable 
in  any  nation  till  long  after  that  of  main¬ 
taining  it  in  the  field  had  devolved  entirely 
upon  the  sovereign  or  commonwealth.  In  all 


303 

the  different  republics  of  ancient  Greece,  to 
learn  his  military  exercises  was  a  necessary 
part  of  education  imposed  by  the  state  upon 
every  free  citizen.  In  every  city  there  seems 
to  have  been  a  public  field,  in  which,  under 
the  protection  of  the  public  magistrate,  the 
young  people  were  taught  their  different 
exercises  by  different  masters.  In  this  very 
simple  institution  consisted  the  whole  ex¬ 
pense  which  any  Grecian  state  seems  ever 
to  have  been  at  in  preparing  its  citizens  for 
war.  In  ancient  Rome  the  exercises  of  the 
Campus  Martius  answered  the  same  purpose 
with  those  of  the  Gymnasium  in  ancient 
Greece.  Under  the  feudal  governments,  the 
many  public  ordinances  that  the  citizens  of 
every  district  should  practise  archery  as  well 
as  several  other  military  exercises  were  in¬ 
tended  for  promoting  the  same  purpose,  but 
do  not  seem  to  have  promoted  it  so  well. 
Either  from  want  of  interest  in  the  officers 
entrusted  with  the  execution  of  those  ordi¬ 
nances,  or  from  some  other  cause,  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  been  universally  neglected; 
and  in  the  progress  of  all  those  governments, 
military  exercises  seem  to  have  gone  gradually 
into  disuse  among  the  great  body  of  the 
people. 

In  the  republics  of  ancient  Greece  and 
Rome,  during  the  whole  period  of  their 
existence,  and  under  the  feudal  governments 
for  a  considerable  time  after  their  first  es¬ 
tablishment,  the  trade  of  a  soldier  was  not 
a  separate,  distinct  trade,  which  constituted 
the  sole  or  principal  occupation  of  a  partic¬ 
ular  class  of  citizens.  Every  subject  of  the 
state,  whatever  might  be  the  ordinary  trade 
or  occupation  by  which  he  gained  his  liveli¬ 
hood,  considered  himself,  upon  all  ordinary 
occasions,  as  fit  likewise  to  exercise  the  trade 
of  a  soldier,  and  upon  many  extraordinary 
occasions  as  bound  to  exercise  it. 

The  art  of  war,  however,  as  it  is  certainly 
the  noblest  of  all  arts,  so  in  the  progress  of 
improvement  it  necessarily  becomes  one  of 
the  most  complicated  among  them.  The  state 
of  the  mechanical,  as  well  as  of  some  other 
arts,  with  which  it  is  necessarily  connected, 
determines  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which 
it  is  capable  of  being  carried  at  any  particular 
time.  But  in  order  to  carry  it  to  this  degree 
of  perfection,  it  is  necessary  that  it  should 
become  the  sole  or  principal  occupation  of  a 
particular  class  of  citizens,  and  the  division 
of  labour  is  as  necessary  for  the  improvement 
of  this,  as  of  every  other  art.  Into  other  arts 
the  division  of  labour  is  naturally  introduced 
by  the  prudence  of  individuals,  who  find 
that  they  promote  their  private  interest  better 
by  confining  themselves  to  a  particular  trade 
than  by  exercising  a  great  number.  But  it  is 
the  wisdom  of  the  state  only  which  can  ren- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


304 

tier  the  trade  of  a  soldier  a  particular  trade 
separate  and  distinct  from  all  others.  A  pri¬ 
vate  citizen  who,  in  time  of  profound  peace, 
and  without  any  particular  encouragement 
from  the  public,  should  spend  the  greater  part 
of  his  time  in  military  exercises,  might,  no 
doubt,  both  improve  himself  very  much  in 
them,  and  amuse  himself  very  well;  but  he 
certainly  would  not  promote  his  own  interest. 
It  is  the  wisdom  of  the  state  only  which  can 
render  it  for  his  interest  to  give  up  the 
greater  part  of  his  time  to  this  peculiar  occu¬ 
pation:  and  states  have  not  always  had  this 
wisdom,  even  when  their  circumstances  had 
become  such  that  the  preservation  of  their 
existence  required  that  they  should  have  it. 

A  shepherd  has  a  great  deal  of  leisure;  a 
husbandman,  in  the  rude  state  of  husbandry, 
has  some;  an  artificer  or  manufacturer  has 
none  at  all.  The  first  may,  without  any  loss, 
employ  a  great  deal  of  his  time  in  martial 
exercises;  the  second  may  employ  some  part 
of  it;  but  the  last  cannot  employ  a  single 
hour  in  them  without  some  loss,  and  his  at¬ 
tention  to  his  own  interest  naturally  leads 
him  to  neglect  them  altogether.  These  im¬ 
provements  in  husbandry  too,  which  the 
progress  of  arts  and  manufactures  necessarily 
introduces,  leave  the  husbandman  as  little 
leisure  as  the  artificer.  Military  exercises 
come  to  be  as  much  neglected  by  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  country  as  by  those  of  the 
town,  and  the  great  body  of  the  people  be¬ 
comes  altogether  unwarlike.  That  wealth,  at 
the  same  time,  which  always  follows  the 
improvements  of  agriculture  and  manufac¬ 
tures,  and  which  in  reality  is  no  more  than 
the  accumulated  produce  of  those  improve¬ 
ments,  provokes  the  invasion  of  all  their 
neighbours.  An  industrious,  and  upon  that 
account  a  wealthy  nation,  is  of  all  nations  the 
most  likely  to  be  attacked;  and  unless  the 
state  takes  some  new  measures  for  the  public 
defence,  the  natural  habits  of  the  people  ren¬ 
der  them  altogether  incapable  of  defending 
themselves. 

In  these  circumstances  there  seem  to  be  but 
two  methods  by  which  the  state  can  make 
any  tolerable  provision  for  the  public  defence. 

It  may  either,  first,  by  means  of  a  very 
rigorous  police,  and  in  spite  of  the  whole 
bent  of  the  interest,  genius,  and  inclinations 
of  the  people,  enforce  the  practice  of  mili¬ 
tary  exercises,  and  oblige  either  all  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  the  military  age,  or  a  certain  number 
of  them,  to  join  in  some  measure  the  trade 
of  a  soldier  to  whatever  other  trade  or  pro¬ 
fession  they  may  happen  to  carry  on. 

Or,  secondly,  by  maintaining  and  employ¬ 
ing  a  certain  number  of  citizens  in  the  con¬ 
stant  practice  of  military  exercises,  it  may 
render  the  trade  of  a  soldier  a  particular 


trade,  separate  and  distinct  from  all  others. 

If  the  state  has  recourse  to  the  first  of  those 
two  expedients,  its  military  force  is  said  to 
consist  in  a  militia;  if  to  the  second,  it  is 
said  to  consist  in  a  standing  army.  The  prac¬ 
tice  of  military  exercises  is  the  sole  or  prin¬ 
cipal  occupation  of  the  soldiers  of  a  standing 
army,  and  the  maintenance  or  pay  which  the 
state  affords  them  is  the  principal  and  or¬ 
dinary  fund  of  their  subsistence.  The  prac¬ 
tice  of  military  exercises  is  only  the  occasional 
occupation  of  the  soldiers  of  a  militia,  and 
they  derive  the  principal  and  ordinary  fund 
of  their  subsistence  from  some  other  occupa¬ 
tion.  In  a  militia,  the  character  of  the  la¬ 
bourer,  artificer,  or  tradesman,  predominates 
over  that  of  the  soldier;  in  a  standing  army, 
that  of  the  soldier  predominates  over  every 
other  character:  and  in  this  distinction  seems 
to  consist  the  essential  difference  between 
those  two  different  species  of  military  force. 

Militias  have  been  of  several  different 
kinds.  In  some  countries  the  citizens  destined 
for  defending  the  states  seem  to  have  been 
exercised  only,  without  being,  if  I  may  say  so, 
regimented;  that  is,  without  being  divided 
into  separate  and  distinct  bodies  of  troops, 
each  of  which  performed  its  exercises  under 
its  own  proper  and  permanent  officers.  In  the 
republics  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome,  each 
citizen,  as  long  as  he  remained  at  home, 
seems  to  have  practised  his  exercises  either 
separately  and  independently,  or  with  such 
of  his  equals  as  he  liked  best,  and  not  to  have 
been  attached  to  any  particular  body  of 
troops  till  he  was  actually  called  upon  to 
take  the  field.  In  other  countries,  the  militia 
has  not  only  been  exercised,  but  regimented. 
In  England,  in  Switzerland,  and,  I  believe,  in 
every  other  country  of  modern  Europe  where 
any  imperfect  military  force  of  this  kind  has 
been  established,  every  militiaman  is,  even  in 
time  of  peace,  attached  to  a  particular  body 
of  troops,  which  performs  its  exercises  under 
its  own  proper  and  permanent  officers. 

Before  the  invention  of  firearms,  that  army 
was  superior  in  which  the  soldiers  had,  each 
individually,  the  greatest  skill  and  dexterity 
in  the  use  of  their  arms.  Strength  and  agility 
of  body  were  of  the  highest  consequence,  and 
commonly  determined  the  state  of  battles. 
But  this  skill  and  dexterity  in  the  use  of  their 
arms  could  be  acquired  only,  in  the  same 
manner  as  fencing  is  at  present,  by  practising, 
not  in  great  bodies,  but  each  man  separately, 
in  a  particular  school,  under  a  particular  mas¬ 
ter,  or  with  his  own  particular  equals  and 
companions.  Since  the  invention  of  firearms, 
strength  and  agility  of  body,  or  even  extraor¬ 
dinary  dexterity  and  skill  in  the  use  of  arms, 
though  they  are  far  from  being  of  no  conse¬ 
quence,  are,  however,  of  less  consequence.  The 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


nature  of  the  weapon,  though  it  by  no  means 
puts  the  awkward  upon  a  level  with  the  skil¬ 
ful,  puts  him  more  nearly  so  than  he  ever 
was  before.  All  the  dexterity  and  skill,  it  is 
supposed,  which  are  necessary  for  using  it, 
can  be  well  enough  acquired  by  practising  in 
great  bodies. 

Regularity,  order,  and  prompt  obedience  to 
command  are  qualities  which,  in  modern 
armies,  are  of  more  importance  towards  de¬ 
termining  the  fate  of  battles  than  the  dex¬ 
terity  and  skill  of  the  soldiers  in  the  use  of 
their  arms.  But  the  noise  of  firearms,  the 
smoke,  and  the  invisible  death  to  which  every 
man  feels  himself  every  moment  exposed  as 
soon  as  he  comes  within  cannon-shot,  and 
frequently  a  long  time  before  the  battle  can 
be  well  said  to  be  engaged,  must  render  it 
very  difficult  to  maintain  any  considerable 
degree  of  this  regularity,  order,  and  prompt 
obedience,  even  in  the  beginning  of  a  modern 
battle.  In  an  ancient  battle  there  was  no  noise 
but  what  arose  from  the  human  voice;  there 
was  no  smoke,  there  was  no  invisible  cause  of 
wounds  or  death.  Every  man,  till  some  mortal 
weapon  actually  did  approach  him,  saw  clear¬ 
ly  that  no  such  weapon  was  near  him.  In  these 
circumstances,  and  among  troops  who  had 
some  confidence  in  their  own  skill  and  dex¬ 
terity  in  the  use  of  their  arms,  it  must  have 
been  a  good  deal  less  difficult  to  preserve 
some  degree  of  regularity  and  order,  not  only 
in  the  beginning,  but  through  the  whole  prog¬ 
ress  of  an  ancient  battle,  and  till  one  of  the 
two  armies  was  fairly  defeated.  But  the  hab¬ 
its  of  regularity,  order,  and  prompt  obedience 
to  command  can  be  acquired  only  by  troops 
which  are  exercised  in  great  bodies. 

A  militia,  however,  in  whatever  manner  it 
may  be  either  disciplined  or  exercised,  must 
always  be  much  inferior  to  a  well-disciplined 
and  well-exercised  standing  army. 

The  soldiers  who  are  exercised  only  once 
a  week,  or  once  a  month,  can  never  be  so  ex¬ 
pert  in  the  use  of  their  arms  as  those  who 
are  exercised  every  day,  or  every  other  day; 
and  though  this  circumstance  may  not  be  of 
so  much  consequence  in  modern  as  it  was  in 
ancient  times,  yet  the  acknowledged  superior¬ 
ity  of  the  Prussian  troops,  owing,  it  is  said, 
very  much  to  their  superior  expertness  in 
their  exercise,  may  satisfy  us  that  it  is,  even 
at  this  day,  of  very  considerable  consequence. 

The  soldiers  who  are  bound  to  obey  their 
officer  only  once  a  week  or  once  a  month,  and 
who  are  at  all  other  times  at  liberty  to  man¬ 
age  their  own  affairs  their  own  way,  without 
being  in  any  respect  accountable  to  him,  can 
never  be  under  the  same  awe  in  his  presence, 
can  never  have  the  same  disposition  to  ready 
obedience,  with  those  whose  whole  life  and 
conduct  are  every  day  directed  by  him,  and 


305 

who  every  day  even  rise  and  go  to  bed,  or  at 
least  retire  to  their  quarters,  according  to  his 
orders.  In  what  is  called  discipline,  or  in  the 
habit  of  ready  obedience,  a  militia  must  al¬ 
ways  be  still  more  inferior  to  a  standing  army 
than  it  may  sometimes  be  in  what  is  called 
the  manual  exercise,  or  in  the  management 
and  use  of  its  arms.  But  in  modem  war  the 
habit  of  ready  and  instant  obedience  is  of 
much  greater  consequence  than  a  consider¬ 
able  superiority  in  the  management  of  arms. 

Those  militias  which,  like  the  Tartar  or 
Arab  militia,  go  to  war  under  the  same  chief¬ 
tains  whom  they  are  accustomed  to  obey  in 
peace  are  by  far  the  best.  In  respect  for  their 
officers,  in  the  habit  of  ready  obedience,  they 
approach  nearest  to  standing  armies.  The 
highland  militia,  when  it  served  under  its 
own  chieftains,  had  some  advantage  of  the 
same  kind.  As  the  highlanders,  however,  were 
not  wandering,  but  stationary  shepherds,  as 
they  had  all  a  fixed  habitation,  and  were  not, 
in  peaceable  times,  accustomed  to  follow  their 
chieftain  from  place  to  place,  so  in  time  of 
war  they  were  less  willing  to  follow  him  to 
any  considerable  distance,  or  to  continue  for 
any  long  time  in  the  field.  When  they  had  ac¬ 
quired  any  booty  they  were  eager  to  return 
home,  and  his  authority  was  seldom  sufficient 
to  detain  them.  In  point  of  obedience  they 
were  always  much  inferior  to  what  is  reported 
of  the  Tartars  and  Arabs.  As  the  highlanders 
too,  from  their  stationary  life,  spend  less  of 
their  time  in  the  open  air,  they  were  always 
less  accustomed  to  military  exercises,  and 
were  less  expert  in  the  use  of  their  arms  than 
the  Tartars  and  Arabs  are  said  to  be. 

A  militia  of  any  kind,  it  must  be  observed, 
however,  which  has  served  for  several  suc¬ 
cessive  campaigns  in  the  field,  becomes  in 
every  respect  a  standing  army.  The  soldiers 
are  every  day  exercised  in  the  use  of  their 
arms,  and,  being  constantly  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  their  officers,  are  habituated  to  the 
same  prompt  obedience  which  takes  place  in 
standing  armies.  What  they  were  before  they 
took  the  field  is  of  little  importance.  They 
necessarily  become  in  every  respect  a  stand¬ 
ing  army  after  they  have  passed  a  few  cam¬ 
paigns  in  it.  Should  the  war  in  America  drag 
out  through  another  campaign,  the  American 
militia  may  become  in  every  respect  a  match 
for  that  standing  army  of  which  the  valour 
appeared,  in  the  last  war,  at  least  not  infe¬ 
rior  to  that  of  the  hardiest  veterans  of  France 
and  Spain. 

This  distinction  being  well  understood,  the 
history  of  all  ages,  it  will  be  found,  bears 
testimony  to  the  irresistible  superiority  which 
a  well-regulated  standing  army  has  over  a 
militia. 

One  of  the  first  standing  armies  of  which 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


306 

we  have  any  distinct  account,  in  any  well- 
authenticated  history,  is  that  of  Philip  of 
Macedon.  His  frequent  wars  with  the  Thra¬ 
cians.  Illyrians,  Thessalians,  and  some  of  the 
Greek  cities  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mace¬ 
don,  gradually  formed  his  troops,  which  in 
the  beginning  were  probably  militia,  to  the 
exact  discipline  of  a  standing  army.  When  he 
was  at  peace,  which  he  was  very  seldom,  and 
never  for  any  long  time  together,  he  was 
careful  not  to  disband  that  army.  It  van¬ 
quished  and  subdued,  after  a  long  and  vio¬ 
lent  struggle,  indeed,  the  gallant  and  well- 
exercised  militias  of  the  principal  republics 
of  ancient  Greece,  and  afterwards,  with  very 
little  struggle,  the  effeminate  and  ill-exercised 
militia  of  the  great  Persian  empire.  The  fall 
of  the  Greek  republics  and  of  the  Persian  em¬ 
pire  was  the  effect  of  the  irresistible  superi¬ 
ority  which  a  standing  army  has  over  every 
sort  of  militia.  It  is  the  first  great  revolution 
in  the  affairs  of  mankind  of  which  history 
has  preserved  any  distinct  or  circumstantial 
account. 

The  fall  of  Carthage,  and  the  consequent 
elevation  of  Rome,  is  the  second.  All  the  vari¬ 
eties  in  the  fortune  of  those  two  famous  re¬ 
publics  may  very  well  be  accounted  for  from 
the  same  cause. 

From  the  end  of  the  first  to  the  beginning 
of  the  second  Carthaginian  war  the  armies 
of  Carthage  were  continually  in  the  field,  and 
employed  under  three  great  generals,  who 
succeeded  one  another  in  the  command:  Ha- 
milcar,  his  son-in-law  Hasdrubal,  and  his  son 
Hannibal;  first  in  chastising  their  own  rebel¬ 
lious  slaves,  afterwards  in  subduing  the  re¬ 
volted  nations  of  Africa,  and,  lastly,  in  con¬ 
quering  the  great  kingdom  of  Spain.  The 
army  which  Hannibal  led  from  Spain  into 
Italy  must  necessarily,  in  those  different  wars, 
have  been  gradually  formed  to  the  exact  dis¬ 
cipline  of  a  standing  army.  The  Romans,  in 
the  meantime,  though  they  had  not  been  al¬ 
together  at  peace,  yet  they  had  not,  during 
this  period,  been  engaged  in  any  war  of  very 
great  consequence,  and  their  military  disci¬ 
pline,  it  is  generally  said,  was  a  good  deal  re¬ 
laxed.  The  Roman  armies  which  Hannibal 
encountered  at  Trebia,  Thrasymenus,  and 
Cannae  were  militia  opposed  to  a  standing 
army.  This  circumstance,  it  is  probable,  con¬ 
tributed  more  than  any  other  to  determine 
the  fate  of  those  battles. 

The  standing  army  which  Hannibal  left  be¬ 
hind  him  in  Spain  had  the  like  superiority 
over  the  militia  which  the  Romans  sent  to 
oppose  it,  and  in  a  few  years,  under  the 
command  of  his  brother,  the  younger  Has¬ 
drubal,  expelled  them  almost  entirely  from 
that  country. 

Hannibal  was  ill  supplied  from  home.  The 


Roman  militia,  being  continually  in  the  field, 
became  in  the  progress  of  the  war  a  well- 
disciplined  and  well-exercised  standing  army, 
and  the  superiority  of  Hannibal  grew  every 
day  less  and  less.  Hasdrubal  judged  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  lead  the  whole,  or  almost  the  whole 
of  the  standing  army  which  he  commanded  in 
Spain,  to  the  assistance  of  his  brother  in 
Italy.  In  this  march  he  is  said  to  have  been 
misled  by  his  guides,  and  in  a  country  which 
he  did  not  know,  was  surprised  and  attacked 
by  another  standing  army,  in  every  respect 
equal  or  superior  to  his  own,  and  was  entirely 
defeated. 

When  Hasdrubal  had  left  Spain,  the  great 
Scipio  found  nothing  to  oppose  him  but  a 
militia  inferior  to  his  own.  He  conquered  and 
subdued  that  militia,  and,  in  the  course  of 
the  war,  his  own  militia  necessarily  became 
a  well-disciplined  and  well-exercised  standing 
army.  That  standing  army  was  afterwards 
carried  to  Africa,  where  it  found  nothing  but 
a  militia  to  oppose  it.  In  order  to  defend 
Carthage  it  became  necessary  to  recall  the 
standing  army  of  Hannibal.  The  disheartened 
and  frequently  defeated  African  militia  joined 
it,  and,  at  the  battle  of  Zama,  composed  the 
greater  part  of  the  troops  of  Hannibal.  The 
event  of  that  day  determined  the  fate  of  the 
two  rival  republics. 

From  the  end  of  the  second  Carthaginian 
war  till  the  fall  of  the  Roman  republic,  the 
armies  of  Rome  were  in  every  respect  stand¬ 
ing  armies.  The  standing  army  of  Macedon 
made  some  resistance  to  their  arms.  In  the 
height  of  their  grandeur  it  cost  them  two 
great  wars,  and  three  great  battles,  to  subdue 
that  little  kingdom,  of  which  the  conquest 
would  probably  have  been  still  more  difficult 
had  it  not  been  for  the  cowardice  of  its  last 
king.  The  militias  of  all  the  civilised  nations 
of  the  ancient  world,  of  Greece,  of  Syria,  and 
of  Egypt,  made  but  a  feeble  resistance  to  the 
standing  armies  of  Rome.  The  militias  of  some 
barbarous  nations  defended  themselves  much 
better.  The  Scythian  or  Tartar  militia,  which 
Mithridates  drew  from  the  countries  north 
of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  seas,  were  the 
most  formidable  enemies  whom  the  Romans 
had  to  encounter  after  the  second  Cartha¬ 
ginian  war.  The  Parthian  and  German  mili¬ 
tias,  too,  were  always  respectable,  and  upon 
several  occasions  gained  very  considerable  ad¬ 
vantages  over  the  Roman  armies.  In  general, 
however,  and  when  the  Roman  armies  were 
well  commanded,  they  appear  to  have  been 
very  much  superior;  and  if  the  Romans  did 
not  pursue  the  final  conquest  either  of  Parthia 
or  Germany,  it  was  probably  because  they 
judged  that  it  was  not  worth  while  to  add 
those  two  barbarous  countries  to  an  empire 
which  was  already  too  large.  The  ancient 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


Parthians  appear  to  have  been  a  nation  of 
Scythian  or  Tartar  extraction,  and  to  have 
always  retained  a  good  deal  of  the  manners  of 
their  ancestors.  The  ancient  Germans  were, 
like  the  Scythians  or  Tartars,  a  nation  of 
wandering  shepherds,  who  went  to  war  under 
the  same  chiefs  whom  they  were  accustomed 
to  follow  in  peace.  Their  militia  was  exactly 
of  the  same  kind  with  that  of  the  Scythians 
or  Tartars,  from  whom,  too,  they  were  prob¬ 
ably  descended. 

Many  different  causes  contributed  to  relax 
the  discipline  of  the  Roman  armies.  Its  extreme 
severity  was,  perhaps,  one  of  those  causes. 
In  the  days  of  their  grandeur,  when  no  enemy 
appeared  capable  of  opposing  them,  their 
heavy  armour  was  laid  aside  as  unnecessarily 
burdensome,  their  labourious  exercises  were 
neglected  as  unnecessarily  toilsome.  Under 
the  Roman  emperors,  besides,  the  standing 
armies  of  Rome,  those  particularly  which 
guarded  the  German  and  Pannonian  frontiers, 
became  dangerous  to  their  masters,  against 
whom  they  used  frequently  to  set  up  their 
own  generals.  In  order  to  render  them  less 
formidable,  according  to  some  authors,  Dio- 
clesian,  according  to  others,  Constantine,  first 
withdrew  them  from  the  frontier,  where  they 
had  always  before  been  encamped  in  great 
bodies,  generally  of  two  or  three  legions  each, 
and  dispersed  them  in  small  bodies  through 
the  different  provincial  towns,  from  whence 
they  were  scarce  ever  removed  but  when 
it  became  necessary  to  repel  an  invasion. 
Small  bodies  of  soldiers  quartered  in  trad¬ 
ing  and  manufacturing  towns,  and  seldom 
removed  from  those  quarters,  became  them¬ 
selves  tradesmen,  artificers,  and  manufactur¬ 
ers.  The  civil  came  to  predominate  over  the 
military  character,  and  the  standing  armies 
of  Rome  gradually  degenerated  into  a  cor¬ 
rupt,  neglected,  and  undisciplined  militia,  in¬ 
capable  of  resisting  the  attack  of  the  German 
and  Scythian  militias,  which  soon  afterwards 
invaded  the  western  empire.  It  was  only  by 
hiring  the  militia  of  some  of  those  nations  to 
oppose  to  that  of  others  that  the  emperors 
were  for  some  time  able  to  defend  themselves. 
The  fall  of  the  western  empire  is  the  third 
great  revolution  in  the  affairs  of  mankind 
of  which  ancient  history  has  preserved  any 
distinct  or  circumstantial  account.  It  was 
brought  about  by  the  irresistible  superiority 
which  the  militia  of  a  barbarous  has  over  that 
of  a  civilised  nation;  which  the  militia  of  a 
nation  of  shepherds  has  over  that  of  a  nation 
of  husbandmen,  artificers,  and  manufactur¬ 
ers.  The  victories  which  have  been  gained  by 
militias  have  generally  been,  not  oyer  stand¬ 
ing  armies,  but  over  other  militias  in  exercise 
and  discipline  inferior  to  themselves.  Such 
were  the  victories  which  the  Greek  militia 


307 

gained  over  that  of  the  Persian  empire;  and 
such  too  were  those  which  in  later  times  the 
Swiss  militia  gained  over  that  of  the  Austrians 
and  Burgundians. 

The  military  force  of  the  German  and 
Scythian  nations  who  established  themselves 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  western  empire  con¬ 
tinued  for  some  time  to  be  of  the  same  kind 
in  their  new  settlements  as  it  had  been  in 
their  original  country.  It  was  a  militia  of 
shepherds  and  husbandmen,  which,  in  time 
of  war,  took  the  field  under  the  command  of 
the  same  chieftains  whom  it  was  accustomed 
to  obey  in  peace.  It  was,  therefore,  tolerably 
well  exercised,  and  tolerably  well  disciplined. 
As  arts  and  industry  advanced,  however,  the 
authority  of  the  chieftains  gradually  decayed, 
and  the  great  body  of  the  people  had  less 
time  to  spare  for  military  exercises.  Both  the 
discipline  and  the  exercise  of  the  feudal  mili¬ 
tia,  therefore,  went  gradually  to  ruin,  and 
standing  armies  were  gradually  introduced  to 
supply  the  place  of  it.  When  the  expedient 
of  a  standing  army,  besides,  had  once  been 
adopted  by  one  civilised  nation,  it  became 
necessary  that  all  its  neighbours  should  fol¬ 
low  their  example.  They  soon  found  that 
their  safety  depended  upon  their  doing  so, 
and  that  their  own  militia  was  altogether  in¬ 
capable  of  resisting  the  attack  of  such  an 
army. 

The  soldiers  of  a  standing  army,  though 
they  may  never  have  seen  an  enemy,  yet  have 
frequently  appeared  to  possess  all  the  cour¬ 
age  of  veteran  troops,  and  the  very  moment 
that  they  took  the  field  to  have  been  fit  to 
face  the  hardiest  and  most  experienced  veter¬ 
ans.  In  1756,  when  the  Russian  army  marched 
into  Poland,  the  valour  of  the  Russian  soldiers 
did  not  appear  inferior  to  that  of  the  Prus¬ 
sians,  at  that  time  supposed  to  be  the  hardiest 
and  most  experienced  veterans  in  Europe. 
The  Russian  empire,  however,  had  enjoyed 
a  profound  peace  for  near  twenty  years  be¬ 
fore,  and  could  at  that  time  have  very  few 
soldiers  who  had  ever  seen  an  enemy.  When 
the  Spanish  war  broke  out  in  1739,  England 
had  enjoyed  a  profound  peace  for  about  eight- 
and-twenty  years.  The  valour  of  her  soldiers, 
however,  far  from  being  corrupted  by  that 
long  peace,  was  never  more  distinguished 
than  in  the  attempt  upon  Carthagena,  the 
first  unfortunate  exploit  of  that  unfortunate 
war.  In  a  long  peace  the  generals,  perhaps, 
may  sometimes  forget  their  skill;  but,  where 
a  well-regulated  standing  army  has  been  kept 
up,  the  soldiers  seem  never  to  forget  their 
valour. 

When  a  civilised  nation  depends  for  its  de¬ 
fence  upon  a  militia,  it  is  at  all  times  exposed 
to  be  conquered  by  any  barbarous  nation 
which  happens  to  be  in  its  neighbourhood. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


308 

The  frequent  conquests  of  all  the  civilised 
countries  in  Asia  by  the  Tartars  sufficiently 
demonstrates  the  natural  superiority  which 
the  militia  of  a  barbarous  has  over  that  of  a 
civilised  nation.  A  well-regulated  standing 
army  is  superior  to  every  militia.  Such  an 
army,  as  it  can  best  be  maintained  by  an  opu¬ 
lent  and  civilised  nation,  so  it  can  alone  de¬ 
fend  such  a  nation  against  the  invasion  of  a 
poor  and  barbarous  neighbour.  It  is  only  by 
means  of  a  standing  army,  therefore,  that  the 
civilisation  of  any  country  can  be  perpetu¬ 
ated,  or  even  preserved  for  any  considerable 
time. 

As  it  is  only  by  means  of  a  well-regulated 
standing  army  that  a  civilised  country  can 
be  defended,  so  it  is  only  by  means  of  it  that 
a  barbarous  country  can  be  suddenly  and  tol¬ 
erably  civilised.  A  standing  army  establishes, 
with  an  irresistible  force,  the  law  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign  through  the  remotest  provinces  of  the 
empire,  and  maintains  some  degree  of  regu¬ 
lar  government  in  countries  which  could  not 
otherwise  admit  of  any.  Whoever  examines, 
with  attention,  the  improvements  which  Peter 
the  Great  introduced  into  the  Russian  em¬ 
pire,  will  find  that  they  almost  all  resolve 
themselves  into  the  establishment  of  a  well- 
regulated  standing  army.  It  is  the  instrument 
which  executes  and  maintains  all  his  other 
regulations.  That  degree  of  order  and  internal 
peace  which  that  empire  has  ever  since  en¬ 
joyed  is  altogether  owing  to  the  influence  of 
that  army. 

Men  of  republican  principles  have  been 
jealous  of  a  standing  army  as  dangerous  to 
liberty.  It  certainly  is  so  wherever  the  inter¬ 
est  of  the  general  and  that  of  the  principal 
officers  are  not  necessarily  connected  with  the 
support  of  the  constitution  of  the  state.  The 
standing  army  of  Caesar  destroyed  the  Roman 
republic.  The  standing  army  of  Cromwell 
turned  the  Long  Parliament  out  of  doors. 
But  where  the  sovereign  is  himself  the  gen¬ 
eral,  and  the  principal  nobility  and  gentry  of 
the  country  the  chief  officers  of  the  army, 
where  the  military  force  is  placed  under  the 
command  of  those  who  have  the  greatest  in¬ 
terest  in  the  support  of  the  civil  authority, 
because  they  have  themselves  the  greatest 
share  of  that  authority,  a  standing  army  can 
never  be  dangerous  to  liberty.  On  the  contrary, 
it  may  in  some  cases  be  favourable  to  liberty. 
The  security  which  it  gives  to  the  sovereign 
renders  unnecessary  that  troublesome  jealousy, 
which,  in  some  modern  republics,  seems  to 
watch  over  the  minutest  actions,  and  to  be 
at  all  times  ready  to  disturb  the  peace  of 
every  citizen.  Where  the  security  of  the 
magistrate,  though  supported  by  the  principal 
people  of  the  country,  is  endangered  by 
every  popular  discontent;  where  a  small  tu¬ 
mult  is  capable  of  bringing  about  in  a  few 


hours  a  great  revolution,  the  whole  author¬ 
ity  of  government  must  be  employed  to  sup¬ 
press  and  punish  every  murmur  and  complaint 
against  it.  To  a  sovereign,  on  the  contrary, 
who  feels  himself  supported,  not  only  by  the 
natural  aristocracy  of  the  country,  but  by  a 
well-regulated  standing  army,  the  rudest,  the 
most  groundless,  and  the  most  licentious  re¬ 
monstrances  can  give  little  disturbance.  He 
can  safely  pardon  or  neglect  them,  and  his 
consciousness  of  his  own  superiority  naturally 
disposes  him  to  do  so.  That  degree  of  liberty 
which  approaches  to  licentiousness  can  be 
tolerated  only  in  countries  where  the  sover¬ 
eign  is  secured  by  a  well-regulated  standing 
army.  It  is  in  such  countries  only  that  the 
public  safety  does  not  require  that  the  sover¬ 
eign  should  be  trusted  with  any  discretionary 
power  for  suppressing  even  the  impertinent 
wantonness  of  this  licentious  liberty. 

The  first  duty  of  the  sovereign,  therefore, 
that  of  defending  the  society  from  the  vio¬ 
lence  and  injustice  of  other  independent  so¬ 
cieties,  grows  gradually  more  and  more  ex¬ 
pensive  as  the  society  advances  in  civilisation. 
The  military  force  of  the  society,  which  orig¬ 
inally  cost  the  sovereign  no  expense  either  in 
time  of  peace  or  in  time  of  war,  must,  in  the 
progress  of  improvement,  first  be  maintained 
by  him  in  time  of  war,  and  afterwards  even 
in  time  of  peace. 

The  great  change  introduced  into  the  art  of 
war  by  the  invention  of  firearms  has  enhanced 
still  further  both  the  expense  of  exercising 
and  disciplining  any  particular  number  of 
soldiers  in  time  of  peace,  and  that  of  employ¬ 
ing  them  in  time  of  war.  Both  their  arms  and 
their  ammunition  are  become  more  expensive. 
A  musket  is  a  more  expensive  machine  than  a 
javelin  or  a  bow  and  arrows;  a  cannon  or  a 
mortar  than  a  balista  or  a  catapulta.  The 
powder  which  is  spent  in  a  modern  review  is 
lost  irrecoverably,  and  occasions  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  expense.  The  javeline  and  arrows 
which  were  thrown  or  shot  in  an  ancient  one 
could  easily  be  picked  up  again,  and  were  be¬ 
sides  of  very  little  value.  The  cannon  and  the 
mortar  are  not  only  much  dearer,  but  much 
heavier  machines  than  the  balista  or  cata¬ 
pulta,  and  require  a  greater  expense,  not  only 
to  prepare  them  for  the  field,  but  to  carry 
them  to  it.  As  the  superiority  of  the  modern 
artillery  too  over  that  of  the  ancients  is  very 
great,  it  has  become  much  more  difficult,  and 
consequently  much  more  expensive,  to  fortify 
a  town  so  as  to  resist  even  for  a  few  weeks  the 
attack  of  that  superior  artillery.  In  modern 
times  many  different  causes  contribute  to 
render  the  defence  of  the  society  more  expen¬ 
sive.  The  unavoidable  effects  of  the  natural 
progress  of  improvement  have,  in  this  respect, 
been  a  good  deal  enhanced  by  a  great  revolu¬ 
tion  in  the  art  of  war,  to  which  a  mere  acci- 


309 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


dent,  the  invention  of  gunpowder,  seems  to 
have  given  occasion. 

In  modern  war  the  great  expense  of  fire¬ 
arms  gives  an  evident  advantage  to  the  na¬ 
tion  which  can  best  afford  that  expense,  and 
consequently  to  an  opulent  and  civilised  over 
a  poor  and  barbarous  nation.  In  ancient  times 
the  opulent  and  civilised  found  it  difficult  to 


defend  themselves  against  the  poor  ana  bar¬ 
barous  nations.  In  modem  times  the  poor  and 
barbarous  find  it  difficult  to  defend  them¬ 
selves  against  the  opulent  and  civilised.  The 
invention  of  firearms,  an  invention  which  at 
first  sight  appears  to  be  so  pernicious,  is  cer¬ 
tainly  favourable  both  to  the  permanency 
and  to  the  extension  of  civilisation. 


Part  2 

Of  the  Expense  of  Justice 


The  second  duty  of  the  sovereign,  that  of 
protecting,  as  far  as  possible,  every  member 
of  the  society  from  the  injustice  or  oppression 
of  every  other  member  of  it,  or  the  duty  of 
establishing  an  exact  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice,  requires,  too,  very  different  degress  of 
expense  in  the  different  periods  of  society. 

Among  nations  of  hunters,  as  there  is  scarce 
any  property,  or  at  least  none  that  exceeds 
the  value  of  two  or  three  days*  labour,  so 
there  is  seldom  any  established  magistrate  or 
any  regular  administration  of  justice.  Men 
who  have  no  property  can  injure  one  another 
only  in  their  persons  or  reputations.  But  when 
one  man  kills,  wounds,  beats,  or  defames  an¬ 
other,  though  he  to  whom  the  injury  is  done 
suffers,  he  who  does  it  receives  no  benefit.  It 
is  otherwise  with  the  injuries  to  property. 
The  benefit  of  the  person  who  does  the  injury 
is  often  equal  to  the  loss  of  him  who  suffers  it. 
Envy,  malice,  or  resentment  are  the  only  pas¬ 
sions  which  can  prompt  one  man  to  injure 
another  in  his  person  or  reputation.  But  the 
greater  part  of  men  are  not  very  frequently 
under  the  influence  of  those  passions,  and  the 
very  worst  of  men  are  so  only  occasionally. 
As  their  gratification  too,  how  agreeable  so¬ 
ever  it  may  be  to  certain  characters,  is  not 
attended  with  any  real  or  permanent  advan¬ 
tage,  it  is  in  the  greater  part  of  men  com¬ 
monly  restrained  by  prudential  considera¬ 
tions.  Men  may  live  together  in  society  with 
some  tolerable  degree  of  security,  though 
there  is  no  civil  magistrate  to  protect  them 
from  the  injustice  of  those  passions.  But 
avarice  and  ambition  in  the  rich,  in  the  poor 
the  hatred  of  labour  and  the  love  of  present 
ease  and  enjoyment,  are  the  passions  which 
prompt  to  invade  property,  passions  much 
more  steady  in  their  operation,  and  much 
more  universal  in  their  influence.  Wherever 
there  is  great  property  there  is  great  inequal¬ 
ity.  For  one  very  rich  man  there  must  be  at 
least  five  hundred  poor,  and  the  affluence  of 
the  few  supposes  the  indigence  of  the  many. 
The  affluence  of  the  rich  excites  the  indig¬ 
nation  of  the  poor,  who  are  often  both  driven 
by  want,  and  prompted  by  envy,  to  invade 
his  possessions.  It  is  only  under  the  shelter 
of  the  civil  magistrate  that  the  owner  of  that 
valuable  property,  which  is  acquired  by  the 


labour  of  many  years,  or  perhaps  of  many 
successive  generations,  can  sleep  a  single  night 
in  security.  He  is  at  all  times  surrounded  by 
unknown  enemies,  whom,  though  he  never 
provoked,  he  can  never  appease,  and  from 
whose  injustice  he  can  be  protected  only  by 
the  powerful  arm  of  the  civil  magistrate  con¬ 
tinually  held  up  to  chastise  it.  The  acqui¬ 
sition  of  valuable  and  extensive  property, 
therefore,  necessarily  requires  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  civil  government.  Where  there  is  no 
property,  or  at  least  none  that  exceeds  the 
value  of  two  or  three  days’  labour,  civil  gov¬ 
ernment  is  not  so  necessary. 

Civil  government  supposes  a  certain  sub¬ 
ordination.  But  as  the  necessity  of  civil  gov¬ 
ernment  gradually  grows  up  with  the  acqui¬ 
sition  of  valuable  property,  so  the  principal 
causes  which  naturally  introduce  subordina¬ 
tion  gradually  grow  up  with  the  growth  of 
that  valuable  property. 

The  causes  or  circumstances  which  nat¬ 
urally  introduce  subordination,  or  which  nat¬ 
urally,  and  antecedent  to  any  civil  institu¬ 
tion,  give  some  men  some  superiority  over  the 
greater  part  of  their  brethren,  seem  to  be  four 
in  number. 

The  first  of  those  causes  or  circumstances 
is  the  superiority  of  personal  qualifications, 
of  strength,  beauty,  and  agility  of  body;  of 
wisdom  and  virtue,  of  prudence,  justice,  for¬ 
titude,  and  moderation  of  mind.  The  qualifi¬ 
cations  of  the  body,  unless  supported  by 
those  of  the  mind,  can  give  little  authority  in 
any  period  of  society.  He  is  a  very  strong 
man,  who,  by  mere  strength  of  body,  can 
force  two  weak  ones  to  obey  him.  The  quali¬ 
fications  of  the  mind  can  alone  give  a  very 
great  authority.  They  are,  however,  invisible 
qualities;  always  disputable;  and  generally 
disputed.  No  society,  whether  barbarous  or 
civilised,  has  ever  found  it  convenient  to 
settle  the  rules  of  precedency  of  rank  and  sub¬ 
ordination  according  to  those  invisible  quali¬ 
ties;  but  according  to  something  that  is  more 
plain  and  palpable. 

The  second  of  those  causes  or  circum¬ 
stances  is  the  superiority  of  age.  An  old  man, 
provided  his  age  is  not  so  far  advanced  as  to 
give  suspicion  of  dotage,  is  everywhere  more 
respected  than  a  young  man  of  equal  rank, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


310 

fortune,  and  abilities.  Among  nations  of 
hunters,  such  as  the  native  tribes  of  North 
America,  age  is  the  sole  foundation  of  rank 
and  precedency.  Among  them,  father  is  the 
appellation  of  a  superior;  brother,  of  an  equal; 
and  son,  of  an  inferior.  In  the  most  opulent 
and  civilised  nations,  age  regulates  rank 
among  those  who  are  in  every  other  respect 
equal,  and  among  whom,  therefore,  there  is 
nothing  else  to  regulate  it.  Among  brothers 
and  among  sisters,  the  eldest  always  takes 
place;  and  in  the  succession  of  the  paternal 
estate  everything  which  cannot  be  divided, 
but  must  go  entire  to  one  person,  such  as  a 
title  of  honour,  is  in  most  cases  given  to  the 
eldest.  Age  is  a  plain  and  palpable  quality 
which  admits  of  no  dispute. 

The  third  of  those  causes  or  circumstances 
is  the  superiority  of  fortune.  The  authority 
of  riches,  however,  though  great  in  every  age 
of  society,  is  perhaps  greatest  in  the  rudest 
age  of  society  which  admits  of  any  consider¬ 
able  inequality  of  fortune.  A  Tartar  chief, 
the  increase  of  whose  herds  and  stocks  is  suffi¬ 
cient  to  maintain  a  thousand  men,  cannot 
well  employ  that  increase  in  any  other  way 
than  in  maintaining  a  thousand  men.  The 
rude  state  of  his  society  does  not  afford  him 
any  manufactured  produce,  any  trinkets  or 
baubles  of  any  kind,  for  which  he  can  ex¬ 
change  that  part  of  his  rude  produce  which 
is  over  and  above  his  own  consumption.  The 
thousand  men  whom  he  thus  maintains,  de¬ 
pending  entirely  upon  him  for  their  subsist¬ 
ence,  must  both  obey  his  orders  in  war,  and 
submit  to  his  jurisdiction  in  peace.  He  is 
necessarily  both  their  general  and  their  judge, 
and  his  chieftainship  is  the  necessary  effect  of 
the  superiority  of  his  fortune.  In  an  opulent 
and  civilised  society,  a  man  may  possess  a 
much  greater  fortune  and  yet  not  be  able 
to  command  a  dozen  people.  Though  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  his  estate  may  be  sufficient  to  main¬ 
tain,  and  may  perhaps  actually  maintain, 
more  than  a  thousand  people,  yet  as  those 
people  pay  for  everything  which  they  get 
from  him,  as  he  gives  scarce  anything  to 
anybody  but  in  exchange  for  an  equiva¬ 
lent,  there  is  scarce  anybody  who  considers 
himself  as  entirely  dependent  upon  him,  and 
his  authority  extends  only  over  a  few  menial 
servants.  The  authority  of  fortune,  however, 
is  very  great  even  in  an  opulent  and  civilised 
society.  That  it  is  much  greater  than  that 
either  of  age  or  of  personal  qualities  has  been 
the  constant  complaint  of  every  period  of 
society  which  admitted  of  any  considerable 
inequality  of  fortune.  The  first  period  of  so¬ 
ciety,  that  of  hunters,  admits  of  no  such  in¬ 
equality.  Universal  poverty  establishes  their 
universal  equality,  and  the  superiority  either 
of  age  or  of  personal  qualities  are  the  feeble 


but  the  sole  foundations  of  authority  and 
subordination.  There  is  therefore  little  or  no 
authority  or  subordination  in  this  period  of 
society.  The  second  period  of  society,  that  of 
shepherds,  admits  of  very  great  inequalities 
of  fortune,  and  there  is  no  period  in  which 
the  superiority  of  fortune  gives  so  great  au¬ 
thority  to  those  who  possess  it.  There  is  no 
period  accordingly  in  which  authority  and 
subordination  are  more  perfectly  established. 
The  authority  of  an  Arabian  sherif  is  very 
great;  that  of  a  Tartar  khan  altogether  des- 
potical. 

The  fourth  of  those  causes  or  circumstances 
is  the  superiority  of  birth.  Superiority  of 
birth  supposes  an  ancient  superiority  of  for¬ 
tune  in  the  family  of  the  person  who  claims 
it.  All  families  are  equally  ancient;  and  the 
ancestors  of  the  prince,  though  they  may  be 
better  known,  cannot  well  be  more  numerous 
than  those  of  the  beggar.  Antiquity  of  family 
means  everywhere  the  antiquity  either  of 
wealth,  or  of  that  greatness  which  is  com¬ 
monly  either  founded  upon  wealth,  or  ac¬ 
companied  with  it.  Upstart  greatness  is  every¬ 
where  less  respected  than  ancient  greatness. 
The  hatred  of  usurpers,  the  love  of  the  fam¬ 
ily  of  an  ancient  monarch,  are,  in  a  great 
measure,  founded  upon  the  contempt  which 
men  naturally  have  for  the  former,  and  upon 
their  veneration  for  the  latter.  As  a  military 
officer  submits  without  reluctance  to  the  au¬ 
thority  of  a  superior  by  whom  he  has  always 
been  commanded,  but  cannot  bear  that  his 
inferior  should  be  set  over  his  head,  so  men 
easily  submit  to  a  family  to  whom  they  and 
their  ancestors  have  always  submitted;  but 
are  fired  with  indignation  when  another 
family,  in  whom  they  had  never  acknowl¬ 
edged  any  such  superiority,  assumes  a  do¬ 
minion  over  them. 

The  distinction  of  birth,  being  subsequent 
to  the  inequality  of  fortune,  can  have  no 
place  in  nations  of  hunters,  among  whom  all 
men,  being  equal  in  fortune,  must  likewise  be 
very  nearly  equal  in  birth.  The  son  of  a  wise 
and  brave  man  may,  indeed,  even  among 
them,  be  somewhat  more  respected  than  a 
man  of  equal  merit  who  has  the  misfortune 
to  be  the  son  of  a  fool  or  a  coward.  The 
difference,  however,  will  not  be  very  great; 
and  there  never  was,  I  believe,  a  great  family 
in  the  world  whose  illustration  was  entirely 
derived  from  the  inheritance  of  wisdom  and 
virtue. 

The  distinction  of  birth  not  only  may,  but 
always  does  take  place  among  nations  of 
shepherds.  Such  nations  are  always  strangers 
to  every  sort  of  luxury,  and  great  wealth 
can  scarce  ever  be  dissipated  among  them  by 
improvident  profusion.  There  are  no  nations 
accordingly  who  abound  more  in  families 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  311 


revered  and  honoured  on  account  of  their 
descent  from  a  long  race  of  great  and  illus¬ 
trious  ancestors,  because  there  are  no  nations 
among  whom  wealth  is  likely  to  continue 
longer  in  the  same  families. 

Birth  and  fortune  are  evidently  the  two 
circumstances  which  principally  set  one  man 
above  another.  They  are  the  two  great 
sources  of  personal  distinction,  and  are  there¬ 
fore  the  principal  causes  which  naturally 
establish  authority  and  subordination  among 
men.  Among  nations  of  shepherds  both  those 
causes  operate  with  their  full  force.  The  great 
shepherd  or  herdsman,  respected  on  account 
of  his  great  wealth,  and  of  the  great  number 
of  those  who  depend  upon  him  for  subsist¬ 
ence,  and  revered  on  account  of  the  nobleness 
of  his  birth,  and  of  the  immemorial  antiquity 
of  his  illustrious  family,  has  a  natural  author¬ 
ity  over  all  the  inferior  shepherds  or  herds¬ 
men  of  his  horde  or  clan.  He  can  command 
the  united  force  of  a  greater  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  than  any  of  them.  His  military  power  is 
greater  than  that  of  any  of  them.  In  time  of 
war  they  are  all  of  them  naturally  disposed 
to  muster  themselves  under  his  banner,  rather 
than  under  that  of  any  other  person,  and  his 
birth  and  fortune  thus  naturally  procure  to 
him  some  sort  of  executive  power.  By  com¬ 
manding,  too,  the  united  force  of  a  greater 
number  of  people  than  any  of  them,  he  is  best 
able  to  compel  any  one  of  them  who  may 
have  injured  another  to  compensate  the 
wrong.  He  is  the  person,  therefore,  to  whom 
all  those  who  are  too  weak  to  defend  them¬ 
selves  naturally  look  up  for  protection.  It  is 
to  him  that  they  naturally  complain  of  the 
injuries  which  they  imagine  have  been  done 
to  them,  and  his  interposition  in  such  cases 
is  more  easily  submitted  to,  even  by  the  per¬ 
son  complained  of,  than  that  of  any  other 
person  would  be.  His  birth  and  fortune  thus 
naturally  procure  him  some  sort  of  judicial 
authority. 

It  is  in  the  age  of  shepherds,  in  the  second 
period  of  society,  that  the  inequality  of  for¬ 
tune  first  begins  to  take  place,  and  intro¬ 
duces  among  men  a  degree  of  authority  and 
subordination  which  could  not  possibly  exist 
before.  It  thereby  introduces  some  degree  of 
that  civil  government  which  is  indispensably 
necessary  for  its  own  preservation:  and  it 
seems  to  do  this  naturally,  and  even  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  consideration  of  that  necessity. 
The  consideration  of  that  necessity  comes  no 
doubt  afterwards  to  contribute  very  much 
to  maintain  and  secure  that  authority  and 
subordination.  The  rich,  in  particular,  are 
necessarily  interested  to  support  that  order  of 
things  which  can  alone  secure  them  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  their  own  advantages.  Men  of  in¬ 
ferior  wealth  combine  to  defend  those  of  su¬ 


perior  wealth  in  the  possession  of  their  prop¬ 
erty,  in  order  that  men  of  superior  wealth 
may  combine  to  defend  them  in  the  possession 
of  theirs.  All  the  inferior  shepherds  and  herds¬ 
men  feel  that  the  security  of  their  own  herds 
and  flocks  depends  upon  the  security  of  those 
of  the  great  shepherd  or  herdsman;  that  the 
maintenance  of  their  lesser  authority  depends 
upon  that  of  his  greater  authority,  and  that 
upon  their  subordination  to  him  depends  his 
power  of  keeping  their  inferiors  in  subordina¬ 
tion  to  them.  They  constitute  a  sort  of  little 
nobility,  who  feel  themselves  interested  to  de¬ 
fend  the  property  and  to  support  the  author¬ 
ity  of  their  own  little  sovereign  in  order  that 
he  may  be  able  to  defend  their  property  and 
to  support  their  authority.  Civil  government, 
so  far  as  it  is  instituted  for  the  security  of 
property,  is  in  reality  instituted  for  the  de¬ 
fence  of  the  rich  against  the  poor,  or  of  those 
who  have  some  property  against  those  who 
have  none  at  all. 

The  judicial  authority  of  such  a  sovereign, 
however,  far  from  being  a  cause  of  expense, 
was  for  a  long  time  a  source  of  revenue  to 
him.  The  persons  who  applied  to  him  for  jus¬ 
tice  were  always  willing  to  pay  for  it,  and  a 
present  never  failed  to  accompany  a  petition. 
After  the  authority  of  the  sovereign,  too,  was 
thoroughly  established,  the  person  found 
guilty,  over  and  above  the  satisfaction  which 
he  was  obliged  to  make  to  the  party,  was 
likewise  forced  to  pay  an  amercement  to  the 
sovereign.  He  had  given  trouble,  he  had  dis¬ 
turbed,  he  had  broke  the  peace  of  his  lord  the 
king,  and  for  those  offences  an  amercement 
was  thought  due.  In  the  Tartar  governments 
of  Asia,  in  the  governments  of  Europe  which 
were  founded  by  the  German  and  Scythian 
nations  who  overturned  the  Roman  empire, 
the  administration  of  justice  was  a  consider¬ 
able  source  of  revenue,  both  to  the  sovereign 
and  to  all  the  lesser  chiefs  or  lords  who  exer¬ 
cised  under  him  any  particular  jurisdiction, 
either  over  some  particular  tribe  or  clan,  or 
over  some  particular  territory  or  district. 
Originally  both  the  sovereign  and  the  inferior 
chiefs  used  to  exercise  this  jurisdiction  in  their 
own  persons.  Afterwards  they  universally 
found  it  convenient  to  delegate  it  to  some 
substitute,  bailiff,  or  judge.  This  substitute, 
however,  was  still  obliged  to  account  to  his 
principal  or  constituent  for  the  profits  of  the 
jurisdiction.  Whoever  reads  the1  instructions 
which  were  given  to  the  judges  of  the  circuit 
in  the  time  of  Henry  II  will  see  clearly  that 
those  judges  were  a  sort  of  itinerant  factors, 
sent  round  the  country  for  the  purpose  of 
levying  certain  branches  of  the  king’s  revenue. 
In  those  days  the  administration  of  justice 

^hey  are  to  be  found  in  Tyrrell’s  History  of 
England. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


312 

not  only  afforded  a  certain  revenue  to  the 
sovereign,  but  to  procure  this  revenue  seems 
to  have  been  one  of  the  principal  advantages 
which  he  proposed  to  obtain  by  the  admini¬ 
stration  of  justice. 

This  scheme  of  making  the  administration 
of  justice  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  rev¬ 
enue  could  scarce  fail  to  be  productive  of 
several  very  gross  abuses.  The  person  who 
applied  for  justice  with  a  large  present  in  his 
hand  was  likely  to  get  something  more  than 
justice;  while  he  who  applied  for  it  with  a 
small  one  was  likely  to  get  something  less. 
Justice,  too,  might  frequently  be  delayed  in 
order  that  this  present  might  be  repeated. 
The  amercement,  besides,  of  the  person  com¬ 
plained  of,  might  frequently  suggest  a  very 
strong  reason  for  finding  him  in  the  wrong, 
even  when  he  had  not  really  been  so.  That 
such  abuses  were  far  from  being  uncommon 
the  ancient  history  of  every  country  in  Eu¬ 
rope  bears  witness. 

When  the  sovereign  or  chief  exercised  his 
judicial  authority  in  his  own  person,  how 
much  soever  he  might  abuse  it,  it  must  have 
been  scarce  possible  to  get  any  redress,  be¬ 
cause  there  could  seldom  be  anybody  power¬ 
ful  enough  to  call  him  to  account.  When  he 
exercised  it  by  a  bailiff,  indeed,  redress  might 
sometimes  be  had.  If  it  was  for  his  own  bene¬ 
fit  only  that  the  bailiff  had  been  guilty  of  any 
act  of  injustice,  the  sovereign  himself  might 
not  always  be  unwilling  to  punish  him,  or  to 
oblige  him  to  repair  the  wrong.  But  if  it  was 
for  the  benefit  of  his  sovereign,  if  it  was  in 
order  to  make  court  to  the  person  who  ap¬ 
pointed  him  and  who  might  prefer  him,  that 
he  had  committed  any  act  of  oppression,  re¬ 
dress  would  upon  most  occasions  be  as  im¬ 
possible  as  if  the  sovereign  had  committed  it 
himself.  In  all  barbarous  governments,  accord¬ 
ingly,  in  all  those  ancient  governments  of  Eu¬ 
rope  in  particular  which  were  founded  upon 
the  ruins  of  the  Roman  empire,  the  admini¬ 
stration  of  justice  appears  for  a  long  time  to 
have  been  extremely  corrupt,  far  from  being 
quite  equal  and  impartial  even  under  the 
best  monarchs,  and  altogether  profligate  un¬ 
der  the  worst. 

Among  nations  of  shepherds,  where  the 
sovereign  or  chief  is  only  the  greatest  shep¬ 
herd  or  herdsman  of  the  horde  or  clan,  he 
is  maintained  in  the  same  manner  as  any  of 
his  vassals  or  subjects,  by  the  increase  of  his 
own  herds  or  flocks.  Among  those  nations  of 
husbandmen  who  are  but  just  come  out  of 
the  shepherd  state,  and  who  are  not  much 
advanced  beyond  that  state,  such  as  the 
Greek  tribes  appear  to  have  been  about  the 
time  of  the  Trojan  war,  and  our  German  and 
Scythian  ancestors  when  they  first  settled 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  western  empire,  the 


sovereign  or  chief  is,  in  the  same  manner, 
only  the  greatest  landlord  of  the  country,  and 
is  maintained,  in  the  same  manner  as  any 
other  landlord,  by  a  revenue  derived  from  his 
own  private  estate,  or  from  what,  in  modern 
Europe,  was  called  the  demesne  of  the  crown. 
His  subjects,  upon  ordinary  occasions,  con¬ 
tributed  nothing  to  his  support,  except  when, 
in  order  to  protect  them  from  the  oppression 
of  some  of  their  fellow-subjects,  they  stand 
in  need  of  his  authority.  The  presents  which 
they  make  him  upon  such  occasions  consti¬ 
tute  the  whole  ordinary  revenue,  the  whole 
of  the  emoluments  which,  except  perhaps 
upon  some  very  extraordinary  emergencies, 
he  derives  from  his  dominion  over  them. 
When  Agamemnon,  in  Homer,  offers  to 
Achilles  for  his  friendship  the  sovereignty  of 
seven  Greek  cities,  the  sole  advantage  which 
he  mentions  as  likely  to  be  derived  from  it 
was  that  the  people  would  honour  him  with 
presents.  As  long  as  such  presents,  as  long  as 
the  emoluments  of  justice,  or  what  may  be 
called  the  fees  of  court,  constituted  in  this 
manner  the  whole  ordinary  revenue  which 
the  sovereign  derived  from  his  sovereignty, 
it  could  not  well  be  expected,  it  could  not 
even  decently  be  proposed,  that  he  should 
give  them  up  altogether.  It  might,  and  it  fre¬ 
quently  was  proposed,  that  he  should  regu¬ 
late  and  ascertain  them.  But  after  they  had 
been  so  regulated  and  ascertained,  how  to 
hinder  a  person  who  was  all-powerful  from 
extending  them  beyond  those  regulations  was 
still  very  difficult,  not  to  say  impossible.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  continuance  of  this  state  of  things, 
therefore,  the  corruption  of  justice,  naturally 
resulting  from  the  arbitrary  and  uncertain 
nature  of  those  presents,  scarce  admitted  of 
any  effectual  remedy. 

But  when  from  different  causes,  chiefly 
from  the  continually  increasing  expenses  of 
defending  the  nation  against  the  invasion  of 
other  nations,  the  private  estate  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign  had  become  altogether  insufficient  for 
defraying  the  expense  of  the  sovereignty,  and 
when  it  had  become  necessary  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  should,  for  their  own  security,  contribute 
towards  this  expense  by  taxes  of  different 
kinds,  it  seems  to  have  been  very  commonly 
stipulated  that  no  present  for  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  justice  should,  under  any  pretence,  be 
accepted  either  by  the  sovereign,  or  by  his 
bailiffs  and  substitutes,  the  judges.  Those 
presents,  it  seems  to  have  been  supposed, 
could  more  easily  be  abolished  altogether 
than  effectually  regulated  and  ascertained. 
Fixed  salaries  were  appointed  to  the  judges, 
which  were  supposed  to  compensate  to  them 
the  loss  of  whatever  might  have  been  their 
share  of  the  ancient  emoluments  of  justice, 
as  the  taxes  more  than  compensated  to  the 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  313 


sovereign  the  loss  of  his.  Justice  was  then 
said  to  be  administered  gratis. 

Justice,  however,  never  was  in  reality  ad¬ 
ministered  gratis  in  any  country.  Lawyers  and 
attorneys,  at  least,  must  always  be  paid  by 
the  parties;  and,  if  they  were  not,  they  would 
perform  their  duty  still  worse  than  they  ac¬ 
tually  perform  it.  The  fees  annually  paid  to 
lawyers  and  attorneys  amount,  in  every  court, 
to  a  much  greater  sum  than  the  salaries  of 
the  judges.  The  circumstance  of  those  salaries 
being  paid  by  the  crown  can  nowhere  much 
diminish  the  necessary  expense  of  a  law-suit. 
But  it  was  not  so  much  to  diminish  the  ex¬ 
pense,  as  to  prevent  the  corruption  of  justice, 
that  the  judges  were  prohibited  from  re¬ 
ceiving  any  present  or  fee  from  the  parties. 

The  office  of  judge  is  in  itself  so  very  hon¬ 
ourable  that  men  are  willing  to  accept  of  it, 
though  accompanied  with  very  small  emolu¬ 
ments.  The  inferior  office  of  justice  of  peace, 
though  attended  with  a  good  deal  of  trouble, 
and  in  most  cases  with  no  emoluments  at  all, 
is  an  object  of  ambition  to  the  greater  part 
of  our  country  gentlemen.  The  salaries  of  all 
the  different  judges,  high  and  low,  together 
with  the  whole  expense  of  the  administra¬ 
tion  and  execution  of  justice,  even  where  it  is 
not  managed  with  very  good  economy,  makes, 
in  any  civilised  country,  but  a  very  incon¬ 
siderable  part  of  the  whole  expense  of  govern¬ 
ment. 

The  whole  expense  of  justice,  too,  might 
easily  be  defrayed  by  the  fees  of  court;  and, 
without  exposing  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice  to  any  real  hazard  of  corruption,  the  pub¬ 
lic  revenue  might  thus  be  entirely  discharged 
from  a  certain,  though,  perhaps,  but  a  small 
incumbrance.  It  is  difficult  to  regulate  the 
fees  of  court  effectually  where  a  person  so 
powerful  as  the  sovereign  is  to  share  in  them, 
and  to  derive  any  considerable  part  of  his 
revenue  from  them.  It  is  very  easy  where  the 
judge  is  the  principal  person  who  can  reap 
any  benefit  from  them.  The  law  can  very 
easily  oblige  the  judge  to  respect  the  regu¬ 
lation,  though  it  might  not  always  be  able 
to  make  the  sovereign  respect  it.  Where  the 
fees  of  court  are  precisely  regulated  and  as¬ 
certained,  where  they  are  paid  all  at  once,  at 
a  certain  period  of  every  process,  into  the 
hands  of  a  cashier  or  receiver,  to  be  by  him 
distributed  in  certain  known  proportions 
among  the  different  judges  after  the  process 
is  decided,  and  not  till  it  is  decided,  there 
seems  to  be  no  more  danger  of  corruption 
than  where  such  fees  are  prohibited  alto¬ 
gether.  Those  fees,  without  occasioning  any 
considerable  increase  in  the  expense  of  a  law¬ 
suit,  might  be  rendered  fully  sufficient  for 
defraying  the  whole  expense  of  justice.  By 
not  being  paid  to  the  judges  till  the  process 


was  determined,  they  might  be  some  incite¬ 
ment  to  the  diligence  of  the  court  in  ex¬ 
amining  and  deciding  it.  In  courts  which  con¬ 
sisted  of  a  considerable  number  of  judges,  by 
proportioning  the  share  of  each  judge  to  the 
number  of  hours  and  days  which  he  had  em¬ 
ployed  in  examining  the  process,  either  in  the 
court  or  in  a  committee  by  order  of  the  court, 
those  fees  might  give  some  encouragement 
to  the  diligence  of  each  particular  judge. 
Public  services  are  never  better  performed 
than  when  their  reward  comes  only  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  their  being  performed,  and  is 
proportioned  to  the  diligence  employed  in 
performing  them.  In  the  different  parliaments 
of  France,  the  fees  of  court  (called  epices 
and  vacations)  constitute  the  far  greater  part 
of  the  emoluments  of  the  judges.  After  all 
deductions  are  made,  the  net  salary  paid  by 
the  crown  to  a  counsellor  or  judge  in  the 
Parliament  of  Toulouse,  in  rank  and  dig¬ 
nity  the  second  parliament  of  the  kingdom, 
amounts  only  to  a  hundred  and  fifty  livres, 
about  six  pounds  eleven  shillings  sterling  a 
year.  About  seven  years  ago  that  sum  was  in 
the  same  place  the  ordinary  yearly  wages  of  a 
common  footman.  The  distribution  of  those 
epices ,  too,  is  according  to  the  diligence  of 
the  judges.  A  diligent  judge  gains  a  comfort¬ 
able,  though  moderate,  revenue  by  his  office: 
an  idle  one  gets  little  more  than  his  salary. 
Those  Parliaments  are  perhaps,  in  many  re¬ 
spects,  not  very  convenient  courts  of  jus¬ 
tice;  but  they  have  never  been  accused,  they 
seem  never  even  to  have  been  suspected,  of 
corruption. 

The  fees  of  court  seem  originally  to  have 
been  the  principal  support  of  the  different 
courts  of  justice  in  England.  Each  court  en¬ 
deavoured  to  draw  to  itself  as  much  business 
as  it  could,  and  was,  upon  that  account,  wil¬ 
ling  to  take  cognisance  of  many  suits  which 
were  not  originally  intended  to  fall  under  its 
jurisdiction.  The  Court  of  Kings  Bench,  in¬ 
stituted  for  the  trial  of  criminal  causes  only, 
took  cognisance  of  civil  suits;  the  plaintiff 
pretending  that  the  defendant,  in  not  doing 
him  justice,  had  been  guilty  of  some  trespass 
or  misdemeanour.  The  Court  of  Exchequer, 
instituted  for  the  levying  of  the  king’s  rev¬ 
enue,  and  for  enforcing  the  payment  of  such 
debts  only  as  were  due  to  the  king,  took  cog¬ 
nisance  of  all  other  contract  debts;  the  plain¬ 
tiff  alleging  that  he  could  not  pay  the  king 
because  the  defendant  would  not  pay  him. 
In  consequence  of  such  fictions  it  came,  in 
many  cases,  to  depend  altogether  upon  the 
parties  before  what  court  they  would  choose 
to  have  their  cause  tried;  and  each  court 
endeavoured,  by  superior  dispatch  and  im¬ 
partiality,  to  draw  to  itself  as  many  causes  as 
it  could.  The  present  admirable  constitution 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


314 

of  the  courts  of  justice  in  England  was,  per¬ 
haps,  originally  in  a  great  measure  formed 
by  this  emulation  which  anciently  took  place 
between  their  respective  judges;  each  judge 
endeavouring  to  give,  in  his  own  court,  the 
speediest  and  most  effectual  remedy  which 
the  law  would  admit  for  every  sort  of  in¬ 
justice.  Originally  the  courts  of  law  gave 
damages  only  for  breach  of  contract.  The 
Court  of  Chancery,  as  a  court  of  conscience, 
first  took  upon  it  to  enforce  the  specific  per¬ 
formance  of  agreements.  When  the  breach 
of  contract  consisted  in  the  non-payment  of 
money,  the  damage  sustained  could  be  com¬ 
pensated  in  no  other  way  than  by  ordering 
payment,  which  was  equivalent  to  a  specific 
performance  of  the  agreement.  In  such  cases, 
therefore,  the  remedy  of  the  courts  of  law 
was  sufficient.  It  was  not  so  in  others.  When 
the  tenant  sued  his  lord  for  having  unjustly 
outed  him  of  his  lease,  the  damages  which  he 
recovered  were  by  no  means  equivalent  to 
the  possession  of  the  land.  Such  causes,  there¬ 
fore,  for  some  time,  went  all  to  the  Court  of 
Chancery,  to  the  no  small  loss  of  the  courts 
of  law.  It  was  to  draw  back  such  causes  to 
themselves  that  the  courts  of  law  are  said  to 
have  invented  the  artificial  and  fictitious 
Writ  of  Ejectment,  the  most  effectual  remedy 
for  an  unjust  outer  or  dispossession  of  land. 

A  stamp-duty  upon  the  law  proceedings  of 
each  particular  court,  to  be  levied  by  that 
court,  and  applied  towards  the  maintenance 
of  the  judges  and  other  officers  belonging  to 
it,  might,  in  the  same  manner,  afford  a  rev¬ 
enue  sufficient  for  defraying  the  expense  of 
the  administration  of  justice,  without  bring¬ 
ing  any  burden  upon  the  general  revenue  of 
the  society.  The  judges  indeed  might,  in  this 
case,  be  under  the  temptation  of  multiplying 
unnecessarily  the  proceedings  upon  every 
cause,  in  order  to  increase,  as  much  as  pos¬ 
sible,  the  produce  of  such  a  stamp-duty.  It 
has  been  the  custom  in  modern  Europe  to 
regulate,  upon  most  occasions,  the  payment  of 
the  attorneys  and  clerks  of  court  according  to 
the  number  of  pages  which  they  had  occasion 
to  write;  the  court,  however,  requiring  that 
each  page  should  contain  so  many  lines,  and 
each  line  so  many  words.  In  order  to  increase 
their  payment,  the  attorneys  and  clerks  have 
contrived  to  multiply  words  beyond  all  ne¬ 
cessity,  to  the  corruption  of  the  law  language 
of,  I  believe,  every  court  of  justice  in  Europe. 
A  like  temptation  might  perhaps  occasion  a 
like  corruption  in  the  form  of  law  proceedings. 

But  whether  the  administration  of  justice 
be  so  contrived  as  to  defray  its  own  expense, 
or  whether  the  judges  be  maintained  by  fixed 
salaries  paid  to  them  from  some  other  fund, 
it  does  not  seem  necessary  that  the  person  or 
persons  entrusted  with  the  executive  power 


should  be  charged  with  the  management  of 
that  fund,  or  with  the  payment  of  those  sal¬ 
aries.  That  fund  might  arise  from  the  rent  of 
landed  estates,  the  management  of  each 
estate  being  entrusted  to  the  particular  court 
which  was  to  be  maintained  by  it.  That  fund 
might  arise  even  from  the  interest  of  a  sum 
of  money,  the  lending  out  of  which  might,  in 
the  same  manner,  be  entrusted  to  the  court 
which  was  to  be  maintained  by  it.  A  part, 
though  indeed  but  a  small  part,  of  the  salary 
of  the  judges  of  the  Court  of  Session  in  Scot¬ 
land  arises  from  the  interest  of  a  sum  of 
money.  The  necessary  instability  of  such  a 
fund  seems,  however,  to  render  it  an  improper 
one  for  the  maintenance  of  an  institution 
which  ought  to  last  for  ever. 

The  separation  of  the  judicial  from  the  ex¬ 
ecutive  power  seems  originally  to  have  arisen 
from  the  increasing  business  of  the  society, 
in  consequence  of  its  increasing  improvement. 
The  administration  of  justice  became  so  la¬ 
borious  and  so  complicated  a  duty  as  to  re¬ 
quire  the  undivided  attention  of  the  persons 
to  whom  it  was  entrusted.  The  person  en¬ 
trusted  with  the  executive  power  not  having 
leisure  to  attend  to  the  decision  of  private 
causes  himself,  a  deputy  was  appointed  to 
decide  them  in  his  stead.  In  the  progress  of 
the  Roman  greatness,  the  consul  was  too 
much  occupied  with  the  political  affairs  of 
the  state  to  attend  to  the  administration  of 
justice.  A  prsetor,  therefore,  was  appointed 
to  administer  it  in  his  stead.  In  the  progress 
of  the  European  monarchies  which  were 
founded  upon  the  ruins  of  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire,  the  sovereigns  and  the  great  lords  came 
universally  to  consider  the  administration  of 
justice  as  an  office  both  too  laborious  and 
too  ignoble  for  them  to  execute  in  their  own 
persons.  They  universally,  therefore,  dis¬ 
charged  themselves  of  it  by  appointing  a 
deputy,  bailiff,  or  judge. 

When  the  judicial  is  united  to  the  executive 
power,  it  is  scarce  possible  that  justice  should 
not  frequently  be  sacrificed  to  what  is  vul¬ 
garly  called  politics.  The  persons  entrusted 
with  the  great  interests  of  the  state  may, 
even  without  any  corrupt  views,  sometimes 
imagine  it  necessary  to  sacrifice  to  those  in¬ 
terests  the  rights  of  a  private  man.  But  upon 
the  impartial  administration  of  justice  de¬ 
pends  the  liberty  of  every  individual,  the 
sense  which  he  has  of  his  own  security.  In 
order  to  make  every  individual  feel  himself 
perfectly  secure  in  the  possession  of  every 
right  which  belongs  to  him,  it  is  not  only 
necessary  that  the  judicial  should  be  sep¬ 
arated  from  the  executive  power,  but  that  it 
should  be  rendered  as  much  as  possible  inde¬ 
pendent  of  that  power.  The  judge  should  not 
be  liable  to  be  removed  from  his  office  accord- 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  315 

ing  to  the  caprice  of  that  power.  The  regular  the  good-will  or  even  upon  the  good  economy 
payment  of  his  salary  should  not  depend  upon  of  that  power. 

Part  3 

Of  the  Expense  of  Public  Works  and  Public  Institutions 


The  third  and  last  duty  of  the  sovereign  or 
commonwealth  is  that  of  erecting  and  main¬ 
taining  those  public  institutions  and  those 
public  works,  which,  though  they  may  be  in 
the  highest  degree  advantageous  to  a  great 
society,  are,  however,  of  such  a  nature  that 
the  profit  could  never  repay  the  expense  to 
any  individual  or  small  number  of  individuals, 
and  which  it  therefore  cannot  be  expected 
that  any  individual  or  small  number  of  indi¬ 
viduals  should  erect  or  maintain.  The  per¬ 
formance  of  this  duty  requires,  too,  very  dif¬ 
ferent  degrees  of  expense  in  the  different 
periods  of  society. 

After  the  public  institutions  and  public 


works  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  society, 
and  for  the  administration  of  justice,  both  of 
which  have  already  been  mentioned,  the  other 
works  and  institutions  of  this  kind  are  chiefly 
those  for  facilitating  the  commerce  of  the 
society,  and  those  for  promoting  the  instruc¬ 
tion  of  the  people.  The  institutions  for  in¬ 
struction  are  of  two  kinds:  those  for  the  edu¬ 
cation  of  youth,  and  those  for  the  instruction 
of  people  of  all  ages.  The  consideration  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  expense  of  those 
different  sorts  of  public  works  and  institu¬ 
tions  may  be  most  properly  defrayed  will 
divide  this  third  part  of  the  present  chapter 
into  three  different  articles. 


Article  I 

Of  the  Public  Works  and  Institutions  for  facilitating  the  Commerce  of  the  Society. 
Andy  first,  of  those  which  are  necessary  for  facilitating  Commerce  in  general. 


That  the  erection  and  maintenance  of  the 
public  works  which  facilitate  the  commerce  of 
any  country,  such  as  good  roads,  bridges, 
navigable  canals,  harbours,  etc.,  must  re¬ 
quire  very  different  degrees  of  expense  in  the 
different  periods  of  society  is  evident  without 
any  proof.  The  expense  of  making  and  main¬ 
taining  the  public  roads  of  any  country  must 
evidently  increase  with  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  that  country,  or 
with  the  quantity  and  weight  of  the  goods 
which  it  becomes  necessary  to  fetch  and 
carry  upon  those  roads.  The  strength  of  a 
bridge  must  be  suited  to  the  number  and 
weight  of  the  carriages  which  are  likely  to 
pass  over  it.  The  depth  and  the  supply  of 
water  for  a  navigable  canal  must  be  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  number  and  tonnage  of  the 
lighters  which  are  likely  to  carry  goods  upon 
it;  the  extent  of  a  harbour  to  the  number  of 
the  shipping  which  are  likely  to  take  shelter 
in  it. 

It  does  not  seem  necessary  that  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  those  public  works  should  be  de¬ 
frayed  from  that  public  revenue,  as  it  is 
commonly  called,  of  which  the  collection  and 
application  is  in  most  countries  assigned  to 
the  executive  power.  The  greater  part  of 
such  public  works  may  easily  be  so  managed 
as  to  afford  a  particular  revenue  sufficient  for 
defraying  their  own  expense,  without  bring¬ 
ing  any  burden  upon  the  general  revenue 
of  the  society. 

A  highway,  a  bridge,  a  navigable  canal,  for 
example,  may  in  most  cases  be  both  made 


and  maintained  by  a  small  toll  upon  the  car¬ 
riages  which  make  use  of  them:  a  harbour, 
by  a  moderate  port-duty  upon  the  tonnage 
of  the  shipping  which  load  or  unload  in  it. 
The  coinage,  another  institution  for  facilitat¬ 
ing  commerce,  in  many  countries,  not  only 
defrays  its  own  expense,  but  affords  a  small 
revenue  or  seignorage  to  the  sovereign.  The 
post-office,  another  institution  for  the  same 
purpose,  over  and  above  defraying  its  own 
expense,  affords  in  almost  all  countries  a  very 
considerable  revenue  to  the  sovereign. 

When  the  carriages  which  pass  over  a  high¬ 
way  or  a  bridge,  and  the  lighters  which  sail 
upon  a  navigable  canal,  pay  toll  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  weight  or  their  tonnage,  they 
pay  for  the  maintenance  of  those  public 
works  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  wear  and 
tear  which  they  occasion  of  them.  It  seems 
scarce  possible  to  invent  a  more  equitable 
way  of  maintaining  such  works.  This  tax  or 
toll  too,  though  it  is  advanced  by  the  carrier, 
is  finally  paid  by  the  consumer,  to  whom  it 
must  always  be  charged  in  the  price  of  the 
goods.  As  the  expense  of  carriage,  however, 
is  very  much  reduced  by  means  of  such  public 
works,  the  goods,  notwithstanding  the  toll, 
come  cheaper  to  the  consumer  than  they 
could  otherwise  have  done;  their  price  not 
being  so  much  raised  by  the  toll  as  it  is 
lowered  by  the  cheapness  of  the  carriage. 
The  person  who  finally  pays  this  tax,  there¬ 
fore,  gains  by  the  application  more  than  he 
loses  by  the  payment  of  it.  His  payment  is 
exactly  in  proportion  to  his  gain.  It  is  in 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


31 6 

reality  no  more  than  a  part  of  that  gain  which 
lie  is  obliged  to  give  up  in  order  to  get  the 
rest.  It  seems  impossible  to  imagine  a  more 
equitable  method  of  raising  a  tax. 

When  the  toll  upon  carriages  of  luxury, 
upon  coaches,  post-chaises,  etc.,  is  made  some¬ 
what  higher  in  proportion  to  their  weight 
than  upon  carriages  of  necessary  use,  such  as 
carts,  waggons,  etc.,  the  indolence  and  vanity 
of  the  rich  is  made  to  contribute  in  a  very 
easy  manner  to  the  relief  of  the  poor,  by 
rendering  cheaper  the  transportation  of  heavy 
goods  to  all  the  different  parts  of  the  country. 

When  high  roads,  bridges,  canals,  etc.,  are 
in  this  manner  made  and  supported  by  the 
commerce  which  is  carried  on  by  means  of 
them,  they  can  be  made  only  where  that 
commerce  requires  them,  and  consequently 
where  it  is  proper  to  make  them.  Their  ex¬ 
penses  too,  their  grandeur  and  magnificence, 
must  be  suited  to  what  that  commerce  can 
afford  to  pay.  They  must  be  made  conse¬ 
quently  as  it  is  proper  to  make  them.  A  mag¬ 
nificent  high  road  cannot  be  made  through 
a  desert  country  where  there  is  little  or  no 
commerce,  or  merely  because  it  happens  to 
lead  to  the  country  villa  of  the  intendant  of 
the  province,  or  to  that  of  some  great  lord 
to  whom  the  intendant  finds  it  convenient  to 
make  his  court.  A  great  bridge  cannot  be 
thrown  over  a  river  at  a  place  where  nobody 
passes,  or  merely  to  embellish  the  view  from 
the  windows  of  a  neighbouring  palace:  things 
which  sometimes  happen  in  countries  where 
works  of  this  kind  are  carried  on  by  any  other 
revenue  than  that  which  they  themselves  are 
capable  of  affording. 

In  several  different  parts  of  Europe  the  toll 
or  lock-duty  upon  a  canal  is  the  property  of 
private  persons,  whose  private  interest  obliges 
them  to  keep  up  the  canal.  If  it  is  not  kept 
in  tolerable  order,  the  navigation  necessarily 
ceases  altogether,  and  along  with  it  the  whole 
profit  which  they  can  make  by  the  tolls.  If 
those  tolls  were  put  under  the  management  of 
commissioners,  who  had  themselves  no  in¬ 
terest  in  them,  they  might  be  less  attentive 
to  the  maintenance  of  the  works  which  pro¬ 
duced  them.  The  canal  of  Languedoc  cost  the 
King  of  France  and  the  province  upwards  of 
thirteen  millions  of  livres,  which  (at  twenty- 
eight  livres  the  mark  of  silver,  the  value  of 
French  money  in  the  end  of  the  last  century) 
amounted  to  upwards  of  nine  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  sterling.  When  that  great  work 
was  finished,  the  most  likely  method,  it  was 
found,  of  keeping  it  in  constant  repair  was  to 
make  a  present  of  the  tolls  to  Riquet  the  engi¬ 
neer,  who  planned  and  conducted  the  work. 
Those  tolls  constitute  at  present  a  very  large 
estate  to  the  different  branches  of  the  family 
of  that  gentleman,  who  have,  therefore,  a 


great  interest  to  keep  the  work  in  constant 
repair.  But  had  those  tolls  been  put  under 
the  management  of  commissioners,  who  had 
no  such  interest,  they  might  perhaps  have 
been  dissipated  in  ornamental  and  unneces¬ 
sary  expenses,  while  the  most  essential  parts 
of  the  work  were  allowed  to  go  to  ruin. 

The  tolls  for  the  maintenance  of  a  high  road 
cannot  with  any  safety  be  made  the  property 
of  private  persons.  A  high  road,  though  en¬ 
tirely  neglected,  does  not  become  altogether 
impassable,  though  a  canal  does.  The  pro¬ 
prietors  of  the  tolls  upon  a  high  road,  there¬ 
fore,  might  neglect  altogether  the  repair  of 
the  road,  and  yet  continue  to  levy  very  nearly 
the  same  tolls.  It  is  proper,  therefore,  that  the 
tolls  for  the  maintenance  of  such  a  work 
should  be  put  under  the  management  of  com¬ 
missioners  or  trustees. 

In  Great  Britain,  the  abuses  which  the 
trustees  have  committed  in  the  management 
of  those  tolls  have  in  many  cases  been  very 
justly  complained  of.  At  many  turnpikes,  it 
has  been  said,  the  money  levied  is  more  than 
double  of  what  is  necessary  for  executing,  in 
the  completest  manner,  the  work  which  is 
often  executed  in  very  slovenly  manner,  and 
sometimes  not  executed  at  all.  The  system  of 
repairing  the  high  roads  by  tolls  of  this  kind, 
it  must  be  observed,  is  not  of  very  long 
standing.  We  should  not  wonder,  therefore, 
if  it  has  not  yet  been  brought  to  that  degree 
of  perfection  of  which  it  seems  capable.  If 
mean  and  improper  persons  are  frequently 
appointed  trustees,  and  if  proper  courts  of 
inspection  and  account  have  not  yet  been 
established  for  controlling  their  conduct,  and 
for  reducing  the  tolls  to  what  is  barely  suffi¬ 
cient  for  executing  the  work  to  be  done  by 
them,  the  recency  of  the  institution  both 
accounts  and  apologizes  for  those  defects,  of 
which,  by  the  wisdom  of  Parliament,  the 
greater  part  may  in  due  time  be  gradually 
remedied. 

The  money  levied  at  the  different  turn¬ 
pikes  in  Great  Britain  is  supposed  to  exceed 
so  much  what  is  necessary  for  repairing  the 
roads,  that  the  savings,  which,  with  proper 
economy,  might  be  made  from  it,  have  been 
considered,  even  by  some  ministers,  as  a  very 
great  resource  which  might  at  some  time  or 
another  be  applied  to  the  exigencies  of  the 
state.  Government,  it  has  been  said,  by  taking 
the  management  of  the  turnpikes  into  its  own 
hands,  and  by  employing  the  soldiers,  who 
would  work  for  a  very  small  addition  to  their 
pay,  could  keep  the  roads  in  good  order  at 
a  much  less  expense  than  it  can  be  done  by 
trustees,  who  have  no  other  workmen  to  em¬ 
ploy  but  such  as  derive  their  whole  subsist¬ 
ence  from  their  wages.  A  great  revenue,  half  a 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


million  perhaps,1  it  has  been  pretended,  might 
in  this  manner  be  gained  without  laying  any 
new  burden  upon  the  people;  and  the  turn¬ 
pike  roads  might  be  made  to  contribute  to 
the  general  expense  of  the  state,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  postoffice  does  at  present. 

That  a  considerable  revenue  might  be 
gained  in  this  manner  I  have  no  doubt, 
though  probably  not  near  so  much  as  the  pro¬ 
jectors  of  this  plan  have  supposed.  The  plan 
itself,  however,  seems  liable  to  several  very 
important  objections. 

First,  if  the  tolls  which  are  levied  at  the 
turnpikes  should  ever  be  considered  as  one 
of  the  resources  for  supplying  the  exigencies 
of  the  state,  they  would  certainly  be  aug¬ 
mented  as  those  exigencies  were  supposed  to 
require.  According  to  the  policy  of  Great 
Britain,  therefore,  they  would  probably  be 
augmented  very  fast.  The  facility  with  which 
a  great  revenue  could  be  drawn  from  them 
would  probably  encourage  administration  to 
recur  very  frequently  to  this  resource.  Though 
it  may,  perhaps,  be  more  than  doubtful 
whether  half  a  million  could  by  any  economy 
be  saved  out  of  the  present  tolls,  it  can  scarce 
be  doubted  but  that  a  million  might  be  saved 
out  of  them  if  they  were  doubled:  and  per¬ 
haps  two  millions  if  they  were  tripled."  This 
great  revenue,  too,  might  be  levied  without 
the  appointment  of  a  single  new  officer  to 
collect  and  receive  it.  But  the  turnpike  tolls 
being  continually  augmented  in  this  manner, 
instead  of  facilitating  the  inland  commerce 
of  the  country  as  at  present,  would  soon  be¬ 
come  a  very  great  incumbrance  upon  it.  The 
expense  of  transporting  all  heavy  goods  from 
one  part  of  the  country  to  another  would 
soon  be  so  much  increased,  the  market  for  all 
such  goods,  consequently,  would  soon  be  so 
much  narrowed,  that  their  production  would 
be  in  a  great  measure  discouraged,  and  the 
most  important  branches  of  the  domestic 
industry  of  the  country  annihilated  alto¬ 
gether. 

Secondly,  a  tax  upon  carriages  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  weight,  though  a  very  equal  tax 
when  applied  to  the  sole  purpose  of  repairing 
the  roads,  is  a  very  unequal  one  when  applied 
to  any  other  purpose,  or  to  supply  the  com¬ 
mon  exigencies  of  the  state.  When  it  is  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  sole  purpose  above  mentioned, 
each  carriage  is  supposed  to  pay  exactly  for 
the  wear  and  tear  which  that  carriage  occa- 

1Since  publishing  the  two  first  editions  of  this 
book,  I  have  got  good  reasons  to  believe  that  all 
the  turnpike  tolls  levied  in  Great  Britain  do  not 
produce  a  net  revenue  that  amounts  to  half  a 
million;  a  sum  which,  under  the  management  of 
Government,  would  not  be  sufficient  to  keep  in 
repair  five  of  the  principal  roads  in  the  kingdom. 

2I  have  now  good  reasons  to  believe  that  all 
these  conjectural  sums  are  by  much  too  large. 


317 

sions  of  the  roads.  But  when  it  is  applied  to 
any  other  purpose,  each  carriage  is  supposed 
to  pay  for  more  than  that  wear  and  tear,  and 
contributes  to  the  supply  of  some  other  exi¬ 
gency  of  the  state.  But  as  the  turnpike  toll 
raises  the  price  of  goods  in  proportion  to 
their  weight,  and  not  to  their  value,  it  is 
chiefly  paid  by  the  consumers  of  coarse  and 
bulky,  not  by  those  of  precious  and  light, 
commodities.  Whatever  exigency  of  the  state 
therefore  this  tax  might  be  intended  to  sup¬ 
ply,  that  exigency  would  be  chiefly  supplied 
at  the  expense  of  the  poor,  not  of  the  rich;  at 
the  expense  of  those  who  are  least  able  to 
supply  it,  not  of  those  who  are  most  able. 

Thirdly,  if  government  should  at  any  time 
neglect  the  reparation  of  the  high  roads,  it 
would  be  still  more  difficult  than  it  is  at  pres¬ 
ent  to  compel  the  proper  application  of  any 
part  of  the  turnpike  tolls.  A  large  revenue 
might  thus  be  levied  upon  the  people  with¬ 
out  any  part  of  it  being  applied  to  the  only 
purpose  to  which  a  revenue  levied  in  this 
manner  ought  ever  to  be  applied.  If  the 
meanness  and  poverty  of  the  trustees  of  turn¬ 
pike  roads  render  it  sometimes  difficult  at 
present  to  oblige  them  to  repair  their  wrong, 
their  wealth  and  greatness  would  render  it 
ten  times  more  so  in  the  case  which  is  here 
supposed. 

In  France,  the  funds  destined  for  the  rep¬ 
aration  of  high  roads  are  under  the  immediate 
direction  of  the  executive  power.  Those  funds 
consist  partly  in  a  certain  number  of  days* 
labour  which  the  country  people  are  in  most 
parts  of  Europe  obliged  to  give  to  the  repara¬ 
tion  of  the  highways,  and  partly  in  such  a 
portion  of  the  general  revenue  of  the  state 
as  the  king  chooses  to  spare  from  his  other 
expenses. 

By  the  ancient  law  of  France,  as  well  as  by 
that  of  most  other  parts  of  Europe,  the  la¬ 
bour  of  the  country  people  was  under  the 
direction  of  a  local  or  provincial  magistracy, 
which  had  no  immediate  dependency  upon 
the  king’s  council.  But  by  the  present  prac¬ 
tice  both  the  labour  of  the  country  people, 
and  whatever  other  fund  the  king  may  choose 
to  assign  for  the  reparation  of  the  high  roads 
in  any  particular  province  or  generality,  are 
entirely  under  the  management  of  the  intend- 
ant;  an  officer  who  is  appointed  and  removed 
by  the  king’s  council,  and  who  receives  his 
orders  from  it,  and  is  in  constant  correspond¬ 
ence  with  it.  In  the  progress  of  despotism  the 
authority  of  the  executive  power  gradually 
absorbs  that  of  every  other  power  in  the 
state,  and  assumes  to  itself  the  management 
of  every  branch  of  revenue  which  is  destined 
for  any  public  purpose.  In  France,  however, 
the  great  post-roads,  the  roads  which  make 
the  communication  between  the  principal 


318  The  Wealth 

towns  of  the  kingdom,  are  in  general  kept  in 
good  order,  and  in  some  provinces  are  even 
a  good  deal  superior  to  the  greater  part  of  the 
turnpike  roads  of  England.  But  what  we  call 
the  cross-roads,  that  is,  the  far  greater  part 
of  the  roads  in  the  country,  are  entirely  neg¬ 
lected,  and  are  in  many  places  absolutely  im¬ 
passable  for  any  heavy  carriage.  In  some 
places  it  is  even  dangerous  to  travel  on  horse¬ 
back,  and  mules  are  the  only  conveyances 
which  can  safely  be  trusted.  The  proud  minis¬ 
ter  of  an  ostentatious  court  may  frequently 
take  pleasure  in  executing  a  work  of  splen¬ 
dour  and  magnificence,  such  as  a  great  high¬ 
way,  which  is  frequently  seen  by  the  principal 
nobility,  whose  applauses  not  only  flatter  his 
vanity,  but  even  contribute  to  support  his  in¬ 
terest  at  court.  But  to  execute  a  great  number 
of  little  works,  in  which  nothing  that  can  be 
done  can  make  any  great  appearance,  or  ex¬ 
cite  the  smallest  degree  of  admiration  in  any 
traveller,  and  which,  in  short,  have  nothing 
to  recommend  them  but  their  extreme  utility, 
is  a  business  which  appears  in  every  respect 
too  mean  and  paltry  to  merit  the  attention 
of  so  great  a  magistrate.  Under  such  an  ad¬ 
ministration,  therefore,  such  works  are  almost 
always  entirely  neglected. 

In  China,  and  in  several  other  governments 
of  Asia,  the  executive  power  charges  itself 
both  with  the  reparation  of  the  high  roads 
and  with  the  maintenance  of  the  navigable 
canals.  In  the  instructions  which  are  given 
to  the  governor  of  each  province,  those  ob¬ 
jects,  it  is  said,  are  constantly  recommended 
to  him,  and  the  judgment  which  the  court 
forms  of  his  conduct  is  very  much  regulated 
by  the  attention  which  he  appears  to  have 
paid  to  this  part  of  his  instructions.  This 
branch  of  public  police  accordingly  is  said  to 
be  very  much  attended  to  in  all  those  coun¬ 
tries,  but  particularly  in  China,  where  the 
high  roads,  and  still  more  the  navigable  ca¬ 
nals,  it  is  pretended,  exceed  very  much  every¬ 
thing  of  the  same  kind  which  is  known  in 
Europe.  The  accounts  of  those  works,  how¬ 
ever,  which  have  been  transmitted  to  Europe, 
have  generally  been  drawn  up  by  weak  and 
wondering  travellers;  frequently  by  stupid 
and  lying  missionaries.  If  they  had  been  ex¬ 
amined  by  more  intelligent  eyes,  and  if  the 
accounts  of  them  had  been  reported  by  more 
faithful  witnesses,  they  would  not,  perhaps, 
appear  to  be  so  wonderful.  The  account  which 
Bernier  gives  of  some  works  of  this  kind  in 
Indostan  falls  very  much  short  of  what  had 
been  reported  of  them  by  other  travellers, 
more  disposed  to  the  marvellous  than  he  was. 
It  may  too,  perhaps,  be  in  those  countries,  as 
in  France,  where  the  great  roads,  the  great 
communications  which  are  likely  to  be  the 
subjects  of  conversation  at  the  court  and  in 


of  Nations 

the  capital,  are  attended  to,  and  all  the  rest 
neglected.  In  China,  besides,  in  Indostan,  and 
in  several  other  governments  of  Asia,  the  rev¬ 
enue  of  the  sovereign  arises  almost  altogether 
from  a  land  tax  or  land  rent,  which  rises  or 
falls  with  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land.  The  great  interest  of  the 
sovereign,  therefore,  his  revenue,  is  in  such 
countries  necessarily  and  immediately  con¬ 
nected  with  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  with 
the  greatness  of  its  produce,  and  with  the 
value  of  its  produce.  But  in  order  to  render 
that  produce  both  as  great  and  as  valuable 
as  possible,  it  is  necessary  to  procure  to  it 
as  extensive  a  market  as  possible,  and  conse¬ 
quently  to  establish  the  freest,  the  easiest,  and 
the  least  expensive  communication  between 
all  the  different  parts  of  the  country;  which 
can  be  done  only  by  means  of  the  best  roads 
and  the  best  navigable  canals.  But  the  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  sovereign  does  not,  in  any  part  of 
Europe,  arise  chiefly  from  a  land  tax  or  land 
rent.  In  all  the  great  kingdoms  of  Europe, 
perhaps,  the  greater  part  of  it  may  ultimately 
depend  upon  the  produce  of  the  land:  but 
that  dependency  is  neither  so  immediate,  nor 
so  evident.  In  Europe,  therefore,  the  sover¬ 
eign  does  not  feel  himself  so  directly  called 
upon  to  promote  the  increase,  both  in  quan¬ 
tity  and  value,  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  or, 
by  maintaining  good  roads  and  canals,  to 
provide  the  most  extensive  market  for  that 
produce.  Though  it  should  be  true,  therefore, 
what  I  apprehend  is  not  a  little  doubtful,  that 
in  some  parts  of  Asia  this  department  of  the 
public  police  is  very  properly  managed  by  the 
executive  power,  there  is  not  the  least  prob¬ 
ability  that,  during  the  present  state  of  things, 
it  could  be  tolerably  managed  by  that  power 
in  any  part  of  Europe. 

Even  those  public  works  which  are  of  such 
a  nature  that  they  cannot  afford  any  revenue 
for  maintaining  themselves,  but  of  which  the 
conveniency  is  nearly  confined  to  some  par¬ 
ticular  place  or  district,  are  always  better 
maintained  by  a  local  or  provincial  revenue, 
under  the  management  of  a  local  or  provin¬ 
cial  administration,  than  by  the  general  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  state,  of  which  the  executive  power 
must  always  have  the  management.  Were  the 
streets  of  London  to  be  lighted  and  paved  at 
the  expense  of  the  treasury,  is  there  any  prob¬ 
ability  that  they  would  be  so  well  lighted  and 
paved  as  they  are  at  present,  or  even  at  so 
small  an  expense?  The  expense,  besides,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  raised  by  a  local  tax  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  each  particular  street,  parish, 
or  district  in  London,  would,  in  this  case,  be 
defrayed  out  of  the  general  revenue  of  the 
state,  and  would  consequently  be  raised  by  a 
tax  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  kingdom, 
of  whom  the  greater  part  derive  no  sort  of 


The  Expenses 

benefit  from  the  lighting  and  paving  of  the 
streets  of  London. 

The  abuses  which  sometimes  creep  into  the 
local  and  provincial  administration  of  a  local 
and  provincial  revenue,  how  enormous  soever 
they  may  appear,  are  in  reality,  however,  al¬ 
most  always  very  trifling  in  comparison  of 
those  which  commonly  take  place  in  the  ad¬ 
ministration  and  expenditure  of  the  revenue 
of  a  great  empire.  They  are,  besides,  much 
more  easily  corrected.  Under  the  local  or  pro¬ 
vincial  administration  of  the  justices  of  the 
peace  in  Great  Britain,  the  six  days’  labour 
which  the  country  people  are  obliged  to  give 
to  the  reparation  of  the  highways  is  not  al¬ 
ways  perhaps  very  judiciously  applied,  but  it 
is  scarce  ever  exacted  with  any  circumstances 
of  cruelty  or  oppression.  In  France,  under  the 
administration  of  the  intendants,  the  applica¬ 
tion  is  not  always  more  judicious,  and  the 
exaction  is  frequently  the  most  cruel  and  op¬ 
pressive.  Such  Corvees,  as  they  are  called, 
make  one  of  the  principal  instruments  of  tyr¬ 
anny  by  which  those  officers  chastise  any 
parish  or  communaute  which  has  had  the 
misfortune  to  fall  under  their  displeasure. 

Of  the  Public  Works  and  Institutions  which  are 

necessary  for  facilitating  particular  Branches 

of  Commerce 

The  object  of  the  public  works  and  insti¬ 
tutions  above  mentioned  is  to  facilitate  com¬ 
merce  in  general.  But  in  order  to  facilitate 
some  particular  branches  of  it,  particular  in¬ 
stitutions  are  necessary,  which  again  require 
a  particular  and  extraordinary  expense. 

Some  particular  branches  of  commerce, 
which  are  carried  on  with  barbarous  and  un¬ 
civilised  nations,  require  extraordinary  pro¬ 
tection.  An  ordinary  store  or  counting-house 
could  give  little  security  to  the  goods  of  the 
merchants  who  trade  to  the  western  coast  of 
Africa.  To  defend  them  from  the  barbarous 
natives,  it  is  necessary  that  the  place  where 
they  are  deposited  should  be,  in  some  meas¬ 
ure,  fortified.  The  disorders  in  the  government 
of  Indostan  have  been  supposed  to  render  a 
like  precaution  necessary  even  among  that 
mild  and  gentle  people;  and  it  was  under  pre¬ 
tence  of  securing  their  persons  and  property 
from  violence  that  both  the  English  and 
French  East  India  Companies  were  allowed 
to  erect  the  first  forts  which  they  possessed 
in  that  country.  Among  other  nations,  whose 
vigorous  government  will  suffer  no  strangers 
to  possess  any  fortified  place  within  their  ter¬ 
ritory,  it  may  be  necessary  to  maintain  some 
ambassador,  minister,  or  counsel,  who  may 
both  decide,  according  to  their  own  customs, 
the  differences  arising  among  his  own  country¬ 
men,  and,  in  their  disputes  with  the  natives, 
may,  by  means  of  his  public  character,  inter¬ 


of  the  Sovereign  319 

fere  with  more  authority,  and  afford  them  a 
more  powerful  protection,  than  they  could 
expect  from  any  private  man.  The  interests 
of  commerce  have  frequently  made  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  maintain  ministers  in  foreign  coun¬ 
tries  where  the  purposes,  either  of  war  or 
alliance,  would  not  have  required  any.  The 
commerce  of  the  Turkey  Company  first  occa¬ 
sioned  the  establishment  of  an  ordinary  am¬ 
bassador  at  Constantinople.  The  first  English 
embassies  to  Russia  arose  altogether  from 
commercial  interests.  The  constant  interfer¬ 
ence  which  those  interests  necessarily  occa¬ 
sioned  between  the  subject?  of  the  different 
states  of  Europe,  has  probably  introduced 
the  custom  of  keeping,  in  all  neighbouring 
countries,  ambassadors  or  ministers  constant¬ 
ly  resident  even  in  the  time  of  peace.  This 
custom,  unknown  to  ancient  times,  seems  not 
to  be  older  than  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  or 
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century;  that  is, 
than  the  time  when  commerce  first  began  to 
extend  itself  to  the  greater  part  of  the  nations 
of  Europe,  and  when  they  first  began  to  at¬ 
tend  to  its  interests. 

It  seems  not  unreasonable  that  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  expense  which  the  protection  of  any 
particular  branch  of  commerce  may  occasion 
should  be  defrayed  by  a  moderate  tax  upon 
that  particular  branch;  by  a  moderate  fine, 
for  example,  to  be  paid  by  the  traders  when 
they  first  enter  into  it,  or,  what  is  more  equal, 
by  a  particular  duty  of  so  much  per  cent 
upon  the  goods  which  they  either  import 
into,  or  export  out  of,  the  particular  coun¬ 
tries  with  which  it  is  carried  on.  The  protec¬ 
tion  of  trade  in  general,  from  pirates  and  free¬ 
booters,  is  said  to  have  given  occasion  to  the 
first  institution  of  the  duties  of  customs.  But, 
if  it  was  thought  reasonable  to  lay  a  general 
tax  upon  trade,  in  order  to  defray  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  protecting  trade  in  general,  it  should 
seem  equally  reasonable  to  lay  a  particular 
tax  upon  a  particular  branch  of  trade,  in 
order  to  defray  the  extraordinary  expense  of 
protecting  that  branch. 

The  protection  of  trade  in  general  has  al¬ 
ways  been  considered  as  essential  to  the  de¬ 
fence  of  the  commonwealth,  and,  upon  that 
account,  a  necessary  part  of  the  duty  of  the 
executive  power.  The  collection  and  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  general  duties  of  customs,  there¬ 
fore,  have  always  been  left  to  that  power. 
But  the  protection  of  any  particular  branch 
of  trade  is  a  part  of  the  general  protection  of 
trade;  a  part,  therefore,  of  the  duty  of  that 
power;  and  if  nations  always  acted  consist¬ 
ently,  the  particular  duties  levied  for  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  such  particular  protection  should  al¬ 
ways  have  been  left  equally  to  its  disposal. 
But  in  this  respect,  as  well  as  in  many  others, 
nations  have  not  always  acted  consistently; 


320  The  W ealth 

and  in  the  greater  part  of  the  commercial 
states  of  Europe,  particular  companies  of 
merchants  have  had  the  address  to  persuade 
the  legislature  to  entrust  to  them  the  per¬ 
formance  of  this  part  of  the  duty  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  together  with  all  the  powers  which  are 
necessarily  connected  with  it. 

These  companies,  though  they  may,  per¬ 
haps,  have  been  useful  for  the  first  introduc¬ 
tion  of  some  branches  of  commerce,  by  mak¬ 
ing,  at  their  own  expense,  an  experiment 
which  the  state  might  not  think  it  prudent 
to  make,  have  in  the  long  run  proved,  univer¬ 
sally,  either  burdensome  or  useless,  and  have 
either  mismanaged  or  confined  the  trade. 

When  those  companies  do  not  trade  upon 
a  joint  stock,  but  are  obliged  to  admit  any 
person,  properly  qualified,  upon  paying  a  cer¬ 
tain  fine,  and  agreeing  to  submit  to  the  regu¬ 
lations  of  the  company,  each  member  trading 
upon  his  own  stock,  and  at  his  own  risk,  they 
are  called  regulated  companies.  When  they 
trade  upon  a  joint  stock,  each  member  shar¬ 
ing  in  the  common  profit  or  loss  in  proportion 
to  his  share  in  this  stock,  they  are  called  joint 
stock  companies.  Such  companies,  whether 
regulated  or  joint  stock,  sometimes  have,  and 
sometimes  have  not,  exclusive  privileges. 

Regulated  companies  resemble,  in  every  re¬ 
spect,  the  corporations  of  trades  so  common 
in  the  cities  and  towns  of  all  the  different 
countries  of  Europe,  and  are  a  sort  of  en¬ 
larged  monopolies  of  the  same  kind.  As  no 
inhabitant  of  a  town  can  exercise  an  incorpo¬ 
rated  trade  without  first  obtaining  his  free¬ 
dom  in  the  corporation,  so  in  most  cases  no 
subject  of  the  state  can  lawfully  carry  on  any 
branch  of  foreign  trade,  for  which  a  regulated 
company  is  established,  without  first  becom¬ 
ing  a  member  of  that  company.  The  monop¬ 
oly  is  more  or  less  strict  according  as  the 
terms  of  admission  are  more  or  less  difficult; 
and  according  as  the  directors  of  the  com¬ 
pany  have  more  or  less  authority,  or  have  it 
more  or  less  in  their  power  to  manage  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  confine  the  greater  part  of 
the  trade  to  themselves  and  their  particular 
friends.  In  the  most  ancient  regulated  com¬ 
panies  the  privileges  of  apprenticeship  were 
the  same  as  in  other  corporations,  and  en¬ 
titled  the  person  who  had  served  his  time  to 
a  member  of  the  company  to  become  himself 
a  member,  either  without  paying  any  fine,  or 
upon  paying  a  much  smaller  one  than  what 
was  exacted  of  other  people.  The  usual  cor¬ 
poration  spirit,  wherever  the  law  does  not 
restrain  it,  prevails  in  all  regulated  compan¬ 
ies.  When  they  have  been  allowed  to  act 
according  to  their  natural  genius,  they  have 
always,  in  order  to  confine  the  competition  to 
as  small  a  number  of  persons  as  possible, 
endeavoured  to  subject  the  trade  to  many 


of  Nations 

burdensome  regulations.  When  the  law  has 
restrained  them  from  doing  this,  they  have 
become  altogether  useless  and  insignificant. 

The  regulated  companies  for  foreign  com¬ 
merce  which  at  present  subsist  in  Great  Brit¬ 
ain  are  the  ancient  merchant  adventurers’ 
company,  now  commonly  called  the  Hamburg 
Company,  the  Russia  Company,  the  East- 
land  Company,  the  Turkey  Company,  and 
the  African  Company. 

The  terms  of  admission  into  the  Hamburg 
Company  are  now  said  to  be  quite  easy,  and 
the  directors  either  have  it  not  in  their  power 
to  subject  the  trade  to  any  burdensome  re¬ 
straint  or  regulations,  or,  at  least,  have  not  of 
late  exercised  that  power.  It  has  not  always 
been  so.  About  the  middle  of  the  last  century, 
the  fine  for  admission  was  fifty,  and  at  one 
time  one  hundred  pounds,  and  the  conduct 
of  the  company  was  said  to  be  extremely  op¬ 
pressive.  In  1643,  in  1645,  and  in  1661,  the 
clothiers  and  free  traders  of  the  West  of  Eng¬ 
land  complained  of  them  to  Parliament  as  of 
monopolists  who  confined  the  trade  and  op¬ 
pressed  the  manufactures  of  the  country. 
Though  those  complaints  produced  an  Act  of 
Parliament,  they  had  probably  intimidated  the 
company  so  far  as  to  oblige  them  to  reform 
their  conduct.  Since  that  time,  at  least,  there 
has  been  no  complaints  against  them.  By  the 
10th  and  11th  of  William  III,  c.  6,  the  fine 
for  admission  into  the  Russia  Company  was 
reduced  to  five  pounds;  and  by  the  25th  of 
Charles  II,  c.  7,  that  for  admission  into  the 
Eastland  Company  to  forty  shillings,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  Sweden,  Denmark,  and 
Norway,  all  the  countries  on  the  north  side 
of  the  Baltic,  were  exempted  from  their  ex¬ 
clusive  charter.  The  conduct  of  those  com¬ 
panies  had  probably  given  occasion  to  those 
two  Acts  of  Parliament.  Before  that  time, 
Sir  Josiah  Child  had  represented  both  these 
and  the  Hamburg  Company  as  extremely  op¬ 
pressive,  and  imputed  to  their  bad  manage¬ 
ment  the  low  state  of  the  trade  which  we  at 
that  time  carried  on  to  the  countries  compre¬ 
hended  within  their  respective  charters.  But 
though  such  companies  may  not,  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  times,  be  very  oppressive,  they  are  cer¬ 
tainly  altogether  useless.  To  be  merely  useless, 
indeed,  is  perhaps  the  highest  eulogy  which 
can  ever  justly  be  bestowed  upon  a  regulated 
company;  and  all  the  three  companies  above 
mentioned  seem,  in  their  present  state,  to 
deserve  this  eulogy. 

The  fine  for  admission  into  the  Turkey 
Company  was  formerly  twenty-five  pounds 
for  all  persons  under  twenty-six  years  of  age, 
and  fifty  pounds  for  all  persons  above  that 
age.  Nobody  but  mere  merchants  could  be 
admitted;  a  restriction  which  excluded  all 
shopkeepers  and  retailers.  By  a  bye-law,  no 


The  Expenses 

British  manufactures  could  be  exported  to 
Turkey  but  in  the  general  ships  of  the  com¬ 
pany;  and  as  those  ships  sailed  always  from 
the  port  of  London,  this  restriction  confined 
the  trade  to  that  expensive  port,  and  the 
traders  to  those  who  lived  in  London  and  in 
its  neighbourhood.  By  another  bye-law,  no 
person  living  within  twenty  miles  of  London, 
and  not  free  of  the  city,  could  be  admitted  a 
member;  another  restriction  which,  joined  to 
the  foregoing,  necessarily  excluded  all  but  the 
freemen  of  London.  As  the  time  for  the  load¬ 
ing  and  sailing  of  those  general  ships  de¬ 
pended  altogether  upon  the  directors,  they 
could  easily  fill  them  with  their  own  goods 
and  those  of  their  particular  friends,  to  the 
exclusion  of  others,  who,  they  might  pretend, 
had  made  their  proposals  too  late.  In  this 
state  of  things,  therefore,  this  company  was 
in  every  respect  a  strict  and  oppressive  mon¬ 
opoly.  Those  abuses  gave  occasion  to  the  act 
of  the  26th  of  George  II,  c.  18,  reducing  the 
fine  for  admission  to  twenty  pounds  for  all 
persons,  without  any  distinction  of  ages,  or 
any  restriction,  either  to  mere  merchants,  or 
to  the  freemen  of  London;  and  granting  to 
all  such  persons  the  liberty  of  exporting,  from 
all  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  to  any  port  in 
Turkey,  all  British  goods  of  which  the  ex¬ 
portation  was  not  prohibited;  and  of  import¬ 
ing  from  thence  all  Turkish  goods  of  which 
the  importation  was  not  prohibited,  upon 
paying  both  the  general  duties  of  customs, 
and  the  particular  duties  assessed  for  defray¬ 
ing  the  necessary  expenses  of  the  company; 
and  submitting,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  law¬ 
ful  authority  of  the  British  ambassador  and 
consuls  resident  in  Turkey,  and  to  the  bye¬ 
laws  of  the  company  duly  enacted.  To  pre¬ 
vent  any  oppression  by  those  bye-laws,  it 
was  by  the  same  act  ordained,  that  if  any 
seven  members  of  the  company  conceived 
themselves  aggrieved  by  any  bye-law  which 
should  be  enacted  after  the  passing  of  this 
act,  they  might  appeal  to  the  Board  of  Trade 
and  Plantations  (to  the  authority  of  which  a 
committee  of  the  Privy  Council  has  now  suc¬ 
ceeded)  ,  provided  such  appeal  was  brought 
within  twelve  months  after  the  bye-law  was 
enacted;  and  that  if  any  seven  members  con¬ 
ceived  themselves  aggrieved  by  any  bye-law 
which  had  been  enacted  before  the  passing 
of  this  act,  they  might  bring  a  like  appeal, 
provided  it  was  within  twelve  months  after 
the  day  on  which  this  act  was  to  take  place. 
The  experience  of  one  year,  however,  may 
not  always  be  sufficient  to  discover  to  all  the 
members  of  a  great  company  the  pernicious 
tendency  of  a  particular  bye-law;  and  if  sev¬ 
eral  of  them  should  afterwards  discover  it, 
neither  the  Board  of  Trade,  nor  the  commit¬ 
tee  of  council,  can  afford  them  any  redress. 


of  the  Sovereign  321 

The  object,  besides,  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
bye-laws  of  all  regulated  companies,  as  well 
as  of  all  other  corporations,  is  not  so  much 
to  oppress  those  who  are  already  members, 
as  to  discourage  others  from  becoming  so; 
which  may  be  done,  not  only  by  a  high  fine, 
but  by  many  other  contrivances.  The  con¬ 
stant  view  of  such  companies  is  always  to 
raise  the  rate  of  their  own  profit  as  high  as 
they  can;  to  keep  the  market,  both  for  the 
goods  which  they  export,  and  for  those  which 
they  import,  as  much  understocked  as  they 
can:  which  can  be  done  only  by  restraining 
the  competition,  or  by  discouraging  new  ad¬ 
venturers  from  entering  into  the  trade.  A  fine 
even  of  twenty  pounds,  besides,  though  it 
may  not  perhaps  be  sufficient  to  discourage 
any  man  from  entering  into  the  Turkey  trade 
with  an  intention  to  continue  in  it,  may  be 
enough  to  discourage  a  speculative  merchant 
from  hazarding  a  single  adventure  in  it.  In 
all  trades,  the  regular  established  traders, 
even  though  not  incorporated,  naturally  com¬ 
bine  to  raise  profits,  which  are  noway  so 
likely  to  be  kept,  at  all  times,  down  to  their 
proper  level,  as  by  the  occasional  competi¬ 
tion  of  speculative  adventurers.  The  Turkey 
trade,  though  in  some  measure  laid  open  by 
this  Act  of  Parliament,  is  still  considered  by 
many  people  as  very  far  from  being  alto¬ 
gether  free.  The  Turkey  Company  contribute 
to  maintain  an  ambassador  and  two  or  three 
consuls,  who,  like  other  public  ministers, 
ought  to  be  maintained  altogether  by  the 
state,  and  the  trade  laid  open  to  all  his  Maj¬ 
esty’s  subjects.  The  different  taxes  levied  by 
the  company,  for  this  and  other  corporation 
purposes,  might  afford  a  revenue  much  more 
than  sufficient  to  enable  the  state  to  maintain 
such  ministers. 

Regulated  companies,  it  was  observed  by 
Sir  Josiah  Child,  though  they  had  frequently 
supported  public  ministers,  had  never  main¬ 
tained  any  forts  or  garrisons  in  the  coun¬ 
tries  to  which  they  traded;  whereas  joint 
stock  companies  frequently  had.  And  in  real¬ 
ity  the  former  seem  to  be  much  more  unfit 
for  this  sort  of  service  than  the  latter.  First, 
the  directors  of  a  regulated  company  have  no 
particular  interest  in  the  prosperity  of  the 
general  trade  of  the  company  for  the  sake  of 
which  such  forts  and  garrisons  are  main¬ 
tained.  The  decay  of  that  general  trade  may 
even  frequently  contribute  to  the  advantage 
of  their  own  private  trade;  as  by  diminish¬ 
ing  the  number  of  their  competitors  it  may 
enable  them  both  to  buy  cheaper,  and  to  sell 
dearer.  The  directors  of  a  joint  stock  com¬ 
pany,  on  the  contrary,  having  only  their 
share  in  the  profits  which  are  made  upon 
the  common  stock  committed  to  their  man¬ 
agement,  have  no  private  trade  of  their  own 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


322 

of  which  the  interest  can  be  separated  from 
that  of  the  general  trade  of  the  company. 
Their  private  interest  is  connected  with  the 
prosperity  of  the  general  trade  of  the  com¬ 
pany,  and  with  the  maintenance  of  the  forts 
and  garrisons  which  are  necessary  for  its  de¬ 
fence.  They  are  more  likely,  therefore,  to 
have  that  continual  and  careful  attention 
which  that  maintenance  necessarily  requires. 
Secondly,  the  directors  of  a  joint  stock  com¬ 
pany  have  always  the  management  of  a  large 
capital,  the  joint  stock  of  the  company,  a 
part  of  which  they  may  frequently  employ, 
with  propriety,  in  building,  repairing,  and 
maintaining  such  necessary  forts  and  garri¬ 
sons.  But  the  directors  of  a  regulated  com¬ 
pany,  having  the  management  of  no  common 
capital,  have  no  other  fund  to  employ  in  this 
way  but  the  casual  revenue  arising  from  the 
admission  fines,  and  from  the  corporation 
duties  imposed  upon  the  trade  of  the  com¬ 
pany.  Though  they  had  the  same  interest, 
therefore,  to  attend  to  the  maintenance  of 
such  forts  and  garrisons,  they  can  seldom 
have  the  same  ability  to  render  that  attention 
effectual.  The  maintenance  of  a  public  minis¬ 
ter  requiring  scarce  any  attention,  and  but  a 
moderate  and  limited  expense,  is  a  business 
much  more  suitable  both  to  the  temper  and 
abilities  of  a  regulated  company. 

Long  after  the  time  of  Sir  Josiah  Child, 
however,  in  1750,  a  regulated  company  was 
established,  the  present  company  of  mer¬ 
chants  trading  to  Africa,  which  was  expressly 
charged  at  first  with  the  maintenance  of  all 
the  British  forts  and  garrisons  that  lie  be¬ 
tween  Cape  Blanc  and  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  and  afterwards  with  that  of  those  only 
which  lie  between  Cape  Rouge  and  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope.  The  act  which  establishes  this 
company  (the  23rd  of  George  II,  c.  31)  seems 
to  have  had  two  distinct  objects  in  view;  first, 
to  restrain  effectually  the  oppressive  and  mo¬ 
nopolizing  spirit  which  is  natural  to  the  di¬ 
rectors  of  a  regulated  company;  and  secondly, 
to  force  them,  as  much  as  possible,  to  give 
an  attention,  which  is  not  natural  to  them, 
towards  the  maintenance  of  forts  and  gar¬ 
risons. 

For  the  first  of  these  purposes  the  fine  for 
admission  is  limited  to  forty  shillings.  The 
company  is  prohibited  from  trading  in  their 
corporate  capacity,  or  upon  a  joint  stock;  from 
borrowing  money  upon  common  seal,  or  from 
laying  any  restraints  upon  the  trade  which 
may  be  carried  on  freely  from  all  places,  and 
by  all  persons  being  British  subjects,  and  pay¬ 
ing  the  fine.  The  government  is  in  a  committee 
of  nine  persons  who  meet  at  London,  but  who 
are  chosen  annually  by  the  freemen  of  the 
company  at  London,  Bristol,  and  Liverpool; 
three  from  each  place.  No  committee-man  can 


be  continued  in  office  for  more  than  three 
years  together.  Any  committee-man  might 
be  removed  by  the  Board  of  Trade  and  Plan¬ 
tations,  now  by  a  committee  council,  after 
being  heard  in  his  own  defence.  The  commit¬ 
tee  are  forbid  to  export  negroes  from  Africa, 
or  to  import  any  African  goods  into  Great 
Britain.  But  as  they  are  charged  with  the 
maintenance  of  forts  and  garrisons,  they  may, 
for  that  purpose,  export  from  Great  Britain 
to  Africa  goods  and  stores  of  different  kinds. 
Out  of  the  monies  which  they  shall  receive 
from  the  company,  they  are  allowed  a  sum 
not  exceeding  eight  hundred  pounds  for  the 
salaries  of  their  clerks  and  agents  at  London, 
Bristol,  and  Liverpool,  the  house  rent  of  their 
office  at  London,  and  all  other  expenses  of 
management,  commission,  and  agency  in  Eng¬ 
land.  What  remains  of  this  sum,  after  de¬ 
fraying  these  different  expenses,  they  may 
divide  among  themselves,  as  compensation  for 
their  trouble,  in  what  manner  they  think 
proper.  By  this  constitution,  it  might  have 
been  expected  that  the  spirit  of  monopoly 
would  have  been  effectually  restrained,  and 
the  first  of  these  purposes  sufficiently  an¬ 
swered.  It  would  seem,  however,  that  it  had 
not.  Though  by  the  4th  of  George  III,  c.  20, 
the  fort  of  Senegal,  with  all  its  dependencies, 
had  been  vested  in  the  company  of  merchants 
trading  to  Africa,  yet  in  the  year  following 
(by  the  5th  of  George  III,  c.  44)  not  only 
Senegal  and  its  dependencies,  but  the  whole 
coast  from  the  port  of  Sallee,  in  south  Bar¬ 
bary,  to  Cape  Rouge,  was  exempted  from  the 
jurisdiction  of  that  company,  was  vested  in 
the  crown,  and  the  trade  to  it  declared  free 
to  all  his  Majesty’s  subjects.  The  company 
had  been  suspected  of  restraining  the  trade, 
and  of  establishing  some  sort  of  improper 
monopoly.  It  is  not,  however,  very  easy  to 
conceive  how,  under  the  regulations  of  the 
23rd  of  George  II,  they  could  do  so.  In  the 
printed  debates  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
not  always  the  most  authentic  records  of 
truth,  I  observe,  however,  that  they  have  been 
accused  of  this.  The  members  of  the  commit¬ 
tee  of  nine,  being  all  merchants,  and  the 
governors  and  factors,  in  their  different  forts 
and  settlements,  being  all  dependent  upon 
them,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  latter  might 
have  given  peculiar  attention  to  the  consign¬ 
ments  and  commissions  of  the  former  which 
would  establish  a  real  monopoly. 

For  the  second  of  these  purposes,  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  the  forts  and  garrisons,  an  annual 
sum  has  been  allotted  to  them  by  Parliament, 
generally  about  £13,000.  For  the  proper  appli¬ 
cation  of  this  sum,  the  committee  is  obliged  to 
account  annually  to  the  Cursitor  Baron  of 
Exchequer;  which  account  is  afterwards  to  be 
laid  before  Parliament.  But  Parliament,  which 


323 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


gives  so  little  attention  to  the  application  of 
millions,  is  not  likely  to  give  much  to  that  of 
£13,000  a  year;  and  the  Cursitor  Baron  of 
Exchequer,  from  his  profession  and  education, 
is  not  likely  to  be  profoundly  skilled  in  the 
proper  expense  of  forts  and  garrisons.  The 
captains  of  his  Majesty's  navy,  indeed,  or  any 
other  commissioned  officers  appointed  by  the 
Board  of  Admiralty,  may  inquire  into  the 
condition  of  the  forts  and  garrisons,  and  re¬ 
port  their  observations  to  that  board.  But 
that  board  seems  to  have  no  direct  jurisdiction 
over  the  committee,  nor  any  authority  to 
correct  those  whose  conduct  it  may  thus  in¬ 
quire  into;  and  the  captains  of  his  Majesty's 
navy,  besides,  are  not  supposed  to  be  always 
deeply  learned  in  the  science  of  fortification. 
Removal  from  an  office  which  can  be  enjoyed 
only  for  the  term  of  three  years,  and  of  which 
the  lawful  emoluments,  even  during  that  term, 
are  so  very  small,  seems  to  be  the  utmost 
punishment  to  which  any  committee-man  is 
liable  for  any  fault,  except  direct  malversa¬ 
tion,  or  embezzlement,  either  of  the  public 
money,  or  of  that  of  the  company;  and  the 
fear  of  that  punishment  can  never  be  a  mo¬ 
tive  of  sufficient  weight  to  force  a  continual 
and  careful  attention  to  a  business  to  which 
he  has  no  other  interest  to  attend.  The  com¬ 
mittee  are  accused  of  having  sent  out  bricks 
and  stones  from  England  for  the  reparation 
of  Cape  Coast  Castle  on  the  coast  of  Guinea, 
a  business  for  which  Parliament  had  several 
times  granted  an  extraordinary  sum  of  money. 
These  bricks  and  stones  too,  which  had  thus 
been  sent  upon  so  long  a  voyage,  were  said  to 
have  been  of  so  bad  a  quality  that  it  was 
necessary  to  rebuild  from  the  foundation  the 
walls  which  had  been  repaired  with  them.  The 
forts  and  garrisons  which  lie  north  of  Cape 
Rouge  are  not  only  maintained  at  the  expense 
of  the  state,  but  are  under  the  immediate 
government  of  the  executive  power;  and  why 
those  which  lie  south  of  that  Cape,  and  which 
too  are,  in  part  at  least,  maintained  at  the 
expense  of  the  state,  should  be  under  a  differ¬ 
ent  government,  it  seems  not  very  easy  even 
to  imagine  a  good  reason.  The  protection  of 
the  Mediterranean  trade  was  the  original  pur¬ 
pose  of  pretence  of  the  garrisons  of  Gibraltar 
and  Minorca,  and  the  maintenance  and  gov¬ 
ernment  of  those  garrisons  has  always  been, 
very  properly,  committed,  not  to  the  Turkey 
Company,  but  to  the  executive  power.  In  the 
extent  of  its  dominion  consists,  in  a  great 
measure,  the  pride  and  dignity  of  that  power; 
and  it  is  not  very  likely  to  fail  in  attention 
to  what  is  necessary  for  the  defence  of  that 
dominion.  The  garrisons  at  Gibraltar  and 
Minorca,  accordingly,  have  never  been  neg¬ 
lected;  though  Minorca  has  been  twice  taken, 
and  is  now  probably  lost  for  ever,  that  disaster 


was  never  even  imputed  to  any  neglect  in  the 
executive  power.  I  would  not,  however,  be 
understood  to  insinuate  that  either  of  those 
expensive  garrisons  was  ever,  even  in  the 
smallest  degree,  necessary  for  the  purpose  for 
which  they  were  originally  dismembered  from 
the  Spanish  monarchy.  That  dismemberment, 
perhaps,  never  served  any  other  real  purpose 
than  to  alienate  from  England  her  natural 
ally  the  King  of  Spain,  and  to  unite  the  two 
principal  branches  of  the  house  of  Bourbon 
in  a  much  stricter  and  more  permanent  alli¬ 
ance  than  the  ties  of  blood  could  ever  have 
united  them. 

Joint  stock  companies,  established  either  by 
Royal  Charter  or  by  Act  of  Parliament,  differ 
in  several  respects,  not  only  from  regulated 
companies,  but  from  private  copartneries. 

First,  in  a  private  copartnery,  no  partner, 
without  the  consent  of  the  company,  can 
transfer  his  share  to  another  person,  or  intro¬ 
duce  a  new  member  into  the  company.  Each 
member,  however,  may,  upon  proper  warning, 
withdraw  from  the  copartnery,  and  demand 
payment  from  them  of  his  share  of  the  com¬ 
mon  stock.  In  a  joint  stock  company,  on  the 
contrary,  no  member  can  demand  payment  of 
his  share  from  the  company;  but  each  member 
can,  without  their  consent,  transfer  his  share 
to  another  person,  and  thereby  introduce  a 
new  member.  The  value  of  a  share  in  a  joint 
stock  is  always  the  price  which  it  will  bring 
in  the  market;  and  this  may  be  either  greater 
or  less,  in  any  proportion,  than  the  sum  which 
its  owner  stands  credited  for  in  the  stock  of 
the  company. 

Secondly,  in  a  private  copartnery,  each 
partner  is  bound  for  the  debts  contracted  by 
the  company  to  the  whole  extent  of  his  for¬ 
tune.  In  a  joint  stock  company,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  each  partner  is  bound  only  to  the 
extent  of  his  share. 

The  trade  of  a  joint  stock  company  is  al¬ 
ways  managed  by  a  court  of  directors.  This 
court,  indeed,  is  frequently  subject,  in  many 
respects,  to  the  control  of  a  general  court  of 
proprietors.  But  the  greater  part  of  those 
proprietors  seldom  pretend  to  understand 
anything  of  the  business  of  the  company,  and 
when  the  spirit  of  faction  happens  not  to 
prevail  among  them,  give  themselves  no 
trouble  about  it,  but  receive  contentedly  such 
half-yearly  or  yearly  dividend  as  the  directors 
think  proper  to  make  to  them.  This  total  ex¬ 
emption  from  trouble  and  from  risk,  beyond 
a  limited  sum,  encourages  many  people  to 
become  adventurers  in  joint  stock  companies, 
who  would,  upon  no  account,  hazard  their 
fortunes  in  any  private  copartnery.  Such 
companies,  therefore,  commonly  draw  to 
themselves  much  greater  stocks  than  any 
private  copartnery  can  boast  of.  The  trading 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


324 

stock  of  the  South  Sea  Company,  at  one  time, 
amounted  to  upwards  of  thirty-three  millions 
eight  hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  divided 
capital  of  the  Bank  of  England  amounts,  at 
present,  to  ten  millions  seven  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  pounds.  The  directors  of 
such  companies,  however,  being  the  managers 
rather  of  other  people’s  money  than  of  their 
own,  it  cannot  well  be  expected  that  they 
should  watch  over  it  with  the  same  anxious 
vigilance  with  which  the  partners  in  a  private 
copartnery  frequently  watch  over  their  own. 
Like  the  stewards  of  a  rich  man,  they  are  apt 
to  consider  attention  to  small  matters  as  not 
for  their  master’s  honour,  and  very  easily  give 
themselves  a  dispensation  from  having  it. 
Negligence  and  profusion,  therefore,  must  al¬ 
ways  prevail,  more  or  less,  in  the  management 
of  the  affairs  of  such  a  company.  It  is  upon 
this  account  that  joint  stock  companies  for 
foreign  trade  have  seldom  been  able  to  main¬ 
tain  the  competition  against  private  adven¬ 
turers.  They  have,  accordingly,  very  seldom 
succeeded  without  an  exclusive  privilege,  and 
frequently  have  not  succeeded  with  one.  With¬ 
out  an  exclusive  privilege  they  have  commonly 
mismanaged  the  trade.  With  an  exclusive 
privilege  they  have  both  mismanaged  and 
confined  it. 

The  Royal  African  Company,  the  prede¬ 
cessors  of  the  present  African  Company,  had 
an  exclusive  privilege  by  charter;  but  as  that 
charter  had  not  been  confirmed  by  Act  of 
Parliament,  the  trade,  in  consequence  of  the 
Declaration  of  Rights,  was,  soon  after  the 
revolution,  laid  open  to  all  his  Majesty’s  sub¬ 
jects.  The  Hudson’s  Bay  Company  are,  as 
to  their  legal  rights,  in  the  same  situation  as 
the  Royal  African  Company.  Their  exclusive 
charter  has  not  been  confirmed  by  Act  of 
Parliament.  The  South  Sea  Company,  as  long 
as  they  continued  to  be  a  trading  company, 
had  an  exclusive  privilege  confirmed  by  Act  of 
Parliament;  as  have  likewise  the  present 
United  Company  of  Merchants  trading  to 
the  East  Indies. 

The  Royal  African  Company  soon  found 
that  they  could  not  maintain  the  competition 
against  private  adventurers,  whom,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  Declaration  of  Rights,  they 
continued  for  some  time  to  call  interlopers, 
and  to  persecute  as  such.  In  1698,  however, 
the  private  adventurers  were  subjected  to  a 
duty  of  ten  per  cent  upon  almost  all  the  dif¬ 
ferent  branches  of  their  trade,  to  be  employed 
by  the  company  in  the  maintenance  of  their 
forts  and  garrisons  But,  notwithstanding  this 
heavy  tax,  the  company  were  still  unable  to 
maintain  the  competition.  Their  stock  and 
credit  gradually  declined.  In  1712,  their  debts 
had  become  so  great  that  a  particular  Act  of 
Parliament  was  thought  necessary,  both  for 


their  security  and  for  that  of  their  creditors. 
It  was  enacted  that  the  resolution  of  two- 
thirds  of  these  creditors  in  number  and  value 
should  bind  the  rest,  both  with  regard  to  the 
time  which  should  be  allowed  to  the  company 
for  the  payment  of  their  debts,  and  with 
regard  to  any  other  agreement  which  it  might 
be  thought  proper  to  make  with  them  con¬ 
cerning  those  debts.  In  1730,  their  affairs  were 
in  so  great  disorder  that  they  were  altogether 
incapable  of  maintaining  their  forts  and 
garrisons,  the  sole  purpose  and  pretext  of 
their  institution.  From  that  year,  till  their 
final  dissolution,  the  Parliament  judged  it 
necessary  to  allow  the  annual  sum  of  ten 
thousand  pounds  for  that  purpose.  In  1732, 
after  having  been  for  many  years  losers  by 
the  trade  of  carrying  negroes  to  the  West 
Indies,  they  at  last  resolved  to  give  it  up 
altogether;  to  sell  to  the  private  traders  to 
America  the  negroes  which  they  purchased 
upon  the  coast;  and  to  employ  their  servants 
in  a  trade  to  the  inland  parts  of  Africa  for 
gold  dust,  elephants’  teeth,  dyeing  drugs,  etc. 
But  their  success  in  this  more  confined  trade 
was  not  greater  than  in  their  former  extensive 
one.  Their  affairs  continued  to  go  gradually 
to  decline,  till  at  last,  being  in  every  respect 
a  bankrupt  company,  they  were  dissolved  by 
Act  of  Parliament,  and  their  forts  and  garri¬ 
sons  vested  in  the  present  regulated  company 
of  merchants  trading  to  Africa.  Before  the 
erection  of  the  Royal  African  Company,  there 
had  been  three  other  joint  stock  companies 
successively  established,  one  after  another,  for 
the  African  trade.  They  were  all  equally  un¬ 
successful.  They  all,  however,  had  exclusive 
charters,  which,  though  not  confirmed  by  Act 
of  Parliament,  were  in  those  days  supposed 
to  convey  a  real  exclusive  privilege. 

The  Hudson’s  Bay  Company,  before  their 
misfortunes  in  the  late  war,  had  been  much 
more  fortunate  than  the  Royal  African  Com¬ 
pany.  Their  necessary  expense  is  much  smaller. 
The  whole  number  of  people  whom  they  main¬ 
tain  in  their  different  settlements  and  habita¬ 
tions,  which  they  have  honoured  with  the 
name  of  forts,  is  said  not  to  exceed  a  hundred 
and  twenty  persons.  This  number,  however, 
is  sufficient  to  prepare  beforehand  the  cargo 
of  furs  and  other  goods  necessary  for  loading 
their  ships,  which,  on  account  of  the  ice,  can 
seldom  remain  above  six  or  eight  weeks  in 
those  seas.  This  advantage  of  having  a  cargo 
ready  prepared  could  not  for  several  years  be 
acquired  by  private  adventurers,  and  without 
it  there  seems  to  be  no  possibility  of  trading 
to  Hudson’s  Bay.  The  moderate  capital  of  the 
company,  which,  it  is  said,  does  not  exceed 
one  hundred  and  ten  thousand  pounds,  may 
besides  be  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  engross 
the  whole,  or  almost  the  whole,  trade  and 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


surplus  produce  of  the  miserable,  though  ex¬ 
tensive  country,  comprehended  within  their 
charter.  No  private  adventurers,  accordingly, 
.have  ever  attempted  to  trade  to  that  country 
in  competition  with  them.  This  company, 
therefore,  have  always  enjoyed  an  exclusive 
trade  in  fact,  though  they  may  have  no  right 
to  it  in  law.  Over  and  above  all  this,  the 
moderate  capital  of  this  company  is  said  to 
be  divided  among  a  very  small  number  of 
proprietors.  But  a  joint  stock  company,  con¬ 
sisting  of  a  small  number  of  proprietors,  with 
a  moderate  capital,  approaches  very  nearly 
to  the  nature  of  a  private  copartnery,  and 
may  be  capable  of  nearly  the  same  degree  of 
vigilance  and  attention.  It  is  not  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at,  therefore,  if,  in  consequence  of  these 
different  advantages,  the  Hudson’s  Bay  Com¬ 
pany  had,  before  the  late  war,  been  able  to 
carry  on  their  trade  with  a  considerable  de¬ 
gree  of  success.  It  does  not  seem  probable, 
however,  that  their  profits  ever  approached 
to  what  the  late  Mr.  Dobbs  imagined  them. 
A  much  more  sober  and  judicious  writer,  Mr. 
Anderson,  author  of  The  Historical  and 
Chronological  Deduction  of  Commerce ,  very 
justly  observes  that,  upon  examining  the 
accounts  of  which  Mr.  Dobbs  himself  was 
given  for  several  years  together  of  their  ex¬ 
ports  and  imports,  and  upon  making  proper 
allowances  for  their  extraordinary  risk  and 
expense,  it  does  not  appear  that  their  profits 
deserve  to  be  envied,  or  that  they  can  much, 
if  at  all,  exceed  the  ordinary  profits  of  trade. 

The  South  Sea  Company  never  had  any 
forts  or  garrisons  to  maintain,  and  therefore 
were  entirely  exempted  from  one  great  ex¬ 
pense  to  which  other  joint  stock  companies 
for  foreign  trade  are  subject.  But  they  had  an 
immense  capital  divided  among  an  immense 
number  of  proprietors.  It  was  naturally  to  be 
expected,  therefore,  that  folly,  negligence,  and 
profusion  should  prevail  in  the  whole  manage¬ 
ment  of  their  affairs.  The  knavery  and  extrav¬ 
agance  of  their  stock -jobbing  projects  are 
sufficiently  known,  and  the  explication  of 
them  would  be  foreign  to  the  present  subject. 
Their  mercantile  projects  were  not  much 
better  conducted.  The  first  trade  which  they 
engaged  in  was  that  of  supplying  the  Spanish 
West  Indies  with  negroes,  of  which  (in  con¬ 
sequence  of  what  was  called  the  Assiento 
contract  granted  them  by  the  Treaty  of 
Utrecht)  they  had  the  exclusive  privilege. 
But  as  it  was  not  expected  that  much  profit 
could  be  made  by  this  trade,  both  the  Por¬ 
tuguese  and  French  companies,  who  had 
enjoyed  it  upon  the  same  terms  before  them, 
having  been  ruined  by  it,  they  were  allowed, 
as  compensation,  to  send  annually  a  ship  of 
a  certain  burden  to  trade  directly  to  the 
Spanish  West  Indies.  Of  the  ten  voyages  which 


325 

this  annual  ship  was  allowed  to  make,  they 
are  said  to  have  gained  considerably  by  one, 
that  of  the  Royal  Caroline  in  1731,  and  to 
have  been  losers,  more  or  less,  by  almost  all 
the  rest.  Their  ill  success  was  imputed,  by 
their  factors  and  agents,  to  the  extortion  and 
oppression  of  the  Spanish  government;  but 
was,  perhaps,  principally  owing  to  the  pro¬ 
fusion  and  depredations  of  those  very  factors 
and  agents,  some  of  whom  are  said  to  have 
acquired  great  fortunes  even  in  one  year.  In 
1731,  the  company  petitioned  the  king  that 
they  might  be  allowed  to  dispose  of  the  trade 
and  tonnage  of  their  annual  ship,  on  account 
of  the  little  profit  which  they  made  by  it,  and 
to  accept  such  equivalent  as  they  could  obtain 
from  the  King  of  Spain. 

In  1724,  this  company  had  undertaken  the 
whale-fishery.  Of  this,  indeed,  they  had  no 
monopoly;  but  as  long  as  they  carried  it  on, 
no  other  British  subjects  appear  to  have  en¬ 
gaged  in  it.  Of  the  eight  voyages  which  their 
ships  made  to  Greenland,  they  were  gainers 
by  one,  and  losers  by  all  the  rest.  After  their 
eighth  and  last  voyage,  when  they  had  sold 
their  ships,  stores,  and  utensils,  they  found 
that  their  whole  loss,  upon  this  branch,  capital 
and  interest  included,  amounted  to  upwards 
of  two  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thousand 
pounds. 

In  1722,  this  company  petitioned  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  to  be  allowed  to  divide  their  immense 
capital  of  more  than  thirty-three  millions 
eight  hundred  thousand  pounds,  the  whole  of 
which  had  been  lent  to  government,  into  tw^o 
equal  parts:  The  one  half,  or  upwards  of  six¬ 
teen  millions  nine  hundred  thousand  pounds, 
to  be  put  upon  the  same  footing  with  other 
government  annuities,  and  not  to  be  subject 
to  the  debts  contracted,  or  losses  incurred, 
by  the  directors  of  the  company  in  the  pros¬ 
ecution  of  their  mercantile  projects;  the  other 
half  to  remain,  as  before,  a  trading  stock,  and 
to  be  subject  to  those  debts  and  losses.  The 
petition  was  too  reasonable  not  to  be  granted. 
In  1733,  they  again  petitioned  the  Parliament 
that  three-fourths  of  their  trading  stock  might 
be  turned  into  annuity  stock,  and  only  one- 
fourth  remain  as  trading  stock,  or  exposed  to 
the  hazards  arising  from  the  bad  management 
of  their  directors.  Both  their  annuity  and 
trading  stocks  had,  by  this  time,  been  reduced 
more  than  two  millions  each  by  several  differ¬ 
ent  payments  from  government;  so  that  this 
fourth  amounted  only  to  £3,662,784  8s.  6d. 
In  1718,  all  the  demands  of  the  company  up¬ 
on  the  King  of  Spain,  in  consequence  of  the 
Assiento  contract,  were,  by  the  Treaty  of 
Aix-la-Chapelle,  given  up  for  what  was  sup¬ 
posed  an  equivalent.  An  end  was  put  to  their 
trade  with  the  Spanish  West  Indies,  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  their  trading  stock  was  turned 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


326 

into  an  annuity  stock,  and  the  company 
ceased  in  every  respect  to  be  a  trading  com¬ 
pany. 

It  ought  to  be  observed  that  in  the  trade 
which  the  South  Sea  Company  carried  on  by 
means  of  their  annual  ship,  the  only  trade  by 
which  it  ever  was  expected  that  they  could 
make  any  considerable  profit,  they  were  not 
without  competitors,  either  in  the  foreign  or 
in  the  home  market.  At  Carthagena,  Porto 
Bello,  and  La  Vera  Cruz,  they  had  to  en¬ 
counter  the  competition  of  the  Spanish  mer¬ 
chants,  who  brought  from  Cadiz,  to  those 
markets,  European  goods  of  the  same  kind 
with  the  outward  cargo  of  their  ship;  and  in 
England  they  had  to  encounter  that  of  the 
English  merchants,  who  imported  from  Cadiz 
goods  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies  of  the  same 
kind  with  the  inward  cargo.  The  goods  both 
of  the  Spanish  and  English  merchants,  indeed, 
were,  perhaps,  subject  to  higher  duties.  But 
the  loss  occasioned  by  the  negligence,  pro¬ 
fusion,  and  malversation  of  the  servants  of 
the  company  had  probably  been  a  tax  much 
heavier  than  all  those  duties.  That  a  joint 
stock  company  should  be  able  to  carry  on 
successfully  any  branch  of  foreign  trade,  when 
private  adventurers  can  come  into  any  sort 
of  open  and  fair  competition  with  them,  seems 
contrary  to  all  experience. 

The  old  English  East  India  Company  was 
established  in  1600  by  a  charter  from  Queen 
Elizabeth.  In  the  first  twelve  voyages  which 
they  fitted  out  for  India,  they  appear  to  have 
traded  as  a  regulated  company,  with  separate 
stocks,  though  only  in  the  general  ships  of 
the  company.  In  1612,  they  united  into  a 
joint  stock.  Their  charter  was  exclusive,  and 
though  not  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament, 
was  in  those  days  supposed  to  convey  a  real 
exclusive  privilege.  For  many  years,  therefore, 
they  were  not  much  disturbed  by  interlopers. 
Their  capital,  which  never  exceeded  seven 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  pounds,  and 
of  which  fifty  pounds  was  a  share,  was  not  so 
exorbitant,  nor  their  dealings  so  extensive,  as 
to  afford  either  a  pretext  for  gross  negligence 
and  profusion,  or  a  cover  to  gross  malver¬ 
sation.  Notwithstanding  some  extraordinary 
losses,  occasioned  partly  by  the  malice  of  the 
Dutch  East  India  Company,  and  partly  by 
other  accidents,  they  carried  on  for  many 
years  a  successful  trade.  But  in  process  of 
time,  when  the  principles  of  liberty  were  bet¬ 
ter  understood,  it  became  every  day  more 
and  more  doubtful  how  far  a  Royal  Charter, 
not  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parliament,  could 
convey  an  exclusive  privilege.  Upon  this  ques¬ 
tion  the  decisions  of  the  courts  of  justice  were 
not  uniform,  but  varied  with  the  authority 
of  government  and  the  humours  of  the  times. 
Interlopers  multiplied  upon  them,  and  towards 


the  end  of  the  reign  of  Charles  II,  through  the 
whole  of  that  of  James  II  and  during  a  part 
of  that  of  William  III,  reduced  them  to  great 
distress.  In  1698,  a  proposal  was  made  to 
Parliament  of  advancing  two  millions  to 
government  at  eight  per  cent,  provided  the 
subscribers  were  erected  into  a  new  East  India 
Company  with  exclusive  privileges.  The  old 
East  India  Company  offered  seven  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  nearly  the  amount  of  their 
capital,  at  four  per  cent  upon  the  same  con¬ 
ditions.  But  such  was  at  that  time  the  state 
of  public  credit,  that  it  was  more  convenient 
for  government  to  borrow  two  millions  at 
eight  per  cent  than  seven  hundred  thousand 
pounds  at  four.  The  proposal  of  the  new 
subscribers  was  accepted,  and  a  new  East 
India  Company  established  in  consequence. 
The  old  East  India  Company,  however,  had 
a  right  to  continue  their  trade  till  1701.  They 
had,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  name  of  their 
treasurer,  subscribed,  very  artfully,  three 
hundred  and  fifteen  thousand  pounds  into 
the  stock  of  the  new.  By  a  negligence  in  the 
expression  of  the  Act  of  Parliament  which 
vested  the  East  India  trade  in  the  subscribers 
to  this  loan  of  two  millions,  it  did  not  appear 
evident  that  they  were  all  obliged  to  unite 
into  a  joint  stock.  A  few  private  traders,  whose 
subscriptions  amounted  only  to  seven  thou¬ 
sand  two  hundred  pounds,  insisted  upon  the 
privilege  of  trading  separately  upon  their  own 
stocks  and  at  their  own  risk.  The  old  East 
India  Company  had  a  right  to  a  separate 
trade  upon  their  old  stock  till  1701;  and  they 
had  likewise,  both  before  and  after  that  pe¬ 
riod,  a  right,  like  that  of  other  private  traders, 
to  a  separate  trade  upon  the  three  hundred 
and  fifteen  thousand  pounds  which  they  had 
subscribed  into  the  stock  of  the  new  company. 
The  competition  of  the  two  companies  with 
the  private  traders,  and  with  one  another,  is 
said  to  have  well-nigh  ruined  both.  Upon  a 
subsequent  occasion,  in  1730,  when  a  proposal 
was  made  to  Parliament  for  putting  the  trade 
under  the  management  of  a  regulated  com¬ 
pany,  and  thereby  laying  it  in  some  measure 
open,  the  East  India  Company,  in  opposition 
to  this  proposal,  represented  in  very  strong 
terms  what  had  been,  at  this  time,  the  miser¬ 
able  effects,  as  they  thought  them,  of  this 
competition.  In  India,  they  said,  it  raised  the 
price  of  goods  so  high  that  they  were  not 
worth  the  buying;  and  in  England,  by  over¬ 
stocking  the  market,  it  sunk  their  price  so 
low  that  no  profit  could  be  made  by  them. 
That  by  a  more  plentiful  supply,  to  the  great 
advantage  and  conveniency  of  the  public,  it 
must  have  reduced,  very  much,  the  price  of 
Indian  goods  in  the  English  market,  cannot 
well  be  doubted;  but  that  it  should  have  raised 
very  much  their  price  in  the  Indian  market 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


seems  not  very  probable,  as  all  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  demand  which  that  competition  could 
occasion  must  have  been  but  as  a  drop  of 
water  in  the  immense  ocean  of  Indian  Com¬ 
merce.  The  increase  of  demand,  besides, 
though  in  the  beginning  it  may  sometimes 
raise  the  price  of  goods,  never  fails  to  lower 
it  in  the  long  run.  It  encourages  production, 
and  thereby  increases  the  competition  of  the 
producers,  who,  in  order  to  undersell  one 
another,  have  recourse  to  new  divisions  of 
labour  and  new  improvements  of  art  which 
might  never  otherwise  have  been  thought  of. 
The  miserable  effects  of  which  the  company 
complained  were  the  cheapness  of  consump¬ 
tion  and  the  encouragement  given  to  produc¬ 
tion,  precisely  the  two  effects  which  it  is  the 
great  business  of  political  economy  to  pro¬ 
mote.  The  competition,  however,  of  which 
they  gave  this  doleful  account,  had  not  been 
allowed  to  be  of  long  continuance.  In  1702, 
the  two  companies  were,  in  some  measure, 
united  by  an  indenture  tripartite,  to  which  the 
queen  was  the  third  party;  and  in  1708,  they 
were,  by  Act  of  Parliament,  perfectly  con¬ 
solidated  into  one  company  by  their  present 
name  of  the  The  United  Company  of  Mer¬ 
chants  trading  to  the  East  Indies.  Into  this 
act  it  was  thought  worth  while  to  insert  a 
clause  allowing  the  separate  traders  to  con¬ 
tinue  their  trade  till  Michaelmas  1711,  but 
at  the  same  time  empowering  the  directors, 
upon  three  years’  notice,  to  redeem  their  lit¬ 
tle  capital  of  seven  thousand  two  hundred 
pounds,  and  thereby  to  convert  the  whole 
stock  of  the  company  into  a  joint  stock.  By 
the  same  act,  the  capital  of  the  company,  in 
consequence  of  a  new  loan  to  government, 
was  augmented  from  two  millions  to  three 
millions  two  hundred  thousand  pounds.  In 
1743,  the  company  advanced  another  million 
to  government.  But  this  million  being  raised, 
not  by  a  call  upon  the  proprietors,  but  by 
selling  annuities  and  contracting  bond-debts, 
it  did  not  augment  the  stock  upon  which 
the  proprietors  could  claim  a  dividend.  It 
augmented,  however,  their  trading  stock,  it 
being  equally  liable  with  the  other  three 
millions  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  to  the 
losses  sustained,  and  debts  contracted,  by  the 
company  in  prosecution  of  their  mercantile 
projects.  From  1708,  or  at  least  from  1711, 
this  company,  being  delivered  from  all  com¬ 
petitors,  and  fully  established  in  the  monopoly 
of  the  English  commerce  to  the  East  Indies, 
carried  on  a  successful  trade,  and  from  their 
profits  made  annually  a  moderate  dividend  to 
their  proprietors.  During  the  French  war, 
which  began  in  1741,  the  ambition  of  Mr. 
Dupleix,  the  French  governor  of  Pondicherry, 
involved  them  in  the  wars  of  the  Carnatic, 
and  in  the  politics  of  the  Indian  princes.  After 


327 

many  signal  successes,  and  equally  signal 
losses,  they  at  last  lost  Madras,  at  that  time 
their  principal  settlement  in  India.  It  was 
restored  to  them  by  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la- 
Chapelle;  and  about  this  time  the  spirit  of 
war  and  conquest  seems  to  have  taken  pos¬ 
session  of  their  servants  in  India,  and  never 
since  to  have  left  them.  During  the  French 
war,  which  began  in  1755,  their  arms  partook 
of  the  general  good  fortune  of  those  of  Great 
Britain.  They  defended  Madras,  took  Pondi¬ 
cherry,  recovered  Calcutta,  and  acquired  the 
revenues  of  a  rich  and  extensive  territory, 
amounting,  it  was  then  said,  to  upwards  of 
three  millions  a  year.  They  remained  for  sev¬ 
eral  years  in  quiet  possession  of  this  revenue: 
but  in  1767,  administration  laid  claim  to  their 
territorial  acquisitions,  and  the  revenue  arising 
from  them,  as  of  right  belonging  to  the  crown; 
and  the  company,  in  compensation  for  this 
claim,  agreed  to  pay  the  government  four 
hundred  thouand  pounds  a  year.  They  had 
before  this  gradually  augmented  their  divi¬ 
dend  from  about  six  to  ten  per  cent;  that  is, 
upon  their  capital  of  three  millions  two 
hundred  thousand  pounds  they  had  increased 
it  by  a  hundred  and  twenty-eight  thousand 
pounds,  or  had  raised  it  from  one  hundred 
and  ninety-two  thousand  to  three  hundred 
and  twenty  thousand  pounds  a  year.  They 
were  attempting  about  this  time  to  raise  it 
still  further,  to  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent, 
which  would  have  made  their  annual  pay¬ 
ments  to  their  proprietors  equal  to  what  they 
had  agreed  to  pay  annually  to  government, 
or  to  four  hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year. 
But  diiring  the  two  years  in  which  their 
agreement  with  government  was  to  take  place, 
they  were  restrained  from  any  further  im 
crease  of  dividend  by  two  successive  Acts  of 
Parliament,  of  which  the  object  was  to  enable 
them  to  make  a  speedier  progress  in  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  their  debts,  which  were  at  this  time 
estimated  at  upwards  of  six  or  seven  millions 
sterling.  In  1769,  they  renewed  their  agree¬ 
ment  with  government  for  five  years  more, 
and  stipulated  that  during  the  course  of  that 
period  they  should  be  allowed  gradually  to 
increase  their  dividend  to  twelve  and  a  half 
per  cent;  never  increasing  it,  however,  more 
than  one  per  cent  in  one  year.  This  increase 
of  dividend,  therefore,  when  it  had  risen  to 
its  utmost  height,  could  augment  their  an¬ 
nual  payments,  to  their  proprietors  and  gov¬ 
ernment  together,  but  by  six  hundred  and 
eight  thousand  pounds  beyond  what  they  had 
been  before  their  late  territorial  acquisitions. 
What  the  gross  revenue  of  those  territorial 
acquisitions  was  supposed  to  amount  to  has 
already  been  mentioned;  and  by  an  account 
brought  by  the  Cruttenden  East  Indiaman  in 
1768,  the  net  revenue,  clear  of  all  deductions 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


328 

and  military  charges,  was  stated  at  two 
millions  forty-eight  thousand  seven  hundred 
and  forty-seven  pounds.  They  were  said  at 
the  same  time  to  possess  another  revenue, 
arising  partly  from  lands,  but  chiefly  from 
the  customs  established  at  their  different  set¬ 
tlements,  amounting  to  four  hundred  and 
thirty-nine  thousand  pounds.  The  profits  of 
their  trade  too,  according  to  the  evidence  of 
their  chairman  before  the  House  of  Commons, 
amounted  at  this  time  to  at  least  four  hundred 
thousand  pounds  a  year,  according  to  that  of 
their  accountant,  to  at  least  five  hundred 
thousand;  according  to  the  lowest  account,  at 
least  equal  to  the  highest  dividend  that  was 
to  be  paid  to  their  proprietors.  So  great  a 
revenue  might  certainly  have  afforded  an 
augmentation  of  six  hundred  and  eight  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  in  their  annual  payments,  and 
at  the  same  time  have  left  a  large  sinking 
fund  sufficient  for  the  speedy  reduction  of 
their  debts.  In  1773,  however,  their  debts, 
instead  of  being  reduced,  were  augmented 
by  an  arrear  to  the  treasury  in  the  payment 
of  the  four  hundred  thousand  pounds,  by 
another  to  the  custom-house  for  duties  un¬ 
paid,  by  a  large  debt  to  the  bank  for  money 
borrowed,  and  by  a  fourth  for  bills  drawn 
upon  them  from  India,  and  wantonly  ac¬ 
cepted,  to  the  amount  of  upwards  of  twelve 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  distress  which 
these  accumulated  claims  brought  upon  them, 
obliged  them  not  only  to  reduce  all  at  once 
their  dividend  to  six  per  cent,  but  to  throw 
themselves  upon  the  mercy  of  government, 
and  to  supplicate,  first,  a  release  from  further 
payment  of  the  stipulated  four  hundred 
thousand  pounds  a  year;  and,  secondly,  a  loan 
of  fourteen  hundred  thousand,  to  save  them 
from  immediate  bankruptcy.  The  great  in¬ 
crease  of  their  fortune  had,  it  seems,  only 
served  to  furnish  their  servants  with  a  pre¬ 
text  for  greater  profusion,  and  a  cover  for 
greater  malversation,  than  in  proportion  even 
to  that  increase  of  fortune.  The  conduct  of 
their  servants  in  India,  and  the  general  state 
of  their  affairs  both  in  India  and  in  Europe, 
became  the  subject  of  a  Parliamentary  in¬ 
quiry,  in  consequence  of  which  several  very 
important  alternations  were  made  in  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  their  government,  both  at  home 
and  abroad.  In  India  their  principal  settle¬ 
ments  of  Madras,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta, 
which  had  before  been  altogether  independent 
of  one  another,  were  subjected  to  a  governor- 
general,  assisted  by  a  council  of  four  assessors, 
Parliament  assuming  to  itself  the  first  nomi¬ 
nation  of  this  governor  and  council  who  were 
to  reside  at  Calcutta;  that  city  having  now 
become,  what  Madras  was  before,  the  most 
important  of  the  English  settlements  in  India. 


The  Court  of  the  Mayor  of  Calcutta,  orig¬ 
inally  instituted  for  the  trial  of  mercantile 
causes  which  arose  in  the  city  and  neighbour¬ 
hood,  had  gradually  extended  its  jurisdiction 
with  the  extension  of  the  empire.  It  was  now 
reduced  and  confined  to  the  original  purpose 
of  its  institution.  Instead  of  it  a  new  supreme 
court  of  judicature  was  established,  consisting 
of  a  chief  justice  and  three  judges  to  be  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  crown.  In  Europe,  the  quali¬ 
fication  necessary  to  entitle  a  proprietor  to 
vote  at  their  general  courts  was  raised  from 
five  hundred  pounds,  the  original  price  of  a 
share  in  the  stock  of  the  company,  to  a  thou¬ 
sand  pounds.  In  order  to  vote  upon  this 
qualification  too,  it  was  declared  necessary 
that  he  should  have  possessed  it,  if  acquired 
by  his  own  purchase,  and  not  by  inheritance, 
for  at  least  one  year,  instead  of  six  months, 
the  term  requisite  before.  The  court  of 
twenty-four  directors  had  before  been  chosen 
annually;  but  it  was  now  enacted  that  each 
director  should,  for  the  future,  be  chosen  for 
four  years;  six  of  them,  however,  to  go  out  of 
office  by  rotation  every  year,  and  not  to  be 
capable  of  being  re-chosen  at  the  election  of 
the  six  new  directors  for  the  ensuing  year.  In 
consequence  of  these  alterations,  the  courts, 
both  of  the  proprietors  and  directors,  it  was 
expected,  would  be  likely  to  act  with  more 
dignity  and  steadiness  than  they  had  usually 
done  before.  But  it  seems  impossible,  by  any 
alterations,  to  render  those  courts,  in  any 
respect,  fit  to  govern,  or  even  to  share  in  the 
government  of  a  great  empire;  because  the 
greater  part  of  their  members  must  always 
have  too  little  interest  in  the  prosperity  of 
that  empire  to  give  any  serious  attention  to 
what  may  promote  it.  Frequently  a  man  of 
great,  sometimes  even  a  man  of  small  fortune, 
is  willing  to  purchase  a  thousand  pounds' 
share  in  India  stock  merely  for  the  influence 
which  he  expects  to  acquire  by  a  vote  in  the 
court  of  proprietors.  It  gives  him  a  share, 
though  not  in  the  plunder,  yet  in  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  the  plunderers  of  India;  the  court  of 
directors,  though  they  make  that  appoint¬ 
ment,  being  necessarily  more  or  less  under  the 
influence  of  the  proprietors,  who  not  only 
elect  those  directors,  but  sometimes  overrule 
the  appointments  of  their  servants  in  India. 
Provided  he  can  enjoy  this  influence  for  a 
few  years,  and  thereby  provide  for  a  certain 
number  of  his  friends,  he  frequently  cares 
little  about  the  dividend,  or  even  about  the 
value  of  the  stock  upon  which  his  vote  is 
founded.  About  the  prosperity  of  the  great 
empire,  in  the  government  of  which  that  vote 
gives  him  a  share,  he  seldom  cares  at  all.  No 
other  sovereigns  ever  were,  or,  from  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  ever  could  be,  so  perfectly  in¬ 
different  about  the  happiness  or  misery  of 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


their  subjects,  the  improvement  or  waste  of 
their  (lorn inions,  the  glory  or  disgrace  of  their 
administration,  as,  from  irresistible  moral 
causes,  the  greater  part  of  the  proprietors  of 
such  a  mercantile  company  are,  and  neces¬ 
sarily  must  be.  This  indifference,  too,  was 
more  likely  to  be  increased  than  diminished 
by  some  of  the  new  regulations  which  were 
made  in  consequence  of  the  Parliamentary 
inquiry.  By  a  resolution  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  for  example,  it  was  declared,  that 
when  the  fourteen  hundred  thousand  pounds 
lent  to  the  company  by  government  should 
be  paid,  and  their  bond-debts  be  reduced  to 
fifteen  hundred  thousand  pounds,  they  might 
then,  and  not  till  then,  divide  eight  per  cent 
upon  their  capital;  and  that  whatever  re¬ 
mained  of  their  revenues  and  net  profits  at 
home  should  be  divided  into  four  parts;  three 
of  them  to  be  paid  into  the  exchequer  for 
the  use  of  the  public,  and  the  fourth  to  be 
reserved  as  a  fund  either  for  the  further  re¬ 
duction  of  their  bond-debts,  or  for  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  other  contingent  exigencies  which 
the  company  might  labour  under.  But  if  the 
company  were  bad  stewards,  and  bad  sover¬ 
eigns,  when  the  whole  of  their  net  revenue 
and  profits  belonged  to  themselves,  and  were 
at  their  own  disposal,  they  were  surely  not 
likely  to  be  better  when  three-fourths  of  them 
were  to  belong  to  other  people,  and  the  other 
fourth,  though  to  be  laid  out  for  the  benefit 
of  the  company,  yet  to  be  so  under  the  in¬ 
spection  and  with  the  approbation  of  other 
people. 

It  might  be  more  agreeable  to  the  com¬ 
pany  that  their  own  servants  and  dependants 
should  have  either  the  pleasure  of  wasting  or 
the  profit  of  embezzling  whatever  surplus 
might  remain  after  paying  the  proposed  div¬ 
idend  of  eight  per  cent  than  that  it  should 
come  into  the  hands  of  a  set  of  people  with 
whom  those  resolutions  could  scarce  fail  to  set 
them,  in  some  measure,  at  variance.  The  in¬ 
terest  of  those  servants  and  dependants  might 
so  far  predominate  in  the  court  of  proprietors 
as  sometimes  to  dispose  it  to  support  the 
authors  of  depredations  which  had  been  com¬ 
mitted  in  direct  violation  of  its  own  author¬ 
ity.  With  the  majority  of  proprietors,  the 
support  even  of  the  authority  of  their  own 
court  might  sometimes  be  a  matter  of  less 
consequence  than  the  support  of  those  who 
had  set  that  authority  at  defiance. 

The  regulations  of  1773,  accordingly,  did 
not  put  an  end  to  the  disorders  of  the  com¬ 
pany’s  government  in  India.  Notwithstanding 
that,  during  a  momentary  fit  of  good  conduct, 
they  had  at  one  time  collected  into  the  treas¬ 
ury  of  Calcutta  more  than  three  millions  ster¬ 
ling;  notwithstanding  that  they  had  after¬ 
wards  extended,  either  their  dominion,  or 


329 

their  depredations,  over  a  vast  accession  of 
some  of  the  richest  and  most  fertile  coun¬ 
tries  in  India,  all  was  wasted  and  destroyed. 
They  found  themselves  altogether  unprepared 
to  stop  or  resist  the  incursion  of  Hyder  Ali; 
and,  in  consequence  of  those  disorders,  the 
company  is  now  (1784)  in  greater  distress 
than  ever;  and,  in  order  to  prevent  immediate 
bankruptcy,  is  once  more  reduced  to  suppli¬ 
cate  the  assistance  of  government.  Different 
plans  have  been  proposed  by  the  different 
parties  in  Parliament  for  the  better  manage¬ 
ment  of  its  affairs.  And  all  those  plans  seem 
to  agree  in  supposing,  what  was  indeed  always 
abundantly  evident,  that  it  is  altogether  un¬ 
fit  to  govern  its  territorial  possessions.  Even 
the  company  itself  seems  to  be  convinced  of 
its  own  incapacity  so  far,  and  seems,  upon 
that  account,  willing  to  give  them  up  to  gov¬ 
ernment. 

W  ith  the  right  of  possessing  forts  and  gar¬ 
risons  in  distant  and  barbarous  countries  is 
necessarily  connected  the  right  of  making 
peace  and  war  in  those  countries.  The  joint 
stock  companies  which  have  had  the  one  right 
have  constantly  exercised  the  other,  and  have 
frequently  had  it  expressly  conferred  upon 
them.  How  unjustly,  how  capriciously,  how 
cruelly  they  have  commonly  exercised  it,  is 
too  well  known  from  recent  experience. 

When  a  company  of  merchants  undertake, 
at  their  own  risk  and  expense,  to  establish 
a  new  trade  with  some  remote  and  barbarous 
nation,  it  may  not  be  unreasonable  to  incor¬ 
porate  them  into  a  joint  stock  company,  and 
to  grant  them,  in  case  of  their  success,  a  mo¬ 
nopoly  of  the  trade  for  a  certain  number  of 
years.  It  is  the  easiest  and  most  natural  way 
in  which  the  state  can  recompense  them  for 
hazarding  a  dangerous  and  expensive  experi¬ 
ment,  of  which  the  public  is  afterwards  to 
reap  the  benefit.  A  temporary  monopoly  of 
this  kind  may  be  vindicated  upon  the  same 
principles  upon  which  a  like  monopoly  of  a 
new  machine  is  granted  to  its  inventor,  and 
that  of  a  new  book  to  its  author.  But  upon  the 
expiration  of  the  term,  the  monopoly  ought 
certainly  to  determine;  the  forts  and  gar¬ 
risons,  if  it  was  found  necessary  to  establish 
any,  to  be  taken  into  the  hands  of  govern¬ 
ment,  their  value  to  be  paid  to  the  com¬ 
pany,  and  the  trade  to  be  laid  open  to  all 
the  subjects  of  the  state.  By  a  perpetual  mo¬ 
nopoly,  all  the  other  subjects  of  the  state  are 
taxed  very  absurdly  in  two  different  ways: 
first,  by  the  high  price  of  goods,  which,  in  the 
case  of  a  free  trade,  they  could  buy  much 
cheaper;  and,  secondly,  by  their  total  exclu¬ 
sion  from  a  branch  of  business  which  it  might 
be  both  convenient  and  profitable  for  many 
of  them  to  carry  on.  It  is  for  the  most  worth¬ 
less  of  all  purposes,  too,  that  they  are  taxed 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


330 

in  this  manner.  It  is  merely  to  enable  the 
company  to  support  the  negligence,  profu¬ 
sion,  and  malversation  of  their  own  servants, 
whose  disorderly  conduct  seldom  allows  the 
dividend  of  the  company  to  exceed  the  or¬ 
dinary  rate  of  profit  in  trades  which  are  alto¬ 
gether  free,  and  very  frequently  makes  it  fall 
even  a  good  deal  short  of  that  rate.  Without 
a  monopoly,  however,  a  joint  stock  company, 
it  would  appear  from  experience,  cannot  long 
carry  on  any  branch  of  foreign  trade.  To  buy 
in  one  market,  in  order  to  sell,  with  profit,  in 
another,  when  there  are  many  competitors 
in  both,  to  watch  over,  not  only  the  occasional 
variations  in  the  demand,  but  the  much  great¬ 
er  and  more  frequent  variations  in  the  compe¬ 
tition,  or  in  the  supply  which  that  demand  is 
likely  to  get  from  other  people,  and  to  suit 
with  dexterity  and  judgment  both  the  quan¬ 
tity  and  quality  of  each  assortment  of  goods 
to  all  these  circumstances,  is  a  species  of  war¬ 
fare  of  which  the  operations  are  continually 
changing,  and  which  can  scarce  ever  be  con¬ 
ducted  successfully  without  such  an  unremit¬ 
ting  exertion  of  vigilance  and  attention  as 
cannot  long  be  expected  from  the  directors 
of  a  joint  stock  company.  The  East  India 
Company,  upon  the  redemption  of  their  funds, 
and  the  expiration  of  their  exclusive  privilege, 
have  a  right,  by  Act  of  Parliament,  to  con¬ 
tinue  a  corporation  with  a  joint  stock,  and  to 
trade  in  their  corporate  capacity  to  the  East 
Indies  in  common  with  the  rest  of  their  fel¬ 
low-subjects.  But  in  this  situation,  the  supe¬ 
rior  vigilance  and  attention  of  private  ad¬ 
venturers  would,  in  all  probability,  soon  make 
them  weary  of  the  trade. 

An  eminent  French  author,  of  great  knowl¬ 
edge  in  matters  of  political  economy ,  the  Abbe 
Morellet,  gives  a  list  of  fifty-five  joint  stock 
companies  for  foreign  trade  which  have  been 
established  in  different  parts  of  Europe  since 
the  year  1600,  and  which,  according  to  him, 
have  all  failed  from  mismanagement,  notwith¬ 
standing  they  had  exclusive  privileges.  He  has 
been  misinformed  with  regard  to  the  history 
of  two  or  three  of  them,  which  were  not  joint 
stock  companies  and  have  not  failed.  But,  in 
compensation,  there  have  been  several  joint 
stock  companies  which  have  failed,  and  which 
he  has  omitted. 

The  only  trades  which  it  seems  possible  for 
a  joint  stock  company  to  carry  on  successful¬ 
ly  without  an  exclusive  privilege  are  those  of 
which  all  the  operations  are  capable  of  being 
reduced  to  what  is  called  a  Routine,  or  to 
such  a  uniformity  of  method  as  admits  of  lit¬ 
tle  or  no  variation.  Of  this  kind  is,  first,  the 
banking  trade;  secondly,  the  trade  of  insur¬ 
ance  from  fire,  and  from  sea  risk  and  capture 
in  time  of  war;  thirdly,  the  trade  of  making 
and  maintaining  a  navigable  cut  or  canal;  and, 


fourthly,  the  similar  trade  of  bringing  water 
for  the  supply  of  a  great  city. 

Though  the  principles  of  the  banking  trade 
may  appear  somewhat  abstruse,  the  practice 
is  capable  of  being  reduced  to  strict  rules.  To 
depart  upon  any  occasion  from  those  rules, 
in  consequence  of  some  flattering  speculation 
of  extraordinary  gain,  is  almost  always  ex¬ 
tremely  dangerous,  and  frequently  fatal,  to 
the  banking  company  which  attempts  it.  But 
the  constitution  of  joint  stock  companies  ren¬ 
ders  them  in  general  more  tenacious  of  estab¬ 
lished  rules  than  any  private  copartnery.  Such 
companies,  therefore,  seem  extremely  well 
fitted  for  this  trade.  The  principal  banking 
companies  in  Europe,  accordingly,  are  joint 
stock  companies,  many  of  which  manage  their 
trade  very  successfully  without  any  exclusive 
privilege.  The  Bank  of  England  has  no  other 
exclusive  privilege  except  that  no  other  bank¬ 
ing  company  in  England  shall  consist  of  more 
than  six  persons.  The  two  banks  of  Edinburgh 
are  joint  stock  companies  without  any  exclu¬ 
sive  privilege. 

The  value  of  the  risk,  either  from  fire,  or 
from  loss  by  sea,  or  by  capture,  though  it 
cannot,  perhaps,  be  calculated  very  exactly, 
admits,  however,  of  such  a  gross  estimation  as 
renders  it,  in  some  degree,  reducible  to  strict 
rule  and  method.  The  trade  of  insurance, 
therefore,  may  be  carried  on  successfully  by 
a  joint  stock  company  without  any  exclusive 
privilege.  Neither  the  London  Assurance  nor 
the  Royal  Exchange  Assurance  companies 
have  any  such  privilege. 

When  a  navigable  cut  or  canal  has  been 
once  made,  the  management  of  it  becomes 
quite  simple  and  easy,  and  it  is  reducible  to 
strict  rule  and  method.  Even  the  making  of 
it  is  so  as  it  may  be  contracted  for  with  under¬ 
takers  at  so  much  a  mile,  and  so  much  a  lock. 
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  a  canal,  an 
aqueduct,  or  a  great  pipe  for  bringing  water 
to  supply  a  great  city.  Such  undertakings, 
therefore,  may  be,  and  accordingly  frequent¬ 
ly  are,  very  successfully  managed  by  joint 
stock  companies  without  any  exclusive  privi- 
lege. 

To  establish  a  joint  stock  company,  how¬ 
ever,  for  any  undertaking,  merely  because 
such  a  company  might  be  capable  of  managing 
it  successfully;  or  to  exempt  a  particular  set 
of  dealers  from  some  of  the  general  laws 
which  take  place  with  regard  to  all  their  neigh¬ 
bours,  merely  because  they  might  be  capable 
of  thriving  if  they  had  such  an  exemp¬ 
tion,  would  certainly  not  be  reasonable. 
To  render  such  an  establishment  perfectly 
reasonable,  with  the  circumstance  of  being 
reducible  to  strict  rule  and  method,  two  other 
circumstances  ought  to  concur.  First,  it  ought 
to  appear  with  the  clearest  evidence  that  the 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  331 


undertaking  is  of  greater  and  more  general 
utility  than  the  greater  part  of  common 
trades;  and  secondly,  that  it  requires  a  great¬ 
er  capital  than  can  easily  be  collected  into  a 
private  copartnery.  If  a  moderate  capital  were 
sufficient,  the  great  utility  of  the  undertaking 
would  not  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  estab¬ 
lishing  a  joint  stock  company;  because,  in 
this  case,  the  demand  for  what  it  was  to 
produce  would  readily  and  easily  be  supplied 
by  private  adventures.  In  the  four  trades 
above  mentioned,  both  those  circumstances 
concur. 

The  great  and  general  utility  of  the  bank¬ 
ing  trade  when  prudently  managed  has  been 
fully  explained  in  the  second  book  of  this 
Inquiry.  But  a  public  bank  which  is  to  sup¬ 
port  public  credit,  and  upon  particular  emer¬ 
gencies  to  advance  to  government  the  whole 
produce  of  a  tax,  to  the  amount,  perhaps, 
of  several  millions,  a  year  or  two  before  it 
comes  in,  requires  a  greater  capital  than  can 
easily  be  collected  into  any  private  copart¬ 
nery. 

The  trade  of  insurance  gives  great  security 
to  the  fortunes  of  private  people,  and  by 
dividing  among  a  great  many  that  loss  which 
would  ruin  an  individual,  makes  it  fall  light 
and  easy  upon  the  whole  society.  In  order  to 
give  this  security,  however,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  insurers  should  have  a  very  large 
capital.  Before  the  establishment  of  the  two 
joint  stock  companies  for  insurance  in  Lon¬ 
don,  a  list,  it  is  said,  was  laid  before  the  at¬ 
torney-general  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  pri¬ 
vate  insurers  who  had  failed  in  the  course  of 
a  few  years. 

That  navigable  cuts  and  canals,  and  the 
works  which  are  sometimes  necessary  for  sup¬ 
plying  a  great  city  with  water,  are  of  great 
and  general  utility,  while  at  the  same  time 
they  frequently  require  a  greater  expense  than 


suits  the  fortunes  of  private  people,  is  suffi¬ 
ciently  obvious. 

Except  the  four  trades  above  mentioned, 
I  have  not  been  able  to  recollect  any  other 
in  which  all  the  three  circumstances  requisite 
for  rendering  reasonable  the  establishment  of 
a  joint  stock  company  concur.  The  English 
copper  company  of  London,  the  lead  smelting 
company,  the  glass  grinding  company,  have 
not  even  the  pretext  of  any  great  or  singular 
utility  in  the  object  which  they  pursue;  nor 
does  the  pursuit  of  that  object  seem  to  re¬ 
quire  any  expense  unsuitable  to  the  fortunes 
of  many  private  men.  Whether  the  trade 
which  those  companies  carry  on  is  reducible 
to  such  strict  rule  and  method  as  to  render 
it  fit  for  the  management  of  a  joint  stock  com¬ 
pany,  or  whether  they  have  any  reason  to 
boast  of  their  extraordinary  profits,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  know.  The  mine-adventurers’  com¬ 
pany  has  been  long  ago  bankrupt.  A  share  in 
the  stock  of  the  British  Linen  Company  of 
Edinburgh  sells,  at  present,  very  much  below 
par,  though  less  so  that  it  did  some  years  ago. 
The  joint  stock  companies  which  are  estab¬ 
lished  for  the  public-spirited  purpose  of  pro¬ 
moting  some  particular  manufacture,  over 
and  above  managing  their  own  affairs  ill,  to 
the  dimunition  of  the  general  stock  of  the 
society,  can  in  other  respects  scarce  ever  fail 
to  do  more  harm  than  good.  Notwithstanding 
the  most  upright  intentions,  the  unavoidable 
partiality  of  their  directors  to  particular 
branches  of  the  manufacture  of  which  the 
undertakers  mislead  and  impose  upon  them 
is  a  real  discouragement  to  the  rest,  and  nec¬ 
essarily  breaks,  more  or  less,  that  natural 
proportion  which  would  otherwise  establish 
itself  between  judicious  industry  and  profit, 
and  which,  to  the  general  industry  of  the 
country,  is  of  all  encouragements  the  greatest 
and  the  most  effectual. 


Article  II 

Of  the  Expense  of  the  Institutions  for  the  Education  of  Youth 


The  institutions  for  the  education  of  the 
youth  may,  in  the  same  manner,  furnish  a 
revenue  sufficient  for  defraying  their  own  ex¬ 
pense.  The  fee  or  honorary  which  the  scholar 
pays  to  the  master  naturally  constitutes  a 
revenue  of  this  kind. 

Even  where  the  reward  of  the  master  does 
not  arise  altogether  from  this  natural  revenue, 
it  still  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be  de¬ 
rived  from  that  general  revenue  of  the  so¬ 
ciety,  of  which  the  collection  and  application 
is,  in  most  countries,  assigned  to  the  executive 
power.  Through  the  greater  part  of  Europe, 
accordingly,  the  endowment  of  schools  and 
colleges  makes  either  no  charge  upon  that 
general  revenue,  or  but  a  very  small  one.  It 


everywhere  arises  chiefly  from  some  local  or 
provincial  revenue,  from  the  rent  of  some 
landed  estate,  or  from  the  interest  of  some 
sum  of  money  allotted  and  put  under  the 
management  of  trustees  for  this  particular 
purpose,  sometimes  by  the  sovereign  himself, 
and  sometimes  by  some  private  donor. 

Have  those  public  endowments  contributed 
in  general  to  promote  the  end  of  their  institu¬ 
tion?  Have  they  contributed  to  encourage  the 
diligence  and  to  improve  the  abilities  of  the 
teachers?  Have  they  directed  the  course  of 
education  towards  objects  more  useful,  both 
to  the  individual  and  to  the  public,  than  those 
to  which  it  would  naturally  have  gone  of  its 
own  accord?  It  should  not  seem  very  difficult 


332 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


to  give  at  least  a  probable  answer  to  each  of 
those  questions. 

In  every  profession,  the  exertion  of  the 
greater  part  of  those  who  exercise  it  is  always 
in  proportion  to  the  necessity  they  are  under 
of  making  that  exertion.  This  necessity  is 
greatest  with  those  to  whom  the  emoluments 
of  their  profession  are  the  only  source  from 
which  they  expect  their  fortune,  or  even  their 
ordinary  revenue  and  subsistence.  In  order 
to  acquire  this  fortune,  or  even  to  get  this 
subsistence,  they  must,  in  the  course  of  a 
year,  execute  a  certain  quantity  of  work  of  a 
known  value;  and,  where  the  competition  is 
free,  the  rivalship  of  competitors,  who  are  all 
endeavouring  to  justle  one  another  out  of 
employment,  obliges  every  man  to  endeavour 
to  execute  his  work  with  a  certain  degree  of 
exactness.  The  greatness  of  the  objects  which 
are  to  be  acquired  by  success  in  some  partic¬ 
ular  professions  may,  no  doubt,  sometimes 
animate  the  exertion  of  a  few  men  of  extraor¬ 
dinary  spirit  and  ambition.  Great  objects, 
however,  are  evidently  not  necessary  in  order 
to  occasion  the  greatest  exertions.  Rivalship 
and  emulation  render  excellency,  even  in 
mean  professions,  an  object  of  ambition,  and 
frequently  occasion  the  very  greatest  exer¬ 
tions.  Great  objects,  on  the  contrary,  alone 
and  unsupported  by  the  necessity  of  applica¬ 
tion,  have  seldom  been  sufficient  to  occasion 
any  considerable  exertion.  In  England,  suc¬ 
cess  in  the  profession  of  the  law  leads  to  some 
very  great  objects  of  ambition;  and  yet  how 
few  men,  born  to  easy  fortunes,  have  ever  in 
this  country  been  eminent  in  that  profession! 

The  endowments  of  schools  and  colleges 
have  necessarily  diminished  more  or  less  the 
necessity  of  application  in  the  teachers.  Their 
subsistence,  so  far  as  it  arises  from  their  sal¬ 
aries,  is  evidently  derived  from  a  fund  alto¬ 
gether  independent  of  their  success  and  repu¬ 
tation  in  their  particular  professions. 

In  some  universities  the  salary  makes  but 
a  part,  and  frequently  but  a  small  part,  of 
the  emoluments  of  the  teacher,  of  which  the 
greater  part  arises  from  the  honoraries  or 
fees  of  his  pupils.  The  necessity  of  applica¬ 
tion,  though  always  more  or  less  diminished, 
is  not  in  this  case  entirely  taken  away.  Repu¬ 
tation  in  his  profession  is  still  of  some  im¬ 
portance  to  him,  and  he  still  has  some  de¬ 
pendency  upon  the  affection,  gratitude,  and 
favourable  report  of  those  who  have  attended 
upon  his  instructions;  and  these  favourable 
sentiments  he  is  likely  to  gain  in  no  way  so 
well  as  by  deserving  them,  that  is,  by  the 
abilities  and  diligence  with  which  he  dis¬ 
charges  every  part  of  his  duty. 

In  other  universities  the  teacher  is  prohib¬ 
ited  from  receiving  any  honorary  or  fee  from 
his  pupils,  and  his  salary  constitutes  the  whole 


of  the  revenue  which  he  derives  from  his  of¬ 
fice.  His  interest  is,  in  this  case,  set  as  direct¬ 
ly  in  opposition  to  his  duty  as  it  is  possible 
to  set  it.  It  is  the  interest  of  every  man  to 
live  as  much  at  his  ease  as  he  can;  and  if  his 
emoluments  are  to  be  precisely  the  same, 
whether  he  does  or  does  not  perform  some 
very  laborious  duty,  it  is  certainly  his  inter¬ 
est,  at  least  as  interest  is  vulgarly  understood, 
either  to  neglect  it  altogether,  or,  if  he  is 
subject  to  some  authority  which  will  not  suf¬ 
fer  him  to  do  this,  to  perform  it  in  as  care¬ 
less  and  slovenly  a  manner  as  that  authority 
will  permit.  If  he  is  naturally  active  and  a 
lover  of  labour,  it  is  his  interest  to  employ 
that  activity  in  any  way  from  which  he  can 
derive  some  advantage,  rather  than  in  the  * 
performance  of  his  duty,  from  which  he  can 
derive  none. 

If  the  authority  to  which  he  is  subject  re¬ 
sides  in  the  body  corporate,  the  college,  or 
university,  of  which  he  himself  is  a  member, 
and  which  the  greater  part  of  the  other  mem¬ 
bers  are,  like  himself,  persons  who  either  are 
or  ought  to  be  teachers,  they  are  likely  to 
make  a  common  cause,  to  be  all  very  indul¬ 
gent  to  one  another,  and  every  man  to  con¬ 
sent  that  his  neighbour  may  neglect  his  duty, 
provided  he  himself  is  allowed  to  neglect  his 
own.  In  the  university  of  Oxford,  the  greater 
part  of  the  public  professors  have,  for  these 
many  years,  given  up  altogether  even  the 
pretence  of  teaching. 

If  the  authority  to  which  he  is  subject  re¬ 
sides,  not  so  much  in  the  body  corporate  of 
which  he  is  a  member,  as  in  some  other  ex¬ 
traneous  persons — in  the  bishop  of  the  dio¬ 
cese,  for  example;  in  the  governor  of  the  prov-  j 
ince;  or,  perhaps,  in  some  minister  of  state — 
it  is  not  indeed  in  this  case  very  likely  that 
he  will  be  suffered  to  neglect  his  duty  alto¬ 
gether.  All  that  such  superiors,  however,  can 
force  him  to  do,  is  to  attend  upon  his  pupils  a 
certain  number  of  hours,  that  is,  to  give  a 
certain  number  of  lectures  in  the  week  or  in 
the  year.  What  those  lectures  shall  be  must 
still  depend  upon  the  diligence  of  the  teacher; 
and  that  diligence  is  likely  to  be  proportioned 
to  the  motives  which  he  has  for  exerting  it.  J 
An  extraneous  jurisdiction  of  this  kind,  be¬ 
sides,  is  liable  to  be  exercised  both  ignorantly 
and  capriciously.  In  its  nature  it  is  arbitrary 
and  discretionary,  and  the  persons  who  ex¬ 
ercise  it,  neither  attending  upon  the  lectures 
of  the  teacher  themselves,  nor  perhaps  under-  t 
standing  the  sciences  which  it  is  his  business  | 

to  teach,  are  seldom  capable  of  exercising  it  i 

with  judgment.  From  the  insolence  of  office,  j 
too,  they  are  frequently  indifferent  how  they  1 
exercise  it,  and  are  very  apt  to  censure  or  t 
deprive  him  of  his  office  wantonly,  and  with-  t 
out  any  just  cause.  The  person  subject  to  t 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


such  jurisdiction  is  necessarily  degraded  by 
it,  and,  instead  of  being  one  of  the  most  re¬ 
spectable,  is  rendered  one  of  the  meanest  and 
most  contemptible  persons  in  the  society.  It 
is  by  powerful  protection  only  that  he  can 
effectually  guard  himself  against  the  bad  us¬ 
age  to  which  he  is  at  all  times  exposed;  and 
this  protection  he  is  most  likely  to  gain,  not 
by  ability  or  diligence  in  his  profession,  but 
by  obsequiousness  to  the  will  of  his  superiors, 
and  by  being  ready,  at  all  times,  to  sacrifice 
to  that  will  the  rights,  the  interest,  and  the 
honour  of  the  body  corporate  of  which  he  is 
a  member.  Whoever  has  attended  for  any 
considerable  time  to  the  administration  of  a 
French  university  must  have  had  occasion  to 
remark  the  effects  which  naturally  result  from 
an  arbitrary  and  extraneous  jurisdiction  of 
this  kind. 

Whatever  forces  a  certain  number  of  stu¬ 
dents  to  any  college  or  university,  independ¬ 
ent  of  the  merit  or  reputation  of  the  teachers, 
tends  more  or  less  to  diminish  the  necessity  of 
that  merit  or  reputation. 

The  privileges  of  graduates  in  arts,  in  law, 
physic,  and  divinity,  when  they  can  be  ob¬ 
tained  only  by  residing  a  certain  number  of 
years  in  certain  universities,  necessarily  force 
a  certain  number  of  students  to  such  univer¬ 
sities,  independent  of  the  merit  or  reputation 
of  the  teachers.  The  privileges  of  graduates 
are  a  sort  of  statutes  of  apprenticeship,  which 
have  contributed  to  the  improvement  of  edu¬ 
cation,  just  as  the  other  statutes  of  apprentice¬ 
ship  have  to  that  of  arts,  and  manufactures. 

The  charitable  foundations  of  scholarships, 
exhibitions,  bursaries,  etc.,  necessarily  attach 
a  certain  number  of  students  to  certain  col¬ 
leges,  independent  altogether  of  the  merit  of 
those  particular  colleges.  Were  the  students 
upon  such  charitable  foundations  left  free  to 
choose  what  college  they  liked  best,  such  lib¬ 
erty  might  perhaps  contribute  to  excite  some 
emulation  among  different  colleges.  A  reg¬ 
ulation,  on  the  contrary,  which  prohibited 
even  the  independent  members  of  every  par¬ 
ticular  college  from  leaving  it  and  going  to 
any  other,  without  leave  first  asked  and  ob¬ 
tained  of  that  which  they  meant  to  abandon, 
would  tend  very  much  to  extinguish  that 
emulation. 

If  in  each  college  the  tutor  or  teacher,  who 
was  to  instruct  each  student  in  all  arts  and 
sciences,  should  not  be  voluntarily  chosen  by 
the  student,  but  appointed  by  the  head  of 
the  college;  and  if,  in  case  of  neglect,  inabil¬ 
ity,  or  bad  usage,  the  student  should  not  be 
allowed  to  change  him  for  another,  without 
leave  first  asked  and  obtained,  such  a  regula¬ 
tion  would  not  only  tend  very  much  to  ex¬ 
tinguish  all  emulation  among  the  different 
tutors  of  the  same  college,  but  to  diminish 


333 

very  much  in  all  of  them  the  necessity  of  dil¬ 
igence  and  of  attention  to  their  respective 
pupils.  Such  teachers,  though  very  well  paid 
by  their  students,  might  be  as  much  disposed 
to  neglect  them  as  those  who  are  not  paid 
by  them  at  all,  or  who  have  no  other  recom¬ 
pense  but  their  salary. 

If  the  teacher  happens  to  be  a  man  of  sense, 
it  must  be  an  unpleasant  thing  to  him  to  be 
conscious,  while  he  is  lecturing  his  students, 
that  he  is  either  speaking  or  reading  non¬ 
sense,  or  what  is  very  little  better  than  non¬ 
sense.  It  must,  too,  be  unpleasant  to  him  to 
observe  that  the  greater  pan  of  his  students 
desert  his  lectures,  or  perhaps  attend  upon 
them  with  plain  enough  marks  of  neglect, 
contempt,  and  derision.  If  he  is  obliged, 
therefore,  to  give  a  certain  number  of  lec¬ 
tures,  these  motives  alone,  without  any  other 
interest,  might  dispose  him  to  take  some  pains 
to  give  tolerably  good  ones.  Several  differ¬ 
ent  expedients,  however,  may  be  fallen  upon 
which  will  effectually  blunt  the  edge  of  all 
those  incitements  to  diligence.  The  teacher, 
instead  of  explaining  to  his  pupils  himself 
the  science  in  which  he  proposes  to  instruct 
them,  may  read  some  book  upon  it;  and  if 
this  book  is  written  in  a  foreign  and  dead 
language,  by  interpreting  it  to  them  into  their 
own;  or,  what  would  give  him  still  less  trouble, 
by  making  them  interpret  it  to  him,  and  by 
now  and  then  making  an  occasional  remark 
upon  it,  he  may  flatter  himself  that  he  is  giv¬ 
ing  a  lecture.  The  slightest  degree  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  application  will  enable  him  to  do 
this  without  exposing  himself  to  contempt  or 
derision,  or  saying  anything  that  is  really 
foolish,  absurd,  or  ridiculous.  The  discipline 
of  the  college,  at  the  same  time,  may  enable 
him  to  force  all  his  pupils  to  the  most  reg¬ 
ular  attendance  upon  this  sham  lecture,  and 
to  maintain  the  most  decent  and  respectful 
behaviour  during  the  whole  time  of  the  per¬ 
formance. 

The  discipline  of  colleges  and  universities 
is  in  general  contrived,  not  for  the  benefit  of 
the  students,  but  for  the  interest,  or  more 
properly  speaking,  for  the  ease  of  the  masters. 
Its  object  is,  in  all  cases,  to  maintain  the 
authority  of  the  master,  and  whether  he  neg¬ 
lects  or  performs  his  duty,  to  oblige  the  stu¬ 
dents  in  all  cases  to  behave  to  him  as  if  he 
performed  it  with  the  greatest  diligence  and 
ability.  It  seems  to  presume  perfect  wisdom 
and  virtue  in  the  one  order,  and  the  greatest 
weakness  and  folly  in  the  other.  Where  the 
masters,  however,  really  perform  their  duty, 
there  are  no  examples,  I  believe,  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  students  ever  neglect  theirs. 
No  discipline  is  ever  requisite  to  force  attend¬ 
ance  upon  lectures  which  are  really  worth  the 
attending,  as  is  well  known  wherever  any 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


334 

such  lectures  are  given.  Force  and  restraint 
may,  no  doubt,  be  in  some  degree  requisite  in 
order  to  oblige  children,  or  very  young  boys, 
to  attend  to  those  parts  of  education  which 
it  is  thought  necessary  for  them  to  acquire 
during  that  early  period  of  life;  but  after 
twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  age,  provided  the 
master  does  his  duty,  force  or  restraint  can 
scarce  ever  be  necessary  to  carry  on  any  part 
of  education.  Such  is  the  generosity  of  the 
greater  part  of  young  men,  that,  so  far  from 
being  disposed  to  neglect  or  despise  the  in¬ 
structions  of  their  master,  provided  he  shows 
some  serious  intention  of  being  of  use  to 
them,  they  are  generally  inclined  to  pardon  a 
great  deal  of  incorrectness  in  the  performance 
of  his  duty,  and  sometimes  even  to  conceal 
from  the  public  a  good  deal  of  gross  neg¬ 
ligence. 

Those  parts  of  education,  it  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served,  for  the  teaching  of  which  there  are 
no  public  institutions,  are  generally  the  best 
taught.  When  a  young  man  goes  to  a  fenc¬ 
ing  or  a  dancing  school,  he  does  not  indeed 
always  learn  to  fence  or  to  dance  very  well; 
but  he  seldom  fails  of  learning  to  fence  or  to 
dance.  The  good  effects  of  the  riding  school 
are  not  commonly  so  evident.  The  expense 
of  a  riding  school  is  so  great,  that  in  most 
places  it  is  a  public  institution.  The  three 
most  essential  parts  of  literary  education,  to 
read,  write,  and  account,  it  still  continues 
to  be  more  common  to  acquire  in  private 
than  in  public  schools;  and  it  very  seldom 
happens  that  anybody  fails  of  acquiring  them 
to  the  degree  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  ac¬ 
quire  them. 

In  England  the  public  schools  are  much 
less  corrupted  than  the  universities.  In  the 
schools  the  youth  are  taught,  or  at  least  may 
be  taught,  Greek  and  Latin;  that  is,  every¬ 
thing  which  the  masters  pretend  to  teach,  or 
which,  it  is  expected,  they  should  teach.  In 
the  universities  the  youth  neither  are  taught, 
nor  always  can  find  any  proper  means  of 
being  taught,  the  sciences  which  it  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  those  incorporated  bodies  to  teach. 
The  reward  of  the  schoolmaster  in  most  cases 
depends  principally,  in  some  cases  almost  en¬ 
tirely,  upon  the  fees  or  honoraries  of  his  schol¬ 
ars.  Schools  have  no  exclusive  privileges.  In 
order  to  obtain  the  honours  of  graduation,  it 
is  not  necessary  that  a  person  should  bring  a 
certificate  of  his  having  studied  a  certain  num¬ 
ber  of  years  at  a  public  school.  If  upon  exam¬ 
ination  he  appears  to  understand  what  is 
taught  there,  no  questions  are  asked  about 
the  place  where  he  learnt  it. 

The  parts  of  education  which  are  common¬ 
ly  taught  in  universities,  it  may,  perhaps,  be 
said  are  not  very  well  taught.  But  had  it  not 
been  for  those  institutions  they  would  not 


have  been  commonly  taught  at  all,  and  both 
the  individual  and  the  public  would  have 
suffered  a  good  deal  from  the  want  of  those 
important  parts  of  education. 

The  present  universities  of  Europe  were 
originally,  the  greater  part  of  them,  ecclesias¬ 
tical  corporations,  instituted  for  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  churchmen.  They  were  founded  by 
the  authority  of  the  Pope,  and  were  so  en¬ 
tirely  under  his  immediate  protection,  that 
their  members,  whether  masters  or  students, 
had  all  of  them  what  was  then  called  the 
benefit  of  clergy,  that  is,  were  exempted  from 
the  civil  jurisdiction  of  the  countries  in  which 
their  respective  universities  were  situated, 
and  were  amenable  only  to  the  ecclesiastical 
tribunals.  What  was  taught  in  the  greater 
part  of  those  universities  was  suitable  to  the 
end  of  their  institution,  either  theology,  or 
something  that  was  merely  preparatory  to 
theology. 

When  Christianity  was  first  established  by 
law,  a  corrupted  Latin  had  become  the  com¬ 
mon  language  of  all  the  western  parts  of 
Europe.  The  service  of  the  church  accordingly, 
and  the  translation  of  the  Bible  which  was 
read  in  churches,  were  both  in  that  corrupted 
Latin;  that  is,  in  the  common  language  of 
the  country.  After  the  irruption  of  the  bar¬ 
barous  nations  who  overturned  the  Roman 
empire,  Latin  gradually  ceased  to  be  the  lan¬ 
guage  of  any  part  of  Europe.  But  the  rever¬ 
ence  of  the  people  naturally  preserves  the 
established  forms  and  ceremonies  of  religion 
long  after  the  circumstances  which  first  in¬ 
troduced  and  rendered  them  reasonable  are 
no  more.  Though  Latin,  therefore,  was  no 
longer  understood  anywhere  by  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  the  whole  service  of  the 
church  still  continued  to  be  performed  in 
that  language.  Two  different  languages  were 
thus  established  in  Europe,  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  in  ancient  Egypt;  a  language  of  the 
priests,  and  a  language  of  the  people;  a  sacred 
and  a  profane;  a  learned  and  an  unlearned 
language.  But  it  was  necessary  that  the 
priests  should  understand  something  of 
that  sacred  and  learned  language  in  which 
they  were  to  officiate;  and  the  study  of  the 
Latin  language  therefore  made,  from  the 
beginning,  an  essential  part  of  university 
education. 

It  was  not  so  with  that  either  of  the  Greek 
or  of  the  Hebrew  language.  The  infallible  de¬ 
crees  of  the  church  had  pronounced  the  Latin 
translation  of  the  Bible,  commonly  called  the 
Latin  Vulgate,  to  have  been  equally  dictated 
by  divine  inspiration,  and  therefore  of  equal 
authority  with  the  Greek  and  Hebrew  orig¬ 
inals.  The  knowledge  of  those  two  languages, 
therefore,  not  being  indispensably  requisite 
to  a  churchman,  the  study  of  them  did  not 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


for  a  long  time  make  a  necessary  part  of  the 
common  course  of  university  education.  There 
are  some  Spanish  universities,  I  am  assured, 
in  which  the  study  of  the  Greek  language  has 
never  yet  made  any  part  of  that  course.  The 
first  reformers  found  the  Greek  text  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  even  the  Hebrew  text 
of  the  Old,  more  favorable  to  their  opinions 
than  the  Vulgate  translation,  which,  as  might 
naturally  be  supposed,  had  been  gradually 
accommodated  to  support  the  doctrines  of 
the  Catholic  Church.  They  set  themselves, 
therefore,  to  expose  the  many  errors  of  that 
translation,  which  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy 
were  thus  put  under  the  necessity  of  defend¬ 
ing  or  explaining.  But  this  could  not  well  be 
done  without  some  knowledge  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  languages,  of  which  the  study  was 
therefore  gradually  introduced  into  the  greater 
part  of  universities,  both  of  those  which  em¬ 
braced,  and  of  those  which  rejected,  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  the  Reformation.  The  Greek  lan¬ 
guage  was  connected  with  every  part  of  that 
classical  learning  which,  though  at  first  prin¬ 
cipally  cultivated  by  Catholics  and  Italians, 
happened  to  come  into  fashion  much  about 
the  same  time  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Ref¬ 
ormation  were  set  on  foot.  In  the  greater 
part  of  universities,  therefore,  that  language 
was  taught  previous  to  the  study  of  philos¬ 
ophy,  and  as  soon  as  the  student  had  made 
some  progress  in  the  Latin.  The  Hebrew  lan¬ 
guage  having  no  connection  with  classical 
learning,  and,  except  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
being  the  language  of  not  a  single  book  in 
any  esteem,  the  study  of  it  did  not  commonly 
commence  till  after  that  of  philosophy,  and 
when  the  student  had  entered  upon  the  study 
of  theology. 

Originally  the  first  rudiments  both  of  the 
Greek  and  Latin  languages  were  taught  in 
universities,  and  in  some  universities  they 
still  continue  to  be  so.  In  others  it  is  expected 
that  the  student  should  have  previously  ac¬ 
quired  at  least  the  rudiments  of  one  or  both 
of  those  languages,  of  which  the  study  con¬ 
tinues  to  make  everywhere  a  very  consider¬ 
able  part  of  university  education. 

The  ancient  Greek  philosophy  was  divided 
into  three  great  branches;  physics,  or  nat¬ 
ural  philosophy;  ethics,  or  moral  philosophy; 
and  logic.  This  general  division  seems  perfect¬ 
ly  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  things. 

The  great  phenomena  of  nature — the  revo¬ 
lutions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  eclipses,  com¬ 
ets;  thunder,  lightning,  and  other  extraordi¬ 
nary  meteors;  the  generation,  the  life,  growth, 
and  dissolution  of  plants  and  animals — are 
objects  which,  as  they  necessarily  excite  the 
wonder,  so  they  naturally  call  forth  the  curi¬ 
osity,  of  mankind  to  inquire  into  their  causes. 
Superstition  first  attempted  to  satisfy  this 


335 

curiosity,  by  referring  all  those  wonderful 
appearances  to  the  immediate  agency  of  the 
gods.  Philosophy  afterwards  endeavoured  to 
account  for  them  from  more  familiar  causes, 
or  from  such  as  mankind  were  better  ac¬ 
quainted  with,  than  the  agency  of  the  gods. 
As  those  great  phenomena  are  the  first  ob¬ 
jects  of  human  curiosity,  so  the  science  which 
pretends  to  explain  them  must  naturally  have 
been  the  first  branch  of  philosophy  that  was 
cultivated.  The  first  philosophers,  accordingly, 
of  whom  history  has  preserved  any  account, 
appear  to  have  been  natural  philosophers. 

In  every  age  and  country  of  the  world  men 
must  have  attended  to  the  characters,  de¬ 
signs,  and  actions  of  one  another,  and  many 
reputable  rules  and  maxims  for  the  conduct 
of  human  life  must  have  been  laid  down  and 
approved  of  by  common  consent.  As  soon  as 
writing  came  into  fashion,  wise  men,  or  those 
who  fancied  themselves  such,  would  natural¬ 
ly  endeavour  to  increase  the  number  of  those 
established  and  respected  maxims,  and  to  ex¬ 
press  their  own  sense  of  what  was  either  prop¬ 
er  or  improper  conduct,  sometimes  in  the 
more  artificial  form  of  apologues,  like  what 
are  called  the  fables  of  ^sop;  and  sometimes 
in  the  more  simple  one  of  apophthegms,  or 
wise  sayings,  like  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon, 
the  verses  of  Theognis  and  Phocyllides,  and 
some  part  of  the  works  of  Hesiod.  They  might 
continue  in  this  manner  for  a  long  time  mere¬ 
ly  to  multiply  the  number  of  those  maxims  of 
prudence  and  morality,  without  even  attempt¬ 
ing  to  arrange  them  in  any  very  distinct  or 
methodical  order,  much  less  to  connect  them 
together  by  one  or  more  general  principles 
from  which  they  were  all  deducible,  like  ef¬ 
fects  from  their  natural  causes.  The  beauty 
of  a  systematical  arrangement  of  different  ob¬ 
servations  connected  by  a  few  common  prin¬ 
ciples  was  first  seen  in  the  rude  essays  of  those 
ancient  times  towards  a  system  of  natural 
philosophy.  Something  of  the  same  kind  was 
afterwards  attempted  in  morals.  The  maxims 
of  common  life  were  arranged  in  some  me¬ 
thodical  order,  and  connected  together  by  a 
few  common  principles,  in  the  same  manner 
as  they  had  attempted  to  arrange  and  con¬ 
nect  the  phenomena  of  nature.  The  science 
which  pretends  to  investigate  and  explain 
those  connecting  principles  is  what  is  prop¬ 
erly  called  moral  philosophy. 

Different  authors  gave  different  systems 
both  of  natural  and  moral  philosophy.  But 
the  arguments  by  which  they  supported  those 
different  systems,  for  from  being  always 
demonstrations,  were  frequently  at  best 
but  very  slender  probabilities,  and  sometimes 
mere  sophisms,  which  had  no  other  founda¬ 
tion  but  the  inaccuracy  and  ambiguity  of 
common  language.  Speculative  systems  have 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


336 

in  all  ages  of  the  world  been  adopted  for  rea¬ 
sons  too  frivolous  to  have  determined  the 
judgment  of  any  man  of  common  sense  in  a 
matter  of  the  smallest  pecuniary  interest. 
Gross  sophistry  has  scarce  ever  had  any  in¬ 
fluence  upon  the  opinions  of  mankind,  ex¬ 
cept  in  matters  of  philosophy  and  speculation; 
and  in  these  it  has  frequently  had  the  great¬ 
est.  The  patrons  of  each  system  of  natural 
and  moral  philosophy  naturally  endeavoured 
to  expose  the  weakness  of  the  arguments 
adduced  to  support  the  systems  which  were 
opposite  to  their  own.  In  examining  those  ar¬ 
guments,  they  were  necessarily  led  to  con¬ 
sider  the  difference  between  a  probable  and 
a  demonstrative  argument,  between  a  fal¬ 
lacious  and  a  conclusive  one:  and  Logic,  or 
the  science  of  the  general  principles  of  good 
and  bad  reasoning,  necessarily  arose  out  of 
the  observations  which  a  scrutiny  of  this  kind 
gave  occasion  to.  Though  in  its  origin  poste¬ 
rior  both  to  physics  and  to  ethics,  it  was  com¬ 
monly  taught,  not  indeed  in  all,  but  in  the 
greater  part  of  the  ancient  schools  of  philos¬ 
ophy,  previously  to  either  of  those  sciences. 
The  student,  it  seems  to  have  been  thought, 
to  understand  well  the  difference  between 
good  and  bad  reasoning  before  he  was  led  to 
reason  upon  subjects  of  so  great  importance. 

This  ancient  division  of  philosophy  into 
three  parts  was  in  the  greater  part  of  the 
universities  of  Europe  changed  for  another 
into  five. 

In  the  ancient  philosophy,  whatever  was 
taught  concerning  the  nature  either  of  the 
human  mind  or  of  the  Deity,  made  a  part 
of  the  system  of  physics.  Those  beings,  in 
whatever  their  essence  might  be  supposed  to 
consist,  were  parts  of  the  great  system  of  the 
universe,  and  parts,  too,  productive  of  the 
most  important  effects.  Whatever  human  rea¬ 
son  could  either  conclude  or  conjecture  con¬ 
cerning  them,  made,  as  it  were,  two  chapters, 
though  no  doubt  two  very  important  ones, 
of  the  science  which  pretended  to  give  an 
account  of  the  origin  and  revolutions  of  the 
great  system  of  the  universe.  But  in  the  uni¬ 
versities  of  Europe,  where  philosophy  was 
taught  only  as  subservient  to  theology,  it  was 
natural  to  dwell  longer  upon  these  two  chap¬ 
ters  than  upon  any  other  of  the  science.  They 
were  gradually  more  and  more  extended, 
and  were  divided  into  many  inferior  chapters, 
till  at  last  the  doctrine  of  spirits,  of  which  so 
little  can  be  known,  came  to  take  up  as  much 
room  in  the  system  of  philosophy  as  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  bodies,  of  which  so  much  can  be 
known.  The  doctrines  concerning  those  two 
subjects  were  considered  as  making  two  dis¬ 
tinct  sciences.  What  are  called  Metaphysics 
or  Pneumatics  were  set  in  opposition  to  Phys¬ 
ics,  and  were  cultivated  not  only  as  the  more 


sublime,  but,  for  the  purposes  of  a  particular 
profession,  as  the  more  useful  science  of  the 
two.  The  proper  subject  of  experiment  and 
observation,  a  subject  in  which  a  careful  at¬ 
tention  is  capable  of  making  so  many  useful 
discoveries,  was  almost  entirely  neglected. 
The  subject  in  which,  after  a  few  very  simple 
and  almost  obvious  truths,  the  most  care¬ 
ful  attention  can  discover  nothing  but  ob¬ 
scurity  and  uncertainty,  and  can  consequent¬ 
ly  produce  nothing  but  subtleties  and  soph¬ 
isms,  was  greatly  cultivated. 

When  those  two  sciences  had  thus  been  set 
in  opposition  to  one  another,  the  comparison 
between  them  naturally  gave  birth  to  a  third, 
to  what  was  called  Ontology,  or  the  science 
which  treated  of  the  qualities  and  attributes 
which  were  common  to  both  the  subjects  of 
the  other  two  sciences.  But  if  subtleties  and 
sophisms  composed  the  greater  part  of  the 
Metaphysics  or  Pneumatics  of  the  schools 
they  composed  the  whole  of  this  cobweb  sci¬ 
ence  of  Ontology,  which  was  likewise  some¬ 
times  called  Metaphysics. 

Wherein  consisted  the  happiness  and  per¬ 
fection  of  a  man,  considered  not  only  as  an 
individual,  but  as  the  member  of  a  family, 
of  a  state,  and  of  the  great  society  of  man¬ 
kind,  was  the  object  which  the  ancient  moral 
philosophy  proposed  to  investigate.  In  that 
philosophy  the  duties  of  human  life  were 
treated  as  subservient  to  the  happiness  and 
perfection  of  human  life.  But  when  moral,  as 
well  as  natural  philosophy,  came  to  be  taught 
only  as  subservient  to  theology,  the  duties  of 
human  life  were  treated  of  as  chiefly  sub¬ 
servient  to  the  happiness  of  a  life  to  come.  In 
the  ancient  philosophy  the  perfection  of  vir¬ 
tue  was  represented  as  necessarily  productive, 
to  the  person  who  possessed  it,  of  the  most 
perfect  happiness  in  this  life.  In  the  modem 
philosophy  it  was  frequently  represented  as 
generally,  or  rather  as  almost  always,  incon¬ 
sistent  with  any  degree  of  happiness  in  this 
life;  and  heaven  was  to  be  earned  only  by 
penance  and  mortification,  by  the  austerities 
and  abasement  of  a  monk;  not  by  the  liberal, 
generous,  and  spirited  conduct  of  a  man.  Cas¬ 
uistry  and  an  ascetic  morality  made  up,  in 
most  cases,  the  greater  part  of  the  moral 
philosophy  of  the  schools.  By  far  the  most 
important  of  all  the  different  branches  of 
philosophy  became  in  this  manner  by  far  the 
most  corrupted. 

Such,  therefore,  was  the  common  course  of 
philosophical  education  in  the  greater  part 
of  the  universities  in  Europe.  Logic  was  taught 
first:  Ontology  came  in  the  second  place: 
Pneumatology,  comprehending  the  doctrine 
concerning  the  nature  of  the  human  soul  and 
of  the  Deity,  in  the  third:  in  the  fourth  fol¬ 
lowed  a  debased  system  of  moral  philosophy 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


which  was  considered  as  immediately  con¬ 
nected  with  the  doctrines  of  Pneumatology, 
with  the  immortality  of  the  human  soul,  and 
with  the  rewards  and  punishments  which, 
from  the  justice  of  the  Deity,  were  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  in  a  life  to  come:  a  short  and  super¬ 
ficial  system  of  Physics  usually  concluded  the 
course. 

The  alterations  which  the  universities  of 
Europe  thus  introduced  into  the  ancient 
course  of  philosophy  were  all  meant  for  the 
education  of  ecclesiastics,  and  to  render  it  a 
more  proper  introduction  to  the  study  of 
theology.  But  the  additional  quantity  of  sub¬ 
tlety  and  sophistry,  the  casuistry  and  the 
ascetic  morality  which  those  alterations  in¬ 
troduced  into  it,  certainly  did  not  render  it 
more  proper  for  the  education  of  gentlemen 
or  men  of  the  world,  or  more  likely  either  to 
improve  the  understanding,  or  to  mend  the 
heart. 

This  course  of  philosophy  is  what  still  con¬ 
tinues  to  be  taught  in  the  greater  part  of  the 
universities  of  Europe,  with  more  or  less  dili¬ 
gence,  according  as  the  constitution  of  each 
particular  university  happens  to  render  dili¬ 
gence  more  or  less  necessary  to  the  teachers. 
In  some  of  the  richest  and  best  endowed  uni¬ 
versities,  the  tutors  content  themselves  with 
teaching  a  few  unconnected  shreds  and  par¬ 
cels  of  this  corrupted  course;  and  even  these 
they  commonly  teach  very  negligently  and 
superficially. 

The  improvements  which,  in  modern  times, 
have  been  made  in  several  different  branches 
of  philosophy  have  not,  the  greater  part  of 
them,  been  made  in  universities,  though  some 
no  doubt  have.  The  greater  part  of  univer¬ 
sities  have  not  even  been  very  forward  to 
adopt  those  improvements  after  they  were 
made;  and  several  of  those  learned  societies 
have  chosen  to  remain,  for  a  long  time,  the 
sanctuaries  in  which  exploded  systems  and 
obsolete  prejudices  found  shelter  and  protec¬ 
tion  after  they  had  been  hunted  out  of  every 
other  corner  of  the  world.  In  general,  the 
richest  and  best  endowed  universities  have 
been  the  slowest  in  adopting  those  improve¬ 
ments,  and  the  most  averse  to  permit  any 
considerable  change  in  the  established  plan  of 
education.  Those  improvements  were  more 
easily  introduced  into  some  of  the  poorer  uni¬ 
versities,  in  which  the  teachers,  depending 
upon  their  reputation  for  the  greater  part  of 
their  subsistence,  were  obliged  to  pay  more 
attention  to  the  current  opinions  of  the  world. 

But  though  the  public  schools  and  univer¬ 
sities  of  Europe  were  originally  intended  only 
for  the  education  of  a  particular  profession, 
that  of  churchmen;  and  though  they  were  not 
always  very  diligent  in  instructing  their  pu¬ 
pils  even  in  the  sciences  which  were  supposed 


337 

necessary  for  that  profession,  yet  they  gradu¬ 
ally  drew  to  themselves  the  education  of  al¬ 
most  all  other  people,  particularly  of  almost 
all  gentlemen  and  men  of  fortune.  No  better 
method,  it  seems,  could  be  fallen  upon  of 
spending,  with  any  advantage,  the  long  inter¬ 
val  between  infancy  and  that  period  of  life  at 
which  men  begin  to  apply  in  good  earnest  to 
the  real  business  of  the  world,  the  business 
which  is  to  employ  them  during  the  remainder 
of  their  days.  The  greater  part  of  what  is 
taught  in  schools  and  universities,  however, 
does  not  seem  to  be  the  most  proper  prepara¬ 
tion  for  that  business. 

In  England  it  becomes  every  day  more  and 
more  the  custom  to  send  young  people  to 
travel  in  foreign  countries  immediately  upon 
their  leaving  school,  and  without  sending 
them  to  any  university.  Our  young  people,  it 
is  said,  generally  return  home  much  improved 
by  their  travels.  A  young  man  who  goes 
abroad  at  seventeen  or  eighteen,  and  returns 
home  at  one  and  twenty,  returns  three  or 
four  years  older  than  he  was  when  he  went 
abroad;  and  at  that  age  it  is  very  difficult  not 
to  improve  a  good  deal  in  three  or  four  years. 
In  the  course  of  his  travels  he  generally  ac¬ 
quires  some  knowledge  of  one  or  two  foreign 
languages;  a  knowledge,  however,  which  is 
seldom  sufficient  to  enable  him  either  to 
speak  or  write  them  with  propriety.  In  other 
respects  he  commonly  returns  home  more 
conceited,  more  unprincipled,  more  dissipated, 
and  more  incapable  of  any  serious  application 
either  to  study  or  to  business  than  he  could 
well  have  become  in  so  short  a  time  had  he 
lived  at  home.  By  travelling  so  very  young, 
by  spending  in  the  most  frivolous  dissipation 
the  most  precious  years  of  his  life,  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  inspection  and  control  of  his 
parents  and  relations,  every  useful  habit  which 
the  earlier  parts  of  his  education  might  have 
had  some  tendency  to  form  in  him,  instead  of 
being  riveted  and  confirmed,  is  almost  neces¬ 
sarily  either  weakened  or  effaced.  Nothing 
but  the  discredit  into  which  the  universities 
are  allowing  themselves  to  fall  could  ever 
have  brought  into  repute  so  very  absurd  a 
practice  as  that  of  travelling  at  this  early 
period  of  life.  By  sending  his  son  abroad,  a 
father  delivers  himself  at  least  for  some  time, 
from  so  disagreeable  an  object  as  that  of  a 
son  unemployed,  neglected,  and  going  to  ruin 
before  his  eyes. 

Such  have  been  the  effects  of  some  of  the 
modern  institutions  for  education. 

Different  plans  and  different  institutions 
for  education  seem  to  have  taken  place  in 
other  ages  and  nations. 

In  the  republics  of  ancient  Greece,  every 
free  citizen  was  instructed,  under  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  public  magistrate,  in  gymnastic 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


338 

exercises  and  in  music.  By  gymnastic  exer¬ 
cises  it  was  intended  to  harden  his  body,  to 
sharpen  his  courage,  and  to  prepare  him  for 
the  'fatigues  and  dangers  of  war;  and  as  the 
Greek  militia  was,  by  all  accounts,  one  of  the 
best  that  ever  was  in  the  world,  this  part  of 
their  public  education  must  have  answered 
completely  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  in¬ 
tended.  By  the  other  part,  music,  it  was 
proposed,  at  least  by  the  philosophers  and 
historians  who  have  given  us  an  account  of 
those  institutions,  to  humanize  the  mind,  to 
soften  the  temper,  and  to  dispose  it  for  per¬ 
forming  all  the  social  and  moral  duties  both 
of  public  and  private  life. 

In  ancient  Rome  the  exercises  of  the  Cam¬ 
pus  Martius  answered  the  same  purpose  as 
those  of  the  Gymnasium  in  ancient  Greece, 
and  they  seem  to  have  answered  it  equally 
well.  But  among  the  Romans  there  was  noth¬ 
ing  which  corresponded  to  the  musical  edu¬ 
cation  of  the  Greeks.  The  morals  of  the 
Romans,  however,  both  in  private  and  public 
life,  seem  to  have  been  not  only  equal,  but, 
upon  the  whole,  a  good  deal  superior  to 
those  of  the  Greeks.  That  they  were  superior 
in  private  life,  we  have  the  express  testimony 
of  Polybius  and  of  Dionysius  of  Halicarnas¬ 
sus,  two  authors  well  acquainted  with  both 
nations;  and  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Greek  and 
Roman  history  bears  witness  to  the  superior¬ 
ity  of  the  public  morals  of  the  Romans.  The 
good  temper  and  moderation  of  contending 
factions  seems  to  be  the  most  essential  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  the  public  morals  of  a  free 
people.  But  the  factions  of  the  Greeks  were 
almost  always  violent  and  sanguinary;  where¬ 
as,  till  the  time  of  the  Gracchi,  no  blood  had 
ever  been  shed  in  any  Roman  faction;  and 
from  the  time  of  the  Gracchi  the  Roman  re¬ 
public  may  be  considered  as  in  reality  dis¬ 
solved.  Notwithstanding,  therefore,  the  very 
respectable  authority  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  and 
Polybius,  and  notwithstanding  the  very  in¬ 
genious  reasons  by  which  Mr.  Montesquieu 
endeavours  to  support  that  authority,  it  seems 
probable  that  the  musical  education  of  the 
Greeks  had  no  great  effect  in  mending  their 
morals,  since,  without  any  such  education, 
those  of  the  Romans  were  upon  the  whole  su¬ 
perior.  The  respect  of  those  ancient  sages  for 
the  institutions  of  their  ancestors  had  prob¬ 
ably  disposed  them  to  find  much  political  wis¬ 
dom  in  what  was,  perhaps,  merely  an  ancient 
custom,  continued  without  interruption  from 
the  earliest  period  of  those  societies  to  the 
times  in  which  they  had  arrived  at  a  con¬ 
siderable  degree  of  refinement.  Music  and 
dancing  are  the  great  amusements  of  almost 
all  barbarous  nations,  and  the  great  accom¬ 
plishments  which  are  supposed  to  fit  any  man 
for  entertaining  his  society.  It  is  so  at  this 


day  among  the  negroes  on  the  coast  of  Africa. 
It  was  so  among  the  ancient  Celts,  among  the 
ancient  Scandinavians,  and,  as  we  may  learn 
from  Homer,  among  the  ancient  Greeks  in 
the  times  preceding  the  Trojan  war.  When 
the  Greek  tribes  had  formed  themselves  into 
little  republics,  it  was  natural  that  the  study 
of  those  accomplishments  should,  for  a  long 
time,  make  a  part  of  the  public  and  common 
education  of  the  people. 

The  masters  who  instructed  the  young  peo¬ 
ple,  either  in  music  or  in  military  exercises,  do 
not  seem  to  have  been  paid,  or  even  appointed 
by  the  state,  either  in  Rome  or  even  in  Ath¬ 
ens,  the  Greek  republic  of  whose  laws  and  cus¬ 
toms  we  are  the  best  informed.  The  state 
required  that  every  free  citizen  should  fit 
himself  for  defending  it  in  war,  and  should, 
upon  that  account,  learn  his  military  exer¬ 
cises.  But  it  left  him  to  learn  them  of  such 
masters  as  he  could  find,  and  it  seems  to  have 
advanced  nothing  for  this  purpose  but  a  pub¬ 
lic  field  or  place  of  exercise  in  which  he  should 
practise  and  perform  them. 

In  the  early  ages  both  of  the  Greek  and 
Roman  republics,  the  other  parts  of  educa¬ 
tion  seem  to  have  consisted  in  learning  to 
read,  write,  and  account  according  to  the 
arithmetic  of  the  times.  These  accomplish¬ 
ments  the  richer  citizens  seem  frequently  to 
have  acquired  at  home  by  the  assistance  of 
some  domestic  pedagogue,  who  was  generally 
either  a  slave  or  a  f reed-man;  and  the  poorer 
citizens,  in  the  schools  of  such  masters  as 
made  a  trade  of  teaching  for  hire.  Such  parts 
of  education,  however,  were  abandoned  alto¬ 
gether  to  the  care  of  the  parents  or  guardians 
of  each  individual.  It  does  not  appear  that 
the  state  ever  assumed  any  inspection  or  di¬ 
rection  of  them.  By  a  law  of  Solon,  indeed, 
the  children  were  acquitted  from  maintaining 
those  parents  in  their  old  age  who  had  neg¬ 
lected  to  instruct  them  in  some  profitable 
trade  or  business. 

In  the  progress  of  refinement,  when  philoso¬ 
phy  and  rhetoric  came  into  fashion,  the  bet¬ 
ter  sort  of  people  used  to  send  their  children 
to  the  schools  of  philosophers  and  rhetori¬ 
cians,  in  order  to  be  instructed  in  these  fash¬ 
ionable  sciences.  But  those  schools  were  not 
supported  by  the  public.  They  were  for  a  long 
time  barely  tolerated  by  it.  The  demand  for 
philosophy  and  rhetoric  was  for  a  long  time 
so  small  that  the  first  professed  teachers  of 
either  could  not  find  constant  employment  in 
any  one  city,  but  were  obliged  to  travel  about 
from  place  to  place.  In  this  manner  lived 
Zeno  of  Elea,  Protagoras,  Gorgias,  Hippias, 
and  many  others.  As  the  demand  increased, 
the  schools  both  of  philosophy  and  rhetoric 
became  stationary;  first  in  Athens,  and  after¬ 
wards  in  several  other  cities.  The  state,  how- 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


ever,  seems  never  to  have  encouraged  them 
further  than  by  assigning  some  of  them  a 
particular  place  to  teach  in,  which  was  some¬ 
times  done,  too,  by  private  donors.  The  state 
seems  to  have  assigned  the  Academy  to  Plato, 
the  Lyceum  to  Aristotle,  and  the  Portico  to 
Zeno  of  Citta,  the  founder  of  the  Stoics.  But 
Epicurus  bequeathed  his  gardens  to  his  own 
school.  Till  about  the  time  of  Marcus  Anto- 
nius,  however,  no  teacher  appears  to  have 
had  any  salary  from  the  public,  or  to  have 
had  any  other  emoluments  but  what  arose 
from  the  honoraries  or  fees  of  his  scholars. 
The  bounty  which  that  philosophical  emper¬ 
or,  as  we  learn  from  Lucian,  bestowed  upon 
one  of  the  teachers  of  philosophy,  probably 
lasted  no  longer  than  his  own  life.  There  was 
nothing  equivalent  to  the  privileges  of  gradu¬ 
ation,  and  to  have  attended  any  of  those 
schools  was  not  necessary,  in  order  to  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  practise  any  particular  trade  or 
profession.  If  the  opinion  of  their  own  utility 
could  not  draw  scholars  to  them,  the  law 
neither  forced  anybody  to  go  to  them  nor  re¬ 
warded  anybody  for  having  gone  to  them. 
The  teachers  had  no  jurisdiction  over  their 
pupils,  nor  any  other  authority  besides  that 
natural  authority,  which  superior  virtue  and 
abilities  never  fail  to  procure  from  young  peo¬ 
ple  towards  those  who  are  entrusted  with  any 
part  of  their  education. 

At  Rome,  the  study  of  the  civil  law  made  a 
part  of  the  education,  not  of  the  greater  part 
of  the  citizens,  but  of  some  particular  fam¬ 
ilies.  The  young  people,  however,  who  wished 
to  acquire  knowledge  in  the  law,  had  no  pub¬ 
lic  school  to  go  to,  and  had  no  other  method 
of  studying  it  than  by  frequenting  the  com¬ 
pany  of  such  of  their  relations  and  friends  as 
were  supposed  to  understand  it.  It  is  perhaps 
worth  while  to  remark,  that  though  the  Laws 
of  the  Twelve  Tables  were,  many  of  them, 
copied  from  those  of  some  ancient  Greek  re¬ 
publics,  yet  law  never  seems  to  have  grown 
up  to  be  a  science  in  any  republic  of  ancient 
Greece.  In  Rome  it  became  a  science  very 
early,  and  gave  a  considerable  degree  of  illus¬ 
tration  to  those  citizens  who  had  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  understanding  it.  In  the  republics  of 
ancient  Greece,  particularly  in  Athens,  the 
ordinary  courts  of  justice  consisted  of  numer¬ 
ous,  and  therefore  disorderly,  bodies  of  peo¬ 
ple,  who  frequently  decided  almost  at  random, 
or  as  clamour,  faction,  and  party  spirit  hap¬ 
pened  to  determine.  The  ignominy  of  an  un¬ 
just  decision,  when  it  was  to  be  divided  among 
five  hundred,  a  thousand,  or  fifteen  hundred 
people  (for  some  of  their  courts  were  so  very 
numerous) ,  could  not  fall  very  heavy  upon 
any  individual.  At  Rome,  on  the  contrary, 
the  principal  courts  of  justice  consisted  either 
of  a  single  judge  or  of  a  small  number  of 


339 

judges,  whose  characters,  especially  as  they 
deliberated  always  in  public,  could  not  fail  to 
be  very  much  affected  by  any  rash  or  unjust 
decision.  In  doubtful  cases  such  courts,  from 
their  anxiety  to  avoid  blame,  would  naturally 
endeavour  to  shelter  themselves  under  the  ex¬ 
ample  or  precedent  of  the  judges  who  had  sat 
before  them,  either  in  the  same  or  in  some 
other  court.  This  attention  to  practice  and 
precedent  necessarily  formed  the  Roman  law 
into  that  regular  and  orderly  system  in  which 
it  has  been  delivered  down  to  us;  and  the 
like  attention  has  had  the  like  effects  upon 
the  laws  of  every  other  country  where  such 
attention  has  taken  place.  The  superiority 
of  character  in  the  Romans  over  that  of 
the  Greeks,  so  much  remarked  by  Polybius 
and  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus,  was  probably 
more  owing  to  the  better  constitution  of  their 
courts  of  justice  than  to  any  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  to  which  those  authors  ascribe  it.  The 
Romans  are  said  to  have  been  particularly 
distinguished  for  their  superior  respect  to  an 
oath.  But  the  people  who  were  accustomed 
to  make  oath  only  before  some  diligent  and 
well-informed  court  of  justice  would  naturally 
be  much  more  attentive  to  what  they  swore 
than  they  who  were  accustomed  to  do  the 
same  thing  before  mobbish  and  disorderly 
assemblies. 

The  abilities,  both  civil  and  military,  of  the 
Greeks  and  Romans  will  readily  be  allowed  to 
have  been  at  least  equal  to  those  of  any  mod¬ 
ern  nation.  Our  prejudice  is  perhaps  rather  to 
overrate  them.  But  except  in  what  related  to 
military  exercises,  the  state  seems  to  have 
been  at  no  pains  to  form  those  great  abilities, 
for  I  cannot  be  induced  to  believe  that  the 
musical  education  of  the  Greeks  could  be  of 
much  consequence  in  forming  them.  Masters, 
however,  had  been  found,  it  seems,  for  in¬ 
structing  the  better  sort  of  people  among 
those  nations  in  every  art  and  science  in  which 
the  circumstances  of  their  society  rendered  it 
necessary  or  convenient  for  them  to  be  in¬ 
structed.  The  demand  for  such  instruction 
produced  what  it  always  produces — the  taient 
for  giving  it;  and  the  emulation  which  an  un¬ 
restrained  competition  never  fails  to  excite, 
appears  to  have  brought  that  talent  to  a  very 
high  degree  of  perfection.  In  the  attention 
which  the  ancient  philosophers  excited,  in  the 
empire  which  they  acquired  over  the  opinions 
and  principles  of  their  auditors,  in  the  faculty 
which  they  possessed  of  giving  a  certain  tone 
and  character  to  the  conduct  and  conversa¬ 
tion  of  those  auditors,  they  appear  to  have 
been  much  superior  to  any  modern  teachers. 
In  modern  times,  the  diligence  of  public  teach¬ 
ers  is  more  or  less  corrupted  by  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  render  them  more  or  less 
independent  of  their  success  and  reputation 


*340  The  Wealth 

in  their  particular  professions.  Their  salaries, 
too,  put  the  private  teacher,  who  would  pre¬ 
tend  to  come  into  competition  with  them,  in 
the  same  state  with  a  merchant  who  attempts 
to  trade  without  a  bounty  in  competition 
with  those  who  trade  with  a  considerable  one. 
If  he  sells  his  goods  at  nearly  the  same  price, 
he  cannot  have  the  same  profit,  and  poverty 
and  beggary  at  least,  if  not  bankruptcy  and 
ruin,  will  infallibly  be  his  lot.  If  he  attempts 
to  sell  them  much  dearer,  he  is  likely  to  have 
so  few  customers  that  his  circumstances  will 
not  be  much  mended.  The  privileges  of  gradu¬ 
ation,  besides,  are  in  many  countries  neces¬ 
sary,  or  at  least  extremely  convenient,  to  most 
men  of  learned  professions,  that  is,  to  the  far 
greater  part  of  those  who  have  occasion  for  a 
learned  education.  But  those  privileges  can  be 
obtained  only  by  attending  the  lectures  of 
the  public  teachers.  The  most  careful  attend¬ 
ance  upon  the  ablest  instructions  of  any  pri¬ 
vate  teacher  cannot  always  give  any  title  to 
demand  them.  It  is  from  these  different  causes 
that  the  private  teacher  of  any  of  the  sciences 
which  are  commonly  taught  in  universities 
is  in  modern  times  generally  considered  as 
in  the  very  lowest  order  of  men  of  letters.  A 
man  of  real  abilities  can  scarce  find  out  a  more 
humiliating  or  a  more  unprofitable  employ¬ 
ment  to  turn  them  to.  The  endowment  of 
schools  and  colleges  have,  in  this  manner,  not 
only  corrupted  the  diligence  of  public  teach¬ 
ers,  but  have  rendered  it  almost  impossible 
to  have  any  good  private  ones. 

Were  there  no  public  institutions  for  educa¬ 
tion,  no  system,  no  science  would  be  taught 
for  which  there  was  not  some  demand,  or 
which  the  circumstances  of  the  times  did  not 
render  it  either  necessary,  or  convenient,  or 
at  least  fashionable,  to  learn.  A  private  teach¬ 
er  could  never  find  his  account  in  teaching 
either  an  exploded  and  antiquated  system  of 
a  science  acknowledged  to  be  useful,  or  a  sci¬ 
ence  universally  believed  to  be  a  mere  useless 
and  pedantic  heap  of  sophistry  and  nonsense. 
Such  systems,  such  sciences,  can  subsist  no¬ 
where,  but  in  those  incorporated  societies  for 
education  whose  prosperity  and  revenue  are 
in  a  great  measure  independent  of  their  repu¬ 
tation  and  altogether  independent  of  their  in¬ 
dustry.  Were  there  no  public  institutions  for 
education,  a  gentleman,  after  going  through 
with  application  and  abilities  the  most  com¬ 
plete  course  of  education  which  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  times  were  supposed  to  afford, 
could  not  come  into  the  world  completely 
ignorant  of  everything  which  is  the  common 
subject  of  conversation  among  gentlemen  and 
men  of  the  world. 

There  are  no  public  institutions  for  the  edu¬ 
cation  of  women,  and  there  is  accordingly 
nothing  useless,  absurd,  or  fantastical  in  the 


of  Nations 

common  course  of  their  education.  They  are 
taught  what  their  parents  or  guardians  judge 
it  necessary  or  useful  for  them  to  learn,  and 
they  are  taught  nothing  else.  Every  part  of 
their  education  tends  evidently  to  some  useful 
purpose;  either  to  improve  the  natural  attrac¬ 
tions  of  their  person,  or  to  form  their  mind 
to  reserve,  to  modesty,  to  chastity,  and  to 
economy;  to  render  them  both  likely  to  be¬ 
come  the  mistresses  of  a  family,  and  to  behave 
properly  when  they  have  become  such.  In 
every  part  of  her  life  a  woman  feels  some 
conveniency  or  advantage  from  every  part 
of  her  education.  It  seldom  happens  that  a 
man,  in  any  part  of  his  life,  derives  any  con¬ 
veniency  or  advantage  from  some  of  the 
most  laborious  and  troublesome  parts  of  his 
education. 

Ought  the  public,  therefore,  to  give  no  at¬ 
tention,  it  may  be  asked,  to  the  education  of 
the  people?  Or  if  it  ought  to  give  any,  what 
are  the  different  parts  of  education  which  it 
ought  to  attend  to  in  the  different  orders  of 
the  people?  and  in  what  manner  ought  it  to 
attend  to  them? 

In  some  cases  the  state  of  the  society  neces¬ 
sarily  places  the  greater  part  of  individuals 
in  such  situations  as  naturally  form  in  them, 
without  any  attention  of  government,  almost 
all  the  abilities  and  virtues  which  that  state 
requires,  or  perhaps  can  admit  of.  In  other 
cases  the  state  of  the  society  does  not  place 
the  greater  part  of  individuals  in  such  situa¬ 
tions,  and  some  attention  of  government  is 
necessary  in  order  to  prevent  the  almost  en¬ 
tire  corruption  and  degeneracy  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people. 

In  the  progress  of  the  division  of  labour, 
the  employment  of  the  far  greater  part  of 
those  who  live  by  labour,  that  is,  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  comes  to  be  confined  to 
a  few  very  simple  operations,  frequently  to 
one  or  two.  But  the  understandings  of  the 
greater  part  of  men  are  necessarily  formed  by 
their  ordinary  employments.  The  man  whose 
whole  life  is  spent  in  performing  a  few  simple 
operations,  of  which  the  effects  are  perhaps 
always  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same, 
has  no  occasion  to  exert  his  understanding  or 
to  exercise  his  invention  in  finding  out  expedi¬ 
ents  for  removing  difficulties  which  never  oc¬ 
cur.  He  naturally  loses,  therefore,  the  habit 
of  such  exertion,  and  generally  becomes  as 
stupid  and  ignorant  as  it  is  possible  for  a 
human  creature  to  become.  The  torpor  of 
his  mind  renders  him  not  only  incapable  of 
relishing  or  bearing  a  part  in  any  rational 
conversation,  but  of  conceiving  any  gener¬ 
ous,  noble,  or  tender  sentiment,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  forming  any  just  judgment  con¬ 
cerning  many  even  of  the  ordinary  duties  of 
private  life.  Of  the  great  and  extensive  in- 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


terests  of  his  country  he  is  altogether  incapa¬ 
ble  of  judging,  and  unless  very  particular 
pains  have  been  taken  to  render  him  other¬ 
wise,  he  is  equally  incapable  of  defending  his 
country  in  war.  The  uniformity  of  his  station¬ 
ary  life  naturally  corrupts  the  courage  of  his 
mind,  and  makes  him  regard  with  abhorrence 
the  irregular,  uncertain,  and  adventurous  life 
of  a  soldier.  It  corrupts  even  the  activity  of 
his  body,  and  renders  him  incapable  of  exert¬ 
ing  his  strength  with  vigour  and  persever¬ 
ance  in  any  other  employment  than  that  to 
which  he  has  been  bred.  His  dexterity  at  his 
own  particular  trade  seems,  in  this  manner, 
to  be  acquired  at  the  expense  of  his  intellec¬ 
tual,  social,  and  martial  virtues.  But  in  every 
improved  and  civilised  society  this  is  the  state 
into  which  the  labouring  poor,  that  is,  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  must  necessarily 
fall,  unless  government  takes  some  pains  to 
prevent  it. 

It  is  otherwise  in  the  barbarous  societies, 
as  they  are  commonly  called,  of  hunters,  of 
shepherds,  and  even  of  husbandmen  in  that 
rude  state  of  husbandry  which  precedes  the 
improvement  of  manufactures  and  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  foreign  commerce.  In  such  soci¬ 
eties  the  varied  occupations  of  every  man 
oblige  every  man  to  exert  his  capacity  and 
to  invent  expedients  for  removing  difficulties 
which  are  continually  occurring.  Invention  is 
kept  alive,  and  the  mind  is  not  suffered  to 
fall  into  that  drowsy  stupidity  which,  in  a 
civilised  society,  seems  to  benumb  the  under¬ 
standing  of  almost  all  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people.  In  those  barbarous  societies,  as  they 
are  called,  every  man,  it  has  already  been  ob¬ 
served,  is  a  warrior.  Every  man,  too,  is  in 
some  measure  a  statesman,  and  can  form  a 
tolerable  judgment  concerning  the  interest  of 
the  society  and  the  conduct  of  those  who 
govern  it.  How  far  their  chiefs  are  good  judges 
in  peace,  or  good  leaders  in  war,  is  obvious 
to  the  observation  of  almost  every  single  man 
among  them.  In  such  a  society,  indeed,  no 
man  can  well  acquire  that  improved  and  re¬ 
fined  understanding  which  a  few  men  some¬ 
times  possess  in  a  more  civilised  state.  Though 
in  a  rude  society  there  is  a  good  deal  of  vari¬ 
ety  in  the  occupations  of  every  individual, 
there  is  not  a  great  deal  in  those  of  the  whole 
society.  Every  man  does,  or  is  capable  of 
doing,  almost  every  thing  which  any  other 
man  does,  or  is  capable  of  doing.  Every  man 
has  a  considerable  degree  of  knowledge,  in¬ 
genuity,  and  invention:  but  scarce  any  man 
has  a  great  degree.  The  degree,  however, 
which  is  commonly  possessed,  is  generally 
sufficient  for  conducting  the  whole  simple 
business  of  the  society.  In  a  civilised  state,  on 
the  contrary,  though  there  is  little  variety  in 
the  occupations  of  the  greater  part  of  individ¬ 


341 

uals,  there  is  an  almost  infinite  variety  in 
those  of  the  whole  society.  These  varied  occu¬ 
pations  present  an  almost  infinite  variety  of 
objects  to  the  contemplation  of  those  few, 
who,  being  attached  to  no  particular  occupa¬ 
tion  themselves,  have  leisure  and  inclination 
to  examine  the  occupations  of  other  people. 
The  contemplation  of  so  great  a  variety  of 
objects  necessarily  exercises  their  minds  in 
endless  comparisons  and  combinations,  and 
renders  their  understandings,  in  an  extraordi¬ 
nary  degree,  both  acute  and  comprehensive. 
Unless  those  few,  however,  happen  to  be  placed 
in  some  very  particular  situations,  their  great 
abilities,  though  honourable  to  themselves, 
may  contribute  very  little  to  the  good  gov¬ 
ernment  or  happiness  of  their  society.  Not¬ 
withstanding  the  great  abilities  of  those  few, 
all  the  nobler  parts  of  the  human  character 
may  be,  in  a  great  measure,  obliterated  and 
extinguished  in  the  great  body  of  the  people. 

The  education  of  the  common  people  re¬ 
quires,  perhaps,  in  a  civilised  and  commercial 
society  the  attention  of  the  public  more  than 
that  of  people  of  some  rank  and  fortune. 
People  of  some  rank  and  fortune  are  generally 
eighteen  or  nineteen  years  of  age  before  they 
enter  upon  that  particular  business,  profes¬ 
sion,  or  trade,  by  which  they  propose  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  themselves  in  the  world.  They  have 
before  that  full  time  to  acquire,  or  at  least  to 
fit  themselves  for  afterwards  acquiring,  every 
accomplishment  which  can  recommend  them 
to  the  public  esteem,  or  render  them  worthy 
of  it.  Their  parents  or  guardians  are  generally 
sufficiently  anxious  that  they  should  be  so 
accomplished,  and  are,  in  most  cases,  willing 
enough  to  lay  out  the  expense  which  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  that  purpose.  If  they  are  not  always 
properly  educated,  it  is  seldom  from  the  want 
of  expense  laid  out  upon  their  education,  but 
from  the  improper  application  of  that  ex¬ 
pense.  It  is  seldom  from  the  want  of  masters, 
but  from  the  negligence  and  incapacity  of 
the  masters  who  are  to  be  had,  and  from  the 
difficulty,  or  rather  from  the  impossibility, 
which  there  is  in  the  present  state  of  things  of 
finding  any  better.  The  employments,  too,  in 
which  people  of  some  rank  or  fortune  spend 
the  greater  part  of  their  lives  are  not,  like 
those  of  the  common  people,  simple  and  uni¬ 
form.  They  are  almost  all  of  them  extremely 
complicated,  and  such  as  exercise  the  head 
more  than  the  hands.  The  understandings  of 
those  who  are  engaged  in  such  employments 
can  seldom  grow  torpid  for  want  of  exercise. 
The  employments  of  people  of  some  rank  and 
fortune,  besides,  are  seldom  such  as  harass 
them  from  morning  to  night.  They  generally 
have  a  good  deal  of  leisure,  during  which  they 
may  perfect  themselves  in  every  branch  either 
of  useful  or  ornamental  knowledge  of  which 


842 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


they  may  have  laid  the  foundation,  or  for 
which  they  may  have  acquired  some  taste  in 
the  earlier  part  of  life. 

It  is  otherwise  with  the  common  people. 
They  have  little  time  to  spare  for  education. 
Their  parents  can  scarce  afford  to  maintain 
them  even  in  infancy.  As  soon  as  they  are 
able  to  work  they  must  apply  to  some  trade 
by  which  they  can  earn  their  subsistence. 
That  trade,  too,  is  generally  so  simple  and 
uniform  as  to  give  little  exercise  to  the  under¬ 
standing,  while,  at  the  same  time,  their  labour 
is  both  so  constant  and  so  severe,  that  it 
leaves  them  little  leisure  and  less  inclination 
to  apply  to,  or  even  to  think  of,  anything  else. 

But  though  the  common  people  cannot,  in 
any  civilised  society,  be  so  well  instructed  as 
people  of  some  rank  and  fortune,  the  most 
essential  parts  of  education,  however,  to  read, 
write,  and  account,  can  be  acquired  at  so 
early  a  period  of  life  that  the  greater  part 
even  of  those  who  are  to  be  bred  to  the  lowest 
occupations  have  time  to  acquire  them  before 
they  can  be  employed  in  those  occupations. 
For  a  very  small  expense  the  public  can  facili¬ 
tate,  can  encourage,  and  can  even  impose 
upon  almost  the  whole  body  of  the  people  the 
necessity  of  acquiring  those  most  essential 
parts  of  education. 

The  public  can  facilitate  this  acquisition  by 
establishing  in  every  parish  or  district  a  little 
school,  where  children  may  be  taught  for  a 
reward  so  moderate  that  even  a  common  la¬ 
bourer  may  afford  it;  the  master  being  partly, 
but  not  wholly,  paid  by  the  public,  because, 
if  he  was  wholly,  or  even  principally,  paid  by 
it,  he  would  soon  learn  to  neglect  his  business. 
In  Scotland  the  establishment  of  such  parish 
schools  has  taught  almost  the  whole  common 
people  to  read,  and  a  very  great  proportion  of 
them  to  write  and  account.  In  England  the 
establishment  of  charity  schools  has  had  an 
effect  of  the  same  kind,  though  not  so  uni¬ 
versally,  because  the  establishment  is  not  so 
universal.  If  in  those  little  schools  the  books, 
by  which  the  children  are  taught  to  read, 
were  a  little  more  instructive  than  they  com¬ 
monly  are,  and  if,  instead  of  a  little  smat¬ 
tering  of  Latin,  which  the  children  of  the 
common  people  are  sometimes  taught  there, 
and  which  can  scarce  ever  be  of  any  use  to 
them,  they  were  instructed  in  the  elementary 
parts  of  geometry  and  mechanics,  the  literary 
education  of  this  rank  of  people  would  per¬ 
haps  be  as  complete  as  it  can  be.  There  is 
scarce  a  common  trade  which  does  not  afford 
some  opportunities  of  applying  to  it  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  geometry  and  mechanics,  and  which 
would  not  therefore  gradually  exercise  and 
improve  the  common  people  in  those  princi¬ 
ples,  the  necessary  introduction  to  the  most 
sublime  as  well  as  to  the  most  useful  sciences. 


The  public  can  encourage  the  acquisition  of 
those  most  essential  parts  of  education  by 
giving  small  premiums,  and  little  badges  of 
distinction,  to  the  children  of  the  common 
people  who  excel  in  them. 

The  public  can  impose  upon  almost  the 
whole  body  of  the  people  the  necessity  of 
acquiring  those  most  essential  parts  of  educa¬ 
tion,  by  obliging  every  man  to  undergo  an 
examination  or  probation  in  them  before  he 
can  obtain  the  freedom  in  any  corporation,  or 
be  allowed  to  set  up  any  trade  either  in  a 
village  or  town  corporate. 

It  was  in  this  manner,  by  facilitating  the 
acquisition  of  their  military  and  gymnastic 
exercises,  by  encouraging  it,  and  even  by  im¬ 
posing  upon  the  whole  body  of  the  people  the 
necessity  of  learning  those  exercises,  that  the 
Greek  and  Roman  republics  maintained  the 
martial  spirit  of  their  respective  citizens.  They 
facilitated  the  acquisition  of  those  exercises  by 
appointing  a  certain  place  for  learning  and 
practising  them,  and  by  granting  to  certain 
masters  the  privilege  of  teaching  in  that  place. 
Those  masters  do  not  appear  to  have  had 
either  salaries  or  exclusive  privileges  of  any 
kind.  Their  reward  consisted  altogether  in 
what  they  got  from  their  scholars;  and  a  citi¬ 
zen  who  had  learnt  his  exercises  in  the  public 
gymnasia  had  no  sort  of  legal  advantage  over 
one  who  had  learnt  them  privately,  provided 
the  latter  had  learnt  them  equally  well.  Those 
republics  encouraged  the  acquisition  of  those 
exercises  by  bestowing  little  premiums  and 
badges  of  distinction  upon  those  who  excelled 
in  them.  To  have  gained  a  prize  in  the  Olym¬ 
pic,  Isthmian,  or  Nemiean  games,  gave  illus¬ 
tration,  not  only  to  the  person  who  gained  it, 
but  to  his  whole  family  and  kindred.  The  ob¬ 
ligation  which  every  citizen  was  under  to 
serve  a  certain  number  of  years,  if  called 
upon,  in  the  armies  of  the  republic,  sufficiently 
imposed  the  necessity  of  learning  those  ex¬ 
ercises,  without  which  he  could  not  be  fit  for 
that  service. 

That  in  the  progress  of  improvement  the 
practice  of  military  exercises,  unless  govern¬ 
ment  takes  proper  pains  to  support  it,  goes 
gradually  to  decay,  and,  together  with  it,  the 
martial  spirit  of  the  great  body  of  the  people, 
the  example  of  modern  Europe  sufficiently 
demonstrates.  But  the  security  of  every  soci¬ 
ety  must  always  depend,  more  or  less,  upon 
the  martial  spirit  of  the  great  body  of  the 
people.  In  the  present  times,  indeed,  that 
martial  spirit  alone,  and  unsupported  by  a 
well-disciplined  standing  army,  would  not  per¬ 
haps  be  sufficient  for  the  defence  and  security 
of  any  society.  But  where  every  citizen  had 
the  spirit  of  a  soldier,  a  smaller  standing  army 
would  surely  be  requisite.  That  spirit,  besides, 
would  necessarily  diminish  very  much  the 


343 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


dangers  to  liberty,  whether  real  or  imaginary, 
which  are  commonly  apprehended  from  a 
standing  army.  As  it  would  very  much  facili¬ 
tate  the  operations  of  that  army  against  a 
foreign  invader,  so  it  would  obstruct  them  as 
much  if,  unfortunately,  they  should  ever  be 
directed  against  the  constitution  of  the  state. 

The  ancient  institutions  of  Greece  and 
Rome  seem  to  have  been  much  more  effectual 
for  maintaining  the  martial  spirit  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people  than  the  establishment  of 
what  are  called  the  militias  of  modern  times. 
They  were  much  more  simple.  When  they 
were  once  established  they  executed  them¬ 
selves,  and  it  required  little  or  no  attention 
from  government  to  maintain  them  in  the 
most  perfect  vigour.  Whereas  to  maintain, 
even  in  tolerable  execution,  the  complex  regu¬ 
lations  of  any  modern  militia,  requires  the 
continual  and  painful  attention  of  govern¬ 
ment,  without  which  they  are  constantly  fall¬ 
ing  into  total  neglect  and  disuse.  The  influ¬ 
ence,  besides,  of  the  ancient  institutions  was 
much  more  universal.  By  means  of  them  the 
whole  body  of  the  people  was  completely  in¬ 
structed  in  the  use  of  arms.  Whereas  it  is  but 
a  very  small  part  of  them  who  can  ever  be  so 
instructed  by  the  regulations  of  any  modern 
militia,  except,  perhaps,  that  of  Switzerland. 
But  a  coward,  a  man  incapable  either  of  de¬ 
fending  or  of  revenging  himself,  evidently 
wants  one  of  the  most  essential  parts  of  the 
character  of  a  man.  He  is  as  much  mutilated 
and  deformed  in  his  mind  as  another  is  in  his 
body,  who  is  either  deprived  of  some  of  its 
most  essential  members,  or  has  lost  the  use 
of  them.  He  is  evidently  the  more  wretched 
and  miserable  of  the  two;  because  happiness 
and  misery,  which  reside  altogether  in  the 
mind,  must  necessarily  depend  more  upon  the 
healthful  or  unhealthful,  the  mutilated  or  en¬ 
tire  state  of  the  mind,  than  upon  that  of  the 
body.  Even  though  the  martial  spirit  of  the 
people  were  of  no  use  towards  the  defence  of 
the  society,  yet  to  prevent  that  sort  of  mem- 
tal  mutilation,  deformity,  and  wretchedness, 
which  cowardice  necessarily  involves  in  it, 
from  spreading  themselves  through  the  great 


body  of  the  people,  would  still  deserve  the 
most  serious  attention  of  government,  in  the 
same  manner  as  it  would  deserve  its  most 
serious  attention  to  prevent  a  leprosy  or  any 
other  loathsome  and  offensive  disease,  though 
neither  mortal  nor  dangerous,  from  spreading 
itself  among  them,  though  perhaps  no  other 
public  good  might  result  from  such  attention 
besides  the  prevention  of  so  great  a  public 
evil. 

The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  gross 
ignorance  and  stupidity  which,  in  a  civilised 
society,  seem  so  frequently  to  benumb  the 
understandings  of  all  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people.  A  man  without  the  proper  use  of  the 
intellectual  faculties  of  a  man,  is,  if  possible, 
more  contemptible  than  even  a  coward,  and 
seems  to  be  mutilated  and  deformed  in  a  still 
more  essential  part  of  the  character  of  human 
nature.  Though  the  state  was  to  derive  no 
advantage  from  the  instruction  of  the  inferior 
ranks  of  people,  it  would  still  deserve  its  at¬ 
tention  that  they  should  not  be  altogether 
uninstructed.  The  state,  however,  derives  no 
inconsiderable  advantage  from  their  instruc¬ 
tion.  The  more  they  are  instructed  the  less 
liable  they  are  to  the  delusions  of  enthusiasm 
and  superstition,  which,  among  ignorant  na¬ 
tions,  frequently  occasion  the  most  dreadful 
disorders.  An  instructed  and  intelligent  peo¬ 
ple,  besides,  are  always  more  decent  and  or¬ 
derly  than  an  ignorant  and  stupid  one.  They 
feel  themselves,  each  individually,  more  re¬ 
spectable  and  more  likely  to  obtain  the  re¬ 
spect  of  their  lawful  superiors,  and  they  are 
therefore  more  disposed  to  respect  those  su¬ 
periors.  They  are  more  disposed  to  examine, 
and  more  capable  of  seeing  through,  the  inter¬ 
ested  complaints  of  faction  and  sedition,  and 
they  are,  upon  that  account,  less  apt  to  be 
misled  into  any  wanton  or  unnecessary  oppo¬ 
sition  to  the  measures  of  government.  In  free 
countries,  where  the  safety  of  government 
depends  very  much  upon  the  favourable  judg¬ 
ment  which  the  people  may  form  of  its  con¬ 
duct,  it  must  surely  be  of  the  highest  impor¬ 
tance  that  they  should  not  be  disposed  to 
judge  rashly  or  capriciously  concerning  it. 


Article  III 

Of  the  Expense  of  the  Institutions  for  the  Instruction  of  People  of  all  Ages 


The  institutions  for  the  instruction  of  peo¬ 
ple  of  all  ages  are  chiefly  those  for  religious 
instruction.  This  is  a  species  of  instruction  of 
which  the  object  is  not  so  much  to  render 
the  people  good  citizens  in  this  world,  as  to 
prepare  them  for  another  and  a  better  world 
in  a  life  to  come.  The  teachers  of  the  doctrine 
which  contains  this  instruction,  in  the  same 
manner  as  other  teachers,  may  either  depend 
altogether  for  their  subsistence  upon  the  vol¬ 


untary  contributions  of  their  hearers,  or  they 
may  derive  it  from  some  other  fund  to  which 
the  law  of  their  country  may  entitle  them; 
such  as  a  landed  estate,  a  tithe  or  land  tax, 
an  established  salary  or  stipend.  Their  exer¬ 
tion,  their  zeal  and  industry,  are  likely  to  be 
much  greater  in  the  former  situation  than  in 
the  latter.  In  this  respect  the  teachers  of  new 
religions  have  always  had  a  considerable  ad¬ 
vantage  in  attacking  those  ancient  and  estab- 


344 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


lished  systems  of  which  the  clergy,  reposing 
themselves  upon  their  benefices,  had  neg¬ 
lected  to  keep  up  the  fervour  of  faith  and  de¬ 
votion  in  the  great  body  of  the  people,  and 
having  given  themselves  up  to  indolence,  were 
become  altogether  incapable  of  making  any 
vigorous  exertion  in  defence  even  of  their  own 
establishment.  The  clergy  of  an  established 
and  well-endowed  religion  frequently  become 
men  of  learning  and  elegance,  who  possess  all 
the  virtues  of  gentlemen,  or  which  can  recom¬ 
mend  them  to  the  esteem  of  gentlemen:  but 
they  are  apt  gradually  to  lose  the  qualities, 
both  good  and  bad,  which  gave  them  author¬ 
ity  and  influence  with  the  inferior  ranks  of 
people,  and  which  had  perhaps  been  the  orig¬ 
inal  causes  of  the  success  and  establishment  of 
their  religion.  Such  a  clergy,  when  attacked 
by  a  set  of  popular  and  bold,  though  perhaps 
stupid  and  ignorant  enthusiasts,  feel  them¬ 
selves  as  perfectly  defenceless  as  the  indolent, 
effeminate,  and  full-fed  nations  of  the  southern 
parts  of  Asia  when  they  were  invaded  by  the 
active,  hardy,  and  hungry  Tartars  of  the 
North.  Such  a  clergy,  upon  such  an  emergency, 
have  commonly  no  other  resource  than  to  call 
upon  the  civil  magistrate  to  persecute,  destroy, 
or  drive  out  their  adversaries,  as  disturbers 
of  the  public  peace.  It  was  thus  that  the 
Roman  Catholic  clergy  called  upon  the  civil 
magistrates  to  persecute  the  Protestants,  and 
the  Church  of  England  to  persecute  the  Dis¬ 
senters;  and  that  in  general  every  religious 
sect,  when  it  has  once  enjoyed  for  a  century 
or  two  the  security  of  a  legal  establishment, 
has  found  itself  incapable  of  making  any  vig¬ 
orous  defence  against  any  new  sect  which 
chose  to  attack  its  doctrine  or  discipline.  Upon 
such  occasions  the  advantage  in  point  of 
learning  and  good  writing  may  sometimes  be 
on  the  side  of  the  established  church.  But 
the  arts  of  popularity,  all  the  arts  of  gaining 
proselytes,  are  constantly  on  the  side  of  its 
adversaries.  In  England  those  arts  have  been 
long  neglected  by  the  well-endowed  clergy 
of  the  established  church,  and  are  at  present 
chiefly  cultivated  by  the  Dissenters  and  by 
the  Methodists.  The  independent  provisions, 
however,  which  in  many  places  have  been 
made  for  dissenting  teachers  by  means  of 
voluntary  subscriptions,  of  trust  rights,  and 
other  evasions  of  the  law,  seem  very  much 
to  have  abated  the  zeal  and  activity  of  those 
teachers.  They  have  many  of  them  become 
very  learned,  ingenious,  and  respectable  men; 
but  they  have  in  general  ceased  to  be  very 
popular  preachers.  The  Methodists,  without 
half  the  learning  of  the  Dissenters,  are  much 
more  in  vogue. 

In  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  industry  and 
zeal  of  the  inferior  clergy  are  kept  more  alive 


by  the  powerful  motive  of  self-interest  than 
perhaps  in  any  established  Protestant  church. 
The  parochial  clergy  derive,  many  of  them,  a 
very  considerable  part  of  their  subsistence 
from  the  voluntary  oblations  of  the  people;  a 
source  of  revenue  which  confession  gives 
them  many  opportunities  of  improving.  The 
mendicant  orders  derive  their  whole  subsist¬ 
ence  from  such  oblations.  It  is  with  them  as 
with  the  hussars  and  light  infantry  of  some 
armies;  no  plunder,  no  pay.  The  parochial 
clergy  are  like  those  teachers  whose  reward 
depends  partly  upon  their  salary,  and  partly 
upon  the  fees  or  honoraries  which  they  get 
from  their  pupils,  and  these  must  always  de¬ 
pend  more  or  less  upon  their  industry  and 
reputation.  The  mendicant  orders  are  like 
those  teachers  whose  subsistence  depends  al¬ 
together  upon  the  industry.  They  are  obliged, 
therefore,  to  use  every  art  which  can  ani¬ 
mate  the  devotion  of  the  common  people. 
The  establishment  of  the  two  great  mendicant 
orders  of  St.  Dominic  and  St.  Francis,  it  is 
observed  by  Machiavel,  revived,  in  the  thir¬ 
teenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  the  languish¬ 
ing  faith  and  devotion  of  the  Catholic  Church. 
In  Roman  Catholic  countries  the  spirit  of 
devotion  is  supported  altogether  by  the  monks 
and  by  the  poorer  parochial  clergy.  The  great 
dignitaries  of  the  church,  with  all  the  accom¬ 
plishments  of  gentlemen  and  men  of  the 
world,  and  sometimes  with  those  of  men  of 
learning,  are  careful  enough  to  maintain  the 
necessary  discipline  over  their  inferiors,  but 
seldom  give  themselves  any  trouble  about  the 
instruction  of  the  people. 

“Most  of  the  arts  and  professions  in  a 
state,”  says  by  far  the  most  illustrious  philos¬ 
opher  and  historian  of  the  present  age,  “are 
of  such  a  nature  that,  while  they  promote  the 
interests  of  the  society,  they  are  also  useful 
or  agreeable  to  some  individuals;  and  in  that 
case,  the  constant  rule  of  the  magistrate,  ex¬ 
cept  perhaps  on  the  first  introduction  of  any 
art,  is  to  leave  the  profession  to  itself,  and 
trust  its  encouragement  to  the  individuals 
who  reap  the  benefit  of  it.  The  artisans,  find¬ 
ing  their  profits  to  rise  by  the  favour  of  their 
customers,  increase  as  much  as  possible  their 
skill  and  industry;  and  as  matters  are  not 
disturbed  by  any  injudicious  tampering,  the 
commodity  is  always  sure  to  be  at  all  times 
nearly  proportioned  to  the  demand. 

“But  there  are  also  some  callings,  which, 
though  useful  and  even  necessary  in  a  state, 
bring  no  advantage  or  pleasure  to  any  in¬ 
dividual,  and  the  supreme  power  is  obliged 
to  alter  its  conduct  with  regard  to  the  re¬ 
tainers  of  those  professions.  It  must  give  them 
public  encouragement  in  order  to  their  sub¬ 
sistence,  and  it  must  provide  against  that 
negligence  to  which  they  will  naturally  be 


345 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


subject,  either  by  annexing  particular  honours 
to  the  profession,  by  establishing  a  long  sub¬ 
ordination  of  ranks  and  a  strict  dependence, 
or  by  some  other  expedient.  The  persons  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  finances,  fleets,  and  magistracy, 
are  instances  of  this  order  of  men. 

“It  may  naturally  be  thought,  at  first  sight, 
that  the  ecclesiastics  belong  to  the  first  class, 
and  that  their  encouragement,  as  well  as  that 
of  lawyers  and  physicians,  may  safely  be  en¬ 
trusted  to  the  liberality  of  individuals,  who 
are  attached  to  their  doctrines,  and  who  find 
benefit  or  consolation  from  their  spiritual 
ministry  and  assistance.  Their  industry  and 
vigilance  will,  no  doubt,  be  whetted  by  such 
an  additional  motive;  and  their  skill  in  the 
profession,  as  well  as  their  address  in  govern¬ 
ing  the  minds  of  the  people,  must  receive 
daily  increase  from  their  increasing  practice, 
study,  and  attention. 

“But  if  we  consider  the  matter  more  closely, 
we  shall  find  that  this  interested  diligence  of 
the  clergy  is  what  every  wise  legislator  will 
study  to  prevent;  because  in  every  religion 
except  the  true  it  is  highly  pernicious,  and  it 
has  even  a  natural  tendency  to  pervert  the 
true,  by  infusing  into  it  a  strong  mixture  of 
superstition,  folly,  and  delusion.  Each  ghostly 
practitioner,  in  order  to  render  himself  more 
precious  and  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  his  retainers, 
will  inspire  them  with  the  most  violent  abhor¬ 
rence  of  all  other  sects,  and  continually 
endeavour,  by  some  novelty,  to  excite  the  lan¬ 
guid  devotion  of  his  audience.  No  regard  will 
be  paid  to  truth,  morals,  or  decency  in  the 
doctrines  inculcated.  Every  tenet  will  be 
adopted  that  best  suits  the  disorderly  affec¬ 
tions  of  the  human  frame.  Customers  will  be 
drawn  to  each  conventicle  by  new  industry 
and  address  in  practising  on  the  passions  and 
credulity  of  the  populace.  And  in  the  end, 
the  civil  magistrate  will  find  that  he  has 
dearly  paid  for  his  pretended  frugality,  in 
saving  a  fixed  establishment  for  the  priests; 
and  that  in  reality  the  most  decent  and  ad¬ 
vantageous  composition  which  he  can  make 
with  the  spiritual  guides,  is  to  bribe  their 
indolence  by  assigning  stated  salaries  to  their 
profession,  and  rendering  it  superfluous  for 
them  to  be  farther  active  than  merely  to  pre¬ 
vent  their  flock  from  straying  in  quest  of  new 
pastures.  And  in  this  manner  ecclesiastical 
establishments,  though  commonly  they  arose 
at  first  from  religious  views,  prove  in  the  end 
advantageous  to  the  political  interests  of 
society .” 

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  good  or 
bad  effects  of  the  independent  provision  of 
the  clergy,  it  has,  perhaps,  been  very  seldom 
bestowed  upon  them  from  any  view  to  those 
effects.  Times  of  violent  religious  controversy 
have  generally  been  times  of  equally  violent 


political  faction.  Upon  such  occasions,  each 
political  party  has  either  found  it,  or  imagined 
it,  for  its  interest  to  league  itself  with  some 
one  or  other  of  the  contending  religious  sects. 
But  this  could  be  done  only  by  adopting,  or 
at  least  by  favouring,  the  tenets  of  that  par¬ 
ticular  sect.  The  sect  which  had  the  good 
fortune  to  be  leagued  with  the  conquering 
party  necessarily  shared  in  the  victory  of  its 
ally,  by  whose  favour  and  protection  it  was 
soon  enabled  in  some  degree  to  silence  and  sub¬ 
due  all  its  adversaries.  Those  adversaries  had 
generally  leagued  themselves  w  ith  the  enemies 
of  the  conqueriug  party,  and  were  therefore 
the  enemies  of  that  party.  The  clergy  of  this 
particular  sect  having  thus  become  complete 
masters  of  the  field,  and  their  influence  and 
authority  with  the  great  body  of  the  people 
being  in  its  highest  vigour,  they  were  power¬ 
ful  enough  to  overawe  the  chiefs  anti  leaders 
of  their  owm  party,  and  to  oblige  the  civil 
magistrate  to  respect  their  opinions  and  in¬ 
clinations.  Their  first  demand  wras  generally 
that  he  should  silence  and  subdue  all  their 
adversaries:  and  their  second,  that  he  should 
bestow  an  independent  provision  on  them¬ 
selves.  As  they  had  generally  contributed  a 
good  deal  to  the  victory,  it  seemed  not  un¬ 
reasonable  that  they  should  have  some  share 
in  the  spoil.  They  were  wreary,  besides,  of 
humouring  the  people,  and  of  depending  upon 
their  caprice  for  a  subsistence.  In  making  this 
demand,  therefore,  they  consulted  their  own 
ease  and  comfort,  without  troubling  them¬ 
selves  about  the  effect  which  it  might  have  in 
future  times  upon  the  influence  and  authority 
of  their  order.  The  civil  magistrate,  wrho  could 
comply  with  this  demand  only  by  giving 
them  something  which  he  wrould  have  chosen 
much  rather  to  take,  or  to  keep  to  himself, 
was  seldom  very  forward  to  grant  it.  Ne¬ 
cessity,  however,  always  forced  him  to  submit 
at  last,  though  frequently  not  till  after  many 
delays,  evasions,  and  affected  excuses. 

But  if  politics  had  never  called  in  the  aid 
of  religion,  had  the  conquering  party  never 
adopted  the  tenets  of  one  sect  more  than 
those  of  another  wrhen  it  had  gained  the 
victory,  it  would  probably  have  dealt  equally 
and  impartially  with  all  the  different  sects, 
and  have  allowed  every  man  to  choose  his 
own  priest  and  his  own  religion  as  he  thought 
proper.  There  would  in  this  case,  no  doubt, 
have  been  a  great  multitude  of  religious  sects. 
Almost  every  different  congregation  might 
probably  have  made  a  little  sect  by  itself,  or 
have  entertained  some  peculiar  tenets  of  its 
own.  Each  teacher  would  no  doubt  have  felt 
himself  under  the  necessity  of  making  the 
utmost  exertion  and  of  using  every  art  both 
to  preserve  and  to  increase  the  number  of  his 
disciples.  But  as  every  other  teacher  would 


346  The  Wealth 

have  felt  himself  under  the  same  necessity, 
the  success  of  no  one  teacher,  or  sect  of 
teachers,  could  have  been  very  great.  The 
interested  and  active  zeal  of  religious  teachers 
can  be  dangerous  and  troublesome  only  where 
there  is  either  but  one  sect  tolerated  in  the 
society,  or  where  the  whole  of  a  large  society 
is  divided  into  two  or  three  great  sects;  the 
teachers  of  each  acting  by  concert,  and  under 
a  regular  discipline  and  subordination.  But 
that  zeal  must  be  altogether  innocent  where 
the  society  is  divided  into  two  or  three  hun¬ 
dred,  or  perhaps  into  as  many  thousand  small 
sects,  of  which  no  one  could  be  considerable 
enough  to  disturb  the  public  tranquillity.  The 
teachers  of  each  sect,  seeing  themselves  sur¬ 
rounded  on  all  sides  with  more  adversaries 
than  friends,  would  be  obliged  to  learn  that 
candour  and  moderation  which  is  so  seldom 
to  be  found  among  the  teachers  of  those  great 
sects  whose  tenets,  being  supported  by  the 
civil  magistrate,  are  held  in  veneration  by 
almost  all  the  inhabitants  of  extensive  king¬ 
doms  and  empires,  and  who  therefore  see 
nothing  round  them  but  followers,  disciples, 
and  humble  admirers.  The  teachers  of  each 
little  sect,  finding  themselves  almost  alone, 
would  be  obliged  to  respect  those  of  almost 
every  other  sect,  and  the  concessions  which 
they  would  mutually  find  it  both  convenient 
and  agreeable  to  make  to  one  another,  might 
in  time  probably  reduce  the  doctrine  of  the 
greater  part  of  them  to  that  pure  and  rational 
religion,  free  from  every  mixture  of  absurdity, 
imposture,  or  fanaticism,  such  as  wise  men 
have  in  all  ages  of  the  world  wished  to  see 
established;  but  such  as  positive  law  has 
perhaps  never  yet  established,  and  probably 
never  will  establish,  in  any  country:  because, 
with  regard  to  religion,  positive  law  always 
has  been,  and  probably  always  will  be,  more 
or  less  influenced  by  popular  superstition  and 
enthusiasm.  This  plan  of  ecclesiastical  govern¬ 
ment,  or  more  properly  of  no  ecclesiastical 
government,  was  what  the  sect  called  In¬ 
dependents,  a  sect  no  doubt  of  very  wild 
enthusiasts,  proposed  to  establish  in  England 
towards  the  end  of  the  civil  war.  If  it  had 
been  established,  though  of  a  very  unphilo- 
sophical  origin,  it  would  probably  by  this  time 
have  been  productive  of  the  most  philo¬ 
sophical  good  temper  and  moderation  with 
regard  to  every  sort  of  religious  principle.  It 
has  been  established  in  Pennsylvania,  where, 
though  the  Quakers  happen  to  be  the  most 
numerous,  the  law  in  reality  favours  no  one 
sect  more  than  another,  and  it  is  there  said 
to  have  been  productive  of  this  philosophical 
good  temper  and  moderation. 

But  though  this  equality  of  treatment 
should  not  be  productive  of  this  good  temper 
and  moderation  in  all,  or  even  in  the  greater 


of  Nations 

part  of  the  religious  sects  of  a  particular 
country,  yet  provided  those  sects  were  suffi¬ 
ciently  numerous,  and  each  of  them  con¬ 
sequently  too  small  to  disturb  the  public 
tranquillity,  the  excessive  zeal  of  each  for 
its  particular  tenets  could  not  well  be  pro¬ 
ductive  of  any  very  harmful  effects,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  of  several  good  ones:  and  if  the 
government  was  perfectly  decided  both  to 
let  them  all  alone,  and  to  oblige  them  all  to 
let  alone  one  another,  there  is  little  danger 
that  they  would  not  of  their  own  accord 
subdivide  themselves  fast  enough  so  as  soon 
to  become  sufficiently  numerous. 

In  every  civilised  society,  in  every  society 
where  the  distinction  of  ranks  has  once  been 
completely  established,  there  have  been  al¬ 
ways  two  different  schemes  or  systems  of 
morality  current  at  the  same  time;  of  which 
the  one  may  be  called  the  strict  or  austere; 
the  other  the  liberal,  or,  if  you  will,  the  loose 
system.  The  former  is  generally  admired  and 
revered  by  the  common  people:  the  latter  is 
commonly  more  esteemed  and  adopted  by 
what  are  called  people  of  fashion.  The  degree 
of  disapprobation  with  which  we  ought  to 
mark  the  vices  of  levity,  the  vices  which  are 
apt  to  arise  from  great  prosperity,  and  from 
the  excess  of  gaiety  and  good  humour,  seems 
to  constitute  the  principal  distinction  between 
those  two  opposite  schemes  or  systems.  In  the 
liberal  or  loose  system,  luxury,  wanton  and 
even  disorderly  mirth,  the  pursuit  of  pleasure 
to  some  degree  of  intemperance,  the  breach 
of  chastity,  at  least  in  one  of  the  two  sexes, 
etc.,  provided  they  are  not  accompanied  with 
gross  indecency,  and  do  not  lead  to  falsehood 
or  injustice,  are  generally  treated  with  a  good 
deal  of  indulgence,  and  are  easily  either  ex¬ 
cused  or  pardoned  altogether.  In  the  austere 
system,  on  the  contrary,  those  excesses  are 
regarded  with  the  utmost  abhorrence  and 
detestation.  The  vices  of  levity  are  always 
ruinous  to  the  common  people,  and  a  single 
week’s  thoughtlessness  and  dissipation  is  often 
sufficient  to  undo  a  poor  workman  for  ever, 
and  to  drive  him  through  despair  upon  com¬ 
mitting  the  most  enormous  crimes.  The  wiser 
and  better  sort  of  the  common  people,  there¬ 
fore,  have  always  the  utmost  abhorrence  and 
detestation  of  such  excesses,  which  their  ex¬ 
perience  tells  them  are  so  immediately  fatal 
to  people  of  their  condition.  The  disorder 
and  extravagance  of  several  years,  on  the 
contrary,  will  not  always  ruin  a  man  of 
fashion,  and  people  of  that  rank  are  very  apt 
to  consider  the  power  of  indulging  in  some 
degree  of  excess  as  one  of  the  advantages  of 
their  fortune,  and  the  liberty  of  doing  so 
without  censure  or  reproach  as  one  of  the 
privileges  which  belong  to  their  station.  In 
people  of  their  own  station,  therefore,  they 


347 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


regard  such  excesses  with  but  a  small  degree 
of  disapprobation,  and  censure  them  either 
very  slightly  or  not  at  all. 

Almost  all  religious  sects  have  begun  among 
the  common  people,  from  whom  they  have 
generally  drawn  their  earliest  as  well  as  their 
most  numerous  proselytes.  The  austere  system 
of  morality  has,  accordingly,  been  adopted 
by  those  sects  almost  constantly,  or  with  very 
few  exceptions;  for  there  have  been  some.  It 
was  the  system  by  which  they  could  best 
recommend  themselves  to  that  order  of  people 
to  whom  they  first  proposed  their  plan  of 
reformation  upon  what  had  been  before  estab¬ 
lished.  Many  of  them,  perhaps  the  greater 
part  of  them,  have  even  endeavoured  to  gain 
credit  by  refining  upon  this  austere  system, 
and  by  carrying  it  to  some  degree  of  folly  and 
extravagance;  and  this  excessive  rigour  has 
frequently  recommended  them  more  than 
anything  else  to  the  respect  and  veneration  of 
the  common  people. 

A  man  of  rank  and  fortune  is  by  his  station 
the  distinguished  member  of  a  great  society, 
who  attend  to  every  part  of  his  conduct,  and 
who  thereby  oblige  him  to  attend  to  every 
part  of  it  himself.  His  authority  and  con¬ 
sideration  depend  very  much  upon  the  respect 
which  this  society  bears  to  him.  He  dare  not 
do  anything  which  would  disgrace  or  discredit 
him  in  it,  and  he  is  obliged  to  a  very  strict 
observation  of  that  species  of  morals,  whether 
liberal  or  austere,  which  the  general  consent 
of  this  society  prescribes  to  persons  of  his 
rank  and  fortune.  A  man  of  low  condition,  on 
the  contrary,  is  far  from  being  a  distinguished 
member  of  any  great  society.  While  he  re¬ 
mains  in  a  country  village  his  conduct  may 
be  attended  to,  and  he  may  be  obliged  to 
attend  to  it  himself.  In  this  situation,  and  in 
this  situation  only,  he  may  have  what  is  called 
a  character  to  lose.  But  as  soon  as  he  comes 
into  a  great  city  he  is  sunk  in  obscurity  and 
darkness.  His  conduct  is  observed  and  at¬ 
tended  to  by  nobody,  and  he  is  therefore  very 
likely  to  neglect  it  himself,  and  to  abandon 
himself  to  every  sort  of  low  profligacy  and 
vice.  He  never  emerges  so  effectually  from 
this  obscurity,  his  conduct  never  excites  so 
much  the  attention  of  any  respectable  society, 
as  by  his  becoming  the  member  of  a  small 
religious  sect.  He  from  that  moment  acquires 
a  degree  of  consideration  which  he  never  had 
before.  All  his  brother  sectaries  are,  for  the 
credit  of  the  sect,  interested  to  observe  his 
conduct,  and  if  he  gives  occasion  to  any 
scandal,  if  he  deviates  very  much  from  those 
austere  morals  which  they  almost  always  re¬ 
quire  of  one  another,  to  punish  him  by  what 
is  always  a  very  severe  punishment,  even 
where  no  civil  effects  attend  it,  expulsion  or 
excommunication  from  the  sect.  In  little  re¬ 


ligious  sects,  accordingly,  the  morals  of  the 
common  people  have  been  almost  always 
remarkably  regular  and  orderly;  generally 
much  more  so  than  in  the  established  church. 
The  morals  of  those  little  sects,  indeed,  have 
frequently  been  rather  disagreeably  rigorous 
and  unsocial. 

There  are  two  very  easy  and  effectual 
remedies,  however,  by  whose  joint  operation 
the  state  might,  without  violence,  correct 
whatever  was  unsocial  or  disagreeably  rigor¬ 
ous  in  the  morals  of  all  the  little  sects  into 
which  the  country  was  divided. 

The  first  of  those  remedies  is  the  study  of 
science  and  philosophy,  which  the  state  might 
render  almost  universal  among  all  people  of 
middling  or  more  than  middling  rank  and 
fortune;  not  by  giving  salaries  to  teachers  in 
order  to  make  them  negligent  and  idle,  but 
by  instituting  some  sort  of  probation,  even 
in  the  higher  and  more  difficult  sciences,  to 
be  undergone  by  every  person  before  he  was 
permitted  to  exercise  any  liberal  profession, 
or  before  he  could  be  received  as  a  candidate 
for  any  honourable  office  of  trust  or  profit. 
If  the  state  imposed  upon  this  order  of  men 
the  necessity  of  learning,  it  would  have  no 
occasion  to  give  itself  any  trouble  about  pro¬ 
viding  them  with  proper  teachers.  They  would 
soon  find  better  teachers  for  themselves  than 
any  whom  the  state  could  provide  for  them. 
Science  is  the  great  antidote  to  the  poison  of 
enthusiasm  and  superstition;  and  where  all 
the  superior  ranks  of  people  were  secured 
from  it,  the  inferior  ranks  could  not  be  much 
exposed  to  it. 

The  second  of  those  remedies  is  the  fre¬ 
quency  and  gaiety  of  public  diversions.  The 
state,  by  encouraging,  that  is  by  giving  entire 
liberty  to  all  those  who  for  their  own  interest 
would  attempt,  without  scandal  or  indecency, 
to  amuse  and  divert  the  people  by  painting, 
poetry,  music,  dancing;  by  all  sorts  of  dra¬ 
matic  representations  and  exhibitions,  would 
easily  dissipate,  in  the  greater  part  of  them, 
that  melancholy  and  gloomy  humour  which 
is  almost  always  the  nurse  of  popular  super¬ 
stition  and  enthusiasm.  Public  diversions  have 
always  been  the  objects  of  dread  and  hatred 
to  all  the  fanatical  promoters  of  those  popular 
frenzies.  The  gaiety  and  good  humour  which 
those  diversions  inspire  were  altogether  in¬ 
consistent  with  that  temper  of  mind  which 
was  fittest  for  their  purpose,  or  which  they 
could  best  work  upon.  Dramatic  representa¬ 
tions,  besides,  frequently  exposing  their  arti¬ 
fices  to  public  ridicule,  and  sometimes  even 
to  public  execration,  were  upon  that  account, 
more  than  all  other  diversions,  the  objects  of 
their  peculiar  abhorrence. 

In  a  country  where  the  law  favoured  the 
teachers  of  no  one  religion  more  than  those 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


348 

of  another,  it  would  not  be  necessary  that 
any  of  them  should  have  any  particular  or 
immediate  dependency  upon  the  sovereign  or 
executive  power;  or  that  he  should  have  any¬ 
thing  to  do  either  in  appointing  or  in  dis¬ 
missing  them  from  their  offices.  In  such  a 
situation  he  would  have  no  occasion  to  give 
himself  any  concern  about  them,  further  than 
to  keep  the  peace  among  them  in  the  same 
manner  as  among  the  rest  of  his  subjects; 
that  is,  to  hinder  them  from  persecuting, 
abusing,  or  oppressing  one  another.  But  it 
is  quite  otherwise  in  countries  where  there  is 
an  established  or  governing  religion.  The 
sovereign  can  in  this  case  never  be  secure 
unless  he  has  the  means  of  influencing  in  a 
considerable  degree  the  greater  part  of  the 
teachers  of  that  religion. 

The  clergy  of  every  established  church  con¬ 
stitute  a  great  incorporation.  They  can  act 
in  concert,  and  pursue  their  interest  upon 
one  plan  and  with  one  spirit,  as  much  as  if 
they  were  under  the  direction  of  one  man; 
and  they  are  frequently,  too,  under  such 
direction.  Their  interest  as  an  incorporated 
body  is  never  the  same  with  that  of  the 
sovereign,  and  is  sometimes  directly  opposite 
to  it.  Their  great  interest  is  to  maintain  their 
authority  with  the  people;  and  this  authority 
depends  upon  the  supposed  certainty  and 
importance  of  the  whole  doctrine  which  they 
inculcate,  and  upon  the  supposed  necessity 
of  adopting  every  part  of  it  with  the  most 
implicit  faith,  in  order  to  avoid  eternal  misery. 
Should  the  sovereign  have  the  imprudence 
to  appear  either  to  deride  or  doubt  himself 
of  the  most  trifling  part  of  their  doctrine,  or 
from  humanity  attempt  to  protect  those  who 
did  either  the  one  or  the  other,  the  punctilious 
honour  of  a  clergy  who  have  no  sort  of 
dependency  upon  him  is  immediately  pro¬ 
voked  to  proscribe  him  as  a  profane  person, 
and  to  employ  all  the  terrors  of  religion  in 
order  to  oblige  the  people  to  transfer  their 
allegiance  to  some  more  orthodox  and  obedi¬ 
ent  prince.  Should  he  oppose  any  of  their 
pretensions  or  usurpations,  the  danger  is 
equally  great.  The  princes  who  have  dared 
in  this  manner  to  rebel  against  the  church, 
over  and  above  this  crime  of  rebellion  have 
generally  been  charged,  too,  with  the  ad¬ 
ditional  crime  of  heresy,  notwithstanding 
their  solemn  protestations  of  their  faith  and 
humble  submission  to  every  tenet  which  she 
thought  proper  to  prescribe  to  them.  But  the 
authority  of  religion  is  superior  to  every  other 
authority.  The  fears  which  it  suggests  con¬ 
quer  all  other  fears.  When  the  authorized 
teachers  of  religion  propagate  through  the 
great  body  of  the  people  doctrines  subversive 
of  the  authority  of  the  sovereign,  it  is  by 
violence  only,  or  by  the  force  of  a  standing 


army,  that  he  can  maintain  his  authority. 
Even  a  standing  army  cannot  in  this  case 
give  him  any  lasting  security;  because  if  the 
soldiers  are  not  foreigners,  which  can  seldom 
be  the  case,  but  drawn  from  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  which  must  almost  always  be 
the  case,  they  are  likely  to  be  soon  corrupted 
by  those  very  doctrines.  The  revolutions  which 
the  turbulence  of  the  Greek  clergy  was  con¬ 
tinually  occasioning  at  Constantinople,  as 
long  as  the  eastern  empire  subsisted;  the  con¬ 
vulsions  which,  during  the  course  of  several 
centuries,  the  turbulence  of  the  Roman  clergy 
was  continually  occasioning  in  every  part  of 
Europe,  sufficiently  demonstrate  how  precari¬ 
ous  and  insecure  must  always  be  the  situation 
of  the  sovereign  who  has  no  proper  means 
of  influencing  the  clergy  of  the  established 
and  governing  religion  of  his  country. 

Articles  of  faith,  as  well  as  all  other  spiritual 
matters,  it  is  evident  enough,  are  not  within 
the  proper  department  of  a  temporal  sov¬ 
ereign,  who,  though  he  may  be  very  well 
qualified  for  protecting,  is  seldom  supposed 
to  be  so  for  instructing  the  people.  With 
regard  to  such  matters,  therefore,  his  author¬ 
ity  can  seldom  be  sufficient  to  counterbalance 
the  united  authority  of  the  clergy  of  the 
established  church.  The  public  tranquillity, 
however,  and  his  own  security,  may  frequently 
depend  upon  the  doctrines  which  they  may 
think  proper  to  propagate  concerning  such 
matters.  As  he  can  seldom  directly  oppose 
their  decision,  therefore,  with  proper  weight 
and  authority,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should 
be  able  to  influence  it;  and  he  can  influence 
it  only  by  the  fears  and  expectations  which 
he  may  excite  in  the  greater  part  of  the 
individuals  of  the  order.  Those  fears  and 
expectations  may  consist  in  the  fear  of  dep¬ 
rivation  or  other  punishment,  and  in  the 
expectation  of  further  preferment. 

In  all  Christian  churches  the  benefices  of 
the  clergy  are  a  sort  of  freeholds  which  they 
enjoy,  not  during  pleasure,  but  during  life 
or  good  behaviour.  If  they  held  them  by  a 
more  precarious  tenure,  and  were  liable  to 
be  turned  out  upon  every  slight  disobligation 
either  of  the  sovereign  or  of  his  ministers,  it 
would  perhaps  be  impossible  for  them  to  main¬ 
tain  their  authority  with  the  people,  who 
would  then  consider  them  as  mercenary  de¬ 
pendents  upon  the  court,  in  the  security  of 
whose  instructions  they  could  no  longer  have 
any  confidence.  But  should  the  sovereign  at¬ 
tempt  irregularly,  and  by  violence,  to  deprive 
any  number  of  clergymen  of  their  freeholds, 
on  account,  perhaps,  of  their  having  propa¬ 
gated,  with  more  than  ordinary  zeal,  some 
factious  or  seditious  doctrine,  he  would  only 
render,  by  such  persecution,  both  them  and 
their  doctrine  ten  times  more  popular,  and 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign  349 


therefore  ten  times  more  troublesome  and 
dangerous,  than  they  had  been  before.  Fear 
is  in  almost  all  cases  a  wretched  instrument 
of  government,  and  ought  in  particular  never 
to  be  employed  against  any  order  of  men  who 
have  the  smallest  pretensions  to  independ¬ 
ency.  To  attempt  to  terrify  them  serves  only 
to  irritate  their  bad  humour,  and  to  confirm 
them  in  an  opposition  which  more  gentle 
usage  perhaps  might  easily  induce  them  either 
to  soften,  or  to  lay  aside  altogether.  The 
violence  which  the  French  government  usually 
employed  in  order  to  oblige  all  their  parlia¬ 
ments,  or  sovereign  courts  of  justice,  to  en- 
register  any  unpopular  edict,  very  seldom 
succeeded.  The  means  commonly  employed, 
however,  the  imprisonment  of  all  the  refrac¬ 
tory  members,  one  would  think  were  forcible 
enough.  The  princes  of  the  house  of  Stewart 
sometimes  employed  the  like  means  in  order 
to  influence  some  of  the  members  of  the 
Parliament  of  England;  and  they  generally 
found  them  equally  intractable.  The  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  England  is  now  managed  in  another 
manner;  and  a  very  small  experiment  which 
the  Duke  of  Choiseul  made  about  twelve  years 
ago  upon  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  demon¬ 
strated  sufficiently  that  all  the  parliaments 
of  France  might  have  been  managed  still 
more  easily  in  the  same  manner.  That  ex¬ 
periment  was  not  pursued.  For  though  man¬ 
agement  and  persuasion  are  always  the  easiest 
and  the  safest  instruments  of  governments,  as 
force  and  violence  are  the  worst  and  the  most 
dangerous,  yet  such,  it  seems,  is  the  natural 
insolence  of  man  that  he  almost  always  dis¬ 
dains  to  use  the  good  instrument,  except 
when  he  cannot  or  dare  not  use  the  bad  one. 
The  French  government  could  and  durst  use 
force,  and  therefore  disdained  to  use  manage¬ 
ment  and  persuasion.  But  there  is  no  order 
of  men,  it  appears,  I  believe,  from  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  all  ages,  upon  whom  it  is  so 
dangerous,  or  rather  so  perfectly  ruinous,  to 
employ  force  and  violence,  as  upon  the  re¬ 
spected  clergy  of  any  established  church.  The 
rights,  the  privileges,  the  personal  liberty  of 
every  individual  ecclesiastic  who  is  upon  good 
terms  with  his  own  order  are,  even  in  the 
most  despotic  governments,  more  respected 
than  those  of  any  other  person  of  nearly  equal 
rank  and  fortune.  It  is  so  in  every  gradation 
of  despotism,  from  that  of  the  gentle  and 
mild  government  of  Paris  to  that  of  the 
violent  and  furious  government  of  Constan¬ 
tinople.  But  though  this  order  of  men  can 
scarce  ever  be  forced,  they  may  be  managed 
as  easily  as  any  other;  and  the  security  of 
the  sovereign,  as  well  as  the  public  tranquil¬ 
lity,  seems  to  depend  very  much  upon  the 
means  which  he  has  of  managing  them;  and 
those  means  seem  to  consist  altogether  in  the 


preferment  which  he  has  to  bestow  upon 
them. 

In  the  ancient  constitution  of  the  Christian 
church,  the  bishop  of  each  diocese  was  elected 
by  the  joint  votes  of  the  clergy  and  of  the 
people  of  the  episcopal  city.  The  people  did 
not  long  retain  their  right  of  election;  and 
while  they  did  retain  it,  they  almost  always 
acted  under  the  influence  of  the  clergy,  who 
in  such  spiritual  matters  appeared  to  be  their 
natural  guides.  The  clergy,  however,  soon 
grew  weary  of  the  trouble  of  managing  them, 
and  found  it  easier  to  elect  their  own  bishops 
themselves.  The  abbot,  in  the  same  manner, 
was  elected  by  the  monks  of  the  monastery, 
at  least  in  the  greater  part  of  the  abbacies. 
All  the  inferior  ecclesiastical  benefices  com¬ 
prehended  within  the  diocese  were  collated 
by  the  bishop,  who  bestowed  them  upon  such 
ecclesiastics  as  he  thought  proper.  All  church 
preferments  were  in  this  manner  in  the  dis¬ 
posal  of  the  church.  The  sovereign,  though 
he  might  have  some  indirect  influence  in  those 
elections,  and  though  it  was  sometimes  usual 
to  ask  both  his  consent  to  elect  and  his  ap¬ 
probation  of  the  election,  yet  had  no  direct 
or  sufficient  means  of  managing  the  clergy. 
The  ambition  of  every  clergyman  naturally 
led  him  to  pay  court  not  so  much  to  his 
sovereign  as  to  his  own  order,  from  which 
only  he  could  expect  preferment. 

Through  the  greater  part  of  Europe  the 
Pope  gradually  drew  to  himself  first  the  col¬ 
lation  of  almost  all  bishoprics  and  abbacies, 
or  of  what  were  called  Consistorial  benefices, 
and  afterwards,  by  various  machinations  and 
pretences,  of  the  greater  part  of  inferior  bene¬ 
fices  comprehended  within  each  diocese;  little 
more  being  left  to  the  bishop  than  what 
was  barely  necessary  to  give  him  a  decent 
authority  with  his  own  clergy.  By  this  ar¬ 
rangement  the  condition  of  the  sovereign  was 
still  worse  than  it  had  been  before.  The  clergy 
of  all  the  different  countries  of  Europe  were 
thus  formed  into  a  sort  of  spiritual  army, 
dispersed  in  different  quarters,  indeed,  but 
of  which  all  the  movements  and  operations 
could  now  be  directed  by  one  head,  and  con¬ 
ducted  upon  one  uniform  plan.  The  clergy  of 
each  particular  country  might  be  considered 
as  a  particular  detachment  of  that  army,  or 
which  the  operations  could  easily  be  supported 
and  seconded  by  all  the  other  detachments 
quartered  in  the  different  countries  round 
about.  Each  detachment  was  not  only  in¬ 
dependent  of  the  sovereign  of  the  country  in 
which  it  was  quartered,  and  by  which  it  was 
maintained,  but  dependent  upon  a  foreign 
sovereign,  who  could  at  any  time  turn  its 
arms  against  the  sovereign  of  that  particular 
country,  and  support  them  by  the  arms  of 
all  the  other  detachments. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


350 

Those  arms  were  the  most  formidable  that 
can  well  be  imagined.  In  the  ancient  state  of 
Europe,  before  the  establishment  of  arts  and 
manufactures,  the  wealth  of  the  clergy  gave 
them  the  same  sort  of  influence  over  the 
common  people  which  that  of  the  great 
barons  gave  them  over  their  respective  vas¬ 
sals,  tenants,  and  retainers.  In  the  great 
landed  estates  which  the  mistaken  piety  both 
of  princes  and  private  persons  had  bestowed 
upon  the  church,  jurisdictions  were  estab¬ 
lished  of  the  same  kind  with  those  of  the 
great  barons,  and  for  the  same  reason.  In 
those  great  landed  estates,  the  clergy,  or  their 
bailiffs,  could  easily  keep  the  peace  without 
the  support  or  assistance  either  of  the  king 
or  of  any  other  person;  and  neither  the  king 
nor  any  other  person  could  keep  the  peace 
there  without  the  support  and  assistance  of 
the  clergy.  The  jurisdictions  of  the  clergy, 
therefore,  in  their  particular  baronies  or 
manors,  were  equally  independent,  and  equal¬ 
ly  exclusive  of  the  authority  of  the  king’s 
courts,  as  those  of  the  great  temporal  lords. 
The  tenants  of  the  clergy  were,  like  those  of 
the  great  barons,  almost  all  tenants  at  will, 
entirely  dependent  upon  their  immediate 
lords,  and  therefore  liable  to  be  called  out 
at  pleasure  in  order  to  fight  in  any  quarrel 
in  which  the  clergy  might  think  proper  to 
engage  them.  Over  and  above  the  rents  of 
those  estates,  the  clergy  possessed  in  the 
tithes,  a  very  large  portion  of  the  rents 
of  all  the  other  estates  in  every  kingdom  of 
Europe.  The  revenues  arising  from  both  those 
species  of  rents  were,  the  greater  part  of 
them,  paid  in  kind,  in  corn,  wine,  cattle 
poultry,  etc.  The  quantity  exceeded  greatly 
what  the  clergy  could  themselves  consume; 
and  there  were  neither  arts  nor  manufactures 
for  the  produce  of  which  they  could  exchange 
the  surplus.  The  clergy  could  derive  advantage 
from  this  immense  surplus  in  no  other  way 
than  by  employing  it,  as  the  great  barons 
employed  the  like  surplus  of  their  revenues, 
in  the  most  profuse  hospitality,  and  in  the 
most  extensive  charity.  Both  the  hospitality 
and  the  charity  of  the  ancient  clergy,  accord¬ 
ingly,  are  said  to  have  been  very  great.  They 
not  only  maintained  almost  the  whole  poor 
of  every  kingdom,  but  many  knights  and 
gentlemen  had  frequently  no  other  means 
of  subsistence  than  by  travelling  about  from 
monastery  to  monastery,  under  pretence  of 
devotion,  but  in  reality  to  enjoy  the  hospital¬ 
ity  of  the  clergy.  The  retainers  of  some  partic¬ 
ular  prelates  were  often  as  numerous  as  those 
of  the  greatest  lay-lords;  and  the  retainers  of 
all  the  clergy  taken  together  were,  perhaps, 
more  numerous  than  those  of  all  the  lay-lords. 
There  was  always  much  more  union  among 
the  clergy  than  among  the  lay-lords.  The 


former  were  under  a  regular  discipline  and 
subordination  to  the  papal  authority.  The 
latter  were  under  no  regular  discipline  or 
subordination,  but  almost  always  equally 
jealous  of  one  another,  and  of  the  king.  Though 
the  tenants  and  retainers  of  the  clergy,  there¬ 
fore,  had  both  together  been  less  numerous 
than  those  of  the  great  lay-lords,  and  their 
tenants  were  probably  much  less  numerous, 
yet  their  union  would  have  rendered  them 
more  formidable.  The  hospitality  and  charity 
of  the  clergy,  too,  not  only  gave  them  the 
command  of  a  great  temporal  force,  but  in¬ 
creased  very  much  the  weight  of  their  spiritual 
weapons.  Those  virtues  procured  them  the 
highest  respect  and  veneration  among  all  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people,  of  whom  many  were 
constantly,  and  almost  all  occasionally,  fed  by 
them.  Everything  belonging  or  related  to  so 
popular  an  order,  its  possessions,  its  privileges, 
its  doctrines,  necessarily  appeared  sacred  in 
the  eyes  of  the  common  people,  and  every 
violation  of  them,  whether  real  or  pretended, 
the  highest  act  of  sacrilegious  wickedness  and 
profaneness.  In  this  state  of  things,  if  the 
sovereign  frequently  found  it  difficult  to  resist 
the  confederacy  of  a  few  of  the  great  nobility, 
we  cannot  wonder  that  he  should  find  it  still 
more  so  to  resist  the  united  force  of  the  clergy 
of  his  own  dominions,  supported  by  that  of 
the  clergy  of  all  the  neighbouring  dominions. 
In  such  circumstances  the  wonder  is,  not  that 
he  was  sometimes  obliged  to  yield,  but  that 
he  ever  was  able  to  resist. 

The  privilege  of  the  clergy  in  those  ancient 
times  (which  to  us  who  live  in  the  present 
times  appear  the  most  absurd) ,  their  total 
exemption  from  the  secular  jurisdiction,  for 
example,  or  what  in  England  was  called  the 
benefit  of  the  clergy,  were  the  natural  or 
rather  the  necessary  consequences  of  this  state 
of  things.  How  dangerous  must  it  have  been 
for  the  sovereign  to  attempt  to  punish  a 
clergyman  for  any  crime  whatever,  if  his  own 
order  were  disposed  to  protect  him,  and  to 
represent  either  the  proof  as  insufficient  for 
convicting  so  holy  a  man,  or  the  punishment 
as  too  severe  to  be  inflicted  upon  one  whose 
person  had  been  rendered  sacred  by  religion? 
The  sovereign  could,  in  such  circumstances, 
do  no  better  than  leave  him  to  be  tried  by 
the  ecclesiastical  courts,  who,  for  the  honour 
of  their  own  order,  were  interested  to  restrain, 
as  much  as  possible,  every  member  of  it  from 
committing  enormous  crimes,  or  even  from 
giving  occasion  to  such  gross  scandal  as  might 
disgust  the  minds  of  the  people. 

In  the  state  in  wffiich  things  were  through 
the  greater  part  of  Europe  during  the  tenth, 
eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  centuries, 
and  for  some  time  both  before  and  after  that 
period,  the  constitution  of  the  Church  of 


351 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


Rome  may  be  considered  as  the  most  for¬ 
midable  combination  that  ever  was  formed 
against  the  authority  and  security  of  civil 
government,  as  well  as  against  the  liberty, 
reason,  and  happiness  of  mankind,  which  can 
flourish  only  where  civil  government  is  able  to 
protect  them.  In  that  constitution  the  gross¬ 
est  delusions  of  superstition  were  supported 
in  such  a  manner  by  the  private  interests  of 
so  great  a  number  of  people  as  put  them  out 
of  all  danger  from  any  assault  of  human 
reason:  because  though  human  reason  might 
perhaps  have  been  able  to  unveil,  even  to  the 
eyes  of  the  common  people,  some  of  the  de¬ 
lusions  of  superstition,  it  could  never  have 
dissolved  the  ties  of  private  interest.  Had  this 
constitution  been  attacked  by  no  other 
enemies  but  the  feeble  efforts  of  human 
reason,  it  must  have  endured  for  ever.  But 
that  immense  and  well-built  fabric,  which 
all  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  man  could  never 
have  shaken,  much  less  have  overturned,  was 
by  the  natural  course  of  things,  first  weak¬ 
ened,  and  afterwards  in  part  destroyed,  and 
is  now  likely,  in  the  course  of  a  few  centuries 
more,  perhaps,  to  crumble  into  ruins  alto¬ 
gether. 

The  gradual  improvements  of  arts,  manu¬ 
factures,  and  commerce,  the  same  causes 
which  destroyed  the  power  of  the  great 
barons,  destroyed  in  the  same  manner, 
through  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  the  whole 
temporal  power  of  the  clergy.  In  the  produce 
of  arts,  manufactures,  and  commerce,  the 
clergy,  like  the  great  barons,  found  something 
for  which  they  could  exchange  their  rude  prod¬ 
uce,  and  thereby  discovered  the  means  of 
spending  their  whole  revenues  upon  their  own 
persons,  without  giving  any  considerable  share 
of  them  to  other  people.  Their  charity  became 
gradually  less  extensive,  their  hospitality  less 
liberal  or  less  profuse.  Their  retainers  became 
consequently  less  numerous,  and  by  degrees 
dwindled  away  altogether.  The  clergy  too, 
like  the  great  barons,  wished  to  get  a  better 
rent  from  their  landed  estates,  in  order  to 
spend  it,  in  the  same  manner,  upon  the  grati¬ 
fication  of  their  own  private  vanity  and  folly. 
But  this  increase  of  rent  could  be  got  only  by 
granting  leases  to  their  tenants,  who  thereby 
became  in  a  great  measure  independent  of 
them.  The  ties  of  interest  which  bound  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people  to  the  clergy  were  in 
this  manner  gradually  broken  and  dissolved. 
They  were  even  broken  and  dissolved  sooner 
than  those  which  bound  the  same  ranks  of 
people  to  the  great  barons:  because  the  bene¬ 
fices  of  the  church  being,  the  greater  part  of 
them,  much  smaller  than  the  estates  of  the 
great  barons,  the  possessor  of  each  benefice 
was  much  sooner  able  to  spend  the  whole  of 
its  revenue  upon  his  own  person.  During  the 


greater  part  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth 
centuries  the  power  of  the  great  barons  was, 
through  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  in  full 
vigour.  But  the  temporal  power  of  the  clergy, 
the  absolute  command  which  they  had  once 
had  over  the  great  body  of  the  people,  was 
very  much  decayed.  The  power  of  the  church 
was  by  that  time  very  nearly  reduced  through 
the  greater  part  of  Europe  to  what  arose  from 
her  spiritual  authority;  and  even  that  spiritual 
authority  was  much  weakened  when  it  ceased 
to  be  supported  by  the  charity  and  hospital¬ 
ity  of  the  clergy.  The  inferior  ranks  of  people 
no  longer  looked  upon  that  order,  as  they  had 
done  before,  as  the  comforters  of  their  dis¬ 
tress,  and  the  relievers  of  their  indigence.  On 
the  contrary,  they  were  provoked  and  dis¬ 
gusted  by  the  vanity,  luxury,  and  expense  of 
the  richer  clergy,  who  appeared  to  spend  upon 
their  own  pleasures  what  had  always  before 
been  regarded  as  the  patrimony  of  the  poor. 

In  this  situation  of  things,  the  sovereigns 
in  the  different  states  of  Europe  endeavoured 
to  recover  the  influence  which  they  had  once 
had  in  the  disposal  of  the  great  benefices  of 
the  church,  by  procuring  to  the  deans  and 
chapters  of  each  diocese  the  restoration  of 
their  ancient  right  of  electing  the  bishop,  and 
to  the  monks  of  each  abbacy  that  of  electing 
the  abbot.  The  re-establishing  of  this  ancient 
order  was  the  object  of  several  statutes  en¬ 
acted  in  England  during  the  course  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  particularly  of  what  is 
called  the  Statute  of  Provisors;  and  of  the 
Pragmatic  Sanction  established  in  France  in 
the  fifteenth  century.  In  order  to  render  the 
election  valid,  it  was  necessary  that  the  sov¬ 
ereign  should  both  consent  to  it  beforehand, 
and  afterwards  approve  of  the  person  elected; 
and  though  the  election  was  still  supposed  to 
be  free,  he  had,  however,  all  the  indirect 
means  which  his  situation  necessarily  afforded 
him  of  influencing  the  clergy  in  his  own  do¬ 
minions.  Other  regulations  of  a  similar  tend¬ 
ency  were  established  in  other  parts  of 
Europe.  But  the  power  of  the  pope  in  the  col¬ 
lation  of  the  great  benefices  of  the  church 
seems,  before  the  Reformation,  to  have  been 
nowhere  so  effectually  and  so  universally  re¬ 
strained  as  in  France  and  England.  The  Con¬ 
cordat  afterwards,  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
gave  to  the  kings  of  France  the  absolute  right 
of  presenting  to  all  the  great,  or  what  are 
called  the  consistorial,  benefices  of  the  Gal- 
lican  Church. 

Since  the  establishment  of  the  Pragmatic 
Sanction  and  of  the  Concordat,  the  clergy  of 
France  have  in  general  shown  less  respect  to 
the  decrees  of  the  papal  court  than  the  clergy 
of  any  other  Catholic  country.  In  all  the  dis¬ 
putes  which  their  sovereign  has  had  with  the 
pope,  they  have  almost  constantly  taken 


352 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


party  with  the  former.  This  independency  of 
the  clergy  of  France  upon  the  court  of  Rome 
seems  to  be  principally  founded  upon  the 
Pragmatic  Sanction  and  the  Concordat.  In 
the  earlier  periods  of  the  monarchy,  the  cler¬ 
gy  of  France  appear  to  have  been  as  much 
devoted  to  the  pope  as  those  of  any  other 
country.  When  Robert,  the  second  prince  of 
the  Capetian  race,  was  most  unjustly  excom¬ 
municated  by  the  court  of  Rome,  his  own 
servants,  it  is  said,  threw  the  victuals  which 
came  from  his  table  to  the  dogs,  and  refused 
to  taste  anything  themselves  which  hud  been 
polluted  by  the  contact  of  a  person  in  his 
situation.  They  were  taught  to  do  so,  it  may 
very  safely  be  presumed,  by  the  clergy  of  his 
own  dominions. 

The  claim  of  collating  to  the  great  benefices 
of  the  church,  a  claim  in  defence  of  which 
the  court  of  Rome  had  frequently  shaken, 
and  sometimes  overturned  the  thrones  of 
some  of  the  greatest  sovereigns  in  Christen¬ 
dom,  was  in  this  manner  either  restrained  or 
modified,  or  given  up  altogether,  in  many  dif¬ 
ferent  parts  of  Europe,  even  before  the  time 
of  the  Reformation.  As  the  clergy  had  now 
less  influence  over  the  people,  so  the  state  had 
more  influence  over  the  clergy.  The  clergy, 
therefore,  had  both  less  power  and  less  in¬ 
clination  to  disturb  the  state. 

The  authority  of  the  Church  of  Rome  was 
in  this  state  of  declension  when  the  disputes 
which  gave  birth  to  the  Reformation  began 
in  Germany,  and  soon  spread  themselves 
through  every  part  of  Europe.  The  new  doc¬ 
trines  were  everywhere  received  with  a  high 
degree  of  popular  favour.  They  were  propa¬ 
gated  with  all  that  enthusiastic  zeal  which 
commonly  animates  the  spirit  of  party  when 
it  attacks  established  authority.  The  teachers 
of  those  doctrines,  though  perhaps  in  other 
respects  not  more  learned  than  many  of  the 
divines  who  defended  the  established  church, 
seem  in  general  to  have  been  better  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  ecclesiastical  history,  and  with  the 
origin  and  progress  of  that  system  of  opin¬ 
ions  upon  which  the  authority  of  the  church 
was  established,  and  they  had  thereby  some 
advantage  in  almost  every  dispute.  The  aus¬ 
terity  of  their  manners  gave  them  authority 
with  the  common  people,  who  contrasted  the 
strict  regularity  of  their  conduct  with  the  dis¬ 
orderly  lives  of  the  greater  part  of  their  own 
clergy.  They  possessed,  too,  in  a  much  higher 
degree  than  their  adversaries  all  the  arts  of 
popularity  and  of  gaining  proselytes,  arts 
which  the  lofty  and  dignified  sons  of  the 
church  had  long  neglected  as  being  to  them 
in  a  great  measure  useless.  The  reason  of  the 
new  doctrines  recommended  them  to  some, 
their  novelty  to  many;  the  hatred  and  con¬ 
tempt  of  the  established  clergy  to  a  still  great¬ 


er  number;  but  the  zealous,  passionate,  and 
fanatical,  though  frequently  coarse  and  rus¬ 
tic,  eloquence  with  which  they  were  almost 
everywhere  inculcated,  recommended  them 
to  by  far  the  greatest  number. 

The  success  of  the  new  doctrines  was  al¬ 
most  everywhere  so  great  that  the  princes 
who  at  that  time  happened  to  be  on  bad 
terms  with  the  court  of  Rome  were  by  means 
of  them  easily  enabled,  in  their  own  domin¬ 
ions,  to  overturn  the  church,  which,  having 
lost  the  respect  and  veneration  of  the  inferior 
ranks  of  people,  could  make  scarce  any  resist¬ 
ance.  The  court  of  Rome  had  disobliged  some 
of  the  smaller  princes  in  the  northern  parts 
of  Germany,  whom  it  had  probably  consid¬ 
ered  as  too  insignificant  to  be  worth  the  man¬ 
aging.  They  universally,  therefore,  established 
the  Reformation  in  their  own  dominions.  The 
tyranny  of  Christian  II  and  of  Troll,  Arch¬ 
bishop  of  Upsala,  enabled  Gustavus  Vasa  to 
expel  them  both  from  Sweden.  The  pope  fa¬ 
voured  the  tyrant  and  the  archbishop,  and 
Gustavus  Vasa  found  no  difficulty  in  estab¬ 
lishing  the  Reformation  in  Sweden.  Christian 
II  was  afterwards  deposed  from  the  throne 
of  Denmark,  where  his  conduct  had  rendered 
him  as  odious  as  in  Sweden.  The  pope,  how¬ 
ever,  was  still  disposed  to  favour  him,  and 
Frederick  of  Holstein,  who  had  mounted  the 
throne  in  his  stead,  revenged  himself  by  fol¬ 
lowing  the  example  of  Gustavus  Vasa.  The 
magistrates  of  Berne  and  Zurich,  who  had  no 
particular  quarrel  with  the  pope,  established 
with  great  ease  the  Reformation  in  their  re¬ 
spective  cantons,  where  just  before  some  of 
the  clergy  had,  by  an  imposture  somewhat 
grosser  than  ordinary,  rendered  the  whole 
order  both  odious  and  contemptible. 

In  this  critical  situation  of  its  affairs,  the 
papal  court  was  at  sufficient  pains  to  culti¬ 
vate  the  friendship  of  the  powerful  sovereigns 
of  France  and  Spain,  of  whom  the  latter  was 
at  that  time  Emperor  of  Germany.  With 
their  assistance  it  was  enabled,  though  not 
without  great  difficulty  and  much  bloodshed, 
either  to  suppress  altogether  or  to  obstruct 
very  much  the  progress  of  the  Reformation 
in  their  dominions.  It  was  well  enough  in¬ 
clined,  too,  to  be  complaisant  to  the  King  of 
England.  But  from  the  circumstances  of  the 
times,  it  could  not  be  so  without  giving  of¬ 
fence  to  a  still  greater  sovereign,  Charles  V, 
King  of  Spain  and  Emperor  of  Germany. 
Henry  VIII  accordingly,  though  he  did  not 
embrace  himself  the  greater  part  of  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  the  Reformation,  was  yet  enabled, 
by  their  general  prevalence,  to  suppress  all 
the  monasteries,  and  to  abolish  the  authority 
of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  his  dominions. 
That  he  should  go  so  far,  though  he  went  no 
further,  gave  some  satisfaction  to  the  patrons 


353 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


of  the  Reformation,  who  having  got  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  government  in  the  reign  of  his 
son  and  successor,  completed  without  any 
difficulty  the  work  which  Henry  VIII  had 
begun. 

In  some  countries,  as  in  Scotland,  where 
the  government  was  weak,  unpopular,  and 
not  very  firmly  established,  the  Reformation 
was  strong  enough  to  overturn,  not  only  the 
church,  but  the  state  likewise  for  attempting 
to  support  the  church. 

Among  the  followers  of  the  Reformation 
dispersed  in  all  the  different  countries  of 
Europe,  there  was  no  general  tribunal  which, 
like  that  of  the  court  of  Rome,  or  an  oecu¬ 
menical  council,  could  settle  all  disputes 
among  them,  and  with  irresistible  authority 
prescribe  to  all  of  them  the  precise  limits  of 
orthodoxy.  When  the  followers  of  the  Refor¬ 
mation  in  one  country,  therefore,  happened 
to  differ  from  their  brethren  in  another,  as 
they  had  no  common  judge  to  appeal  to,  the 
dispute  could  never  be  decided;  and  many 
such  disputes  arose  among  them.  Those  con¬ 
cerning  the  government  of  the  church,  and 
the  right  of  conferring  ecclesiastical  benefices, 
were  perhaps  the  most  interesting  to  the 
peace  and  welfare  of  civil  society.  They  gave 
birth  accordingly  to  the  two  principal  parties 
of  sects  among  the  followers  of  the  Reforma¬ 
tion,  the  Lutheran  and  Calvinistic  sects,  the 
only  sects  among  them  of  which  the  doctrine 
and  discipline  have  ever  yet  been  established 
by  law  in  any  part  of  Europe. 

The  followers  of  Luther,  together  with  what 
is  called  the  Church  of  England,  preserved 
more  or  less  of  the  episcopal  government,  es¬ 
tablished  subordination  among  the  clergy, 
gave  the  sovereign  the  disposal  of  all  the  bish¬ 
oprics  and  other  consistorial  benefices  within 
his  dominions,  and  thereby  rendered  him  the 
real  head  of  the  church;  and  without  depriv¬ 
ing  the  bishop  of  the  right  of  collating  to  the 
smaller  benefices  within  his  diocese,  they, 
even  to  those  benefices,  not  only  admitted, 
but  favoured  the  right  of  presentation  both 
in  the  sovereign  and  in  all  other  lay-patrons. 
This  system  of  church  government  was  from 
the  beginning  favourable  to  peace  and  good 
order,  and  to  submission  to  the  civil  sov¬ 
ereign.  It  has  never,  accordingly,  been  the 
occasion  of  any  tumult  or  civil  commotion  in 
any  country  in  which  it  has  once  been  estab¬ 
lished.  The  Church  of  England  in  particular 
has  always  valued  herself,  with  great  reason, 
upon  the  unexceptionable  loyalty  of  her  prin¬ 
ciples.  LTnder  such  a  government  the  clergy 
naturally  endeavour  to  recommend  them¬ 
selves  to  the  sovereign,  to  the  court,  and  to 
the  nobility  and  gentry  of  the  country,  by 
whose  influence  they  chiefly  expect  to  obtain 
preferment.  They  pay  court  to  those  patrons 


sometimes,  no  doubt,  by  the  vilest  flat  tery 
and  assentation,  but  frequently,  too,  by  cul¬ 
tivating  all  those  arts  which  best  deserve,  and 
which  are  therefore  most  likely  to  gain  them 
the  esteem  of  people  of  rank  and  fortune;  by 
their  knowledge  in  all  the  different  branches 
of  useful  and  ornamental  learning,  by  the 
decent  liberality  of  their  manners,  by  the  so¬ 
cial  good  humour  of  their  conversation,  and 
by  their  avowed  contempt  of  those  absurd 
and  hypocritical  austerities  which  fanatics  in¬ 
culcate  and  pretend  to  practise,  in  order  to 
draw  upon  themselves  the  veneration,  and 
upon  the  greater  part  of  men  of  rank  and 
fortune,  who  avow  that  they  do  not  practise 
them,  the  abhorrence  of  the  common  people. 
Such  a  clergy,  however,  while  they  pay  their 
court  in  this  manner  to  the  higher  ranks  of 
life,  are  very  apt  to  neglect  altogether  the 
means  of  maintaining  their  influence  and  au¬ 
thority  with  the  lower.  They  are  listened  to, 
esteemed,  and  respected  by  their  superiors; 
but  before  their  inferiors  they  are  frequently 
incapable  of  defending,  effectually  and  to  the 
conviction  of  such  hearers,  their  own  sober 
and  moderate  doctrines  against  the  most  ig¬ 
norant  enthusiast  who  chooses  to  attack  them. 

The  followers  of  Zwingli,  or  more  properly 
those  of  Calvin,  on  the  contrary,  bestowed 
upon  the  people  of  each  parish,  whenever  the 
church  became  vacant,  the  right  of  electing 
their  own  pastor,  and  established  at  the  same 
time  the  most  perfect  equality  among  the 
clergy.  The  former  part  of  this  institution,  as 
long  as  it  remained  in  vigour,  seems  to  have 
been  productive  of  nothing  but  disorder  and 
confusion,  and  to  have  tended  equally  to  cor¬ 
rupt  the  morals  both  of  the  clergy  and  of  the 
people.  The  latter  part  seems  never  to  have 
had  any  effects  but  what  were  perfectly 
agreeable. 

As  long  as  the  people  of  each  parish  pre¬ 
served  the  right  of  electing  their  own  pastors, 
they  acted  almost  always  under  the  influence 
of  the  clergy,  and  generally  of  the  most  fac¬ 
tious  and  fanatical  of  the  order.  The  clergy, 
in  order  to  preserve  their  influence  in  those 
popular  elections,  became,  or  affected  to  be¬ 
come,  many  of  them,  fanatics  themselves, 
encouraged  fanaticism  among  the  people,  and 
gave  the  preference  almost  always  to  the  most 
fanatical  candidate.  So  small  a  matter  as  the 
appointment  of  a  parish  priest  occasioned  al¬ 
most  always  a  violent  contest,  not  only  in  one 
parish,  but  in  all  the  neighbouring  parishes, 
who  seldom  failed  to  take  part  in  the  quarrel. 
When  the  parish  happened  to  be  situated  in 
a  great  city,  it  divided  all  the  inhabitants  into 
two  parties;  and  when  that  city  happened 
either  to  constitute  itself  a  little  republic,  or 
to  be  the  head  and  capital  of  a  little  republic, 
as  is  the  case  with  many  of  the  considerable 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


354 

cities  in  Switzerland  and  Holland,  every  pal¬ 
try  dispute  of  this  kind,  over  and  above  exas¬ 
perating  the  animosity  of  all  their  other  fac¬ 
tions,  threatened  to  leave  behind  it  both  a 
new  schism  in  the  church,  and  a  new  faction 
in  the  state.  In  those  small  republics,  there¬ 
fore,  the  magistrate  very  soon  found  it  nec¬ 
essary,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  public 
peace,  to  assume  to  himself  the  right  of  pre¬ 
senting  to  all  vacant  benefices.  In  Scotland, 
the  most  extensive  country  in  which  this 
Presbyterian  form  of  church  government  has 
ever  been  established,  the  rights  of  patron¬ 
age  were  in  effect  abolished  by  the  act  which 
established  Presbytery  in  the  beginning  of 
the  reign  of  William  III.  That  act  at  least 
put  it  in  the  power  of  certain  classes  of  peo¬ 
ple  in  each  parish  to  purchase,  for  a  very 
small  price,  the  right  of  electing  their  own 
pastor.  The  constitution  which  this  act  es¬ 
tablished  was  allowed  to  subsist  for  about 
two-and-twenty  years,  but  was  abolished  by 
the  10th  of  Queen  Anne,  c.  12,  on  account 
of  the  confusions  and  disorders  which  this 
more  popular  mode  of  election  had  almost 
everywhere  occasioned.  In  so  extensive  a 
country  as  Scotland,  however,  a  tumult  in 
a  remote  parish  was  not  so  likely  to  give  dis¬ 
turbance  to  government  as  in  a  smaller  state. 
The  10th  of  Queen  Anne  restored  the  rights 
of  patronage.  But  though  in  Scotland  the  law 
gives  the  benefice  without  any  exception  to 
the  person  presented  by  the  patron,  yet  the 
church  requires  sometimes  (for  she  has  not 
in  this  respect  been  very  uniform  in  her  de¬ 
cisions)  a  certain  concurrence  of  the  people 
before  she  will  confer  upon  the  presentee 
what  is  called  the  cure  of  souls,  or  the  ec¬ 
clesiastical  jurisdiction  in  the  parish.  She 
sometimes  at  least,  from  an  affected  concern 
for  the  peace  of  the  parish,  delays  the  settle¬ 
ment  till  this  concurrence  can  be  procured. 
The  private  tampering  of  some  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  clergy,  sometimes  to  procure,  but 
more  frequently  to  prevent,  this  concurrence, 
and  the  popular  arts  which  they  cultivate  in 
order  to  enable  them  upon  such  occasions  to 
tamper  more  effectually,  are  perhaps  the 
causes  which  principally  keep  up  whatever 
remains  of  the  old  fanatical  spirit,  either  in 
the  clergy  or  in  the  people  of  Scotland. 

The  equality  which  the  Presbyterian  form 
of  church  government  establishes  among  the 
clergy,  consists,  first,  in  the  equality  of  au¬ 
thority  or  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction;  and, 
secondly,  in  the  equality  of  benefice.  In  all 
Presbyterian  churches  the  equality  of  au¬ 
thority  is  perfect:  that  of  benefice  is  not  so. 
The  difference,  however,  between  one  benefice 
and  another  is  seldom  so  considerable  as  com¬ 
monly  to  tempt  the  possessor  even  of  the 
small  one  to  pay  court  to  his  patron  by  the 


vile  arts  of  flattery  and  assentation  in  or¬ 
der  to  get  a  better.  In  all  the  Presbyterian 
churches,  where  the  rights  of  patronage  are 
thoroughly  established,  it  is  by  nobler  and 
better  arts  that  the  established  clergy  in  gen¬ 
eral  endeavour  to  gain  the  favour  of  their 
superiors;  by  their  learning,  by  the  irreproach¬ 
able  regularity  of  their  life,  and  by  the  faith¬ 
ful  and  diligent  discharge  of  their  duty.  Their 
patrons  even  frequently  complain  of  the  in¬ 
dependency  of  their  spirit,  which  they  are 
apt  to  construe  into  ingratitude  for  past  fa¬ 
vours,  but  which  at  worst,  perhaps,  is  sel¬ 
dom  any  more  than  that  indifference  which 
naturally  arises  from  the  consciousness  that 
no  further  favours  of  the  kind  are  ever  to  be 
expected.  There  is  scarce  perhaps  to  be  found 
anywhere  in  Europe  a  more  learned,  decent, 
independent,  and  respectable  set  of  men  than 
the  greater  part  of  the  Presbyterian  clergy  of 
Holland,  Geneva,  Switzerland,  and  Scotland. 

Where  the  church  benefices  are  all  nearly 
equal,  none  of  them  can  be  very  great,  and 
this  mediocrity  of  benefice,  though  it  may  no 
doubt  be  carried  too  far,  has,  however,  some 
very  agreeable  effects.  Nothing  but  the  most 
exemplary  morals  can  give  dignity  to  a  man 
of  small  fortune.  The  vices  of  levity  and  van¬ 
ity  necessarily  render  him  ridiculous,  and  are, 
besides,  almost  as  ruinous  to  him  as  they  are 
to  the  common  people.  In  his  own  conduct, 
therefore,  he  is  obliged  to  follow  that  system 
of  morals  which  the  common  people  respect 
the  most.  He  gains  their  esteem  and  affection 
by  that  plan  of  life  which  his  own  interest 
and  situation  would  lead  him  to  follow.  The 
common  people  look  upon  him  with  that 
kindness  with  which  we  naturally  regard  one 
who  approaches  somewhat  to  our  own  con¬ 
dition,  but  who,  we  think,  ought  to  be  in  a 
higher.  Their  kindness  naturally  provokes  his 
kindness.  He  becomes  careful  to  instruct 
them,  and  attentive  to  assist  and  relieve  them. 
He  does  not  even  despise  the  prejudices  of 
people  who  are  disposed  to  be  so  favourable 
to  him,  and  never  treats  them  with  those 
contemptuous  and  arrogant  airs  which  we  so 
often  meet  with  in  the  proud  dignitaries  of 
opulent  and  well-endowed  churches.  The 
Presbyterian  clergy,  accordingly,  have  more 
influence  over  the  minds  of  the  common  peo¬ 
ple  than  perhaps  the  clergy  of  any  other  es¬ 
tablished  church.  It  is  accordingly  in  Pres¬ 
byterian  countries  only  that  we  ever  find  the 
common  people  converted,  without  persecu¬ 
tion,  completely,  and  almost  to  a  man,  to  the 
established  church. 

In  countries  where  church  benefices  are  the 
greater  part  of  them  very  moderate,  a  chair 
in  a  university  is  generally  a  better  establish¬ 
ment  than  a  church  benefice.  The  universi¬ 
ties  have,  in  this  case,  the  picking  and  choos- 


The  Expenses  of  the  Sovereign 


ing  of  their  members  from  all  the  churchmen 
of  the  country,  who,  in  every  country,  con¬ 
stitute  by  far  the  most  numerous  class  of  men 
of  letters.  Where  church  benefices,  on  the 
contrary,  are  many  of  them  very  consider¬ 
able,  the  church  naturally  draws  from  the 
universities  the  greater  part  of  their  eminent 
men  of  letters,  who  generally  find  some  pa¬ 
tron  who  does  himself  honour  by  procuring 
them  church  preferment.  In  the  former  situ¬ 
ation  we  are  likely  to  find  the  universities 
filled  with  the  most  eminent  men  of  letters 
that  are  to  be  found  in  the  country.  In  the 
latter  we  are  likely  to  find  few  eminent  men 
among  them,  and  those  few  among  the  young¬ 
est  members  of  the  society,  who  are  likely, 
too,  to  be  drained  away  from  it  before  they 
can  have  acquired  experience  and  knowledge 
enough  to  be  of  much  use  to  it.  It  is  observed 
by  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  that  Father  Porree,  a 
Jesuit  of  no  great  eminence  in  the  republic 
of  letters,  was  the  only  professor  they  had 
ever  had  in  France  whose  works  were  worth 
the  reading.  In  a  country  which  has  produced 
so  many  eminent  men  of  letters,  it  must  ap¬ 
pear  somewhat  singular  that  scarce  one  of 
them  should  have  been  a  professor  in  a  uni¬ 
versity.  The  famous  Gassendi  was,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  his  life,  a  professor  in  the  Univer¬ 
sity  of  Aix.  Upon  the  first  dawning  of  his 
genius,  it  was  represented  to  him  that  by 
going  into  the  church  he  could  easily  find  a 
much  more  quiet  and  comfortable  subsistence, 
as  well  as  a  better  situation  for  pursuing  his 
studies;  and  he  immediately  followed  the  ad¬ 
vice.  The  observation  of  Mr.  de  Voltaire  may 
be  applied,  I  believe,  not  only  to  France,  but 
to  all  other  Roman  Catholic  countries.  We 
very  rarely  find,  in  any  of  them,  an  eminent 
man  of  letters  who  is  a  professor  in  a  uni¬ 
versity,  except,  perhaps,  in  the  professions 
of  law  and  physic;  professions  from  which 
the  church  is  not  so  likely  to  draw  them.  After 
the  Church  of  Rome,  that  of  England  is  by 
far  the  richest  and  best  endowed  church  in 
Christendom.  In  England,  accordingly,  the 
church  is  continually  draining  the  universi¬ 
ties  of  all  their  best  and  ablest  members;  and 
an  old  college  tutor,  who  is  known  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  in  Europe  as  an  eminent  man  of 
letters,  is  as  rarely  to  be  found  there  as  in 
any  Roman  Catholic  country.  In  Geneva,  on 
the  contrary,  in  the  Protestant  cantons  of 
Switzerland,  in  the  Protestant  countries  of 
Germany,  in  Holland,  in  Scotland,  in  Sweden, 
and  Denmark,  the  most  eminent  men  of  let¬ 
ters  whom  those  countries  have  produced, 
have,  not  all  indeed,  but  the  far  greater  part 
of  them,  been  professors  in  universities.  In 
those  countries  the  universities  are  contin¬ 
ually  draining  the  church  of  all  its  most  emi¬ 
nent  men  of  letters. 


355 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  worth  while  to  remark 
that,  if  we  expect  the  poets,  a  few  orators, 
and  a  few  historians,  the  far  greater  part  of 
the  other  eminent  men  of  letters,  both  of 
Greece  and  Rome,  appear  to  have  been  either 
public  or  private  teachers;  generally  either  of 
philosophy  or  of  rhetoric.  This  remark  will  be 
found  to  hold  true  from  the  days  of  Lysias 
and  Isocrates,  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  down 
to  those  of  Plutarch  and  Epictetus,  of  Sue¬ 
tonius  and  Quintilian.  To  impose  upon  any 
man  the  necessity  of  teaching,  year  after 
year,  any  particular  branch  of  science,  seems, 
in  reality,  to  be  the  most  effectual  method  for 
rendering  him  completely  master  of  it  him¬ 
self.  By  being  obliged  to  go  every  year  over 
the  same  ground,  if  he  is  good  for  anything, 
he  necessarily  becomes,  in  a  few  years,  well 
acquainted  with  every  part  of  it:  and  if  upon 
any  particular  point  he  should  form  too  hasty 
an  opinion  one  year,  when  he  comes  in  the 
course  of  his  lectures  to  reconsider  the  same 
subject  the  year  thereafter,  he  is  very  likely 
to  correct  it.  As  to  be  a  teacher  of  science  is 
certainly  the  natural  employment  of  a  mere 
man  of  letters,  so* is  it  likewise,  perhaps,  the 
education  which  is  most  likely  to  render 
him  a  man  of  solid  learning  and  knowledge. 
The  mediocity  of  church  benefices  naturally 
tends  to  draw  the  greater  part  of  men  of  let¬ 
ters,  in  the  country  where  it  takes  place,  to 
the  employment  in  which  they  can  be  the 
most  useful  to  the  public,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  to  give  them  the  best  education,  per¬ 
haps,  they  are  capable  of  receiving.  It  tends 
to  render  their  learning  both  as  solid  as  pos¬ 
sible,  and  as  useful  as  possible. 

The  revenue  of  every  established  church, 
such  parts  of  it  excepted  as  may  arise  from 
particular  lands  or  manors,  is  a  branch,  it 
ought  to  be  observed,  of  the  general  revenue 
of  the  state  which  is  thus  diverted  to  a  pur¬ 
pose  very  different  from  the  defence  of  the 
state.  The  tithe,  for  example,  is  a  real  land- 
tax,  which  puts  it  out  of  the  power  of  the 
proprietors  of  land  to  contribute  so  largely 
towards  the  defence  of  the  state  as  they 
otherwise  might  be  able  to  do.  The  rent  of 
land,  however,  is,  according  to  some,  the  sole 
fund,  and,  according  to  others,  the  principal 
fund,  from  which,  in  all  great  monarchies, 
the  exigencies  of  the  state  must  be  ultimately 
supplied.  The  more  of  this  fund  that  is  given 
to  the  church,  the  less,  it  is  evident,  can  be 
spared  to  the  state.  It  may  be  laid  down  as 
a  certain  maxim  that,  all  other  things  being 
supposed  equal,  the  richer  the  church,  the 
poorer  must  necessarily  be,  either  the  sov¬ 
ereign  on  the  one  hand,  or  the  people  on  the 
other;  and,  in  all  cases,  the  less  able  must 
the  state  be  to  defend  itself.  In  several 
Protestant  countries,  particularly  in  all  the 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


356 

Protestant  cantons  of  Switzerland,  the  reve¬ 
nue  which  anciently  belonged  to  the  Homan 
Catholic  Church,  the  tithes  and  church  lands, 
has  been  found  a  fund  sufficient,  not  only  to 
afford  competent  salaries  to  the  established 
clergy,  but  to  defray,  with  little  or  no  ad¬ 
dition,  all  the  other  expenses  of  the  state.  The 
magistrates  of  the  powerful  canton  of  Berne, 
in  particular,  have  accumulated  out  of  the 
savings  from  this  fund  a  very  large  sum,  sup- 
posed  to  amount  to  several  millions,  part  of 
which  is  deposited  in  a  public  treasure,  and 
part  is  placed  at  interest  in  what  are  called 
the  public  funds  of  the  different  indebted 
nations  of  Europe;  chiefly  in  those  of  France 
and  Great  Britain.  What  may  be  the  amount 
of  the  whole  expense  which  the  church,  either 
of  Berne,  or  of  any  other  Protestant  canton, 
costs  the  state,  I  do  not  pretend  to  know.  By 
a  very  exact  account  it  appears  that,  in  1755, 
the  whole  revenue  of  the  clergy  of  the  Church 
of  Scotland,  including  their  glebe  or  church 
lands,  and  the  rent  of  their  manses  or  dwell¬ 
ing-houses,  estimated  according  to  a  reason¬ 
able  valuation,  amounted  only  to  £68,514  Is. 
5i/h>d.  This  very  moderate  revenue  affords 
a  decent  subsistence  to  nine  hundred  and 
forty-four  ministers.  The  whole  expense  of 
the  church,  including  what  is  occasionally 
laid  out  for  the  building  and  reparation  of 
churches,  and  of  the  manses  of  ministers, 
cannot  well  be  supposed  to  exceed  eighty  or 
eighty-five  thousand  pounds  a  year.  The  most 
opulent  church  in  Christendom  does  not 
maintain  better  the  uniformity  of  faith,  the 
fervour  of  devotion,  the  spirit  of  order,  reg¬ 
ularity,  and  austere  morals  in  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  than  this  very  poorly  endowed 
Church  of  Scotland.  All  the  good  effects,  both 
civil  and  religious,  which  an  established 
church  can  be  supposed  to  produce,  are  pro¬ 
duced  by  it  as  completely  as  by  any  other. 


The  greater  part  of  the  Protestant  churches 
of  Switzerland,  which  in  general  are  not  bet¬ 
ter  endowed  than  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
produce  those  effects  in  a  still  higher  degree. 
In  the  greater  part  of  the  Protestant  cantons 
there  is  not  a  single  person  to  be  found  who 
does  not  profess  himself  to  be  of  the  estab¬ 
lished  church.  If  he  professes  himself  to  be 
of  any  other,  indeed,  the  law  obliges  him  to 
leave  the  canton.  But  so  severe,  or  rather  in¬ 
deed  so  oppressive  a  law,  could  never  have 
been  executed  in  such  free  countries  had  not 
the  diligence  of  the  clergy  beforehand  con¬ 
verted  to  the  established  church  the  whole 
body  of  the  people,  with  the  exception  of, 
perhaps,  a  few  individuals  only.  In  some  parts 
of  Switzerland,  accordingly,  where,  from  the 
accidental  union  of  a  Protestant  and  Roman 
Catholic  country,  the  conversion  has  not 
been  so  complete,  both  religions  are  not  only 
tolerated  but  established  by  law. 

The  proper  performance  of  every  service 
seems  to  require  that  its  pay  or  recompense 
should  be,  as  exactly  as  possible,  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  nature  of  the  service.  If  any 
service  is  very  much  underpaid,  it  is  very 
apt  to  suffer  by  the  meanness  and  incapacity 
of  the  greater  part  of  those  who  are  employed 
in  it.  If  it  is  very  much  overpaid,  it  is  apt 
to  suffer,  perhaps,  still  more  by  their  negli¬ 
gence  and  idleness.  A  man  of  a  large  revenue, 
whatever  may  be  his  profession,  thinks  he 
ought  to  live  like  other  men  of  large  reve¬ 
nues,  and  to  spend  a  great  part  of  his  time 
in  festivity,  in  vanity,  and  in  dissipation.  But 
in  a  clergyman  this  train  of  life  not  only  con¬ 
sumes  the  time  which  ought  to  be  employed 
in  the  duties  of  his  function,  but  in  the  eyes 
of  the  common  people  destroys  almost  entire¬ 
ly  that  sanctity  of  character  which  can  alone 
enable  him  to  perform  those  duties  with 
proper  weight  and  authority. 


Part  4 

Of  the  Expense  of  Supporting  the  Dignity  of  the  Sovereign 


Over  and  above  the  expenses  necessary  for 
enabling  the  sovereign  to  perform  his  several 
duties,  a  certain  expense  is  requisite  for  the 
support  of  his  dignity.  This  expense  varies 
both  with  the  different  periods  of  improve¬ 
ment,  and  with  the  different  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment. 

In  an  opulent  and  improved  society,  where 
all  the  different  orders  of  people  are  growing 
every  day  more  expensive  in  their  houses,  in 
their  furniture,  in  their  tables,  in  their  dress, 
and  in  their  equipage,  it  cannot  well  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  the  sovereign  should  alone  hold 
out  against  the  fashion.  He  naturally,  there¬ 
fore,  or  rather  necessarily,  becomes  more  ex¬ 
pensive  in  all  those  different  articles  too.  His 


dignity  even  seems  to  require  that  he  should 
become  so. 

As  in  point  of  dignity  a  monarch  is  more 
raised  above  his  subjects  than  the  chief  mag¬ 
istrate  of  any  republic  is  ever  supposed  to  be 
above  his  fellow-citizens,  so  a  greater  expense 
is  necessary  for  supporting  that  higher  dig¬ 
nity.  We  naturally  expect  more  splendour  in 
the  court  of  a  king  than  in  the  mansion-house 
of  a  doge  or  burgomaster. 

Conclusion 

The  expense  of  defending  the  society,  and 
that  of  supporting  the  dignity  of  the  chief 
magistrate,  are  both  laid  out  for  the  general 
benefit  of  the  whole  society.  It  is  reasonable, 


357 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


therefore,  that  they  should  be  defrayed  by 
the  general  contribution  of  the  whole  society, 
all  the  different  members  contributing,  as 
nearly  as  possible,  in  proportion  to  their  re¬ 
spective  abilities. 

The  expense  of  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice,  too,  may,  no  doubt,  be  considered  as 
laid  out  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  society. 
There  is  no  impropriety,  therefore,  in  its 
being  defrayed  by  the  general  contribution 
of  the  whole  society.  The  persons,  however, 
who  gave  occasion  to  this  expense  are  those 
who,  by  their  injustice  in  one  way  or  another, 
make  it  necessary  to  seek  redress  or  protec¬ 
tion  from  the  courts  of  justice.  The  persons 
again  most  immediately  benefited  by  this 
expense  are  those  whom  the  courts  of  justice 
either  restore  to  their  rights  or  maintain  in 
their  rights.  The  expense  of  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  justice,  therefore,  may  very  properly 
be  defrayed  by  the  particular  contribution 
of  one  or  other,  or  both,  of  those  two  dif¬ 
ferent  sets  of  persons,  according  as  different 
occasions  may  require,  that  is,  by  the  fees  of 
court.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  have  recourse 
to  the  general  contribution  of  the  whole  so¬ 
ciety,  except  for  the  conviction  of  those 
criminals  who  have  not  themselves  any  estate 
or  fund  sufficient  for  paying  those  fees. 

Those  local  or  provincial  expenses  of  which 
the  benefit  is  local  or  provincial  (what  is  laid 
out,  for  example,  upon  the  police  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  town  or  district)  ought  to  be  defrayed 
by  a  local  or  provincial  revenue,  and  ought 
to  be  no  burden  upon  the  general  revenue  of 
the  society.  It  is  unjust  that  the  whole  society 
should  contribute  towards  an  expense  of 
which  the  benefit  is  confined  to  a  part  of  the 
society. 

The  expense  of  maintaining  good  roads  and 
communications  is,  no  doubt,  beneficial  to 
the  whole  society,  and  may,  therefore,  with¬ 
out  any  injustice,  be  defrayed  by  the  general 
contribution  of  the  whole  society.  This  ex¬ 
pense,  however,  is  most  immediately  and  di¬ 
rectly  beneficial  to  those  who  travel  or  carry 
goods  from  one  place  to  another,  and  to  those 
who  consume  such  goods.  The  turnpike  tolls 
in  England,  and  the  duties  called  peages  in 


other  countries,  lay  it  altogether  upon  those 
two  different  sets  of  people,  and  thereby  dis¬ 
charge  the  general  revenue  of  the  society 
from  a  very  considerable  burden. 

The  expense  of  the  institutions  for  educa¬ 
tion  and  religious  instruction  is  likewise,  no 
doubt,  beneficial  to  the  whole  society,  and 
may,  therefore,  without  injustice,  be  defrayed 
by  the  general  contribution  of  the  whole  so¬ 
ciety.  This  expense,  however,  might  perhaps 
with  equal  propriety,  and  even  with  some 
advantage,  be  defrayed  altogether  by  those 
who  receive  the  immediate  benefit  of  such 
education  and  instruction,  or  by  the  volun¬ 
tary  contribution  of  those  who  think  they 
have  occasion  for  either  the  one  or  the  other. 

When  the  institutions  or  public  works 
which  are  beneficial  to  the  whole  society 
either  cannot  be  maintained  altogether,  or  are 
not  maintained  altogether  by  the  contribu¬ 
tion  of  such  particular  members  of  the  society 
as  are  most  immediately  benefited  by  them, 
the  deficiency  must  in  most  cases  be  made  up 
by  the  general  contribution  of  the  whole  so¬ 
ciety.  The  general  revenue  of  the  society,  over 
and  above  defraying  the  expense  of  defending 
the  society,  and  of  supporting  the  dignity  of 
the  chief  magistrate,  must  make  up  for  the 
deficiency  of  many  particular  branches  of 
revenue.  The  sources  of  this  general  or  pub¬ 
lic  revenue  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  in  the 
following  chapter. 

CHAPTER  II 

Of  the  Sources  of  the  General  or  Public 
Revenue  of  the  Society 

The  revenue  which  must  defray,  not  only 
the  expense  of  defending  the  society  and  of 
supporting  the  dignity  of  the  chief  magistrate, 
but  all  the  other  necessary  expenses  of  gov¬ 
ernment  for  which  the  constitution  of  the 
state  has  not  provided  any  particular  reve¬ 
nue,  may  be  drawn  either,  first,  from  some 
fund  which  peculiarly  belongs  to  the  sov¬ 
ereign  or  commonwealth,  and  which  is  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  revenue  of  the  people;  or,  sec¬ 
ondly,  from  the  revenue  of  the  people. 


Part  1 

Of  the  Funds  or  Sources  of  Revenue  which  may  'peculiarly  belong  to  the  Sovereign  or  Commonwealth 


The  funds  or  sources  of  revenue  which  may 
peculiarly  belong  to  the  sovereign  or  com¬ 
monwealth  must  consist  either  in  stock  or 
in  land. 

The  sovereign,  like  any  other  owner  of 
stock,  may  derive  a  revenue  from  it,  either 
by  employing  it  himself,  or  by  lending  it. 
His  revenue  is  in  the  one  case  profit,  in  the 
other  interest. 


The  revenue  of  a  Tartar  or  Arabian  chief 
consists  in  profit.  It  arises  principally  from 
the  milk  and  increase  of  his  own  herds  and 
flocks,  of  which  he  himself  superintends  the 
management,  and  is  the  principal  shepherd 
or  herdsman  of  his  own  horde  or  tribe.  It  is, 
however,  in  this  earliest  and  rudest  state  of 
civil  government  only  that  profit  has  ever 
made  the  principal  part  of  the  public  revenue 


358  The  Wealth 

of  a  monarchial  state. 

Small  republics  have  sometimes  derived  a 
considerable  revenue  from  the  profit  of  mer¬ 
cantile  projects.  The  republic  of  Hamburg 
is  said  to  do  so  from  the  profits  of  a  public 
wine  cellar  and  apothecary’s  shop.1  The  state 
cannot  be  very  great  of  which  the  sovereign 
has  leisure  to  carry  on  the  trade  of  a  wine 
merchant  or  apothecary.  The  profit  of  a  pub¬ 
lic  bank  has  been  a  source  of  revenue  to  more 
considerable  states.  It  has  been  so  not  only 
to  Hamburg,  but  to  Venice  and  Amsterdam. 

A  revenue  of  this  kind  has  even  by  some 
people  been  thought  not  below  the  attention 
of  so  great  an  empire  as  that  of  Great  Britain. 
Reckoning  the  ordinary  dividend  of  the  Bank 
of  England  at  five  and  a  half  per  cent  and 
its  capital  at  ten  millions  seven  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  pounds,  the  net  annual  profit, 
after  paying  the  expense  of  management, 
must  amount,  it  is  said,  to  five  hundred  and 
ninety-two  thousand  nine  hundred  pounds. 
Government,  it  is  pretended,  could  borrow 
this  capital  at  three  per  cent  interest,  and  by 
taking  the  management  of  the  bank  into 
its  own  hands,  might  make  a  clear  profit 
of  two  hundred  and  sixty-nine  thousand  five 
hundred  pounds  a  year.  The  orderly,  vigilant, 
and  parsimonious  administration  of  such  aris¬ 
tocracies  as  those  of  Venice  and  Amsterdam 
is  extremely  proper,  it  appears  from  experi¬ 
ence,  for  the  management  of  a  mercantile 
project  of  this  kind.  But  whether  such  a  gov¬ 
ernment  as  that  of  England — which,  whatever 
may  be  its  virtues,  has  never  been  famous 
for  good  economy;  which,  in  time  of  peace, 
has  generally  conducted  itself  with  the  sloth¬ 
ful  and  negligent  profusion  that  is  perhaps 
natural  to  monarchies;  and  in  time  of  war 
has  constantly  acted  with  all  the  thoughtless 
extravagance  that  democracies  are  apt  to 
fall  into — could  be  safely  trusted  with  the 
management  of  such  a  project,  must  at  least 
be  a  good  deal  more  doubtful. 

The  post  office  is  properly  a  mercantile 
project.  The  government  advances  the  expense 
of  establishing  the  different  offices,  and  of 
buying  or  hiring  the  necessary  horses  or  car¬ 
riages,  and  is  repaid  with  a  large  profit  by 

1  See  M emoires  concernant  les  droits  et  imposi¬ 
tions  en  Europe ,  vol,  i,  p.  73.  This  work  was 
compiled  by  the  order  of  the  court  for  the  use  of 
a  commission  employed  for  some  years  past  in 
considering  the  proper  means  for  reforming  the 
finances  of  France.  The  account  of  the  French 
taxes,  which  takes  up  three  volumes  in  quarto, 
may  be  regarded  as  perfectly  authentic.  That  of 
those  of  other  European  nations  was  compiled 
from  such  informations  as  the  French  ministers 
at  the  different  courts  could  procure.  It  is  much 
shorter,  and  probably  not  quite  so  exact  as  that 
of  the  French  taxes. 


of  Nations 

the  duties  upon  what  is  carried.  It  is  perhaps 
the  only  mercantile  project  which  has  been 
successfully  managed  by,  I  believe,  every  sort 
of  government.  The  capital  to  be  advanced 
is  not  very  considerable.  There  is  no  mystery 
in  the  business.  The  returns  are  not  only 
certain,  but  immediate. 

Princes,  however,  have  frequently  engaged 
in  many  other  mercantile  projects,  and  have 
been  willing,  like  private  persons,  to  mend 
their  fortunes  by  becoming  adventurers  in 
the  common  branches  of  trade.  They  have 
scarce  ever  succeeded.  The  profusion  with 
which  the  affairs  of  princes  are  always  man¬ 
aged  renders  it  almost  impossible  that  they 
should.  The  agents  of  a  prince  regard  the 
wealth  of  their  master  as  inexhaustible;  are 
careless  at  what  price  they  buy;  are  careless 
at  what  price  they  sell;  are  careless  at  what 
expense  they  transport  his  goods  from  one 
place  to  another.  Those  agents  frequently 
live  with  the  profusion  of  princes,  and  some¬ 
times  too,  in  spite  of  that  profusion,  and 
by  a  proper  method  of  making  up  their  ac¬ 
counts,  acquire  the  fortunes  of  princes.  It 
was  thus,  as  we  are  told  by  Machiavel,  that 
the  agents  of  Lorenzo  of  Medicis,  not  a  prince 
of  mean  abilities,  carried  on  his  trade.  The 
republic  of  Florence  was  several  times  obliged 
to  pay  the  debt  into  which  their  extravagance 
had  involved  him.  He  found  it  convenient, 
accordingly,  to  give  up  the  business  of  mer¬ 
chant,  the  business  to  which  his  family  had 
originally  owed  their  fortune,  and  in  the 
latter  part  of  his  life  to  employ  both  what 
remained  of  that  fortune,  and  the  revenue 
of  the  state  of  which  he  had  the  disposal, 
in  projects  and  expenses  more  suitable  to 
his  station. 

No  two  characters  seem  more  inconsistent 
than  those  of  trader  and  sovereign.  If  the 
trading  spirit  of  the  English  East  India  Com¬ 
pany  renders  them  very  bad  sovereigns,  the 
spirit  of  sovereignty  seems  to  have  rendered 
them  equally  bad  traders.  While  they  were 
traders  only  they  managed  their  trade  suc¬ 
cessfully,  and  were  able  to  pay  from  their 
profits  a  moderate  dividend  to  the  proprie¬ 
tors  of  their  stock.  Since  they  became  sov¬ 
ereigns,  with  a  revenue  which,  it  is  said,  was 
originally  more  than  three  millions  sterling, 
they  have  been  obliged  to  beg  extraordinary 
assistance  of  government  in  order  to  avoid 
immediate  bankruptcy.  In  their  former  situ¬ 
ation,  their  servants  in  India  considered  them¬ 
selves  as  the  clerks  of  merchants:  in  their 
present  situation,  those  servants  consider 
themselves  as  the  ministers  of  sovereigns. 

A  state  may  sometimes  derive  some  part 
of  its  public  revenue  from  the  interest  of 
money,  as  well  as  from  the  profits  of  stock. 
If  it  has  amassed  a  treasure,  it  may  lend  a 


The  Sources 

part  of  that  treasure  either  to  foreign  states, 
or  to  its  own  subjects. 

The  canton  of  Berne  derives  a  consider¬ 
able  revenue  by  lending  a  part  of  its  treasure 
to  foreign  states;  that  is,  by  placing  it  in  the 
public  funds  of  the  different  indebted  nations 
of  Europe,  chiefly  in  those  of  France  and 
England.  The  security  of  this  revenue  must 
depend,  first,  upon  the  security  of  the  funds 
in  which  it  is  placed,  or  upon  the  good  faith 
of  the  government  which  has  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  them;  and,  secondly,  upon  the  cer¬ 
tainty  or  probability  of  the  continuance  of 
peace  with  the  debtor  nation.  In  the  case  of 
a  war,  the  very  first  act  of  hostility,  on  the 
part  of  the  debtor  nation,  might  be  the  for¬ 
feiture  of  the  funds  of  its  creditor.  This  policy 
of  lending  money  to  foreign  states  is,  so  far 
as  I  know,  peculiar  to  the  canton  of  Berne. 

The  city  of  Hamburg1  has  established  a 
sort  of  public  pawnshop,  which  lends  money 
to  the  subjects  of  the  state  upon  pledges  at 
six  per  cent  interest.  This  pawnshop  or  Lom¬ 
bard,  as  it  is  called,  affords  a  revenue,  it  is 
pretended,  to  the  state  of  a  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  crowns,  which,  at  four  and  sixpence 
the  crown,  amounts  to  £33,750  sterling. 

The  government  of  Pennsylvania,  without 
amassing  any  treasure,  invented  a  method 
of  lending,  not  money  indeed,  but  what  is 
equivalent  to  money,  to  its  subjects.  By  ad¬ 
vancing  to  private  people  at  interest,  and 
upon  land  security  to  double  the  value,  paper 
bills  of  credit  to  be  redeemed  fifteen  years 
after  their  date,  and  in  the  meantime  made 
transferable  from  hand  to  hand  like  bank 
notes,  and  declared  by  act  of  assembly  to  be 
a  legal  tender  in  all  payments  from  one  in¬ 
habitant  of  the  province  to  another,  it  raised 
a  moderate  revenue,  which  went  a  consider¬ 
able  way  towards  defraying  an  annual  ex¬ 
pense  of  about  £1500,  the  whole  ordinary 
expense  of  that  frugal  and  orderly  govern¬ 
ment.  The  success  of  an  expedient  of  this 
kind  must  have  depended  upon  three  different 
circumstances;  first,  upon  the  demand  for 
some  other  instrument  of  commerce  besides 
gold  and  silver  money;  or  upon  the  demand 
for  such  a  quantity  of  consumable  stock  as 
could  not  be  had  without  sending  abroad  the 
greater  part  of  their  gold  and  silver  money 
in  order  to  purchase  it;  secondly,  upon  the 
good  credit  of  the  government  which  made 
use  of  this  expedient;  and,  thirdly,  upon  the 
moderation  with  which  it  was  used,  the  whole 
value  of  the  paper  bills  of  credit  never  ex¬ 
ceeding  that  of  the  gold  and  silver  money 
which  would  have  been  necessary  for  carrying 
on  their  circulation  had  there  been  no  paper 

1  See  M emoires  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol. 
i,  p.  73. 


of  Revenue  359 

bills  of  credit.  The  same  expedient  was  upon 
different  occasions  adopted  by  several  other 
American  colonies:  but,  from  want  of  this 
moderation,  it  produced,  in  the  greater  part  of 
them,  much  more  disorder  than  conveniency. 

The  unstable  and  perishable  nature  of 
stock  and  credit,  however,  render  them  unfit 
to  be  trusted  to  as  the  principal  funds  of 
that  sure,  steady,  and  permanent  revenue 
which  can  alone  give  security  and  dignity 
to  government.  The  government  of  no  great 
nation  that  was  advanced  beyond  the  shep¬ 
herd  state  seems  ever  to  have  derived  the 
greater  part  of  its  public  revenue  from  such 
sources. 

Land  is  a  fund  of  a  more  stable  and  per¬ 
manent  nature;  and  the  rent  of  public  lands, 
accordingly,  has  been  the  principal  source  of 
the  public  revenue  of  many  a  great  nation 
that  was  much  advanced  beyond  the  shep¬ 
herd  state.  From  the  produce  or  rent  of  the 
public  lands,  the  ancient  republics  of  Greece 
and  Italy  derived,  for  a  long  time,  the  greater 
part  of  that  revenue  which  defrayed  the 
necessary  expenses  of  the  commonwealth.  The 
rent  of  the  crown  lands  constituted  for  a  long 
time  the  greater  part  of  the  revenue  of  the 
ancient  sovereigns  of  Europe. 

War  and  the  preparation  for  war  are  the 
two  circumstances  which  in  modern  times 
occasion  the  greater  part  of  the  necessary 
expense  of  all  great  states.  But  in  the  ancient 
republics  of  Greece  and  Italy  every  citizen 
was  a  soldier,  who  both  served  and  prepared 
himself  for  service  at  his  own  expense.  Nei¬ 
ther  of  those  two  circumstances,  therefore, 
could  occasion  any  very  considerable  expense 
to  the  state.  The  rent  of  a  very  moderate 
landed  estate  might  be  fully  sufficient  for 
defraying  all  the  other  necessary  expenses 
of  government. 

In  the  ancient  monarchies  of  Europe,  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  times  sufficiently 
prepared  the  great  body  of  the  people  for 
war;  and  when  they  took  the  field,  they 
were,  by  the  condition  of  their  feudal  tenures, 
to  be  maintained  either  at  their  own  expense, 
or  at  that  of  their  immediate  lords,  without 
bringing  any  new  charge  upon  the  sovereign. 
The  other  expenses  of  government  were,  the 
greater  part  of  them,  very  moderate.  The 
administration  of  justice,  it  has  been  shown, 
instead  of  being  a  cause  of  expense,  was  a 
source  of  revenue.  The  labour  of  the  country 
people,  for  three  days  before  and  for  three 
days  after  harvest,  was  thought  a  fund  suffi¬ 
cient  for  making  and  maintaining  all  the 
bridges,  highways,  and  other  public  works 
which  the  commerce  of  the  country  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  require.  In  those  flays  the  principal 
expense  of  the  sovereign  seems  to  have  con¬ 
sisted  in  the  maintenance  of  his  own  family 


360 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


and  household.  The  officers  of  his  household, 
accordingly,  were  then  the  great  officers 
of  state.  The  lord  treasurer  received  his  rents. 
The  lord  steward  and  lord  chamberlain  looked 
after  the  expense  of  his  family.  The  care  of 
his  stables  was  committed  to  the  lord  con¬ 
stable  and  the  lord  marshal.  His  houses  were 
all  built  in  the  form  of  castles,  and  seem  to 
have  been  the  principal  fortresses  which  he 
possessed.  The  keepers  of  those  houses  or 
castles  might  be  considered  as  a  sort  of  mili¬ 
tary  governors.  They  seem  to  have  been  the 
only  military  officers  whom  it  was  necessary 
to  maintain  in  time  of  peace.  In  these  cir¬ 
cumstances  the  rent  of  a  great  landed  estate 
might,  upon  ordinary  occasions,  very  well 
defray  all  the  necessary  expenses  of  govern¬ 
ment. 

In  the  present  state  of  the  greater  part 
of  the  civilised  monarchies  of  Europe,  the 
rent  of  all  the  lands  in  the  country,  managed 
as  they  probably  would  be  if  they  all  be¬ 
longed  to  one  proprietor,  would  scarce  per¬ 
haps  amount  to  the  ordinary  revenue  which 
they  levy  upon  the  people  even  in  peaceable 
times.  The  ordinary  revenue  of  Great  Britain, 
for  example,  including  not  only  what  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  defraying  the  current  expense  of 
the  year,  but  for  paying  the  interest  of  the 
public  debts,  and  for  sinking  a  part  of  the 
capital  of  those  debts,  amounts  to  upwards 
of  ten  millions  a  year.  But  the  land-tax,  at 
four  shillings  in  the  pound,  falls  short  of  two 
millions  a  year.  This  land-tax,  as  it  is  called, 
however,  is  supposed  to  be  one-fifth,  not 
only  of  the  rent  of  all  the  land,  but  of  that 
of  all  the  houses,  and  of  the  interest  of  all 
the  capital  stock  of  Great  Britain,  that  part 
of  it  only  excepted  which  is  either  let  to  the 
public,  or  employed  as  farming  stock  in  the 
cultivation  of  land.  A  very  considerable  part 
of  the  produce  of  this  tax  arises  from  the 
rent  of  houses,  and  the  interest  of  capital 
stock.  The  land-tax  of  the  city  of  London, 
for  example,  at  four  shillings  in  the  pound, 
amounts  to  £123,399  6s.  7d.  That  of  the 
city  of  Westminster,  to  £63,092  Is.  5d.  That 
of  the  palaces  of  Whitehall  and  St.  James’s, 
to  £30,754  6s.  3d.  A  certain  proportion  of  the 
land-tax  is  in  the  same  manner  assessed  upon 
all  the  other  cities  and  towns  corporate  in 
the  kingdom,  and  arises  almost  altogether, 
either  from  the  rent  of  houses,  or  from  what 
is  supposed  to  be  the  interest  of  trading  and 
capital  stock.  According  to  the  estimation, 
therefore,  by  which  Great  Britain  is  rated 
to  the  land-tax,  the  whole  mass  of  revenue 
arising  from  the  rent  of  all  the  lands,  from 
that  of  all  the  houses,  and  from  the  interest 
of  all  the  capital  stock,  that  part  of  it 
only  excepted  which  is  either  lent  to  the 
public,  or  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  land, 


does  not  exceed  ten  millions  sterling  a  year, 
the  ordinary  revenue  which  government  lev¬ 
ies  upon  the  people  even  in  peaceable  times. 
The  estimation  by  which  Great  Britain  is 
rated  to  the  land-tax  is,  no  doubt,  taking 
the  whole  kingdom  at  an  average,  very 
much  below  the  real  value;  though  in  several 
particular  counties  and  districts  it  is  said  to 
be  nearly  equal  to  that  value.  The  rent  of 
the  lands  alone,  exclusively  of  that  of  houses, 
and  of  the  interest  of  stock,  has  by  many 
people  been  estimated  at  twenty  millions, 
an  estimation  made  in  a  great  measure  at 
random,  and  which,  I  apprehend,  is  as  likely 
to  be  above  as  below  the  truth.  But  if  the 
lands  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  present  state 
of  their  cultivation,  do  not  afford  a  rent  of 
more  than  twenty  millions  a  year,  they  could 
not  well  afford  the  half,  most  probably  not 
the  fourth  part  of  that  rent,  if  they  all  be¬ 
longed  to  a  single  proprietor,  and  were  put 
under  the  negligent,  expensive,  and  oppressive 
management  of  his  factors  and  agents.  The 
crown  lands  of  Great  Britain  do  not  at  present 
afford  the  fourth  part  of  the  rent  which 
could  probably  be  drawn  from  them  if  they 
were  the  property  of  private  persons.  If  the 
crown  lands  were  more  extensive,  it  is  prob¬ 
able  they  would  be  still  worse  managed. 

The  revenue  which  the  great  body  of  the 
people  derives  from  land  is  in  proportion,  not 
to  the  rent,  but  to  the  produce  of  the  land. 
The  whole  annual  produce  of  the  land  of 
every  country,  if  we  except  what  is  reserved 
for  seed,  is  either  annually  consumed  by  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  or  exchanged  for 
something  else  that  is  consumed  by  them. 
Whatever  keeps  down  the  produce  of  the 
land  below  what  it  would  otherwise  rise  to 
keeps  down  the  revenue  of  the  great  body 
of  the  people  still  more  than  it  does  that  of 
the  proprietors  of  land.  The  rent  of  land, 
that  portion  of  the  produce  which  belongs  to 
the  proprietors,  is  scarce  anywhere  in  Great 
Britain  supposed  to  be  more  than  a  third 
part  of  the  whole  produce.  If  the  land  which 
in  one  state  of  cultivation  affords  a  rent  of 
ten  millions  sterling  a  year  would  in  another 
afford  a  rent  of  twenty  millions,  the  rent 
being,  in  both  cases,  supposed  a  third  part 
of  the  produce,  the  revenue  of  the  proprietors 
would  be  less  than  it  otherwise  might  be  by 
ten  millions  a  year  only;  but  the  revenue 
of  the  great  body  of  the  people  would  be  less 
than  it  otherwise  might  be  by  thirty  millions 
a  year,  deducting  only  what  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  for  seed.  The  population  of  the  country 
would  be  less  by  the  number  of  people  which 
thirty  millions  a  year,  deducting  always  the 
seed,  could  maintain  according  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  mode  of  living  and  expense  which 
might  take  place  in  the  different  ranks  of 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


men  among  whom  the  remainder  was  dis¬ 
tributed. 

Though  there  is  not  at  present,  in  Europe, 
any  civilised  state  of  any  kind  which  derives 
the  greater  part  of  its  public  revenue  from 
the  rent  of  lands  which  are  the  property  of 
the  state,  yet  in  all  the  great  monarchies  of 
Europe  there  are  still  many  large  tracts  of 
land  which  belong  to  the  crown.  They  are 
generally  forest;  and  sometimes  forest  where, 
after  travelling  several  miles,  you  will  scarce 
find  a  single  tree;  a  mere  waste  and  loss  of 
country  in  respect  both  of  produce  and  popu¬ 
lation.  In  every  great  monarchy  of  Europe 
the  sale  of  the  crown  lands  would  produce 
a  very  large  sum  of  money,  which,  if  applied 
to  the  payment  of  the  public  debts,  would 
deliver  from  mortgage  a  much  greater  revenue 
than  any  which  those  lands  have  ever  af¬ 
forded  to  the  crown.  In  countries  where  lands, 
improved  and  cultivated  very  highly,  and 
yielding  at  the  time  of  sale  as  great  a  rent 
as  can  easily  be  got  from  them,  commonly 
sell  at  thirty  years’  purchase,  the  unimproved, 
uncultivated,  and  low-rented  crown  lands 
might  well  be  expected  to  sell  at  forty,  fifty, 
or  sixty  years’  purchase.  The  crown  might 
immediately  enjoy  the  revenue  which  this 
great  price  would  redeem  from  mortgage.  In 
the  course  of  a  few  years  it  would  probably 
enjoy  another  revenue.  When  the  crown  lands 
had  become  private  property,  they  would, 
in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  become  well 
improved  and  well  cultivated.  The  increase 
of  their  produce  would  increase  the  popula¬ 
tion  of  the  country  by  augmenting  the  rev¬ 


361 

enue  and  consumption  of  the  people.  But 
the  revenue  which  the  crown  derives  from 
the  duties  of  customs  and  excise  would  nec¬ 
essarily  increase  with  the  revenue  and  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  people. 

The  revenue  which,  in  any  civilised  mon¬ 
archy,  the  crown  derives  from  the  crown 
lands,  though  it  appears  to  cost  nothing  to 
individuals,  in  reality  costs  more  to  the 
society  than  perhaps  any  other  equal  revenue 
which  the  crown  enjoys.  It  would,  in  all  cases, 
be  for  the  interest  of  the  society  to  replace 
this  revenue  to  the  crown  by  some  other 
equal  revenue,  and  to  divide  the  lands  among 
the  people,  which  could  not  well  be  done 
better,  perhaps,  than  by  exposing  them  to 
public  sale. 

Lands  for  the  purposes  of  pleasure  and 
magnificence — parks,  gardens,  public  walks, 
etc.,  possessions  which  are  everywhere  con¬ 
sidered  as  causes  of  expense,  not  as  sources 
of  revenue — seem  to  be  the  only  lands  which, 
in  a  great  and  civilised  monarchy,  ought  to 
belong  to  the  crown. 

Public  stock  and  public  lands,  therefore, 
the  two  sources  of  revenue  which  may  pe¬ 
culiarly  belong  to  the  sovereign  or  common¬ 
wealth,  being  both  improper  and  insufficient 
funds  for  defraying  the  necessary  expense 
of  any  great  and  civilised  state,  it  remains 
that  this  expense  must,  the  greater  part  of 
it,  be  defrayed  by  taxes  of  one  kind  or  an¬ 
other;  the  people  contributing  a  part  of  their 
own  private  revenue  in  order  to  make  up 
a  public  revenue  to  the  sovereign  or  common¬ 
wealth. 


Part  2 
Of  Taxes 


The  private  revenue  of  individuals,  it  has 
been  shown  in  the  first  book  of  this  Inquiry, 
arises  ultimately  from  three  different  sources: 
Rent,  Profit,  and  Wages.  Every  tax  must 
finally  be  paid  from  some  one  or  other  of 
those  three  different  sorts  of  revenue,  or  from 
all  of  them  indifferently.  I  shall  endeavour 
to  give  the  best  account  I  can,  first,  of  those 
taxes  which,  it  is  intended,  should  fall  upon 
rent;  secondly,  of  those  which,  it  is  intended, 
should  fall  upon  profit;  thirdly,  of  those 
which,  it  is  intended,  should  fall  upon  wages; 
and,  fourthly,  of  those  which,  it  is  intended, 
should  fall  indifferently  upon  all  those  three 
different  sources  of  private  revenue.  The  par¬ 
ticular  consideration  of  each  of  these  four 
different  sorts  of  taxes  will  divide  the  second 
part  of  the  present  chapter  into  four  articles, 
three  of  which  will  require  several  other  subdi¬ 
visions.  Many  of  those  taxes,  it  will  appear 
from  the  following  review,  are  not  finally  paid 
from  the  fund,  or  source  of  revenue,  upon 


which  it  was  intended  they  should  fall. 

Before  I  enter  upon  the  examination  of 
particular  taxes,  it  is  necessary  to  premise 
the  four  following  maxims  with  regard  to 
taxes  in  general. 

I.  The  subjects  of  every  state  ought  to 
contribute  towards  the  support  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  proportion 
to  their  respective  abilities;  that  is,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  revenue  which  they  respec¬ 
tively  enjoy  under  the  protection  of  the 
state.  The  expense  of  government  to  the  in¬ 
dividuals  of  a  great  nation  is  like  the  expense 
of  management  to  the  joint  tenants  of  a  great 
estate,  who  are  all  obliged  to  contribute  in 
proportion  to  their  respective  interests  in 
the  estate.  In  the  observation  or  neglect  of 
this  maxim  consists  what  is  called  the  equality 
or  inequality  of  taxation.  Every  tax,  it  must 
be  observed  once  for  all,  which  falls  finally 
upon  one  only  of  the  three  sorts  of  revenue 
above  mentioned,  is  necessarily  unequal  in 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


362 

so  far  as  it  does  not  affect  the  other  two.  In 
the  following  examination  of  different  taxes 
I  shall  seldom  take  much  further  notice  of 
this  sort  of  inequality,  but  shall,  in  most  cases, 
confine  my  observations  to  that  inequality 
which  is  occasioned  by  a  particular  tax  falling 
unequally  even  upon  that  particular  sort  of 
private  revenue  which  is  affected  by  it. 

II.  The  tax  which  each  individual  is  bound 
to  pay  ought  to  be  certain,  and  not  arbitrary. 
The  time  of  payment,  the  manner  of  pay¬ 
ment,  the  quantity  to  be  paid,  ought  all  to 
be  clear  and  plain  to  the  contributor,  and 
to  every  other  person.  Where  it  is  otherwise, 
every  person  subject  to  the  tax  is  put  more 
or  less  in  the  power  of  the  tax-gathered,  who 
can  either  aggravate  the  tax  upon  any  ob¬ 
noxious  contributor,  or  extort,  by  the  terror 
of  such  aggravation,  some  present  or  per¬ 
quisite  to  himself.  The  uncertainty  of  taxa¬ 
tion  encourages  the  insolence  and  favours 
the  corruption  of  an  order  of  men  who  are 
naturally  unpopular,  even  where  they  are 
neither  insolent  nor  corrupt.  The  certainty 
of  what  each  individual  ought  to  pay  is,  in 
taxation,  a  matter  of  so  great  importance 
that  a  very  considerable  degree  of  inequality, 
it  appears,  I  believe,  from  the  experience  of 
all  nations,  is  not  near  so  great  an  evil  as  a 
very  small  degree  of  uncertainty. 

III.  Every  tax  ought  to  be  levied  at  the 
time,  or  in  the  manner,  in  which  it  is  most 
likely  to  be  convenient  for  the  contributor 
to  pay  it.  A  tax  upon  the  rent  of  land  or 
of  houses,  payable  at  the  same  term  at  which 
such  rents  are  usually  paid,  is  levied  at  the 
time  when  it  is  most  likely  to  be  convenient 
for  the  contributor  to  pay;  or,  when  he  is 
most  likely  to  have  wherewithal  to  pay.  Taxes 
upon  such  consumable  goods  as  are  articles 
of  luxury  are  all  finally  paid  by  the  consumer, 
and  generally  in  a  manner  that  is  very  con¬ 
venient  for  him.  He  pays  them  by  little  and 
little,  as  he  has  occasion  to  buy  the  goods. 
As  he  is  at  liberty,  too,  either  to  buy,  or  not 
to  buy,  as  he  pleases,  it  must  be  his  own 
fault  if  he  ever  suffers  any  considerable  in- 
conveniency  from  such  taxes. 

IV.  Every  tax  ought  to  be  so  contrived 
as  both  to  take  out  and  to  keep  out  of  the 
pockets  of  the  people  as  little  as  possible 
over  and  above  what  it  brings  into  the  public 
treasury  of  the  state.  A  tax  may  either  take 
out  or  keep  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people 
a  great  deal  more  than  it  brings  into  the 
public  treasury,  in  the  four  following  ways. 
First,  the  levying  of  it  may  require  a  great 


number  of  officers,  whose  salaries  may  eat 
up  the  greater  part  of  the  produce  of  the  tax, 
and  whose  perquisites  may  impose  another 
additional  tax  upon  the  people.  Secondly,  it 
may  obstruct  the  industry  of  the  people,  and 
discourage  them  from  applying  to  certain 
branches  of  business  which  might  give  main¬ 
tenance  and  employment  to  great  multi¬ 
tudes.  While  it  obliges  the  people  to  pay, 
it  may  thus  diminish,  or  perhaps  destroy, 
some  of  the  funds  which  might  enable  them 
more  easily  to  do  so.  Thirdly,  by  the  for¬ 
feitures  and  other  penalties  which  those  un¬ 
fortunate  individuals  incur  who  attempt 
unsuccessfully  to  evade  the  tax,  it  may 
frequently  ruin  them,  and  thereby  put  an 
end  to  the  benefit  which  the  community 
might  have  received  from  the  employment 
of  their  capitals.  An  injudicious  tax  offers 
a  great  temptation  to  smuggling.  But  the 
penalties  of  smuggling  must  rise  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  temptation.  The  law,  contrary  to 
all  the  ordinary  principles  of  justice,  first 
creates  the  temptation,  and  then  punishes 
those  who  yield  to  it;  and  it  commonly  en¬ 
hances  the  punishment,  too,  in  proportion 
to  the  very  circumstance  which  ought  cer¬ 
tainly  to  alleviate  it,  the  temptation  to  com¬ 
mit  the  crime.1  Fourthly,  by  subjecting  the 
people  to  the  frequent  visits  and  the  odious 
examination  of  the  tax-gatherers,  it  may 
expose  them  to  much  unnecessary  trouble, 
vexation,  and  oppression;  and  though  vexa¬ 
tion  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  expense,  it  is 
certainly  equivalent  to  the  expense  at  which 
every  man  would  be  willing  to  redeem  him¬ 
self  from  it.  It  is  in  some  one  or  other  of 
these  four  different  ways  that  taxes  are  fre¬ 
quently  so  much  more  burdensome  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  than  they  are  beneficial  to  the  sovereign. 

The  evident  justice  and  utility  of  the  fore¬ 
going  maxims  have  recommended  them  more 
or  less  to  the  attention  of  all  nations.  All 
nations  have  endeavoured,  to  the  best  of 
their  judgment,  to  render  their  taxes  as  equal 
as  they  could  contrive;  as  certain,  as  con¬ 
venient  to  the  contributor,  both  in  the  time 
and  in  the  mode  of  payment,  and,  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  revenue  which  they  brought  to 
the  prince,  as  little  burdensome  to  the  people. 
The  following  short  review  of  some  of  the 
principal  taxes  which  have  taken  place  in 
different  ages  and  countries  will  show  that 
the  endeavours  of  all  nations  have  not  in 
this  respect  been  equally  successful. 

1  See  Sketches  of  the  History  of  Man,  p.  474, 
et  seq. 


Article  I 

Taxes  upon  Rent  Taxes  upon  the  Rent  of  Land 

A  tax  upon  the  rent  of  land  may  either  every  district  being  valued  at  a  certain  reni, 
be  imposed  according  to  a  certain  canon,  which  valuation  is  not  afterwards  to  be 


363 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


altered,  or  it  may  be  imposed  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  as  to  vary  with  every  variation  in  the 
real  rent  of  the  land,  and  to  rise  or  fall  with 
the  improvement  or  declension  of  its  cultiva¬ 
tion. 

A  land-tax  which,  like  that  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain,  is  assessed  upon  each  district  according 
to  a  certain  invariable  canon,  though  it  should 
be  equal  at  the  time  of  its  first  establish¬ 
ment,  necessarily  becomes  unequal  in  process 
of  time,  according  to  the  unequal  degrees  of 
improvement  or  neglect  in  the  cultivation 
of  the  different  parts  of  the  country.  In 
England,  the  valuation  according  to  which 
the  different  countries  and  parishes  were  as¬ 
sessed  to  the  land-tax  by  the  4th  of  William 
and  Mary  was  very  unequal  even  at  its  first 
establishment.  This  tax,  therefore,  so  far 
offends  against  the  first  of  the  four  maxims 
above  mentioned.  It  is  perfectly  agreeable 
to  the  other  three.  It  is  perfectly  certain. 
The  time  of  payment  for  the  tax,  being  the 
same  as  that  for  the  rent,  is  as  convenient 
as  it  can  be  to  the  contributor.  Though  the 
landlord  is  in  all  cases  the  real  contributor, 
the  tax  is  commonly  advanced  by  the  tenant, 
to  whom  the  landlord  is  obliged  to  allow  it 
in  the  payment  of  the  rent.  This  tax  is  levied 
by  a  much  smaller  number  of  officers  than 
any  other  which  affords  nearly  the  same 
revenue.  As  the  tax  upon  each  district  does 
not  rise  with  the  rise  of  the  rent,  the  sovereign 
does  not  share  in  the  profits  of  the  landlord’s 
improvements.  Those  improvements  some¬ 
times  contribute,  indeed,  to  the  discharge  of 
the  other  landlords  of  the  district.  But  the 
aggravation  of  the  tax  which  may  sometimes 
occasion  upon  a  particular  estate  is  always 
so  very  small  that  it  never  can  discourage 
those  improvements,  nor  keep  down  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  the  land  below  what  it  would  other¬ 
wise  rise  to.  As  it  has  no  tendency  to  diminish 
the  quantity,  it  can  have  none  to  raise  the 
price  of  that  produce.  It  does  not  obstruct 
the  industry  of  the  people.  It  subjects  the 
landlord  to  no  other  inconveniency  besides 
the  unavoidable  one  of  paying  the  tax. 

The  advantage,  however,  which  the  land¬ 
lord  has  derived  from  the  invariable  con¬ 
stancy  of  the  valuation  by  which  all  the 
lands  of  Great  Britain  are  rated  to  the  land- 
tax,  has  been  principally  owing  to  some 
circumstances  altogether  extraneous  to  the 
nature  of  the  tax. 

It  has  been  owing  in  part  to  the  great 
prosperity  of  almost  every  part  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  the  rents  of  almost  all  the  estates  of 
Great  Britain  having,  since  the  time  when 
this  valuation  was  first  established,  been 
continually  rising,  and  scarce  any  of  them 


having  fallen.  The  landlords,  therefore,  have 
almost  all  gained  the  difference  between  the 
tax  which  they  would  have  paid  according 
to  the  present  rent  of  their  estates,  and  that 
which  they  actually  pay  according  to  the  an¬ 
cient  valuation.  Had  the  state  of  the  country 
been  different,  had  rents  been  gradually  fall¬ 
ing  in  consequence  of  the  declension  of  cul¬ 
tivation,  the  landlords  would  almost  all  have 
lost  this  difference.  In  the  state  of  things 
which  has  happened  to  take  place  since  the 
revolution,  the  constancy  of  the  valuation  has 
been  advantageous  to  the  landlord  and  hurt¬ 
ful  to  the  sovereign.  In  a  different  state  of 
things  it  might  have  been  advantageous  to 
the  sovereign  and  hurtful  to  the  landlord, 

As  the  tax  is  made  payable  in  money,  so  the 
valuation  of  the  land  is  expressed  in  money. 
Since  the  establishment  of  this  valuation  the 
value  of  silver  has  been  pretty  uniform,  and 
there  has  been  no  alteration  in  the  standard 
of  the  coin  either  as  to  weight  or  fineness. 
Had  silver  risen  considerably  in  its  value, 
as  it  seems  to  have  done  in  the  course  of 
the  two  centuries  which  preceded  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  mines  of  America,  the  constancy 
of  the  valuation  might  have  proved  very 
oppressive  to  the  landlord.  Had  silver  fallen 
considerably  in  its  value,  as  it  certainly  did 
for  about  a  century  at  least  after  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  those  mines,  the  same  constancy 
of  valuation  would  have  reduced  very  much 
this  branch  of  the  revenue  of  the  sovereign. 
Had  any  considerable  alteration  been  made 
in  the  standard  of  the  money,  either  by 
sinking  the  same  quantity  of  silver  to  a  lower 
denomination,  or  by  raising  it  to  a  higher; 
had  an  ounce  of  silver,  for  example,  instead 
of  being  coined  into  five  shillings  and  two¬ 
pence,  been  coined  either  into  pieces  which 
bore  so  low  a  denomination  as  two  shillings 
and  sevenpence,  or  into  pieces  which  bore 
so  high  a  one  as  ten  shillings  and  fourpence, 
it  would  in  the  one  case  have  hurt  the  rev¬ 
enue  of  the  proprietor,  in  the  other  that 
of  the  sovereign. 

In  circumstances,  therefore,  somewhat  dif¬ 
ferent  from  those  which  have  actually  taken 
place,  this  constancy  of  valuation  might  have 
been  a  very  great  inconveniency,  either  to  the 
contributors,  or  to  the  commonwealth.  In 
the  course  of  ages  such  circumstances,  how¬ 
ever,  must,  at  some  time  or  other,  happen. 
But  though  empires,  like  all  the  other  works 
of  men,  have  all  hitherto  proved  mortal,  yet 
every  empire  aims  at  immortality.  Every 
constitution,  therefore,  which  it  is  meant 
should  be  as  permanent  as  the  empire  itself, 
ought  to  be  convenient,  not  in  certain  cir¬ 
cumstances  only,  but  in  all  circumstances;  or 
ought  to  be  suited,  not  to  those  circumstances 


364  The  Wealth 

which  are  transitory,  occasional,  or  accidental, 
but  to  those  which  are  necessary  and  there¬ 
fore  always  the  same. 

A  tax  upon  the  rent  of  land  which  varies 
with  every  variation  of  the  rent,  or  which 
rises  and  falls  according  to  the  improvement 
or  neglect  of  cultivation,  is  recommended  by 
that  sect  of  men  of  letters  in  France  who  call 
themselves  The  Economists  as  the  most  equi¬ 
table  of  all  taxes.  All  taxes,  they  pretend,  fall 
ultimately  upon  the  rent  of  land,  and  ought 
therefore  to  be  imposed  equally  upon  the 
fund  which  must  finally  pay  them.  That  all 
taxes  ought  to  fall  as  equally  as  possible 
upon  the  fund  which  must  finally  pay  them 
is  certainly  true.  But  without  entering  into 
the  disagreeable  discussion  of  the  metaphysi¬ 
cal  arguments  by  which  they  support  their 
very  ingenious  theory,  it  will  sufficiently  ap¬ 
pear,  from  the  following  review,  what  are 
the  taxes  which  fall  finally  upon  the  rent 
of  the  land,  and  what  are  those  which  fall 
finally  upon  some  other  fund. 

In  the  Venetian  territory  all  the  arable 
lands  which  are  given  in  lease  to  farmers 
are  taxed  at  a  tenth  of  the  rent.1  The  leases 
are  recorded  in  a  public  register  which  is 
kept  by  the  officers  of  revenue  in  each  prov¬ 
ince  or  district.  When  the  proprietor  culti¬ 
vates  his  own  lands,  they  are  valued  according 
to  an  equitable  estimation,  and  he  is  allowed 
a  deduction  of  one-fifth  of  the  tax,  so  that 
for  such  lands  he  pays  only  eight  instead 
of  ten  per  cent  of  the  supposed  rent. 

A  land-tax  of  this  kind  is  certainly  more 
equal  than  the  land-tax  of  England.  It  might 
not,  perhaps,  be  altogether  so  certain,  and 
the  assessment  of  the  tax  might  frequently 
occasion  a  good  deal  more  trouble  to  the 
landlord.  It  might,  too,  be  a  good  deal  more 
expensive  in  the  levying. 

Such  a  system  of  administration,  however, 
might  perhaps  be  contrived  as  would,  in  a 
great  measure,  both  prevent  this  uncertainty 
and  moderate  this  expense. 

The  landlord  and  tenant,  for  example, 
might  jointly  be  obliged  to  record  their  lease 
in  a  public  register.  Proper  penalties  might 
be  enacted  against  concealing  or  misrepre¬ 
senting  any  of  the  conditions;  and  if  part 
of  those  penalties  were  to  be  paid  to  either 
of  the  two  parties  who  informed  against  and 
convicted  the  other  of  such  concealment  or 
misrepresentation,  it  would  effectually  deter 
them  from  combining  together  in  order  to 
defraud  the  public  revenue.  All  the  conditions 
of  the  lease  might  be  sufficiently  known  from 
such  a  record. 

Some  landlords,  instead  of  raising  the  rent, 

1  Memoires  concemant  les  droits,  etc.,  pp.  240, 
241. 


of  Nations 

take  a  fine  for  the  renewal  of  the  lease.  This 
practice  is  in  most  cases  the  expedient  of  a 
spendthrift,  who  for  a  sum  of  ready  money 
sells  a  future  revenue  of  much  greater  value. 
It  is  in  most  cases,  therefore,  hurtful  to  the 
landlords.  It  is  frequently  hurtful  to  the  ten¬ 
ant,  and  it  is  always  hurtful  to  the  commu¬ 
nity.  It  frequently  takes  from  the  tenant  so 
great  a  part  of  his  capital,  and  thereby  di¬ 
minishes  so  much  his  ability  to  cultivate  the 
land,  that  he  finds  it  more  difficult  to  pay 
a  small  rent  than  it  would  otherwise  have 
been  to  pay  a  great  one.  Whatever  diminishes 
his  ability  to  cultivate,  necessarily  keeps  down, 
below  what  it  would  otherwise  have  been, 
the  most  important  part  of  the  revenue  of 
the  community.  By  rendering  the  tax  upon 
such  fines  a  good  deal  heavier  than  upon 
the  ordinary  rent,  this  hurtful  practice  might 
be  discouraged,  to  the  no  small  advantage  of 
all  the  different  parties  concerned,  of  the 
landlord,  of  the  tenant,  of  the  sovereign,  and 
of  the  whole  community. 

Some  leases  prescribe  to  the  tenant  a  cer¬ 
tain  mode  of  cultivation  and  a  certain  suc¬ 
cession  of  crops  during  the  whole  continuance 
of  the  lease.  This  condition,  which  is  generally 
the  effect  of  the  landlord’s  conceit  of  his  own 
superior  knowledge  (a  conceit  in  most  cases 
very  ill  founded) ,  ought  always  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  an  additional  rent;  as  a  rent  in 
service  instead  of  a  rent  in  money.  In  order 
to  discourage  the  practice,  which  is  generally 
a  foolish  one,  this  species  of  rent  might  be 
valued  rather  high,  and  consequently  taxed 
somewhat  higher  than  common  money  rents. 

Some  landlords,  instead  of  a  rent  in  money, 
require  a  rent  in  kind,  in  corn,  cattle,  poultry, 
wine,  oil,  etc.;  others,  again,  require  a  rent 
in  service.  Such  rents  are  always  more  hurtful 
to  the  tenant  than  beneficial  to  the  landlord. 
They  either  take  more  or  keep  more  out  of 
the  pocket  of  the  former  than  they  put  into 
that  of  the  latter.  In  every  country  where 
they  take  place  the  tenants  are  poor  and 
beggarly,  pretty  much  according  to  the  degree 
in  which  they  take  place.  By  valuing,  in  the 
same  manner,  such  rents  rather  high,  and 
consequently  taxing  them  somewhat  higher 
than  common  money  rents,  a  practice  which 
is  hurtful  to  the  whole  community  might 
perhaps  be  sufficiently  discouraged. 

When  the  landlord  chose  to  occupy  him¬ 
self  a  part  of  his  own  lands,  the  rent  might  be 
valued  according  to  an  equitable  arbitration 
of  the  farmers  and  landlords  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  and  a  moderate  abatement  of  the  tax 
might  be  granted  to  him,  in  the  same  manner 
as  in  the  Venetian  territory,  provided  the 
rent  of  the  lands  which  he  occupied  did  not 
exceed  a  certain  sum.  It  is  of  importance 
that  the  landlord  should  be  encouraged  to 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


365 


cultivate  a  part  of  his  own  land.  His  capital 
is  generally  greater  than  that  of  the  tenant, 
and  with  less  skill  he  can  frequently  raise  a 
greater  produce.  The  landlord  can  afford  to 
try  experiments,  and  is  generally  disposed  to 
do  so.  His  unsuccessful  experiments  occasion 
only  a  moderate  loss  to  himself.  His  success¬ 
ful  ones  contribute  to  the  improvement  and 
better  cultivation  of  the  whole  country.  It 
might  be  of  importance,  however,  that  the 
abatement  of  the  tax  should  encourage  him 
to  cultivate  to  a  certain  extent  only.  If  the 
landlords  should,  the  greater  part  of  them, 
be  tempted  to  farm  the  whole  of  their  own 
lands,  the  country  (instead  of  sober  and  in¬ 
dustrious  tenants,  who  are  bound  by  their 
own  interest  to  cultivate  as  well  as  their 
capital  and  skill  will  allow  them)  would  be 
filled  with  idle  and  profligate  bailiffs,  whose 
abusive  management  would  soon  degrade  the 
cultivation  and  reduce  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land,  to  the  diminution,  not  only  of  the 
revenue  of  their  masters,  but  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  part  of  that  of  the  whole  society. 

Such  a  system  of  administration  might, 
perhaps,  free  a  tax  of  this  kind  from  any  de¬ 
gree  of  uncertainty  which  could  occasion 
either  oppression  or  inconveniency  of  the  con¬ 
tributor;  and  might  at  the  same  time  serve 
to  introduce  into  the  common  management 
of  land  such  a  plan  or  policy  as  might  con¬ 
tribute  a  good  deal  to  the  general  improve¬ 
ment  and  good  cultivation  of  the  country. 

The  expense  of  levying  a  land-tax  which 
varied  with  every  variation  of  the  rent  would 
no  doubt  be  somewhat  greater  than  that  of 
levying  one  which  was  already  rated  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  fixed  valuation.  Some  additional  ex¬ 
pense  would  necessarily  be  incurred  both  by 
the  different  register  offices  which  it  would 
be  proper  to  establish  in  the  different  districts 
of  the  country,  and  by  the  different  valua¬ 
tions  which  might  occasionally  be  made  of  the 
lands  which  the  proprietor  chose  to  occupy 
himself.  The  expense  of  all  this,  however, 
might  be  very  moderate,  and  much  below 
what  is  incurred  in  the  levying  of  many  other 
taxes  which  afford  a  very  inconsiderable  reve¬ 
nue  in  comparison  of  what  might  easily  be 
drawn  from  a  tax  of  this  kind. 

The  discouragement  which  a  variable  land- 
tax  of  this  kind  might  give  to  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  land  seems  to  be  the  most  important 
objection  which  can  be  made  to  it.  The  land¬ 
lord  would  certainly  be  less  disposed  to  im¬ 
prove  when  the  sovereign,  who  contributed 
nothing  to  the  expense,  was  to  share  in  the 
profit  of  the  improvement.  Even  this  objec¬ 
tion  might  perhaps  be  obviated  by  allowing 
the  landlord,  before  he  began  his  improve¬ 
ment,  to  ascertain,  in  conjunction  with  the 
officers  of  revenue,  the  actual  value  of  his 


lands  according  to  the  equitable  arbitration 
of  a  certain  number  of  landlords  and  farmers 
in  the  neighborhood,  equally  chosen  by  both 
parties,  and  by  rating  him  according  to  this 
valuation  for  such  a  number  of  years  as  might 
be  fully  sufficient  for  his  complete  indemni¬ 
fication.  To  draw  the  attention  of  the  sover¬ 
eign  towards  the  improvement  of  the  land, 
from  a  regard  to  the  increase  of  his  own  reve¬ 
nue,  is  one  of  the  principal  advantages  pro¬ 
posed  by  this  species  of  land-tax.  The  term, 
therefore,  allowed  for  the  indemnification  of 
the  landlord  ought  not  to  be  a  great  deal 
longer  than  what  was  necessary  for  that  pur¬ 
pose,  lest  the  remoteness  of  the  interest 
should  discourage  too  much  this  attention. 
It  had  better,  however,  be  somewhat  too  long 
than  in  any  respect  too  short.  No  incitement 
to  the  attention  of  the  sovereign  can  ever 
counterbalance  the  smallest  discouragement 
to  that  of  the  landlord.  The  attention  of  the 
sovereign  can  be  at  best  but  a  very  general 
and  vague  consideration  of  what  is  likely  to 
contribute  to  the  better  cultivation  of  the 
greater  part  of  his  dominions.  The  attention 
of  the  landlord  is  a  particular  and  minute 
consideration  of  what  is  likely  to  be  the  most 
advantageous  application  of  every  inch  of 
ground  upon  his  estate.  The  principal  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  sovereign  ought  to  be  to  encour¬ 
age,  by  every  means  in  his  power,  the  atten¬ 
tion  both  of  the  landlord  and  of  the  farmer, 
by  allowing  both  to  pursue  their  own  interest 
in  their  own  way  and  according  to  their  own 
judgment;  by  giving  to  both  the  most  perfect 
security  that  they  shall  enjoy  the  full  recom¬ 
pense  of  their  own  industry;  and  by  procur¬ 
ing  to  both  the  most  extensive  market  for 
every  part  of  their  produce,  in  consequence 
of  establishing  the  easiest  and  safest  com¬ 
munications  both  by  land  and  by  water 
through  every  part  of  his  own  dominions  as 
well  as  the  most  unbounded  freedom  of  ex¬ 
portation  to  the  dominions  of  all  other 
princes. 

If  by  such  a  system  of  administration  a 
tax  of  this  kind  could  be  so  managed  as  to 
give,  not  only  no  discouragement,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  some  encouragement  to  the  im¬ 
provement  of  land,  it  does  not  appear  likely 
to  occasion  any  other  inconveniency  to  the 
landlord,  except  always  the  unavoidable  one 
of  being  obliged  to  pay  the  tax. 

In  all  the  variations  of  the  state  of  the  so¬ 
ciety,  in  the  improvement  and  in  the  declen¬ 
sion  of  agriculture;  in  all  the  variations  in  the 
value  of  silver,  and  in  all  those  in  the  stand¬ 
ard  of  the  coin,  a  tax  of  this  kind  would,  of 
its  own  accord  and  without  any  attention  of 
government,  readily  suit  itself  to  the  actual 
situation  of  things,  and  would  be  equally  just 
and  equitable  in  all  those  different  changes. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


366 

It  would,  therefore,  be  much  more  proper  to 
be  established  as  a  perpetual  and  unalterable 
regulation,  or  as  what  is  called  a  fundamental 
law  of  the  commonwealth,  than  any  tax 
which  was  always  to  be  levied  according  to 
a  certain  valuation. 

Some  states,  instead  of  the  simple  and  ob¬ 
vious  expedient  of  a  register  of  leases,  have 
had  recourse  to  the  laborious  and  expensive 
one  of  an  actual  survey  and  valuation  of  all 
the  lands  in  the  country.  They  have  sus¬ 
pected,  probably,  that  the  lessor  and  lessee, 
in  order  to  defraud  the  public  revenue,  might 
combine  to  conceal  the  real  terms  of  the  lease. 
Domesday-Book  seems  to  have  been  the  re¬ 
sult  of  a  very  accurate  survey  of  this  kind. 

In  the  ancient  dominions  of  the  King  of 
Prussia,  the  land-tax  is  assessed  according  to 
an  actual  survey  and  valuation,  which  is  re¬ 
viewed  and  altered  from  time  to  time.1  Ac¬ 
cording  to  that  valuation,  the  lay  proprietors 
pay  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  per  cent  of 
their  revenue.  Ecclesiastics  from  forty  to 
forty-five  per  cent.  The  survey  and  valuation 
of  Silesia  was  made  by  order  of  the  present 
king;  it  is  said  with  great  accuracy.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  that  valuation,  the  lands  belonging  to 
the  Bishop  of  Breslaw  are  taxed  at  twenty- 
five  per  cent  of  their  rent.  The  other  reve¬ 
nues  of  the  ecclesiastics  of  both  religions,  at 
fifty  per  cent.  The  commanderies  of  the  Teu¬ 
tonic  order,  and  of  that  of  Malta,  at  forty 
per  cent.  Lands  held  by  a  noble  tenure,  at 
thirty-eight  and  one-third  per  cent.  Lands 
held  by  a  base  tenure,  at  thirty-five  and  one- 
third  per  cent. 

The  survey  and  valuation  of  Bohemia  is 
said  to  have  been  the  work  of  more  than  a 
hundred  years.  It  was  not  perfected  till  after 
the  peace  of  1748,  by  the  orders  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  empress  queen.2  The  survey  of  the  duchy 
of  Milan,  which  was  begun  in  the  time  of 
Charles  VI,  was  not  perfected  till  after  1760. 
It  is  esteemed  one  of  the  most  accurate  that 
has  ever  been  made.  The  survey  of  Savoy 
and  Piedmont  was  executed  under  the  orders 
of  the  late  King  of  Sardinia.3 

In  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Prussia 
the  revenue  of  the  church  is  taxed  much 
higher  than  that  of  lay  proprietors.  The  reve¬ 
nue  of  the  church  is,  the  greater  part  of  it, 
a  burden  upon  the  rent  of  land.  It  seldom 
happens  that  any  part  of  it  is  applied  towards 
the  improvement  of  land,  or  is  so  employed  as 
to  contribute  in  any  respect  towards  increas¬ 
ing  the  revenue  of  the  great  body  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  His  Prussian  Majesty  had  probably, 
upon  that  account,  thought  it  reasonable  that 

1  Memoires  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  i,  pp. 
114,  115,  116,  etc. 

2 Ibid ..  pp.  83,  81. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  280,  etc.,  also  p.  287,  etc.,  to  316. 


it  should  contribute  a  good  deal  more  towards 
relieving  the  exigencies  of  the  state.  In  some 
countries  the  lands  of  the  church  are  ex¬ 
empted  from  all  taxes.  In  others  they  are 
taxed  more  lightly  than  other  lands.  In  the 
duchy  of  Milan,  the  lands  which  the  church 
possessed  before  1575  are  rated  to  the  tax  at 
a  third  only  of  their  value. 

In  Silesia,  lands  held  by  a  noble  tenure  are 
taxed  three  per  cent  higher  than  those  held 
by  a  base  tenure.  The  honours  and  privileges 
of  different  kinds  annexed  to  the  former,  his 
Prussian  Majesty  had  probably  imagined, 
would  sufficiently  compensate  to  the  proprie¬ 
tor  a  small  aggravation  of  the  tax;  while  at 
the  same  time  the  humiliating  inferiority  of 
the  latter  would  be  in  some  measure  alle¬ 
viated  by  being  taxed  somewhat  more  lightly. 
In  other  countries,  the  system  of  taxation, 
instead  of  alleviating,  aggravates  this  inequal¬ 
ity.  In  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Sar¬ 
dinia,  and  in  those  provinces  of  France  which 
are  subject  to  what  is  called  the  real  or  pre¬ 
dial  taille,  the  tax  falls  altogether  upon  the 
lands  held  by  a  base  tenure.  Those  held  by 
a  noble  one  are  exempted. 

A  land-tax  assessed  according  to  a  general 
survey  and  valuation,  how  equal  soever  it 
may  be  at  first,  must,  in  the  course  of  a  very 
moderate  period  of  time,  become  unequal. 
To  prevent  its  becoming  so  would  require  the 
continual  and  painful  attention  of  govern¬ 
ment  to  all  the  variations  in  the  state  and 
produce  of  every  different  farm  in  the  coun¬ 
try.  The  governments  of  Prussia,  of  Bo¬ 
hemia,  of  Sardinia,  and  of  the  duchy  of  Milan 
actually  exert  an  attention  of  this  kind;  an 
attention  so  unsuitable  to  the  nature  of 
government  that  it  is  not  likely  to  be  of  long 
continuance,  and  which,  if  it  is  continued, 
will  probably  in  the  long-run  occasion  much 
more  trouble  and  vexation  than  it  can  pos¬ 
sibly  bring  relief  to  the  contributors. 

In  1666,  the  generality  of  Montauban  was 
assessed  to  the  real  or  predial  taille  according, 
it  is  said,  to  a  very  exact  survey  and  valua¬ 
tion.4  By  1727,  this  assessment  had  become 
altogether  unequal.  In  order  to  remedy  this 
inconveniency,  government  has  found  no  bet¬ 
ter  expedient  than  to  impose  upon  the  whole 
generality  an  additional  tax  of  a  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  livres.  This  additional  tax 
is  rated  upon  all  the  different  districts  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  taille  according  to  the  old  assess¬ 
ment.  But  it  is  levied  only  upon  those  which 
in  the  actual  state  of  things  are  by  that 
assessment  undertaxed,  and  it  is  applied  to 
the  relief  of  those  which  by  the  same  assess¬ 
ment  are  overtaxed.  Two  districts,  for  ex- 

*  Memoires  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  ii, 
p.  139,  etc. 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


ample,  one  of  which  ought  in  the  actual  state 
of  things  to  be  taxed  at  nine  hundred,  the 
other  at  eleven  hundred  livres,  are  by  the 
old  assessment  both  taxed  at  a  thousand 
livres.  Both  these  districts  are  by  the  addi¬ 
tional  tax  rated  at  eleven  hundred  livres  each. 
But  this  additional  tax  is  levied  only  upon  the 
district  undercharged,  and  it  is  applied  alto¬ 
gether  to  the  relief  of  that  overcharged,  which 
consequently  pays  only  nine  hundred  livres. 
The  government  neither  gains  nor  loses  by 
the  additional  tax,  which  is  applied  altogether 
to  remedy  the  inequalities  arising  from  the 
old  assessment.  The  application  is  pretty 
much  regulated  according  to  the  discretion  of 
the  intendant  of  the  generality,  and  must, 
therefore,  be  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary. 

Taxes  which  are  proportioned,  not  to  the  Rent , 

but  to  the  Produce  of  Land 

Taxes  upon  the  produce  of  land  are  in 
reality  taxes  upon  the  rent;  and  though  they 
may  be  originally  advanced  by  the  farmer, 
are  finally  paid  by  the  landlord.  When  a  cer¬ 
tain  portion  of  the  produce  is  to  be  paid 
away  for  a  tax,  the  farmer  computes,  as  well 
as  he  can,  what  the  value  of  this  portion  is, 
one  year  with  another,  likely  to  amount  to, 
and  he  makes  a  proportionable  abatement  in 
the  rent  which  he  agrees  to  pay  to  the  land¬ 
lord.  There  is  no  farmer  who  does  not  com¬ 
pute  beforehand  what  the  church  tithe, 
which  is  a  land-tax  of  this  kind,  is,  one  year 
with  another,  likely  to  amount  to. 

The  tithe,  and  every  other  land-tax  of  this 
kind,  under  the  appearance  of  perfect  equal¬ 
ity,  are  very  unequal  taxes;  a  certain  portion 
of  the  produce  being,  in  different  situations, 
equivalent  to  a  very  different  portion  of  the 
rent.  In  some  very  rich  lands  the  produce  is 
so  great  that  the  one  half  of  it  is  fully  suffi¬ 
cient  to  replace  to  the  farmer  his  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  cultivation,  together  with  the  or¬ 
dinary  profits  of  farming  stock  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  The  other  half,  or,  what  comes  to 
the  same  thing,  the  value  of  the  other  half, 
he  could  afford  to  pay  as  rent  to  the  landlord, 
if  there  was  no  tithe.  But  if  a  tenth  of  the 
produce  is  taken  from  him  in  the  way  of 
tithe,  he  must  require  an  abatement  of  the 
fifth  part  of  his  rent,  otherwise  he  cannot  get 
back  his  capital  with  the  ordinary  profit. 
In  this  case  the  rent  of  the  landlord,  instead 
of  amounting  to  a  half  or  five-tenths  of  the 
whole  produce,  will  amount  only  to  four- 
tenths  of  it.  In  poorer  lands,  on  the  contrary, 
the  produce  is  sometimes  so  small,  and  the 
expense  of  cultivation  so  great,  that  it  re¬ 
quires  four-fifths  of  the  whole  produce  to 
replace  to  the  farmer  his  capital  with  the 
ordinary  profit.  In  this  case,  though  there 
was  no  tithe,  the  rent  of  the  landlord  could 


367 

amount  to  no  more  than  one-fifth  or  two- 
tenths  of  the  whole  produce.  But  if  the 
farmer  pays  one-tenth  of  the  produce  in  the 
way  of  tithe,  he  must  require  an  equal  abate¬ 
ment  of  the  rent  of  the  landlord,  which  will 
thus  be  reduced  to  one-tenth  only  of  the 
whole  produce.  Upon  the  rent  of  rich  lands, 
the  tithe  may  sometimes  be  a  tax  of  no  more 
than  one-fifth  part,  or  four  shillings  in  the 
pound;  whereas  upon  that  of  poorer  lands,  it 
may  sometimes  be  a  tax  of  one-half,  or  of 
ten  shillings  in  the  pound. 

The  tithe,  as  it  is  frequently  a  very  un¬ 
equal  tax  upon  the  rent,  so  it  is  always  a 
great  discouragement  both  to  the  improve¬ 
ments  of  the  landlord  and  to  the  cultivation 
of  the  farmer.  The  one  cannot  venture  to 
make  the  most  important,  which  are  gener¬ 
ally  the  most  expensive  improvements,  nor 
the  other  to  raise  the  most  valuable,  which 
are  generally  too  the  most  expensive  crops, 
when  the  church,  which  lays  out  no  part  of 
the  expense,  is  to  share  so  very  largely  in  the 
profit.  The  cultivation  of  madder  was  for  a 
long  time  confined  by  the  tithe  to  the  United 
Provinces,  which,  being  Presbyterian  coun¬ 
tries,  and  upon  that  account  exempted  from 
this  destructive  tax,  enjoyed  a  sort  of  mo¬ 
nopoly  of  that  useful  dyeing  drug  against  the 
rest  of  Europe.  The  late  attempts  to  intro¬ 
duce  the  culture  of  this  plant  into  England 
have  been  made  only  in  consequence  of  the 
statute  which  enacted  that  five  shillings  an 
acre  should  be  received  in  lieu  of  all  manner 
of  tithe  upon  madder. 

As  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe  the 
church,  so  in  many  different  countries  of  Asia 
the  state,  is  principally  supported  by  a  land- 
tax,  proportioned,  not  to  the  rent,  but  to  the 
produce  of  the  land.  In  China,  the  principal 
revenue  of  the  sovereign  consists  in  a  tenth 
part  of  the  produce  of  all  lands  of  the 
empire.  This  tenth  part,  however,  is  esti¬ 
mated  so  very  moderately  that,  in  many 
provinces,  it  is  said  not  to  exceed  a  thirtieth 
part  of  the  ordinary  produce.  The  land-tax 
or  land-rent  which  used  to  be  paid  to  the 
Mahometan  government  of  Bengal,  before 
that  country  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  East  India  Company,  is  said  to  have 
amounted  to  about  a  fifth  part  of  the  prod¬ 
uce.  The  land-tax  of  ancient  Egypt  is  said 
likewise  to  have  amounted  to  a  fifth  part. 

In  Asia,  this  sort  of  land-tax  is  said  to  in¬ 
terest  the  sovereign  in  the  improvement  and 
cultivation  of  land.  The  sovereigns  of  China, 
those  of  Bengal  while  under  the  Mahometan 
government,  and  those  of  ancient  Egypt,  are 
said  accordingly  to  have  been  extremely  at¬ 
tentive  to  the  making  and  maintaining  of 
good  roads  and  navigable  canals,  in  order  to 
increase,  as  much  as  possible,  both  the  quan- 


368  The  Wealth 

tity  and  value  of  every  part  of  the  produce 
of  the  land,  by  procuring  to  every  part  of  it 
the  most  extensive  market  which  their  own 
dominions  could  afford.  The  tithe  of  the 
church  is  divided  into  such  small  portions 
that  no  one  of  its  proprietors  can  have  any 
interest  of  this  kind.  The  parson  of  a  parish 
could  never  find  his  account  in  making  a 
road  or  canal  to  a  distant  part  of  the  country, 
in  order  to  extend  the  market  for  the  produce 
of  his  own  particular  parish.  Such  taxes,  when 
destined  for  the  maintenance  of  the  state, 
have  some  advantages  which  may  serve  in 
some  measure  to  balance  their  inconveniency. 
When  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
church,  they  are  attended  with  nothing  but 
inconveniency. 

Taxes  upon  the  produce  of  land  may  be 
levied  either  in  kind,  or,  according  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  valuation,  in  money. 

The  parson  of  a  parish,  or  a  gentleman  of 
small  fortune  who  lives  upon  his  estate,  may 
sometimes,  perhaps,  find  some  advantage  in 
receiving,  the  one  his  tithe,  and  the  other  his 
rent,  in  kind.  The  quantity  to  be  collected, 
and  the  district  within  which  it  is  to  be  col¬ 
lected,  are  so  small  that  they  both  can  over¬ 
see,  with  their  own  eyes,  the  collection  and 
disposal  of  every  part  of  what  is  due  to  them. 
A  gentleman  of  great  fortune,  who  lived  in 
the  capital,  would  be  in  danger  of  suffering 
much  by  the  neglect,  and  more  by  the  fraud 
of  his  factors  and  agents,  if  the  rents  of  an 
estate  in  a  distant  province  were  to  be  paid 
to  him  in  this  manner.  The  loss  of  the  sover¬ 
eign  from  the  abuse  and  depredation  of  his 
tax-gatherers  would  necessarily  be  much 
greater.  The  servants  of  the  most  careless 
private  person  are,  perhaps,  more  under  the 
eye  of  their  master  than  those  of  the  most 
careful  prince;  and  a  public  revenue  which 
was  paid  in  kind  would  suffer  so  much  from 
the  mismanagement  of  the  collectors  that  a 
very  small  part  of  what  was  levied  upon  the 
people  would  ever  arrive  at  the  treasury  of 
the  prince.  Some  part  of  the  public  revenue 
of  China,  however,  is  said  to  be  paid  in  this 
manner.  The  mandarins  and  other  tax- 
gatherers  will,  no  doubt,  find  their  advantage 
in  continuing  the  practice  of  a  payment 
which  is  so  much  more  liable  to  abuse  than 
any  payment  in  money. 

A  tax  upon  the  produce  of  land  which  is 
levied  in  money  may  be  levied  either  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  valuation  which  varies  with  all  the 
variations  of  the  market  price,  or  according 
to  a  fixed  valuation,  a  bushel  of  wheat,  for 
example,  being  always  valued  at  one  and  the 
same  money  price,  whatever  may  be  the  state 
of  the  market.  The  produce  of  a  tax  levied 
in  the  former  way  will  vary  only  according 
to  the  variations  in  the  real  produce  of  the 


of  Nations 

land,  according  to  the  improvement  or  neg¬ 
lect  of  cultivation.  The  produce  of  a  tax 
levied  in  the  latter  way  will  vary,  not  only 
according  to  the  variations  in  the  produce  of 
the  land,  but  according  to  both  those  in  the 
value  of  the  precious  metals  and  those  in  the 
quantity  of  those  metals  which  is  at  differ¬ 
ent  times  contained  in  coin  of  the  same  de¬ 
nomination.  The  produce  of  the  former  will 
always  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  value 
of  the  real  produce  of  the  land.  The  produce 
of  the  latter  may,  at  different  times,  bear 
very  different  proportions  to  that  value. 

When,  instead  either  of  a  certain  portion 
of  the  produce  of  land,  or  of  the  price  of  a 
certain  portion,  a  certain  sum  of  money  is  to 
be  paid  in  full  compensation  for  all  tax  or 
tithe,  the  tax  becomes,  in  this  case,  exactly 
of  the  same  nature  with  the  land-tax  of  Eng¬ 
land.  It  neither  rises  nor  falls  with  the  rent 
of  the  land.  It  neither  encourages  nor  dis¬ 
courages  improvement.  The  tithe  in  the 
greater  part  of  those  parishes  which  pay  what 
is  called  a  Modus  in  lieu  of  all  other  tithe  is 
a  tax  of  this  kind.  During  the  Mahometan 
government  of  Bengal,  instead  of  the  pay¬ 
ment  in  kind  of  a  fifth  part  of  the  produce, 
a  modus,  and,  it  is  said,  a  very  moderate  one, 
was  established  in  the  greater  part  of  the 
districts  or  zemindaries  of  the  country.  Some 
of  the  servants  of  the  East  India  Company, 
under  pretence  of  restoring  the  public  reve¬ 
nue  to  its  proper  value,  have,  in  some  prov¬ 
inces,  exchanged  this  modus  for  a  payment 
in  kind.  Under  their  management  this  change 
is  likely  both  to  discourage  cultivation,  and 
to  give  new  opportunities  for  abuse  in  the 
collection  of  the  public  revenue  which  has 
fallen  very  much  below  what  it  was  said  to 
have  been  when  it  first  fell  under  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  the  company.  The  servants  of  the 
company  may,  perhaps,  have  profited  by  this 
change,  but  at  the  expense,  it  is  probable, 
both  of  their  masters  and  of  the  country. 

Taxes  upon  the  Rent  of  Houses 

The  rent  of  a  house  may  be  distinguished 
into  two  parts,  of  which  the  one  may  very 
properly  be  called  the  Building-rent;  the  other 
is  commonly  called  the  Ground-rent. 

The  building-rent  is  the  interest  or  profit  of 
the  capital  expended  in  building  the  house. 
In  order  to  put  the  trade  of  a  builder  upon  a 
level  with  other  trades,  it  is  necessary  that 
this  rent  should  be  sufficient,  first,  to  pay  him 
the  same  interest  which  he  would  have  got  for 
his  capital  if  he  had  lent  it  upon  good  secu¬ 
rity;  and,  secondly,  to  keep  the  house  in  con¬ 
stant  repair,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same 
thing,  to  replace,  within  a  certain  term  of 
years,  the  capital  which  had  been  employed 
in  building  it.  The  building-rent,  or  the 


369 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


ordinary  profit  of  building,  is,  therefore, 
everywhere  regulated  by  the  ordinary  inter¬ 
est  of  money.  Where  the  market  rate  of  in¬ 
terest  is  four  per  cent  the  rent  of  a  house 
which,  over  and  above  paying  the  ground-rent, 
affords  six  or  six  and  a  half  per  cent  upon  the 
whole  expense  of  building,  may  perhaps  afford 
a  sufficient  profit  to  the  builder.  Where  the 
market  rate  of  interest  is  five  per  cent,  it  may 
perhaps  require  seven  or  seven  and  a  half 
per  cent.  If,  in  proportion  to  the  interest  of 
money,  the  trade  of  the  builder  affords  at  any 
time  a  much  greater  profit  than  this,  it  will 
soon  draw  so  much  capital  from  other  trades 
as  will  reduce  the  profit  to  its  proper  level. 
If  it  affords  at  any  time  much  less  than  this, 
other  trades  will  soon  draw  so  much  capital 
from  it  as  will  again  raise  that  profit. 

Whatever  part  of  the  whole  rent  of  a  house 
is  over  and  above  what  is  sufficient  for  afford¬ 
ing  this  reasonable  profit  naturally  goes  to 
the  ground-rent;  and  where  the  owner  of 
the  ground  and  the  owner  of  the  building  are 
two  different  persons,  is,  in  most  cases,  com¬ 
pletely  paid  to  the  former.  This  surplus  rent 
is  the  price  which  the  inhabitant  of  the  house 
pays  for  some  real  or  supposed  advantage  of 
the  situation.  In  country  houses  at  a  distance 
from  any  great  town,  where  there  is  plenty  of 
ground  to  choose  upon,  the  ground-rent  is 
scarce  anything,  or  no  more  than  what  the 
ground  which  the  house  stands  upon  would 
pay  if  employed  in  agriculture.  In  country 
villas  in  the  neighborhood  of  some  great 
town,  it  is  sometimes  a  good  deal  higher,  and 
the  peculiar  conveniency  or  beauty  of  situa¬ 
tion  is  there  frequently  very  well  paid  for. 
Ground-rents  are  generally  highest  in  the 
capital,  and  in  those  particular  parts  of  it 
where  there  happens  to  be  the  greatest  de¬ 
mand  for  houses,  whatever  be  the  reason  of 
that  demand,  whether  for  trade  and  business, 
for  pleasure  and  society,  or  for  mere  vanity 
and  fashion. 

A  tax  upon  house-rent,  payable  by  the  ten¬ 
ant  and  proportioned  to  the  whole  rent  of 
each  house,  could  not,  for  any  considerable 
time  at  least,  affect  the  building-rent.  If  the 
builder  did  not  get  his  reasonable  profit,  he 
would  be  obliged  to  quit  the  trade;  which,  by 
raising  the  demand  for  building,  would  in  a 
short  time  bring  back  his  profit  to  its  proper 
level  with  that  of  other  trades.  Neither  would 
such  a  tax  fall  altogether  upon  the  ground- 
rent;  but  it  would  divide  itself  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  fall  partly  upon  the  inhabitant 
of  the  house,  and  partly  upon  the  owner  of 
the  ground. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  a  par¬ 
ticular  person  judges  that  he  can  afford  for 
house-rent  an  expense  of  sixty  pounds  a  year; 
and  let  us  suppose,  too,  that  a  tax  of  four 


shillings  in  the  pound,  or  of  one-fifth,  pay¬ 
able  by  the  inhabitant,  is  laid  upon  house- 
rent.  A  house  of  sixty  pounds  rent  will  in 
this  case  cost  him  seventy-two  pounds  a  year, 
which  is  twelve  pounds  more  than  he  thinks 
he  can  afford.  He  will,  therefore,  content  him¬ 
self  with  a  worse  house,  or  a  house  of  fifty 
pounds  rent,  which,  with  the  additional  ten 
pounds  that  he  must  pay  for  the  tax,  will 
make  up  the  sum  of  sixty  pounds  a  year,  the 
expense  which  he  judges  he  can  afford;  and 
in  order  to  pay  the  tax  he  will  give  up  a 
part  of  the  additional  conveniency  which  he 
might  have  had  from  a  house  of  ten  pounds 
a  year  more  rent.  He  will  give  up,  I  say,  a 
part  of  this  additional  conveniency;  for  he 
will  seldom  be  obliged  to  give  up  the  whole, 
but  will,  in  consequence  of  the  tax,  get  a 
better  house  for  fifty  pounds  a  year  than  he 
could  have  got  if  there  had  been  no  tax. 
For  as  a  tax  of  this  kind,  by  taking  away  this 
particular  competitor,  must  diminish  the  com¬ 
petition  for  houses  of  sixty  pounds  rent,  so 
it  must  likewise  diminish  it  for  those  of  fifty 
pounds  rent,  and  in  the  same  manner  for 
those  of  all  other  rents,  except  the  lowest 
rent,  for  which  it  would  for  some  time  in¬ 
crease  the  competition.  But  the  rents  of 
every  class  of  houses  for  which  the  competi¬ 
tion  was  diminished  would  necessarily  be 
more  or  less  reduced.  As  no  part  of  this  re¬ 
duction,  however,  could,  for  any  considerable 
time  at  least,  affect  the  building-rent,  the 
whole  of  it  must  in  the  long-run  necessarily 
fall  upon  the  ground-rent.  The  final  payment 
of  this  tax,  therefore,  would  fall  partly  upon 
the  inhabitant  of  the  house,  who,  in  order  to 
pay  his  share,  would  be  obliged  to  give  up  a 
part  of  his  conveniency,  and  partly  upon  the 
owner  of  the  ground,  who,  in  order  to  pay  his 
share,  would  be  obliged  to  give  up  a  part  of 
his  revenue.  In  what  proportion  this  final 
payment  would  be  divided  between  them  it 
is  not  perhaps  very  easy  to  ascertain.  The 
division  would  probably  be  very  different  in 
different  circumstances,  and  a  tax  of  this  kind 
might,  according  to  those  different  circum¬ 
stances,  affect  very  unequally  both  the  in¬ 
habitant  of  the  house  and  the  owner  of  the 
ground. 

The  inequality  with  which  a  tax  of  this 
kind  might  fall  upon  the  owners  of  different 
ground-rents  would  arise  altogether  from  the 
accidental  inequality  of  this  division.  But 
the  inequality  with  which  it  might  fall  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  different  houses  would 
arise  not  only  from  this,  but  from  another 
cause.  The  proportion  of  the  expense  of 
house-rent  to  the  whole  expense  of  living  is 
different  in  the  different  degrees  of  fortune.  It 
is  perhaps  highest  in  the  highest  degree,  and 
it  diminishes  gradually  through  the  inferior 


370  The  Wealth 

degrees,  so  as  in  general  to  be  lowest  in  the 
lowest  degree.  The  necessaries  of  life  occa¬ 
sion  the  great  expense  of  the  poor.  They  find 
it  difficult  to  get  food,  and  the  greater  part 
of  their  little  revenue  is  spent  in  getting  it. 
The  luxuries  and  vanities  of  life  occasion  the 
principal  expense  of  the  rich,  and  a  magnifi¬ 
cent  house  embellishes  and  sets  off  to  the  best 
advantage  all  the  other  luxuries  and  vanities 
which  they  possess.  A  tax  upon  house-rents, 
therefore,  would  in  general  fall  heaviest  upon 
the  rich;  and  in  this  sort  of  inequality  there 
would  not,  perhaps,  be  anything  very  un¬ 
reasonable.  It  is  not  very  unreasonable  that 
the  rich  should  contribute  to  the  public  ex¬ 
pense,  not  only  in  proportion  to  their  reve¬ 
nue,  but  something  more  than  in  that  pro¬ 
portion. 

The  rent  of  houses,  though  it  in  some  re¬ 
spects  resembles  the  rent  of  land,  is  in  one 
respect  essentially  different  from  it.  The  rent 
of  land  is  paid  for  the  use  of  a  productive 
subject.  The  land  which  pays  it  produces  it. 
The  rent  of  houses  is  paid  for  the  use  of  an 
unproductive  subject.  Neither  the  house  nor 
the  ground  which  it  stands  upon  produce 
anything.  The  person  who  pays  the  rent, 
therefore,  must  draw  it  from  some  other 
source  of  revenue  distinct  from  the  independ¬ 
ent  of  this  subject.  A  tax  upon  the  rent  of 
houses,  so  far  as  it  falls  upon  the  inhabit¬ 
ants,  must  be  drawn  from  the  same  source  as 
the  rent  itself,  and  must  be  paid  from  their 
revenue,  whether  derived  from  the  wages  of 
labour,  the  profits  of  stock,  or  the  rent  of 
land.  So  far  as  it  falls  upon  the  inhabitants, 
it  is  one  of  those  taxes  which  fall,  not  upon 
one  only,  but  indifferently  upon  all  the  three 
different  sources  of  revenue,  and  is  in  every 
respect  of  the  same  nature  as  a  tax  upon  any 
other  sort  of  consumable  commodities.  In 
general  there  is  not,  perhaps,  any  one  article 
of  expense  or  consumption  by  which  the 
liberality  or  narrowness  of  a  man’s  whole  ex¬ 
pense  can  be  better  judged  of  than  by  his 
house-rent.  A  proportional  tax  upon  this 
particular  article  of  expense  might,  perhaps, 
produce  a  more  considerable  revenue  than 
any  which  has  hitherto  been  drawn  from  it 
in  any  part  of  Europe.  If  the  tax  indeed  was 
very  high,  the  greater  part  of  people  would 
endeavour  to  evade  it,  as  much  as  they  could, 
by  contenting  themselves  with  smaller  houses, 
and  by  turning  the  greater  part  of  their  ex¬ 
pense  into  some  other  channel. 

The  rent  of  houses  might  easily  be  ascer¬ 
tained  with  sufficient  accuracy  by  a  policy  of 
the  same  kind  with  that  which  would  be 
necessary  for  ascertaining  the  ordinary  rent 
of  land.  Houses  not  inhabited  ought  to  pay 
no  tax.  A  tax  upon  them  would  fall  alto¬ 
gether  upon  the  proprietor,  who  would  thus 


of  Nations 

be  taxed  for  a  subject  which  afforded  him 
neither  conveniency  nor  revenue.  Houses  in¬ 
habited  by  the  proprietor  ought  to  be  rated, 
not  according  to  the  expense  which  they 
might  have  cost  in  building,  but  according  to 
the  rent  which  an  equitable  arbitration  might 
judge  them  likely  to  bring  if  leased  to  a  ten¬ 
ant.  If  rated  according  to  the  expense  which 
they  may  have  cost  in  building,  a  tax  of 
three  or  four  shillings  in  the  pound,  joined 
with  other  taxes,  would  ruin  almost  all  the 
rich  and  great  families  of  this,  and,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  of  every  other  civilised  country.  Who¬ 
ever  will  examine,  with  attention,  the  differ¬ 
ent  town  and  country  houses  of  some  of  the 
richest  and  greatest  families  in  this  country 
will  find  that,  at  the  rate  of  only  six  and  a 
half  or  seven  per  cent  upon  the  original  ex¬ 
pense  of  building,  their  house-rent  is  nearly 
equal  to  the  whole  net  rent  of  their  estates. 
It  is  the  accumulated  expense  of  several  suc¬ 
cessive  generations,  laid  out  upon  objects  of 
great  beauty  and  magnificance,  indeed;  but, 
in  proportion  to  what  they  cost,  of  very  small 
exchangeable  value.1 

Ground-rents  are  a  still  more  proper  sub¬ 
ject  of  taxation  than  the  rent  of  houses.  A 
tax  upon  ground-rents  would  not  raise  the 
rents  of  houses.  It  would  fall  altogether 
upon  the  owner  of  the  ground-rent,  who  acts 
always  as  a  monopolist,  and  exacts  the  great¬ 
est  rent  which  can  be  got  for  the  use  of  his 
ground.  More  or  less  can  be  got  for  it  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  competitors  happen  to  be 
richer  or  poorer,  or  can  afford  to  gratify  their 
fancy  for  a  particular  spot  of  ground  at  a 
greater  or  smaller  expense.  In  every  country 
the  greatest  number  of  rich  competitors  is  in 
the  capital,  and  it  is  there  accordingly  that 
the  highest  ground-rents  are  always  to  be 
found.  As  the  wealth  of  those  competitors 
would  in  no  respect  be  increased  by  a  tax 
upon  ground-rents,  they  would  not  probably 
be  disposed  to  pay  more  for  the  use  of  the 
ground.  Whether  the  tax  was  to  be  advanced 
by  the  inhabitant,  or  by  the  owner  of  the 
ground,  would  be  of  little  importance.  The 
more  the  inhabitant  was  obliged  to  pay  for 
the  tax,  the  less  he  would  incline  to  pay  for 
the  ground;  so  that  the  final  payment  of  the 
tax  would  fall  altogether  upon  the  owner  of 
the  ground-rent.  The  ground-rents  of  un¬ 
inhabited  houses  ought  to  pay  no  tax. 

Both  ground-rents  and  the  ordinary  rent 
of  land  are  a  species  of  revenue  which  the 
owner,  in  many  cases,  enjoys  without  any 
care  or  attention  of  his  own.  Though  a  part 
of  this  revenue  should  be  taken  from  him  in 
order  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  state,  no 

1  Since  the  first  publication  of  this  book,  a  tax 
nearly  upon  the  above-mentioned  principles  has 
been  imposed. 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


discouragement  will  thereby  be  given  to  any 
sort  of  industry.  The  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  society,  the  real  wealth 
and  revenue  of  the  great  body  of  the  people, 
might  be  the  same  after  such  a  tax  as  before. 
Ground-rents  and  the  ordinary  rent  of  land 
are,  therefore,  perhaps,  the  species  of  reve¬ 
nue  which  can  best  bear  to  have  a  peculiar 
tax  imposed  upon  them. 

Ground-rents  seem,  in  this  respect,  a  more 
proper  subject  of  peculiar  taxation  than  even 
the  ordinary  rent  of  land.  The  ordinary  rent 
of  land  is,  in  many  cases,  owing  partly  at 
least  to  the  attention  and  good  management 
of  the  landlord.  A  very  heavy  tax  might  dis¬ 
courage  too  much  this  attention  and  good 
management.  Ground-rents,  so  far  as  they 
exceed  the  ordinary  rent  of  land,  are  alto¬ 
gether  owing  to  the  good  government  of  the 
sovereign,  which,  by  protecting  the  industry 
either  of  the  whole  people,  or  of  the  inhabit¬ 
ants  of  some  particular  place,  enables  them 
to  pay  so  much  more  than  its  real  value  for 
the  ground  which  they  build  their  houses 
upon;  or  to  make  to  its  owner  so  much  more 
than  compensation  for  the  loss  which  he 
might  sustain  by  this  use  of  it.  Nothing  can 
be  more  reasonable  than  that  a  fund  which 
owes  its  existence  to  the  good  government  of 
the  state  should  be  taxed  peculiarly,  or  should 
contribute  something  more  than  the  greater 
part  of  other  funds,  towards  the  support  of 
that  government. 

Though,  in  many  different  countries  of 
Europe,  taxes  have  been  imposed  upon  the 
rent  of  houses,  I  do  not  know  of  any  in  which 
ground-rents  have  been  considered  as  a  sep¬ 
arate  subject  of  taxation.  The  contrivers  of 
taxes  have,  probably,  found  some  difficulty  in 
ascertaining  what  part  of  the  rent  ought  to 
be  considered  as  ground-rent,  and  what  part 
ought  to  be  considered  as  building-rent.  It 
should  not,  however,  seem  very  difficult  to 
distinguish  those  two  parts  of  the  rent  from 
one  another. 

In  Great  Britain  the  rent  of  houses  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  taxed  in  the  same  proportion  as 
the  rent  of  land  by  what  is  called  the  annual 
land-tax.  The  valuation,  according  to  which 
each  different  parish  and  district  is  assessed 
to  this  tax,  is  always  the  same.  It  was  origin¬ 
ally  extremely  unequal,  and  it  still  continues 
to  be  so.  Through  the  greater  part  of  the 
kingdom  this  tax  falls  still  more  lightly  upon 
the  rent  of  houses  than  upon  that  of  land. 
In  some  few  districts  only,  which  were  origi¬ 
nally  rated  high,  and  in  which  the  rents  of 
houses  have  fallen  considerably,  the  land-tax 
of  three  or  four  shillings  in  the  pound  is  said 
to  amount  to  an  equal  proportion  of  the  real 
rent  of  houses.  Untenanted  houses,  though 
by  law  subject  to  the  tax,  are,  in  most  dis¬ 


371 

tricts,  exempted  from  it  by  the  lavour  of  the 
assessors;  and  this  exemption  sometimes  oc¬ 
casions  some  little  variation  in  the  rate  of 
particular  houses,  though  that  of  the  district 
is  always  the  same.  Improvements  of  rent, 
by  new  buildings,  repairs,  etc.,  go  to  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  the  district,  which  occasions  still 
further  variations  in  the  rate  of  particular 
houses. 

In  the  province  of  Holland  every  house  is 
taxed  at  two  and  a  half  per  cent  of  its  value, 
without  any  regard  either  to  the  rent  which 
it  actually  pays,  or  to  the  circumstances  of 
its  being  tenanted  or  un tenanted.  There 
seems  to  be  a  hardship  in  obliging  the  pro¬ 
prietor  to  pay  a  tax  for  an  untenanted  house, 
from  which  he  can  derive  no  revenue,  espe¬ 
cially  so  very  heavy  a  tax.  In  Holland,  where 
the  market  rate  of  interest  does  not  exceed 
three  per  cent,  two  and  a  half  per  cent  upon 
the  whole  value  of  the  house  must,  in  most 
cases,  amount  to  more  than  a  third  of  the 
building-rent,  perhaps  of  the  whole  rent.  The 
valuation,  indeed,  according  to  which  the 
houses  are  rated,  though  very  unequal,  is 
said  to  be  always  below  the  real  value.  When 
a  house  is  rebuilt,  improved,  or  enlarged, 
there  is  a  new  valuation,  and  the  tax  is  rated 
accordingly. 

The  contrivers  of  the  several  taxes  which 
in  England  have,  at  different  times,  been  im¬ 
posed  upon  houses,  seem  to  have  imagined 
that  there  was  some  great  difficulty  in  ascer¬ 
taining,  with  tolerable  exactness,  what  was 
the  real  rent  of  every  house.  They  have  regu¬ 
lated  their  taxes,  therefore,  according  to  some 
more  obvious  circumstances,  such  as  they  had 
probably  imagined  would,  in  most  cases,  bear 
some  proportion  to  the  rent. 

The  first  tax  of  this  kind  was  hearth- 
money,  or  a  tax  of  two  shillings  upon  every 
hearth.  In  order  to  ascertain  how  many 
hearths  were  in  the  house,  it  was  necessary 
that  the  tax-gatherer  should  enter  every  room 
in  it.  This  odious  visit  rendered  the  tax  odious. 
Soon  after  the  revolution,  therefore,  it  was 
abolished  as  a  badge  of  slavery. 

The  next  tax  of  this  kind  was  a  tax  of 
two  shillings  upon  every  dwelling-house  in¬ 
habited.  A  house  with  ten  windows  to  pay 
four  shillings  more.  A  house  with  twenty 
windows  and  upwards  to  pay  eight  shillings. 
This  tax  was  afterwards  so  far  altered  that 
houses  with  twenty  windows,  and  with  less 
than  thirty,  were  ordered  to  pay  ten  shillings, 
and  those  with  thirty  windows  and  upwards 
to  pay  twenty  shillings.  The  number  of  win¬ 
dows  can,  in  most  cases,  be  counted  from  the 
outside,  and,  in  all  cases,  without  entering 
every  room  in  the  house.  The  visit  of  the 

1Memoires  concernant  les  droits,  etc.  p.  223. 


872 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


tax-gatherer,  therefore,  was  less  offensive  in 
this  tax  than  in  the  hearth-money. 

This  tax  was  afterwards  repealed,  and  in 
the  room  of  it  was  established  the  window- 
tax,  which  has  undergone,  too,  several  altera¬ 
tions  and  augmentations.  The  window-tax, 
as  it  stands  at  present  (January  1775),  over 
and  above  the  duty  of  three  shillings  upon 
every  house  in  England,  and  of  one  shilling 
upon  every  house  in  Scotland,  lays  a  duty 
upon  every  window,  which,  in  England,  aug¬ 
ments  gradually  from  twopence,  the  lowest 
rate,  upon  houses  with  not  more  than  seven 
windows,  to  two  shillings,  the  highest  rate, 
upon  houses  with  twenty-five  windows  and 
upwards. 

The  principal  objection  to  all  such  taxes 
is  their  inequality,  an  inequality  of  the  worst 
kind,  as  they  must  frequently  fall  much  heav¬ 
ier  upon  the  poor  than  upon  the  rich.  A 
house  of  ten  pounds  rent  in  a  country  town 
may  sometimes  have  more  windows  than  a 
house  of  five  hundred  pounds  rent  in  London; 


and  though  the  inhabitant  of  the  former  is 
likely  to  be  a  much  poorer  man  than  that  of 
the  latter,  yet  so  far  as  his  contribution  is 
regulated  by  the  window-tax,  he  must  con¬ 
tribute  more  to  the  support  of  the  state. 
Such  taxes  are,  therefore,  directly  contrary 
to  the  first  of  the  four  maxims  above  men¬ 
tioned.  They  do  not  seem  to  offend  much 
against  any  of  the  other  three. 

The  natural  tendency  of  the  window-tax, 
and  of  all  other  taxes  upon  houses,  is  to 
lower  rents.  The  more  a  man  pays  for  the 
tax,  the  less,  it  is  evident,  he  can  afford  to 
pay  for  the  rent.  Since  the  imposition  of  the 
window-tax,  however,  the  rents  of  houses 
have  upon  the  whole  risen,  more  or  less,  in 
almost  every  town  and  village  of  Great 
Britain  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  Such 
has  been  almost  everywhere  the  increase  of 
the  demand  for  houses,  that  it  has  raised  the 
rents  more  than  the  window-tax  could  sink 
them;  one  of  the  many  proofs  of  the  great 
prosperity  of  the  country,  and  of  the  in¬ 
creasing  revenue  of  its  inhabitants.  Had  it 
not  been  for  the  tax,  rents  would  probably 
have  risen  still  higher. 


Article  II 

Taxes  on  Profit ,  or  upon  the  Revenue  arising  from  Stock 


The  revenue  or  profit  arising  from  stock 
naturally  divides  itself  into  two  parts;  that 
which  pays  the  interest,  and  which  belongs 
to  the  owner  of  the  stock,  and  that  surplus 
part  which  is  over  and  above  what  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  paying  the  interest. 

This  latter  part  of  profit  is  evidently  a  sub¬ 
ject  not  taxable  directly.  It  is  the  compensa¬ 
tion,  and  in  most  cases  it  is  no  more  than  a 
very  moderate  compensation,  for  the  risk  and 
trouble  of  employing  the  stock.  The  em¬ 
ployer  must  have  this  compensation,  other¬ 
wise  he  cannot,  consistently  with  his  own  in¬ 
terest,  continue  the  employment.  If  he  was 
taxed  directly,  therefore,  in  proportion  to  the 
whole  profit,  he  would  be  obliged  either  to 
raise  the  rate  of  his  profit,  or  to  charge  the 
tax  upon  the  interest  of  money;  that  is,  to 
pay  less  interest.  If  he  raised  the  rate  of  his 
profit  in  proportion  to  the  tax,  the  whole  tax, 
though  it  might  be  advanced  by  him,  would 
be  finally  paid  by  one  or  other  of  two  differ¬ 
ent  sets  of  people,  according  to  the  different 
ways  in  which  he  might  employ  the  stock  of 
which  he  had  the  management.  If  he  em¬ 
ployed  it  as  a  farming  stock  in  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  land,  he  could  raise  the  rate  of  his 
profit  only  by  retaining  a  greater  portion, 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  price 
of  a  greater  portion  of  the  produce  of  the 
land;  and  as  this  could  be  done  only  by  a 
reduction  of  rent,  the  final  payment  of  the 
tax  would  fall  upon  the  landlord.  If  he  em¬ 


ployed  it  as  a  mercantile  or  manufacturing 
stock,  he  could  raise  the  rate  of  his  profit 
only  by  raising  the  price  of  his  goods;  in 
which  case  the  final  payment  of  the  tax  would 
fall  altogether  upon  the  consumers  of  those 
goods.  If  he  did  not  raise  the  rate  of  his  prof¬ 
it,  he  would  be  obliged  to  charge  the  whole 
tax  upon  that  part  of  it  which  was  allotted 
for  the  interest  of  money.  He  could  afford 
less  interest  for  whatever  stock  he  borrowed, 
and  the  whole  weight  of  the  tax  would  in  this 
case  fall  ultimately  upon  the  interest  of 
money.  So  far  as  he  could  not  relieve  himself 
from  the  tax  in  the  one  way,  he  would  be 
obliged  to  relieve  himself  in  the  other. 

The  interest  of  money  seems  at  first  sight 
a  subject  equally  capable  of  being  taxed  di¬ 
rectly  as  the  rent  of  land.  Like  the  rent  of 
land,  it  is  a  net  produce  which  remains  after 
completely  compensating  the  whole  risk  and 
trouble  of  employing  the  stock.  As  a  tax 
upon  the  rent  of  land  cannot  raise  rents;  be¬ 
cause  the  net  produce  which  remains  after  re¬ 
placing  the  stock  of  the  farmer,  together  with 
his  reasonable  profit,  cannot  be  greater  after 
the  tax  than  before  it,  so,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  a  tax  upon  the  interest  of  money  could 
not  raise  the  rate  of  interest;  the  quantity  of 
stock  or  money  in  the  country,  like  the 
quantity  of  land,  being  supposed  to  remain 
the  same  after  the  tax  as  before  it.  The 
ordinary  rate  of  profit,  it  has  been  shown  in 
the  first  book,  is  everywhere  regulated  by 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


the  quantity  of  stock  to  be  employed  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  quantity  of  the  employment, 
or  of  the  business  which  must  be  done  by  it. 
But  the  quantity  of  the  employment,  or  of 
the  business  to  be  done  by  stock,  could 
neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  by  any 
tax  upon  the  interest  of  money.  If  the  quanti¬ 
ty  of  the  stock  to  be  employed,  therefore, 
was  neither  increased  nor  diminished  by  it, 
the  ordinary  rate  of  profit  would  necessarily 
remain  the  same.  But  the  portion  of  this 
profit  necessary  for  compensating  the  risk  and 
trouble  of  the  employer  would  likewise  re¬ 
main  the  same,  that  risk  and  trouble  being 
in  no  respect  altered.  The  residue,  therefore, 
that  portion  which  belongs  to  the  owner  of 
the  stock,  and  which  pays  the  interest  of 
money,  would  necessarily  remain  the  same 
too.  At  first  sight,  therefore,  the  interest  of 
money  seems  to  be  a  subject  as  fit  to  be  taxed 
directly  as  the  rent  of  land. 

There  are,  however,  two  different  circum¬ 
stances  which  render  the  interest  of  money 
a  much  less  proper  subject  of  direct  taxation 
than  the  rent  of  land. 

First,  the  quantity  and  value  of  the  land 
which  any  man  possesses  can  never  be  a 
secret,  and  can  always  be  ascertained  with 
great  exactness.  But  the  whole  amount  of  the 
capital  stock  which  he  possesses  is  almost  al¬ 
ways  a  secret,  and  can  scarce  ever  be  ascer¬ 
tained  with  tolerable  exactness.  It  is  liable, 
besides,  to  almost  continual  variations.  A 
year  seldom  passes  away,  frequently  not  a 
month,  sometimes  scarce  a  single  day,  in  which 
it  does  not  rise  or  fall  more  or  less.  An  in¬ 
quisition  into  every  man’s  private  circum¬ 
stances,  and  an  inquisition  which,  in  order  to 
accommodate  the  tax  to  them,  watched  over 
all  the  fluctuations  of  his  fortunes,  would  be  a 
source  of  such  continual  and  endless  vexation 
as  no  people  could  support. 

Secondly,  land  is  a  subject  which  cannot 
be  removed;  whereas  stock  easily  may.  The 
proprietor  of  land  is  necessarily  a  citizen  of 
the  particular  country  in  which  his  estate 
lies.  The  proprietor  of  stock  is  properly  a  citi¬ 
zen  of  the  world,  and  is  not  necessarily  at¬ 
tached  to  any  particular  country.  He  would 
be  apt  to  abandon  the  country  in  which  he 
was  exposed  to  a  vexatious  inquisition,  in 
order  to  be  assessed  to  a  burdensome  tax, 
and  would  remove  his  stock  to  some  other 
country  where  he  could  either  carry  on  his 
business,  or  enjoy  his  fortune  more  at  his 
ease.  By  removing  his  stock  he  would  put  an 
end  to  all  the  industry  which  it  had  main¬ 
tained  in  the  country  which  he  left.  Stock 
cultivates  land;  stock  employs  labour.  A  tax 
which  tended  to  drive  away  stock  from  any 
particular  country  would  so  far  tend  to  dry 
up  every  source  of  revenue  both  to  the  sov¬ 


373 

ereign  and  to  the  society.  Not  only  the  profits 
of  stock,  but  the  rent  of  land  and  the  wages 
of  labour  would  necessarily  be  more  or  less 
diminished  by  its  removal. 

The  nations,  accordingly,  who  have  at¬ 
tempted  to  tax  the  revenue  arising  from 
stock,  instead  of  any  severe  inquisition  of 
this  kind,  have  been  obliged  to  content  them¬ 
selves  with  some  very  loose,  and,  therefore, 
more  or  less  arbitrary,  estimation.  The  ex¬ 
treme  inequality  and  uncertainty  of  a  tax 
assessed  in  this  manner  can  be  compensated 
only  by  its  extreme  moderation,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  every  man  finds  himself 
rated  so  very  much  below  his  real  revenue 
that  he  gives  himself  little  disturbance  though 
his  neighbour  should  be  rated  somewhat 
lower. 

By  what  is  called  the  land-tax  in  England, 
it  was  intended  that  stock  should  be  taxed  in 
the  same  proportion  as  land.  When  the  tax 
upon  land  was  at  four  shillings  in  the  pound, 
or  at  one-fifth  of  the  supposed  rent,  it  was 
intended  that  stock  should  be  taxed  at  one- 
fifth  of  the  supposed  interest.  When  the  pres¬ 
ent  annual  land-tax  was  first  imposed,  the 
legal  rate  of  interest  was  six  per  cent.  Every 
hundred  pounds  stock,  accordingly,  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  taxed  at  twenty-four  shillings, 
the  fifth  part  of  six  pounds.  Since  the  legal 
rate  of  interest  has  been  reduced  to  five  per 
cent  every  hundred  pounds  stock  is  supposed 
to  be  taxed  at  twenty  shillings  only.  The 
sum  to  be  raised  by  what  is  called  the  land- 
tax  was  divided  between  the  country  and  the 
principal  towns.  The  greater  part  of  it  was 
laid  upon  the  country;  and  of  what  was  laid 
upon  the  towns,  the  greater  part  was  as¬ 
sessed  upon  the  houses.  What  remained  to  be 
assessed  upon  the  stock  or  trade  of  the  towns 
(for  the  stock  upon  the  land  was  not  meant 
to  be  taxed)  was  very  much  below  the  real 
value  of  that  stock  or  trade.  Whatever  in¬ 
equalities,  therefore,  there  might  be  in  the 
original  assessment  gave  little  disturbance. 
Every  parish  and  district  still  continues  to 
be  rated  for  its  land,  its  houses,  and  its  stock, 
according  to  the  original  assessment;  and  the 
almost  universal  prosperity  of  the  country, 
which  in  most  places  has  raised  very  much 
the  value  of  all  these,  has  rendered  those  in¬ 
equalities  of  still  less  importance  now.  The 
rate,  too,  upon  each  district  continuing  al¬ 
ways  the  same,  the  uncertainty  of  this  tax 
so  far  as  it  might  be  assessed  upon  the  stock 
of  any  individual,  has  been  very  much  di¬ 
minished,  as  well  as  rendered  of  much  less 
consequence.  If  the  greater  part  of  the  lands 
of  England  are  not  rated  to  the  land-tax  at 
half  their  actual  value,  the  greater  part  of 
the  stock  of  England  is,  perhaps,  scarce  rated 
at  the  fiftieth  part  of  its  actual  value.  In 


374 


The  Wealth 

some  towns  the  whole  land-tax  is  assessed 
upon  houses,  as  in  Westminster,  where  stock 
and  trade  are  free.  It  is  otherwise  in  London. 

In  all  countries  a  severe  inquisition  into 
the  circumstances  of  private  persons  has  been 
carefully  avoided. 

At  Hamburg1  every  inhabitant  is  obliged 
to  pay  to  the  state  one-fourth  per  cent  of  all 
that  lie  possesses;  and  as  the  wealth  of  the 
people  of  Hamburg  consists  principally  in 
stock,  this  tax  may  be  considered  as  a  tax 
upon  stock.  Every  man  assesses  himself,  and, 
in  the  presence  of  the  magistrate,  puts  annu¬ 
ally  into  the  public  coffer  a  certain  sum  of 
money  which  he  declares  upon  oath  to  be 
one-fourth  per  cent  of  all  that  he  possesses, 
but  without  declaring  what  it  amounts  to, 
or  being  liable  to  any  examination  upon  that 
subject.  This  tax  is  generally  supposed  to  be 
paid  with  great  fidelity.  In  a  small  republic, 
where  the  people  have  entire  confidence  in 
their  magistrates,  are  convinced  of  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  the  tax  for  the  support  of  the  state, 
and  believe  that  it  will  be  faithfully  applied 
to  that  purpose,  such  conscientious  and  vol¬ 
untary  payment  may  sometimes  be  expected. 
It  is  not  peculiar  to  the  people  of  Hamburg. 

The  canton  of  Unterwald  in  Switzerland  is 
frequently  ravaged  by  storms  and  inun¬ 
dations,  and  is  thereby  exposed  to  extraor¬ 
dinary  expenses.  Upon  such  occasions  the 
people  assemble,  and  every  one  is  said  to  de¬ 
clare  with  the  greatest  frankness  what  he  is 
worth  in  order  to  be  taxed  accordingly.  At 
Zurich  the  law  orders  that,  in  cases  of  neces¬ 
sity,  every  one  should  be  taxed  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  his  revenue — the  amount  of  which  he 
is  obliged  to  declare  upon  oath.  They  have 
no  suspicion,  it  is  said,  that  any  of  their 
fellow-citizens  will  deceive  them.  At  Basel 
the  principal  revenue  of  the  state  arises  from 
a  small  custom  upon  goods  exported.  All  the 
citizens  make  oath  that  they  will  pay  every 
three  months  all  the  taxes  imposed  by  the 
law.  All  merchants  and  even  all  inkeepers 
are  trusted  with  keeping  themselves  the  ac¬ 
count  of  the  goods  which  they  sell  either 
within  or  without  the  territory.  At  the  end 
of  every  three  months  they  send  this  account 
to  the  treasurer  with  the  amount  of  the  tax 
computed  at  the  bottom  of  it.  It  is  not  sus¬ 
pected  that  the  revenue  suffers  by  this  con¬ 
fidence.2 

To  oblige  every  citizen  to  declare  publicly 
upon  oath  the  amount  of  his  fortune  must 
not,  it  seems,  in  those  Swiss  cantons  be  reck¬ 
oned  a  hardship.  At  Hamburg  it  would  be 
reckoned  the  greatest.  Merchants  engaged  in 

1  Mernoires  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  i,  p. 
74. 

2  Mernoires  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  i,  pp. 
1G3,  ICO,  171. 


of  Nations 

the  hazardous  projects  of  trade  all  tremble 
at  the  thoughts  of  being  obliged  at  all  times 
to  expose  the  real  state  of  their  circumstances. 
The  ruin  of  their  credit  and  the  miscarriage 
of  their  projects,  they  foresee,  would  too  often 
be  the  consequence.  A  sober  and  parsimonious 
people,  who  are  strangers  to  all  such  projects, 
do  not  feel  that  they  have  occasion  for  any 
such  concealment. 

In  Holland,  soon  after  the  exaltation  of 
the  late  Prince  of  Orange  to  the  stadtholder- 
ship,  a  tax  of  two  per  cent,  or  the  fiftieth 
penny,  as  it  was  called,  was  imposed  upon  the 
whole  substance  of  every  citizen.  Every  citi¬ 
zen  assessed  himself  and  paid  his  tax  in  the 
same  manner  as  at  Hamburg,  and  it  was  in 
general  supposed  to  have  been  paid  with 
great  fidelity.  The  people  had  at  that  time 
the  greatest  affection  for  their  new  govern¬ 
ment,  which  they  had  just  established  by  a 
general  insurrection.  The  tax  was  to  be  paid 
but  once,  in  order  to  relieve  the  state  in  a 
particular  exigency.  It  was,  indeed,  too  heavy 
to  be  permanent.  In  a  country  where  the 
market  rate  of  interest  seldom  exceeds  three 
per  cent,  a  tax  of  two  per  cent  amounts  to 
thirteen  shillings  and  fourpence  in  the  pound 
upon  the  highest  net  revenue  which  is  com¬ 
monly  drawn  from  stock.  It  is  a  tax  which 
very  few  people  could  pay  without  encroach¬ 
ing  more  or  less  upon  their  capitals.  In  a  par¬ 
ticular  exigency  the  people  may,  from  great 
public  zeal,  make  a  great  effort,  and  give  up 
even  a  part  of  their  capital  in  order  to  relieve 
the  state.  But  it  is  impossible  that  they  should 
continue  to  do  so  for  any  considerable  time; 
and  if  they  did,  the  tax  would  soon  ruin  them 
so  completely  as  to  render  them  altogether 
incapable  of  supporting  the  state. 

The  tax  upon  stock  imposed  by  the  Land- 
tax  Bill  in  England,  though  it  is  proportioned 
to  the  capital,  is  not  intended  to  diminish  or 
take  away  any  part  of  that  capital.  It  is 
meant  only  to  be  a  tax  upon  the  interest  of 
money  proportioned  to  that  upon  the  rent  of 
land,  so  that  when  the  latter  is  at  four  shil¬ 
lings  in  the  pound,  the  former  may  be  at  four 
shillings  in  the  pound  too.  The  tax  at  Ham¬ 
burg  and  the  still  more  moderate  taxes  of 
Unterwald  and  Zurich  are  meant,  in  the  same 
manner,  to  be  taxes,  not  upon  the  capital, 
but  upon  the  interest  or  net  revenue  of  stock. 
That  of  Holland  was  meant  to  be  a  tax  upon 
the  capital. 

Taxes  upon  the  Profit  of  particular  Employments 

In  some  countries  extraordinary  taxes  are 
imposed  upon  the  profits  of  stock,  sometimes 
when  employed  in  particular  branches  of 
trade,  and  sometimes  when  employed  in  ag¬ 
riculture. 

Of  the  former  kind  are  in  England  the  tax 


The  Sources 

upon  hawkers  and  pedlars,  that  upon  hack¬ 
ney  coaches  and  chairs,  and  that  which  the 
keepers  of  ale-houses  pay  for  a  licence  to  re¬ 
tail  ale  and  spirituous  liquors.  During  the 
late  war,  another  tax  of  the  same  kind  was 
proposed  upon  shops.  The  war  having  been 
undertaken,  it  was  said,  in  defence  of  the 
trade  of  the  country,  the  merchants,  who 
were  to  profit  by  it,  ought  to  contribute 
towards  the  support  of  it. 

A  tax,  however,  upon  the  profits  of  stock 
employed  in  any  particular  branch  of  trade 
can  never  fall  finally  upon  the  dealers  (who 
must  in  all  ordinary  cases  have  their  reason¬ 
able  profit,  and  where  the  competition  is  free 
can  seldom  have  more  than  that  profit) ,  but 
always  upon  the  consumers,  who  must  be 
obliged  to  pay  in  the  price  of  the  goods  the 
tax  which  the  dealer  advances;  and  gen¬ 
erally  with  some  overcharge. 

A  tax  of  this  kind  when  it  is  proportioned 
to  the  trade  of  the  dealer  is  finally  paid  by 
the  consumer,  and  occasions  no  oppression  to 
the  dealer.  When  it  is  not  so  proportioned, 
but  is  the  same  upon  all  dealers,  though  in 
this  case,  too,  it  is  finally  paid  by  the  con¬ 
sumer,  yet  it  favours  the  great,  and  occasions 
some  oppression  to  the  small  dealer.  The  tax 
of  five  shillings  a  week  upon  every  hackney 
coach,  and  that  of  ten  shillings  a  year  upon 
every  hackney  chair,  so  far  as  it  is  advanced 
by  the  different  keepers  of  such  coaches  and 
chairs,  is  exactly  enough  proportioned  to  the 
extent  of  their  respective  dealings.  It  neither 
favours  the  great,  nor  oppresses  the  smaller 
dealer.  The  tax  of  twenty  shillings  a  year  for 
a  licence  to  sell  ale;  of  forty  shillings  for  a 
licence  to  sell  spirituous  liquors;  and  of  forty 
shillings  more  for  a  licence  to  sell  wine,  being 
the  same  upon  all  retailers,  must  necessarily 
give  some  advantage  to  the  great,  and  occa¬ 
sion  some  oppression  to  the  small  dealers.  The 
former  must  find  it  more  easy  to  get  back  the 
tax  in  the  price  of  their  goods  than  the  latter. 
The  moderation  of  the  tax,  however,  renders 
this  inequality  of  less  importance,  and  it  may 
to  many  people  appear  not  improper  to  give 
some  discouragement  to  the  multiplication 
of  little  ale-houses.  The  tax  upon  shops,  it 
was  intended,  should  be  the  same  upon  all 
shops.  It  could  not  well  have  been  otherwise. 

It  would  have  been  impossible  to  proportion 
with  tolerable  exactness  the  tax  upon  a  shop 
to  the  extent  of  the  trade  carried  on  in  it 
without  such  an  inquisition  as  would  have 
been  altogether  insupportable  in  a  free  coun¬ 
try.  If  the  tax  had  been  considerable,  it  would 
have  oppressed  the  small,  and  forced  almost 
the  whole  retail  trade  into  the  hands  of  the 
great  dealers.  The  competition  of  the  former 
being  taken  away,  the  latter  would  have  en¬ 
joyed  a  monopoly  of  the  trade,  and  like  all 


of  Revenue  375 

other  monopolists  would  soon  have  combined 
to  raise  their  profits  much  beyond  what  was 
necessary  for  the  payment  of  the  tax.  The 
final  payment,  instead  of  falling  upon  the 
shopkeeper,  would  have  fallen  upon  the  con¬ 
sumer,  with  a  considerable  overcharge  to  the 
profit  of  the  shopkeeper.  For  these  reasons 
the  project  of  a  tax  upon  shops  was  laid 
aside,  and  in  the  room  of  it  was  substituted 
the  subsidy,  1759. 

What  in  France  is  called  the  personal  taille 
is,  perhaps,  the  most  important  tax  upon 
the  profits  of  stock  employed  in  agriculture 
that  is  levied  in  any  part  of  Europe. 

In  the  disorderly  state  of  Europe  during 
the  prevalence  of  the  feudal  government,  the 
sovereign  was  obliged  to  content  himself  w ith 
taxing  those  who  were  too  weak  to  refuse  to 
pay  taxes.  The  great  lords,  though  willing  to 
assist  him  upon  particular  emergencies,  re¬ 
fused  to  subject  themselves  to  any  constant 
tax,  and  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  force 
them.  The  occupiers  of  land  all  over  Europe 
were,  the  greater  part  of  them,  originally 
bondmen.  Through  the  greater  part  of  Europe 
they  were  gradually  emancipated.  Some  of 
them  acquired  the  property  of  landed  estates 
which  they  held  by  some  base  or  ignoble 
tenure,  sometimes  under  the  king,  and  some¬ 
times  under  some  other  great  lord,  like  the 
ancient  copy-holders  of  England.  Others 
without  acquiring  the  property,  obtained 
leases  for  terms  of  years  of  the  lands  which 
they  occupied  under  their  lord,  and  thus  be¬ 
came  less  dependent  upon  him.  The  great 
lords  seem  to  have  beheld  the  degree  of  pros¬ 
perity  and  independency  which  this  inferior 
order  of  men  had  thus  come  to  enjoy  with 
a  malignant  and  contemptuous  indignation, 
and  willingly  consented  that  the  sovereign 
should  tax  them.  In  some  countries  this  tax 
was  confined  to  the  lands  which  were  held  in 
property  by  an  ignoble  tenure;  and,  in  this 
case,  the  taille  was  said  to  be  real.  The  land- 
tax  established  by  the  late  King  of  Sardinia, 
and  the  taille  in  the  provinces  of  Languedoc, 
Provence,  Dauphine,  and  Brittany,  in  the 
generality  of  Montauban,  and  in  the  elections 
of  Agen  and  Comdom,  as  well  as  in  some 
other  districts  of  France,  are  taxes  upon  lands 
held  in  property  by  an  ignoble  tenure.  In 
other  countries  the  tax  was  laid  upon  the  sup¬ 
posed  profits  of  all  those  who  held  in  farm 
or  lease  lands  belonging  to  other  people,  what¬ 
ever  might  be  the  tenure  by  which  the  pro¬ 
prietor  held  them;  and  in  this  case  the  taille 
was  said  to  be  personal.  In  the  greater  part 
of  those  provinces  of  France  which  are  called 
the  Countries  of  Elections  the  taille  is  of  this 
kind.  The  real  taille,  as  it  is  imposed  only 
upon  a  part  of  the  lands  of  the  country,  is 
necessarily  an  unequal,  but  it  is  not  always 


376 


The  Wealth 

an  arbitrary  tax,  though  it  is  so  upon  some 
occasions.  The  personal  taille,  as  it  is  intend¬ 
ed  to  be  proportioned  to  the  profits  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  class  of  people  which  can  only  be  guessed 
at,  is  necessarily  both  arbitrary  and  unequal. 

In  France  the  personal  taille  at  present 
(1775)  annually  imposed  upon  the  twenty 
generalities  called  the  Countries  of  Elections 
amounts  to  40,107,239  livres,  16  sous.1  The 
proportion  in  which  this  sum  is  assessed  upon 
those  different  provinces  varies  from  year  to 
year  according  to  the  reports  which  are  made 
to  the  king’s  council  concerning  the  goodness 
or  badness  of  the  crops,  as  well  as  other  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  may  either  increase  or  di¬ 
minish  their  respective  abilities  to  pay,  Each 
generality  it  divided  into  a  certain  number 
of  elections,  and  the  proportion  in  which  the 
sum  imposed  upon  the  whole  generality  is 
divided  among  those  different  elections  varies 
likewise  from  year  to  year  according  to  the 
reports  made  to  the  council  concerning  their 
respective  abilities.  It  seems  impossible  that 
the  council,  with  the  best  intentions,  can  ever 
proportion  with  tolerable  exactness  either  of 
those  two  assessments  to  the  real  abilities  of 
the  province  or  district  upon  which  they  are 
respectively  laid.  Ignorance  and  misinforma¬ 
tion  must  always,  more  or  less,  mislead  the 
most  upright  council.  The  proportion  which 
each  parish  ought  to  support  of  what  is  as¬ 
sessed  upon  the  whole  election,  and  that 
which  each  individual  ought  to  support  of 
what  is  assessed  upon  his  particular  parish, 
are  both  in  the  same  manner  varied,  from 
year  to  year,  according  as  circumstances  are 
supposed  to  require.  These  circumstances  are 
judged  of,  in  the  one  case,  by  the  officers  of 
the  election,  in  the  other  by  those  of  the  par¬ 
ish,  and  both  the  one  and  the  other  are,  more 
or  less,  under  the  direction  and  influence  of 
the  intendant.  Not  only  ignorance  and  mis¬ 
information,  but  friendship,  party  animosity, 
and  private  resentment  are  said  frequently 
to  mislead  such  assessors.  No  man  subject  to 
such  a  tax,  it  is  evident,  can  ever  be  certain, 
before  he  is  assessed,  of  what  he  is  to  pay.  He 
cannot  even  be  certain  after  he  is  assessed.  If 
any  person  has  been  taxed  who  ought  to  have 
been  exempted,  or  if  any  person  has  been  taxed 
beyond  his  proportion,  though  both  must  pay 
in  the  meantime,  yet  if  they  complain,  and 
make  good  their  complaints,  the  whole  parish 
is  reimposed  next  year  in  order  to  reimburse 
them.  If  any  of  the  contributors  become  bank¬ 
rupt  or  insolvent,  the  collector  is  obliged  to 
advance  his  tax,  and  the  whole  parish  is  re¬ 
imposed  next  year  in  order  to  reimburse  the 
collector.  If  the  collector  himself  should  be- 

1  Memoircs  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  ii, 
p.  17. 


of  Nations 

come  bankrupt,  the  parish  which  elects  him 
must  answer  for  his  conduct  to  the  receiver- 
general  of  the  election.  But,  as  it  might  be 
troublesome  for  the  receiver  to  prosecute  the 
whole  parish,  he  takes  at  his  choice  five  or  six 
of  the  richest  contributors  and  obliges  them 
to  make  good  what  had  been  lost  by  the  in¬ 
solvency  of  the  collector.  The  parish  is  after¬ 
wards  reimposed  in  order  to  reimburse  those 
five  or  six.  Such  reimpositions  are  always 
over  and  above  the  taille  of  the  particular 
year  in  which  they  are  laid  on. 

When  a  tax  is  imposed  upon  the  profits  of 
stock  in  a  particular  branch  of  trade,  the 
traders  are  all  careful  to  bring  no  more  goods 
to  market  than  what  they  can  sell  at  a  price 
sufficient  to  reimburse  them  for  advancing 
the  tax.  Some  of  them  withdraw  a  part  of 
their  stocks  from  the  trade,  and  the  market 
is  more  sparingly  supplied  than  before.  The 
price  of  the  goods  rises,  and  the  final  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  tax  falls  upon  the  consumer.  But 
when  a  tax  is  imposed  upon  the  profits  of 
stock  employed  in  agriculture,  it  is  not  the 
interest  of  the  farmers  to  withdraw  any  part 
of  their  stock  from  that  employment.  Each 
farmer  occupies  a  certain  quantity  of  land, 
for  which  he  pays  rent.  For  the  proper  culti¬ 
vation  of  this  land  a  certain  quantity  of  stock 
is  necessary,  and  by  withdrawing  any  part 
of  this  necessary  quantity,  the  farmer  is  not 
likely  to  be  more  able  to  pay  either  the  rent 
or  the  tax.  In  order  to  pay  the  tax,  it  can 
never  be  his  interest  to  diminish  the  quantity 
of  his  produce,  nor  consequently  to  supply 
the  market  more  sparingly  than  before.  The 
tax,  therefore,  will  never  enable  him  to  raise 
the  price  of  his  produce  so  as  to  reimburse 
himself  by  throwing  the  final  payment  upon 
the  consumer.  The  farmer,  however,  must 
have  his  reasonable  profit  as  well  as  every 
other  dealer,  otherwise  he  must  give  up  the 
trade.  After  the  imposition  of  a  tax  of  this 
kind,  he  can  get  this  reasonable  profit  only 
by  paying  less  rent  to  the  landlord.  The  more 
he  is  obliged  to  pay  in  the  way  of  tax  the  less 
he  can  afford  to  pay  in  the  way  of  rent.  A  tax 
of  this  kind  imposed  during  the  currency  of 
a  lease  may,  no  doubt,  distress  or  ruin  the 
farmer.  Upon  the  renewal  of  the  lease  it  must 
always  fall  upon  the  landlord. 

In  the  countries  where  the  personal  taille 
takes  place,  the  farmer  is  commonly  assessed 
in  proportion  to  the  stock  which  he  appears 
to  employ  in  cultivation.  He  is,  upon  this  ac¬ 
count,  frequently  afraid  to  have  a  good  team 
of  horses  or  oxen,  but  endeavours  to  cultivate 
with  the  meanest  and  most  wretched  instru¬ 
ments  of  husbandry  that  he  can.  Such  is  his 
distrust  in  the  justice  of  his  assessors  that  he 
counterfeits  poverty,  and  wishes  to  appear 
scarce  able  to  pay  anything  for  fear  of  being 


377 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


obliged  to  pay  too  much.  By  this  miserable 
policy  he  does  not,  perhaps,  always  consult 
his  own  interest  in  the  most  effectual  man¬ 
ner,  and  he  probably  loses  more  by  the  dim¬ 
inution  of  his  produce  than  he  saves  by  that 
of  his  tax.  Though,  in  consequence  of  this 
wretched  cultivation,  the  market  is,  no  doubt, 
somewhat  worse  supplied,  yet  the  small  rise 
of  price  which  may  occasion,  as  it  is  not 
likely  even  to  indemnify  the  farmer  for  the 
diminution  of  his  produce,  it  is  still  less  like¬ 
ly  to  enable  him  to  pay  more  rent  to  the 
landlord.  The  public,  the  farmer,  the  land¬ 
lord,  all  suffer  more  or  less  by  this  degraded 
cultivation.  That  the  personal  taille  tends,  in 
many  different  ways,  to  discourage  cultiva¬ 
tion,  and  consequently  to  dry  up  the  prin¬ 
cipal  source  of  the  wealth  of  every  great 
country,  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  ob¬ 
serve  in  the  third  book  of  this  Inquiry. 

What  are  called  poll-taxes  in  the  southern 
provinces  of  North  America,  and  in  the  West 
Indian  Islands  annual  taxes  of  so  much  a 
head  upon  every  negro,  are  properly  taxes 
upon  the  profits  of  a  certain  species  of  stock 
employed  in  agriculture.  As  the  planters  are, 
the  greater  part  of  them,  both  farmers  and 
landlords,  the  final  payment  of  the  tax  falls 
upon  them  in  their  quality  of  landlords  with¬ 
out  any  retribution. 

Taxes  of  so  much  a  head  upon  the  bond- 
men  employed  in  cultivation  seem  anciently 
to  have  been  common  all  over  Europe.  There 
subsists  at  present  a  tax  of  this  kind  in  the 
empire  of  Russia.  It  is  probably  upon  this 
account  that  poll-taxes  of  all  kinds  have  often 
been  represented  as  badges  of  slavery.  Every 
tax,  however,  is  to  the  person  who  pays  it  a 
badge,  not  of  slavery,  but  of  liberty.  It  de¬ 
notes  that  he  is  subject  to  government,  in¬ 
deed,  but  that,  as  he  has  some  property,  he 
cannot  himself  be  the  property  of  a  master. 
A  poll-tax  upon  slaves  is  altogether  different 
from  a  poll-tax  upon  freemen.  The  latter  is 
paid  by  the  persons  upon  whom  it  is  imposed; 
the  former  by  a  different  set  of  persons.  The 
latter  is  either  altogether  arbitrary  or  alto¬ 
gether  unequal,  and  in  most  cases  is  both  the 
one  and  the  other;  the  former,  though  in  some 


respects  unequal,  different  slaves  being  of 
different  values,  is  in  no  respect  arbitrary. 
Every  master  who  knows  the  number  of  his 
own  slaves  knows  exactly  what  he  has  to  pay. 
Those  different  taxes,  however,  being  called 
by  the  same  name,  have  been  considered  as 
of  the  same  nature. 

The  taxes  which  in  Holland  are  imposed 
upon  men-  and  maid-servants  are  taxes,  not 
upon  stock,  but  upon  expense,  and  so  far  re¬ 
semble  the  taxes  upon  consumable  commodi¬ 
ties.  The  tax  of  a  guinea  a  head  for  every 
man-servant  which  has  lately  been  imposed 
in  Great  Britain  is  of  the  same  kind.  It  falls 
heaviest  upon  the  middling  rank.  A  man  of 
two  hundred  a  year  may  keep  a  single  man¬ 
servant.  A  man  of  ten  thousand  a  year  will 
not  keep  fifty.  It  does  not  affect  the  poor. 

Taxes  upon  the  profits  of  stock  in  partic¬ 
ular  employments  can  never  affect  the  interest 
of  money.  Nobody  will  lend  his  money  for  less 
interest  to  those  who  exercise  the  taxed  than 
to  those  who  exercise  the  untaxed  employ¬ 
ments.  Taxes  upon  the  revenue  arising  from 
stock  in  all  employments  where  the  govern¬ 
ment  attempts  to  levy  them  with  any  de¬ 
gree  of  exactness,  will,  in  many  cases,  fall 
upon  the  interest  of  money.  The  Vingtieme , 
or  twentieth  penny,  in  France  is  a  tax  of  the 
same  kind  with  what  is  called  the  land-tax  in 
England,  and  is  assessed,  in  the  same  manner, 
upon  the  revenue  arising  from  land,  houses, 
and  stock.  So  far  as  it  affects  stock  it  is  as¬ 
sessed,  though  not  with  great  rigour,  yet 
with  much  more  exactness  than  that  part  of 
the  land-tax  of  England  which  is  imposed 
upon  the  same  fund.  It,  in  many  cases,  falls 
altogether  upon  the  interest  of  money.  Money 
is  frequently  sunk  in  France  upon  what  are 
called  Contracts  for  the  constitution  of  a 
rent;  that  is,  perpetual  annuities  redeemable 
at  any  time  by  the  debtor  upon  repayment 
of  the  sum  originally  advanced,  but  of  which 
this  redemption  is  not  exigible  by  the  credi¬ 
tor  except  in  particular  cases.  The  Vingtieme 
seems  not  to  have  raised  the  rate  of  those  an¬ 
nuities,  though  it  is  exactly  levied  upon 
them  all. 


Appendix  to  Articles  I  and  II. 


Taxes  upon  the  Capital  Value 

While  property  remains  in  the  possession 
of  the  same  person,  whatever  permanent  taxes 
may  have  been  imposed  upon  it,  they  have 
never  been  intended  to  diminish  or  take  away 
any  part  of  its  capital  value,  but  only  some 
part  of  the  revenue  arising  from  it.  But  when 
property  changes  hands,  when  it  is  transmit¬ 
ted  either  from  the  dead  to  the  living,  or 
from  the  living  to  the  living,  such  taxes  have 


of  Land ,  Houses ,  and  Stock 

frequently  been  imposed  upon  it  as  neces¬ 
sarily  take  away  some  part  of  its  capital 
value. 

The  transference  of  all  sorts  of  property 
from  the  dead  to  the  living,  and  that  of  im¬ 
movable  property,  of  lands  and  houses,  from 
the  living  to  the  living,  are  transactions  which 
are  in  their  nature  either  public  and  notorious, 
or  such  as  cannot  be  long  concealed.  Such 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


378 

transactions,  therefore,  may  be  taxed  directly. 
The  transference  of  stock,  or  movable  prop¬ 
erty,  from  the  living  to  the  living,  by  the 
lending  of  money,  is  frequently  a  secret 
transaction,  and  may  always  be  made  so.  It 
cannot  easily,  therefore,  be  taxed  directly.  It 
has  been  taxed  indirectly  in  two  different 
ways;  first,  by  requiring  that  the  deed  con¬ 
taining  the  obligation  to  repay  should  be 
written  upon  paper  or  parchment  which  had 
paid  a  certain  stamp-duty,  otherwise  not  to 
be  valid;  secondly,  by  requiring,  under  the 
like  penalty  of  invalidity,  that  it  should  be 
recorded  either  in  a  public  or  secret  register, 
and  by  imposing  certain  duties  upon  such 
registration.  Stamp-duties  and  duties  of  reg¬ 
istration  have  frequently  been  imposed  like¬ 
wise  upon  the  deeds  transferring  property  of 
all  kinds  from  the  dead  to  the  living,  and 
upon  those  transferring  immovable  property 
from  the  living  to  the  living,  transactions 
which  might  easily  have  been  taxed  directly. 

The  Vicesima  Hereditatum ,  the  twentieth 
penny  of  inheritances  imposed  by  Augustus 
upon  the  ancient  Romans,  was  a  tax  upon 
the  transference  of  property  from  the  dead 
to  the  living.  Dion  Cassius,1  the  author  who 
writes  concerning  it  the  least  indistinctly, 
says  that  it  was  imposed  upon  all  succes¬ 
sions,  legacies,  and  donations  in  case  of  death, 
except  upon  those  to  the  nearest  relations 
and  to  the  poor. 

Of  the  same  kind  is  the  Dutch  tax  upon 
successions.2  Collateral  successions  are  taxed, 
according  to  the  degree  of  relation,  from  five 
to  thirty  per  cent  upon  the  whole  value  of 
the  succession.  Testamentary  donations,  or 
legacies  to  collaterals,  are  subject  to  the  like 
duties.  Those  from  husband  to  wife,  or  from 
wife  to  husband,  to  the  fiftieth  penny.  The 
Luctuosa  Hereditas,  the  mournful  scuccession 
of  ascendants  to  descendants,  to  the  twen¬ 
tieth  penny  only.  Direct  successions,  or  those 
of  descendants  to  ascendants,  pay  no  tax. 
The  death  of  a  father,  to  such  of  his  children 
as  live  in  the  same  house  with  him,  is  seldom 
attended  with  any  increase,  and  frequently 
with  a  considerable  diminution  of  revenue, 
by  the  loss  of  his  industry,  of  his  office,  or  of 
some  life-rent  estate  of  which  he  may  have 
been  in  possession.  That  tax  would  be  cruel 
and  oppressive  which  aggravated  their  loss 
by  taking  from  them  any  part  of  his  succes¬ 
sion.  It  may,  however,  sometimes  be  other¬ 
wise  with  those  children  who,  in  the  lan¬ 
guage  of  the  Roman  law,  are  said  to  be 
emancipated;  in  that  of  the  Scotch  law,  to 

1  Bk.  iv.  See  also  Burmann,  De  vectigalibus  pop- 
uli  romani,  ch.  xi.  and  Bouchaud,  De  Vimpot  du 
vingtieme  sur  les  successions. 

2  Memoir es  concernant  les  droits ,  etc.,  vol.  i, 
p.  225. 


be  forisfamiliated;  that  is,  who  have  received 
their  portion,  have  got  families  of  their  own, 
and  are  supported  by  funds  separate  and 
independent  of  those  of  their  father.  What¬ 
ever  part  of  his  succession  might  come  to 
such  children  would  be  a  real  addition  to 
their  fortune,  and  might  therefore,  perhaps, 
without  more  inconveniency  than  what  at¬ 
tends  all  duties  of  this  kind,  be  liable  to 
some  tax. 

The  casualties  of  the  feudal  law  were  taxes 
upon  the  transference  of  land,  both  from  the 
dead  to  the  living,  and  from  the  living  to  the 
living.  In  ancient  times  they  constituted  in 
every  part  of  Europe  one  of  the  principal 
branches  of  the  revenue  of  the  crown. 

The  heir  of  every  immediate  vassal  of  the 
crown  paid  a  certain  duty,  generally  a  year’s 
rent,  upon  receiving  the  investiture  of  the 
estate.  If  the  heir  was  a  minor,  the  whole 
rents  of  the  estate  during  the  continuance  of 
the  minority  devolved  to  the  superior  with¬ 
out  any  other  charge  besides  the  maintenance 
of  the  minor,  and  the  payment  of  the  widow’s 
dower  when  there  happened  to  be  a  dowager 
upon  the  land.  When  the  minor  came  to  be 
of  age,  another  tax,  called  Relief,  was  still 
due  to  the  superior,  which  generally  amount¬ 
ed  likewise  to  a  year’s  rent.  A  long  minor¬ 
ity,  which  in  the  present  times  so  frequently 
disburdens  a  great  estate  of  all  its  incum¬ 
brances  and  restores  the  family  to  their 
ancient  splendour,  could  in  those  times  have 
no  such  effect.  The  waste,  and  not  the  dis- 
incumbrance  of  the  estate,  was  the  common 
effect  of  a  long  minority. 

By  the  feudal  law  the  vassal  could  not 
alienate  without  the  consent  of  his  superior, 
who  generally  extorted  a  fine  or  composi¬ 
tion  for  granting  it.  This  fine,  which  was  at 
first  arbitrary,  came  in  many  countries  to  be 
regulated  at  a  certain  portion  of  the  price  of 
the  land.  In  some  countries  where  the  greater 
part  of  the  other  feudal  customs  have  gone 
into  disuse,  this  tax  upon  the  alienation  of 
land  still  continues  to  make  a  very  consid¬ 
erable  branch  of  the  revenue  of  the  sovereign. 
In  the  canton  of  Berne  it  is  so  high  as  a  sixth 
part  of  the  price  of  all  noble  fiefs,  and  a  tenth 
part  of  that  of  all  ignoble  ones.3  In  the  canton 
of  Lucerne  the  tax  upon  the  sale  of  lands  is 
not  universal,  and  takes  place  only  in  certain 
districts.  But  if  any  person  sells  his  land  in 
order  to  remove  out  of  the  territory,  he  pays 
ten  per  cent  upon  the  whole  price  of  the 
sale.4  Taxes  of  the  same  kind  upon  the  sale 
either  of  all  lands,  or  of  lands  held  by  cer¬ 
tain  tenures,  take  place  in  many  other  coun¬ 
tries,  and  make  a  more  or  less  considerable 

3  Memoir  es  concernant  les  droits,  etc.,  vol.  i, 
p.  154. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  157. 


The  Sources 


branch  of  the  revenue  of  the  sovereign. 

Such  transactions  may  be  taxed  indirectly 
by  means  either  of  stamp-duties,  or  of  duties 
upon  registration,  and  those  duties  either  may 
or  may  not  be  proportioned  to  the  value  of 
the  subject  which  is  transferred. 

In  Great  Britain  the  stamp-duties  are 
higher  or  lower,  not  so  much  according  to 
the  value  of  the  property  transferred  (an 
eighteenpenny  or  half-crown  stamp  being 
sulficient  upon  a  bond  for  the  largest  sum  of 
money)  as  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
deed.  The  highest  do  not  exceed  six  pounds 
upon  every  sheet  of  paper  or  skin  of  parch¬ 
ment,  and  these  high  duties  fall  chiefly  upon 
grants  from  the  crown,  and  upon  certain  law 
proceedings,  without  any  regard  to  the  value 
of  the  subject.  There  are  in  Great  Britain 
no  duties  on  the  registration  of  deeds  or  writ¬ 
ings,  except  the  fees  of  the  officers  who  keep 
the  register,  and  these  are  seldom  more  than 
a  reasonable  recompense  for  their  labour.  The 
crown  derives  no  revenue  from  them. 

In  Holland1  there  are  both  stamp-duties 
and  duties  upon  registration,  which  in  some 
cases  are,  and  in  some  are  not,  proportioned 
to  the  value  of  the  property  transferred.  All 
testaments  must  be  written  upon  stamped 
paper  of  which  the  price  is  proportioned  to 
the  property  disposed  of,  so  that  there  are 
stamps  which  cost  from  threepence,  or  three 
stivers  a  sheet,  to  three  hundred  florins,  equal 
to  about  twenty-seven  pounds  ten  shillings 
of  our  money.  If  the  stamp  is  of  an  inferior 
price  to  what  the  testator  ought  to  have 
made  use  of,  his  succession  is  confiscated. 
This  is  over  and  above  all  their  other  taxes 
on  succession.  Except  bills  of  exchange,  and 
some  other  mercantile  bills,  all  other  deeds, 
bonds,  and  contracts  are  subject  to  a  stamp- 
duty.  This  duty,  however,  does  not  rise  in 
proportion  to  the  value  of  the  subject.  All 
sales  of  land  and  of  houses,  and  all  mortgages 
upon  either,  must  be  registered,  and,  upon 
registration,  pay  a  duty  to  the  state  of  two 
and  a  half  per  cent  upon  the  amount  of  the 
price  or  of  the  mortgage.  This  duty  is  ex¬ 
tended  to  the  sale  of  all  ships  and  vessels  of 
more  than  two  tons  burden,  whether  decked 
or  undecked.  These,  it  seems,  are  considered 
as  a  sort  of  houses  upon  the  water.  The  sale 
of  movables,  when  it  is  ordered  by  a  court  of 
justice,  is  subject  to  the  like  duty  of  two  and 
a  half  per  cent. 

In  France  there  are  both  stamp-duties  and 
e  duties  upon  registration.  The  former  are  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  branch  of  the  aides  or  excise,  and 
in  the  provinces  where  those  duties  take  place 
e  are  levied  by  the  excise  officers.  The  latter  are 
considered  as  a  branch  of  the  domain  of  the 

1  Ibid.,  p.  157. 


of  Revenue  379 

crown,  and  are  levied  by  a  different  set  of 
officers. 

Those  modes  of  taxation,  by  stamp-duties 
and  by  duties  upon  registration,  are  of  very 
modern  invention.  In  the  course  of  little  more 
than  a  century,  however,  stamp-duties  have, 
in  Europe,  become  almost  universal,  and  du¬ 
ties  upon  registration  extremely  common. 
There  is  no  art  which  one  government  sooner 
learns  of  another  than  that  of  draining  money 
from  the  pockets  of  the  people. 

Taxes  upon  the  transference  of  property 
from  the  dead  to  the  living  fall  finally  as  well 
as  immediately  upon  the  person  to  whom  the 
property  is  transferred.  Taxes  upon  the  sale 
of  land  fall  altogether  upon  the  seller.  The 
seller  is  almost  always  under  the  necessity  of 
selling,  and  must,  therefore,  take  such  a  price 
as  he  can  get.  The  buyer  is  scarce  ever  under 
the  necessity  of  buying,  and  will,  therefore, 
only  give  such  a  price  as  he  likes.  He  consid¬ 
ers  what  the  land  will  cost  him  in  tax  and 
price  together.  The  more  he  is  obliged  to  pay 
in  the  way  of  tax,  the  less  he  will  be  disposed 
to  give  in  the  way  of  price.  Such  taxes,  there¬ 
fore,  fall  almost  always  upon  a  necessitous 
person,  and  must,  therefore,  be  frequently 
very  cruel  and  oppressive.  Taxes  upon  the 
sale  of  new-built  houses,  where  the  building 
is  sold  without  the  ground,  fall  generally 
upon  the  buyer,  because  the  builder  must 
generally  have  his  profit,  otherwise  he  must 
give  up  the  trade.  If  he  advances  the  tax, 
therefore,  the  buyer  must  generally  repay  it 
to  him.  Taxes  upon  the  sale  of  old  houses, 
for  the  same  reason  as  those  upon  the  sale  of 
land,  fall  generally  upon  the  seller,  whom  in 
most  cases  either  conveniency  or  necessity 
obliges  to  sell.  The  number  of  new-built  houses 
that  are  annually  brought  to  market  is  more 
or  less  regulated  by  the  demand.  Unless  the 
demand  is  such  as  to  afford  the  builder  his 
profit,  after  paying  all  expenses,  he  will  build 
no  more  houses.  The  number  of  old  houses 
which  happen  at  any  time  to  come  to  market 
is  regulated  by  accidents  of  which  the  greater 
part  have  no  relation  to  the  demand.  Two  or 
three  great  bankruptcies  in  a  mercantile  town 
will  bring  many  houses  to  sale  which  must 
be  sold  for  what  can  be  got  for  them.  Taxes 
upon  the  sale  of  ground-rents  fall  altogether 
upon  the  seller,  for  the  same  reason  as  those 
upon  the  sale  of  land.  Stamp-duties,  and  du¬ 
ties  upon  the  registration  of  bonds  and  con¬ 
tracts  for  borrowed  money,  fall  altogether 
upon  the  borrower,  and,  in  fact,  are  always 
paid  by  him.  Duties  of  the  same  kind  upon 
law  proceedings  fall  upon  the  suitors.  They 
reduce  to  both  the  capital  value  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  in  dispute.  The  more  it  costs  to  acquire 
any  property,  the  less  must  be  the  net  value 
of  it  when  acquired. 


380 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


All  taxes  upon  the  transference  of  property 
of  every  kind,  so  far  as  they  diminish  the 
capital  value  of  that  property,  tend  to  dimin¬ 
ish  the  funds  destined  for  the  maintenance 
of  productive  labour.  They  are  all  more  or 
less  unthrifty  taxes  that  increase  the  revenue 
of  the  sovereign,  which  seldom  maintains  any 
but  unproductive  labourers,  at  the  expense 
of  the  capital  of  the  people,  which  maintains 
none  but  productive. 

Such  taxes,  even  when  they  are  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  value  of  the  property  trans¬ 
ferred,  are  still  unequal,  the  frequency  of 
transference  not  being  always  equal  in  prop¬ 
erty  of  equal  value.  When  they  are  not  pro¬ 
portioned  to  this  value,  which  is  the  case 
with  the  greater  part  of  the  stamp-duties  and 
duties  of  registration,  they  are  still  more  so. 
They  are  in  no  respect  arbitrary,  but  are  or 
may  be  in  all  cases  perfectly  clear  and  certain. 
Though  they  sometimes  fall  upon  the  person 
who  is  not  very  able  to  pay,  the  time  of  pay¬ 
ment  is  in  most  cases  sufficiently  convenient 
for  him.  When  the  payment  becomes  due,  he 
must  in  most  cases  have  the  money  to  pay. 
They  are  levied  at  very  little  expense,  and 
in  general  subject  the  contributors  to  no  other 
inconveniency  besides  always  the  unavoid¬ 
able  one  of  paying  the  tax. 

In  France  the  stamp-duties  are  not  much 
complained  of.  Those  of  registration,  which 
they  call  the  Controle ,  are.  They  give  occa¬ 
sion,  it  is  pretended,  to  much  extortion  in  the 
officers  of  the  farmers-general  who  collect  the 
tax,  which  is  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary 
and  uncertain.  In  the  greater  part  of  the  libels 
which  have  been  written  against  the  present 
system  of  finances  in  France  the  abuses  of  the 
Controle  make  a  principal  article.  Uncertain¬ 
ty,  however,  does  not  seem  to  be  necessarily 
inherent  in  the  nature  of  such  taxes.  If  the 
popular  complaints  are  well  founded,  the 
abuse  must  arise,  not  so  much  from  the  na¬ 


ture  of  the  tax  as  from  the  want  of  precision 
and  distinctness  in  the  words  of  the  edicts  or 
laws  which  impose  it. 

The  registration  of  mortgages,  and  in  gen¬ 
eral  of  all  rights  upon  immovable  property, 
as  it  gives  great  security  both  to  creditors 
and  purchasers,  is  extremely  advantageous 
to  the  public.  That  of  the  greater  part  of 
deeds  of  other  kinds  is  frequently  incon¬ 
venient  and  even  dangerous  to  individuals, 
without  any  advantage  to  the  public.  All  reg¬ 
isters  which,  it  is  acknowledged,  ought  to  be 
kept  secret,  ought  certainly  never  to  exist. 
The  credit  of  individuals  ought  certainly 
never  to  depend  upon  so  very  slender 
a  security  as  the  probity  and  religion  of  the 
inferior  officers  of  revenue.  But  where  the 
fees  of  registration  have  been  made  a  source 
of  revenue  to  the  sovereign,  register  offices 
have  commonly  been  multiplied  without  end, 
both  for  the  deeds  which  ought  to  be  regis¬ 
tered,  and  for  those  which  ought  not.  In 
France  there  are  several  different  sorts  of 
secret  registers.  This  abuse,  though  not  per¬ 
haps  a  necessary,  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
is  a  very  natural  effect  of  such  taxes. 

Such  stamp-duties  as  those  in  England 
upon  cards  and  dice,  upon  newspapers  and 
periodical  pamphlets,  etc.,  are  properly  taxes 
upon  consumption;  the  final  payment  falls 
upon  the  persons  who  use  or  consume  such 
commodities.  Such  stamp-duties  as  those 
upon  licences  to  retail  ale,  wine,  and  spirit¬ 
uous  liquors,  though  intended,  perhaps,  to 
fall  upon  the  profits  of  the  retailers,  are  like¬ 
wise  finally  paid  by  the  consumers  of  those 
liquors.  Such  taxes,  though  called  by  the 
same  name,  and  levied  by  the  same  officers 
and  in  the  same  manner  with  the  stamp- 
duties  above  mentioned  upon  the  transfer¬ 
ence  of  property,  are,  however,  of  a  quite 
different  nature,  and  fall  upon  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  funds. 


Article  III. 

Taxes  upon  the  Wages  of  Labour 


The  wages  of  the  inferior  classes  of  work¬ 
men,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in  the  first 
book,  are  everywhere  necessarily  regulated 
by  two  different  circumstances;  the  demand 
for  labour,  and  the  ordinary  or  average  price 
of  provisions.  The  demand  for  labour,  ac¬ 
cording  as  it  happens  to  be  either  increasing, 
stationary,  or  declining,  or  to  require  an  in¬ 
creasing,  stationary,  or  declining  population, 
regulates  the  subsistence  of  the  labourer,  and 
determines  in  what  degree  it  shall  be,  either 
liberal,  moderate,  or  scanty.  The  ordinary  or 
average  price  of  provisions  determines  the 
quantity  of  money  which  must  be  paid  to 


the  workman  in  order  to  enable  him,  one  year 
with  another,  to  purchase  this  liberal,  mod¬ 
erate,  or  scanty  subsistence.  While  the  de¬ 
mand  for  labour  and  the  price  of  provisions, 
therefore,  remain  the  same,  a  direct  tax  upon 
the  wages  of  labour  can  have  no  other  effect 
than  to  raise  them  somewhat  higher  than  the 
tax.  Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  in  a 
particular  place  the  demand  for  labour  and 
the  price  of  provisions  were  such  as  to  render 
ten  shillings  a  week  the  ordinary  wages  of 
labour,  and  that  a  tax  of  one-fifth,  or  four 
shillings  in  the  pound,  was  imposed  upon 
wages.  If  the  demand  for  labour  and  the  price 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


of  provisions  remained  the  same,  it  would 
still  be  necessary  that  the  labourer  should  in 
that  place  earn  such  a  subsistence  as  could 
be  bought  only  for  ten  shillings  a  week  free 
wages.  But  in  order  to  leave  him  such  free 
wages  after  paying  such  a  tax,  the  price  of 
labour  must  in  that  place  soon  rise,  not  to 
twelve  shillings  a  week  only,  but  to  twelve 
and  sixpence;  that  is,  in  order  to  enable  him 
to  pay  a  tax  of  one-fifth,  his  wages  must  nec¬ 
essarily  soon  rise,  not  one-fifth  part  only,  but 
one-fourth.  Whatever  was  the  proportion  of 
the  tax,  the  wages  of  labour  must  in  all  cases 
rise,  not  only  in  that  proportion,  but  in  a 
higher  proportion.  If  the  tax,  for  example, 
was  one-tenth,  the  wages  of  labour  must 
necessarily  soon  rise,  not  one-tenth  part  only, 
but  one-eighth. 

A  direct  tax  upon  the  wages  of  labour, 
therefore,  though  the  labourer  might  per¬ 
haps  pay  it  out  of  his  hand,  could  not  proper¬ 
ly  be  said  to  be  even  advanced  by  him;  at 
least  if  the  demand  for  labour  and  the  aver¬ 
age  price  of  provisions  remained  the  same 
after  the  tax  as  before  it.  In  all  such  cases, 
not  only  the  tax  but  something  more  than 
the  tax  would  in  reality  be  advanced  by  the 
person  who  immediately  employed  him.  The 
final  payment  would  in  different  cases  fall 
upon  different  persons.  The  rise  which  such 
a  tax  might  occasion  in  the  wages  of  manu¬ 
facturing  labour  would  be  advanced  by  the 
master  manufacturer,  who  would  both  be 
entitled  and  obliged  to  charge  it,  with  a  prof¬ 
it,  upon  the  price  of  his  goods.  The  final  pay¬ 
ment  of  this  rise  of  wages,  therefore,  together 
with  the  additional  profit  of  the  master  man¬ 
ufacturer,  would  fall  upon  the  consumer.  The 
rise  which  such  a  tax  might  occasion  in  the 
wages  of  country  labour  would  be  advanced 
by  the  farmer,  who,  in  order  to  maintain  the 
same  number  of  labourers  as  before,  would 
be  obliged  to  employ  a  greater  capital.  In  or¬ 
der  to  get  back  this  greater  capital,  together 
with  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  it  would 
be  necessary  that  he  should  retain  a  larger 
portion,  or  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
the  price  of  a  larger  portion,  of  the  produce  of 
the  land,  and  consequently  that  he  should 
pay  less  rent  to  the  landlord.  The  final  pay¬ 
ment  of  this  rise  of  wages,  therefore,  would 
in  this  case  fall  upon  the  landlord,  together 
with  the  additional  profit  of  the  farmer  who 
had  advanced  it.  In  all  cases  a  direct  tax 
upon  the  wages  of  labour  must,  in  the  long- 
run,  occasion  both  a  greater  reduction  in  the 
rent  of  land,  and  a  greater  rise  in  the  price 
of  manufactured  goods,  than  would  have  fol¬ 
lowed  from  the  proper  assessment  of  a  sum 
equal  to  the  produce  of  the  tax  partly  upon 
the  rent  of  land,  and  partly  upon  consumable 
commodities. 


381 

If  direct  taxes  upon  the  wages  of  labour 
have  not  always  occasioned  a  proportionable 
rise  in  those  wages,  it  is  because  they  have 
generally  occasioned  a  considerable  fall  in  the 
demand  for  labour.  The  declension  of  indus¬ 
try,  the  decrease  of  employment  for  the  poor, 
the  diminution  of  the  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  country,  have  gen¬ 
erally  been  the  effects  of  such  taxes.  In  con¬ 
sequence  of  them,  however,  the  price  of  la¬ 
bour  must  always  be  higher  than  it  otherwise 
would  have  been  in  the  actual  state  of  the 
demand:  and  this  enhancement  of  price,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  profit  of  those  who  advance 
it,  must  always  be  finally  paid  by  the  land¬ 
lords  and  consumers. 

A  tax  upon  the  wages  of  country  labour 
does  not  raise  the  price  of  the  rude  prod¬ 
uce  of  land  in  proportion  to  the  tax,  for  the 
same  reason  that  a  tax  upon  the  farmer’s 
profit  does  not  raise  that  price  in  that  propor¬ 
tion. 

Absurd  and  destructive  as  such  taxes  are, 
however,  they  take  place  in  many  countries. 
In  France  that  part  of  the  taille  which  is 
charged  upon  the  industry  of  workmen  and 
day-labourers  in  country  villages  is  properly 
a  tax  of  this  kind.  Their  wages  are  computed 
according  to  the  common  rate  of  the  district 
in  which  they  reside,  and  that  they  may  be 
as  little  liable  as  possible  to  any  overcharge, 
their  yearly  gains  are  estimated  at  no  more 
than  two  hundred  working  days  in  the  year.1 
The  tax  of  each  individual  is  varied  from  year 
to  year  according  to  different  circumstances, 
of  which  the  collector  or  the  commissary 
whom  the  intendant  appoints  to  assist  him 
are  the  judges.  In  Bohemia,  in  consequence 
of  the  alteration  in  the  system  of  finances 
which  was  begun  in  1748,  a  very  heavy  tax 
is  imposed  upon  the  industry  of  artificers. 
They  are  divided  into  four  classes.  The  high¬ 
est  class  pay  a  hundred  florins  a  year  which, 
at  two-and  twenty  pence  halfpenny  a  florin, 
amounts  to  £9  7s.  fid.  The  second  class  are 
taxed  at  seventy;  the  third  at  fifty;  and  the 
fourth,  comprehending  artificers  in  villages, 
and  the  lowest  class  of  those  in  towns,  at 
twenty-five  florins.2 

The  recompense  of  ingenious  artists  and  of 
men  of  liberal  professions,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  show  in  the  first  book,  necessarily  keeps  a 
certain  proportion  to  the  emoluments  of  in¬ 
ferior  trades.  A  tax  upon  this  recompense, 
therefore,  could  have  no  other  effect  than  to 
raise  it  somewhat  higher  than  in  proportion 
to  the  tax.  If  it  did  not  rise  in  this  manner, 
the  ingenious  arts  and  the  liberal  professions, 
being  no  longer  upon  a  level  with  other  trades, 

1 M emoires  concernant  les  droits,  etc.,  vol.  ii, 

p.  108. 

2  Ibid.,  vol.  iii,  p.  87. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


382 

would  be  so  much  deserted  that  they  would 
soon  return  to  that  level . 

The  emoluments  of  offices  are  not,  like 
those  of  trades  and  professions,  regulated  by 
the  free  competition  of  the  market,  and  do 
not,  therefore,  always  bear  a  just  proportion 
to  what  the  nature  of  the  employment  re¬ 
quires.  They  are,  perhaps,  in  most  countries, 
higher  than  it  requires;  the  persons  who  have 
the  administration  of  government  being  gen¬ 
erally  disposed  to  reward  both  themselves  and 
their  immediate  dependants  rather  more  than 
enough.  The  emoluments  of  offices,  therefore, 
can  in  most  cases  very  well  bear  to  be  taxed. 
The  persons,  besides,  who  enjoy  public  of¬ 
fices,  especially  the  more  lucrative,  are  in  all 


countries  the  objects  of  general  envy,  and  a 
tax  upon  their  emoluments,  even  though  it 
should  be  somewhat  higher  than  upon  any 
other  sort  of  revenue,  is  always  a  very  pop¬ 
ular  tax.  In  England,  for  example,  when  by 
the  land-tax  every  other  sort  of  revenue  was 
supposed  to  be  assessed  at  four  shillings  in 
the  pound,  it  was  very  popular  to  lay  a  real 
tax  of  five  shillings  and  sixpence  in  the  pound 
upon  the  salaries  of  offices  which  exceeded  a 
hundred  pounds  a  year,  the  pensions  of  the 
younger  branches  of  the  royal  family,  the  pay 
of  the  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  and  a 
few  others  less  obnoxious  to  envy  excepted. 
There  are  in  England  no  other  direct  taxes 
upon  the  wages  of  labour. 


Article  IV 

Taxes  which,  it  is  intended ,  should  fall  indifferently  upon  every  different  Species  of  Revenue 


The  taxes  which,  it  is  intended,  should  fall 
indifferently  upon  every  different  species  of 
revenue,  are  capitation  taxes,  and  taxes  upon 
consumable  commodities.  These  must  be  paid 
indifferently  from  whatever  revenue  the  con¬ 
tributors  may  possess;  from  the  rent  of  their 
land,  from  the  profits  of  their  stock,  or  from 
the  wages  of  their  labour. 

Capitation  Taxes 

Capitation  taxes,  if  it  is  attempted  to  pro¬ 
portion  them  to  the  fortune  or  revenue  of 
each  contributor,  become  altogether  arbi¬ 
trary.  The  state  of  a  man’s  fortune  varies 
from  day  to  day,  and  without  an  inquisition 
more  intolerable  than  any  tax,  and  renewed 
at  least  once  every  year,  can  only  be  guessed 
at.  His  assessment,  therefore,  must  in  most 
cases  depend  upon  the  good  or  bad  humour 
of  his  assessors,  and  must,  therefore,  be  alto¬ 
gether  arbitrary  and  uncertain. 

Capitation  taxes,  if  they  are  proportioned 
not  to  the  supposed  fortune,  but  to  the  rank 
of  each  contributor,  become  altogether  un¬ 
equal,  the  degrees  of  fortune  being  frequently 
unequal  in  the  same  degree  of  rank. 

Such  taxes,  therefore,  if  it  is  attempted 
to  render  them  equal,  become  altogether 
arbitrary  and  uncertain,  and  if  it  is  attempted 
to  render  them  certain  and  not  arbitrary, 
become  altogether  unequal.  Let  the  tax  be 
light  or  heavy,  uncertainty  is  always  a  great 
grievance.  In  a  light  tax  a  considerable  degree 
of  inequality  may  be  supported;  in  a  heavy 
one  it  is  altogether  intolerable. 

In  the  different  poll-taxes  which  took  place 
in  England  during  the  reign  of  William  III 
the  contributors  were,  the  greater  part  of 
them,  assessed  according  to  the  degree  of 
their  rank;  as  dukes,  marquisses,  earls,  vis¬ 
counts,  barons,  esquires,  gentlemen,  the  eldest 


and  youngest  sons  of  peers,  etc.  All  shop¬ 
keepers  and  tradesmen  worth  more  than  three 
hundred  pounds,  that  is,  the  better  sort  of 
them,  were  subject  to  the  same  assessment, 
how  great  soever  might  be  the  difference  in 
their  fortunes.  Their  rank  was  more  con¬ 
sidered  than  their  fortune.  Several  of  those 
who  in  the  first  poll-tax  were  rated  according 
to  their  supposed  fortune  were  afterwards 
rated  according  to  their  rank.  Serjeants,  at¬ 
torneys,  and  proctors  at  law,  who  in  the 
first  poll-tax  were  assessed  at  three  shillings 
in  the  pound  of  their  supposed  income,  were 
afterwards  assessed  as  gentlemen.  In  the  as¬ 
sessment  of  a  tax  which  was  not  very  heavy, 
a  considerable  degree  of  inequality  had  been 
found  less  insupportable  than  any  degree 
of  uncertainty. 

In  the  capitation  which  has  been  levied 
in  France  without  any  interruption  since 
the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  the 
highest  orders  of  people  are  rated  according 
to  their  rank  by  an  invariable  tariff;  the  lower 
orders  of  people,  according  to  what  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  their  fortune,  by  an  assessment 
which  varies  from  year  to  year.  The  officers 
of  the  king’s  court,  the  judges  and  other 
officers  in  the  superior  courts  of  justice,  the 
officers  of  the  troops,  etc.,  are  assessed  in 
the  first  manner.  The  inferior  ranks  of  people 
in  the  provinces  are  assessed  in  the  second. 
In  France  the  great  easily  submit  to  a  con¬ 
siderable  degree  of  inequality  in  a  tax  which, 
so  far  as  it  affects  them,  is  not  a  very  heavy 
one,  but  could  not  brook  the  arbitrary  assess¬ 
ment  of  an  intendant.  The  inferior  ranks  of 
people  must,  in  that  country,  suffer  patiently 
the  usage  which  their  superiors  think  proper 
to  give  them. 

In  England  the  different  poll-taxes  never 
produced  the  sum  which  had  been  expected 


383 


The  Sources 

from  them,  or  which,  it  was  supposed,  they 
might  have  produced,  had  they  been  exactly 
levied.  In  France  the  capitation  always  pro¬ 
duces  the  sum  expected  from  it.  The  mild 
government  of  England,  when  it  assessed 
the  different  ranks  of  people  to  the  poll-tax, 
contented  itself  with  what  that  assessment 
happened  to  produce,  and  required  no  com¬ 
pensation  for  the  loss  which  the  state  might 
sustain  either  by  those  who  could  not  pay, 
or  by  those  who  would  not  pay  (for  there 
were  many  such) ,  and  who,  by  the  indulgent 
execution  of  the  law,  were  not  forced  to  pay. 
The  more  severe  government  of  France  as¬ 
sesses  upon  each  generality  a  certain  sum, 
which  the  intendant  must  find  as  he  can.  If 
any  province  complains  of  being  assessed 
too  high,  it  may,  in  the  assessment  of  next 
year,  obtain  an  abatement  proportioned  to 
the  overcharge  of  the  year  before.  But  it 
must  pay  in  the  meantime.  The  intendant, 
in  order  to  be  sure  of  finding  the  sum  assessed 
upon  his  generality,  was  empowered  to  assess 
it  in  a  larger  sum  that  the  failure  or  inability 
of  some  of  the  contributors  might  be  com¬ 
pensated  by  the  overcharge  of  the  rest,  and 
till  1765  the  fixation  of  this  surplus  assessment 
was  left  altogether  to  his  discretion.  In  that 
year,  indeed,  the  council  assumed  this  power 
to  itself.  In  the  capitation  of  the  provinces, 
it  is  observed  by  the  perfectly  well-informed 
author  of  the  Memoires  upon  the  impositions 
in  France,  the  proportion  which  falls  upon 
the  nobility,  and  upon  those  whose  privileges 
exempt  them  from  the  taille,  is  the  least 
considerable.  The  largest  falls  upon  those 
subject  to  the  taille,  who  are  assessed  to  the 
capitation  at  so  much  a  pound  of  what  they 
pay  to  that  other  tax. 

Capitation  taxes,  so  far  as  they  are  levied 
upon  the  lower  ranks  of  people,  are  direct 
taxes  upon  the  wages  of  labour,  and  are 
attended  with  all  the  inconveniences  of  such 
taxes. 

Capitation  taxes  are  levied  at  little  expense, 
and,  where  they  are  rigorously  exacted,  af¬ 
ford  a  very  sure  revenue  to  the  state.  It  is 
upon  this  account  that  in  countries  where 
the  ease,  comfort,  and  security  of  the  inferior 
ranks  of  people  are  little  attended  to,  capita¬ 
tion  taxes  are  very  common.  It  is  in  general, 
however,  but  a  small  part  of  the  public 
revenue  which,  in  a  great  empire,  has  ever 
been  drawn  from  such  taxes,  and  the  greatest 
sum  which  they  have  ever  afforded  might  al¬ 
ways  have  been  found  in  some  other  way 
much  more  convenient  to  the  people. 

Taxes  upon  Consumable  Commodities 

The  impossibility  of  taxing  the  people,  in 
proportion  to  their  revenue,  by  any  capita¬ 
tion,  seems  to  have  given  occasion  to  the 


of  Revenue 

invention  of  taxes  upon  consumable  com¬ 
modities.  The  state,  not  knowing  how  to  tax, 
directly  and  proportionably,  the  revenue  of 
its  subjects,  endeavours  to  tax  it  indirectly 
by  taxing  their  expense,  which,  it  is  supposed, 
will  in  most  cases  be  nearly  in  proportion  to 
their  revenue.  Their  expense  is  taxed  by 
taxing  the  consumable  commodities  upon 
which  it  is  laid  out. 

Consumable  commodities  are  either  neces¬ 
saries  or  luxuries. 

By  necessaries  I  understand  not  only  the 
commodities  which  are  indispensably  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  support  of  life,  but  whatever 
the  custom  of  the  country  renders  it  indecent 
for  creditable  people,  even  of  the  lowest 
order,  to  be  without.  A  linen  shirt,  for 
example,  is,  strictly  speaking,  not  a  necessary 
of  life.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  lived,  I  sup¬ 
pose,  very  comfortably  though  they  had  no 
linen.  But  in  the  present  times,  through  the 
greater  part  of  Europe,  a  creditable  day- 
labourer  would  be  ashamed  to  appear  in 
public  without  a  linen  shirt,  the  want  of 
which  would  be  supposed  to  denote  that 
disgraceful  degree  of  poverty  which,  it  is 
presumed,  nobody  can  well  fall  into  without 
extreme  bad  conduct.  Custom,  in  the  same 
manner,  has  rendered  leather  shoes  a  neces¬ 
sary  of  life  in  England.  The  poorest  creditable 
person  of  either  sex  would  be  ashamed  to 
appear  in  public  without  them.  In  Scotland, 
custom  has  rendered  them  a  necessary  of 
life  to  the  lowest  order  of  men;  but  not  to 
the  same  order  of  women,  who  may,  without 
any  discredit,  walk  about  barefooted.  In 
France  they  are  necessaries  neither  to  men 
nor  to  women,  the  lowest  rank  of  both  sexes 
appearing  there  publicly,  without  any  dis¬ 
credit,  sometimes  in  wooden  shoes,  and  some¬ 
times  barefooted.  Under  necessaries,  therefore, 
I  comprehend  not  only  those  things  which 
nature,  but  those  things  which  the  established 
rules  of  decency  have  rendered  necessary  to 
the  lowest  rank  of  people.  All  other  things 
I  call  luxuries,  without  meaning  by  this  ap¬ 
pellation  to  throw  the  smallest  degree  of 
reproach  upon  the  temperate  use  of  them. 
Beer  and  ale,  for  example,  in  Great  Britain, 
and  wine,  even  in  the  wine  countries,  I  call 
luxuries.  A  man  of  any  rank  may,  without 
any  reproach,  abstain  totally  from  tasting 
such  liquors.  Nature  does  not  render  them 
necessary  for  the  support  of  life,  and  custom 
nowhere  renders  it  indecent  to  live  without 
them. 

As  the  wages  of  labour  are  everywhere 
regulated,  partly  by  the  demand  for  it,  and 
partly  by  the  average  price  of  the  necessary 
articles  of  subsistence,  whatever  raises  this 
average  price  must  necessarily  raise  those 
wages  so  that  the  labourer  may  still  be  able 


384 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


to  purchase  that  quantity  of  those  necessary 
articles  which  the  state  of  the  demand  for 
labour,  whether  increasing,  stationary,  or  de¬ 
clining,  requires  that  he  should  have.1  A  tax 
upon  those  articles  necessarily  raises  their 
price  somewhat  higher  than  the  amount  of 
the  tax,  because  the  dealer,  who  advances 
the  tax,  must  generally  get  it  back  with  a 
profit.  Such  a  tax  must,  therefore,  occasion 
a  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour  proportionable 
to  this  rise  of  price. 

It  is  thus  that  a  tax  upon  the  necessaries 
of  life  operates  exactly  in  the  same  manner 
as  a  direct  tax  upon  the  wages  of  labour. 
The  labourer,  though  he  may  pay  it  out  of 
his  hand,  cannot,  for  any  considerable  time 
at  least,  be  properly  said  even  to  advance  it. 
It  must  always  in  the  long-run  be  advanced 
to  him  by  his  immediate  employer  in  the 
advanced  rate  of  his  wages.  His  employer, 
if  he  is  a  manufacturer,  will  charge  upon 
the  price  of  his  goods  this  rise  of  wages, 
together  with  a  profit;  so  that  the  final  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  tax,  together  with  this  over¬ 
charge,  will  fall  upon  the  consumer.  If  his 
employer  is  a  farmer,  the  final  payment, 
together  with  a  like  overcharge,  will  fall 
upon  the  rent  of  the  landlord. 

It  is  otherwise  with  taxes  upon  what  I 
call  luxuries,  even  upon  those  of  the  poor. 
The  rise  in  the  price  of  the  taxed  commodities 
will  not  necessarily  occasion  any  rise  in  the 
wages  of  labour.  A  tax  upon  tobacco,  for 
example,  though  a  luxury  of  the  poor  as  well 
as  of  the  rich,  will  not  raise  wages.  Though 
it  is  taxed  in  England  at  three  times,  and 
in  France  at  fifteen  times  its  original  price, 
those  high  duties  seem  to  have  no  effect 
upon  the  wages  of  labour.  The  same  thing 
may  be  said  of  the  taxes  upon  tea  and  sugar, 
which  in  England  and  Holland  have  become 
luxuries  of  the  lowest  ranks  of  people,  and 
of  those  upon  chocolate,  which  in  Spain  is 
said  to  have  become  so.  The  different  taxes 
which  in  Great  Britain  have  in  the  course 
of  the  present  century  been  imposed  upon 
spirituous  liquors  are  not  supposed  to  have 
had  any  effect  upon  the  wages  of  labour.  The 
rise  in  the  price  of  porter,  occasioned  by  an 
additional  tax  of  three  shillings  upon  the  bar¬ 
rel  of  strong  beer,  has  not  raised  the  wages 
of  common  labour  in  London.  These  were 
about  eighteen  pence  and  twenty  pence  a  day 
before  the  tax,  and  they  are  not  more  now. 

The  high  price  of  such  commodities  does 
not  necessarily  diminish  the  ability  of  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people  to  bring  up  families. 
Upon  the  sober  and  industrious  poor,  taxes 
upon  such  commodities  act  as  sumptuary 
laws,  and  dispose  them  either  to  moderate, 
or  to  refrain  altogether  from  the  use  of 

1  See  Bk.  i.,  ch.  8. 


superfluities  which  they  can  no  longer  easily 
afford.  Their  ability  to  bring  up  families,  in 
consequence  of  this  forced  frugality,  instead 
of  being  diminished,  is  frequently,  perhaps, 
increased  by  the  tax.  It  is  the  sober  and 
industrious  poor  who  generally  bring  up  the 
most  numerous  families,  and  who  principally 
supply  the  demand  for  useful  labour.  All  the 
poor,  indeed,  are  not  sober  and  industrious, 
and  the  dissolute  and  disorderly  might  con¬ 
tinue  to  indulge  themselves  in  the  use  of 
such  commodities  after  this  rise  of  price  in 
the  same  manner  as  before  without  regarding 
the  distress  which  this  indulgence  might 
bring  upon  their  families.  Such  disorderly 
persons,  however,  seldom  rear  up  numerous 
families,  their  children  generally  perishing 
from  neglect,  mismanagement,  and  the  scanti¬ 
ness  or  unwholesomeness  of  their  food.  If  by 
the  strength  of  their  constitution  they  survive 
the  hardships  to  which  the  bad  conduct  of 
their  parents  exposes  them,  yet  the  example 
of  that  bad  conduct  commonly  corrupts  their 
morals,  so  that,  instead  of  being  useful  to 
society  by  their  industry,  they  become  public 
nuisances  by  their  vices  and  disorders.  Though 
the  advanced  price  of  the  luxuries  of  the 
poor,  therefore,  might  increase  somewhat 
the  distress  of  such  disorderly  families,  and 
thereby  diminish  somewhat  their  ability  to 
bring  up  children,  it  would  not  probably 
diminish  much  the  useful  population  of 
the  country. 

Any  rise  in  the  average  price  of  necessaries, 
unless  it  is  compensated  by  a  proportionable 
rise  in  the  wages  of  labour,  must  necessarily 
diminish  more  or  less  the  ability  of  the  poor 
to  bring  up  numerous  families,  and  conse¬ 
quently  to  supply  the  demand  for  useful 
labour,  whatever  may  be  the  state  of  that 
demand,  whether  increasing,  stationary,  or 
declining,  or  such  as  requires  an  increasing, 
stationary,  or  declining  population. 

Taxes  upon  luxuries  have  no  tendency  to 
raise  the  price  of  any  other  commodities 
except  that  of  the  commodities  taxed.  Taxes 
upon  necessaries,  by  raising  the  wages  of 
labour,  necessarily  tend  to  raise  the  price  of 
all  manufactures,  and  consequently  to  di¬ 
minish  the  extent  of  their  sale  and  consump¬ 
tion.  Taxes  upon  luxuries  are  finally  paid 
by  the  consumers  of  the  commodities  taxed 
without  any  retribution.  They  fall  indiffer¬ 
ently  upon  every  species  of  revenue,  the 
wages  of  labour,  the  profits  of  stock,  and  the 
rent  of  land.  Taxes  upon  necessaries,  so  far 
as  they  affect  the  labouring  poor,  are  finally 
paid,  partly  by  landlords  in  the  diminished 
rent  of  their  lands,  and  partly  by  rich  con¬ 
sumers,  whether  landlords  or  others,  in  the 
advanced  price  of  manufactured  goods,  and 
always  with  a  considerable  overcharge.  The 


The  Sources 

advanced  price  of  such  manufactures  as  are 
real  necessaries  of  life,  and  are  destined  for 
the  consumption  of  the  poor,  of  coarse  wool¬ 
lens,  for  example,  must  be  compensated  to 
the  poor  by  a  further  advancement  of  their 
wages.  The  middling  and  superior  ranks  of 
people,  if  they  understand  their  own  interest, 
ought  always  to  oppose  all  taxes  upon  the 
necessaries  of  life,  as  well  as  all  direct  taxes 
upon  the  wages  of  labour.  The  final  payment 
of  both  the  one  and  the  other  falls  altogether 
upon  themselves,  and  always  with  a  consider¬ 
able  overcharge.  They  fall  heaviest  upon  the 
landlords,  who  always  pay  in  a  double  capac¬ 
ity;  in  that  of  landlords  by  the  reduction 
of  their  rent,  and  in  that  of  rich  consumers 
by  the  increase  of  their  expense.  The  obser¬ 
vation  of  Sir  Matthew  Decker,  that  certain 
taxes  are,  in  the  price  of  certain  goods,  some¬ 
times  repeated  and  accumulated  four  or  five 
times,  is  perfectly  just  with  regard  to  taxes 
upon  the  necessaries  of  life.  In  the  price  of 
leather,  for  example,  you  must  pay  not  only 
for  the  tax  upon  the  leather  of  your  own 
shoes,  but  for  a  part  of  that  upon  those  of 
the  shoemaker  and  the  tanner.  You  must 
pay,  too,  for  the  tax  upon  the  salt,  upon 
the  soap,  and  upon  the  candles  which  those 
workmen  consume  while  employed  in  your 
service,  and  for  the  tax  upon  the  leather 
which  the  salt-maker,  the  soap-maker,  and 
the  candle-maker  consume  while  employed  in 
their  service. 

In  Great  Britain,  the  principal  taxes  upon 
the  necessaries  of  life  are  those  upon  the 
four  commodities  just  now  mentioned,  salt, 
leather,  soap,  and  candles. 

Salt  is  a  very  ancient  and  a  very  universal 
subject  of  taxaation.  It  was  taxed  among  the 
Romans,  and  it  is  so  at  present  in,  I  believe, 
every  part  of  Europe.  The  quantity  annually 
consumed  by  any  individual  is  so  small,  and 
may  be  purchased  so  gradually,  that  nobody, 
it  seems  to  have  been  thought,  could  feel 
very  sensibly  even  a  pretty  heavy  tax  upon 
it.  It  is  in  England  taxed  at  three  shillings 
and  fourpence  a  bushel — about  three  times 
the  original  price  of  the  commodity.  In  some 
other  countries  the  tax  is  still  higher.  Leather 
is  a  real  necessary  of  life.  The  use  of  linen 
renders  soap  such.  In  countries  where  the 
winter  nights  are  long,  candles  are  a  necessary 
instrument  of  trade.  Leather  and  soap  are  in 
Great  Britain  taxed  at  three  halfpence  a 
pound,  candles  at  a  penny;  taxes  which,  upon 
the  original  price  of  leather,  may  amount  to 
about  eight  or  ten  per  cent;  upon  that  of 
soap  to  about  twenty  or  five-and-twenty  per 
cent;  and  upon  that  of  candles  to  about  four¬ 
teen  or  fifteen  per  cent;  taxes  which,  though 
lighter  than  that  upon  salt,  are  still  very 
heavy.  As  all  those  four  commodities  are  real 


of  Revenue  385 

necessaries  of  life,  such  heavy  taxes  upon 
them  must  increase  somewhat  the  expense 
of  the  sober  and  industrious  poor,  and  must 
consequently  raise  more  or  less  the  wages  of 
their  labour. 

In  a  country  where  the  winters  are  so  cold 
as  in  Great  Britain,  fuel  is,  during  that 
season,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  a 
necessary  of  life,  not  only  for  the  purpose 
of  dressing  victuals,  but  for  the  comfortable 
subsistence  of  many  different  sorts  of  work¬ 
men  who  work  within  doors;  and  coals  are 
the  cheapest  of  all  fuel.  The  price  of  fuel  has 
so  important  an  influence  upon  that  of  labour 
that  all  over  Great  Britain  manufactures 
have  confined  themselves  principally  to  the 
coal  countries,  other  parts  of  the  country,  on 
account  of  the  high  price  of  this  necessary 
article,  not  being  able  to  work  so  cheap.  In 
some  manufactures,  besides,  coal  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  instrument  of  trade,  as  in  those  of  glass, 
iron,  and  all  other  metals.  If  a  bounty  could 
in  any  case  be  reasonable,  it  might  perhaps  be 
so  upon  the  transportation  of  coals  from 
those  parts  of  the  country  in  which  they 
abound  to  those  in  which  they  are  wanted. 
But  the  legislature,  instead  of  a  bounty,  has 
imposed  a  tax  of  three  shillings  and  three¬ 
pence  a  ton  upon  coal  carried  coastways, 
which  upon  most  sorts  of  coal  is  more  than 
sixty  per  cent  of  the  original  price  at  the 
coal-pit.  Coals  carried  either  by  land  or  by 
inland  navigation  pay  no  duty.  Where  they 
are  naturally  cheap,  they  are  consumed  duty 
free:  where  they  are  naturally  dear,  they 
are  loaded  with  a  heavy  duty. 

Such  taxes,  though  they  raise  the  price  of 
subsistence,  and  consequently  the  wages  of 
labour,  yet  they  afford  a  considerable  revenue 
to  government  which  it  might  not  be  easy 
to  find  in  any  other  way.  There  may,  there¬ 
fore,  be  good  reasons  for  continuing  them. 
The  bounty  upon  the  exportation  of  com, 
so  far  as  it  tends  in  the  actual  state  of  tillage 
to  raise  the  price  of  that  necessary  article, 
produces  all  the  like  bad  effects,  and  instead 
of  affording  any  revenue,  frequently  occasions 
a  very  great  expense  to  government.  The 
high  duties  upon  the  importation  of  foreign 
corn,  which  in  years  of  moderate  plenty 
amount  to  a  prohibition,  and  the  absolute 
prohibition  of  the  importation  either  of  live 
cattle  or  of  salt  provisions,  which  takes  place 
in  the  ordinary  state  of  the  law,  and  which, 
on  account  of  the  scarcity,  is  at  present  sus¬ 
pended  for  a  limited  time  with  regard  to 
Ireland  and  the  British  plantations,  have 
all  the  bad  effects  of  taxes  upon  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life,  and  produce  no  revenue  to 
government.  Nothing  seems  necessary  for 
the  repeal  of  such  regulations  but  to  convince 
the  public  of  the  futility  of  that  system  in 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


386 

consequence  of  which  they  have  been  es¬ 
tablished. 

Taxes  upon  the  necessaries  of  life  are  much 
higher  in  many  other  countries  than  in  Great 
Britain.  Duties  upon  flour  and  meal  when 
ground  at  the  mill,  and  upon  bread  when 
baked  at  the  oven,  take  place  in  many  coun¬ 
tries.  In  Holland  the  money  price  of  the 
bread  consumed  in  towns  is  supposed  to  be 
doubled  by  means  of  such  taxes.  In  lieu  of 
a  part  of  them,  the  people  who  live  in  the 
country  pay  every  year  so  much  a  head 
according  to  the  sort  of  bread  they  are 
supposed  to  consume.  Those  who  consume 
wheaten  bread  pay  three  guilders  fifteen 
stivers — about  six  shillings  and  ninepence 
halfpenny.  These,  and  some  other  taxes  of 
the  same  kind,  by  raising  the  price  of  labour, 
are  said  to  have  ruined  the  greater  part  of 
the  manufactures  of  Holland.1  Similar  taxes, 
though  not  quite  so  heavy,  take  place  in  the 
Milanese,  in  the  states  of  Genoa,  in  the  duchy 
of  Modena,  in  the  duchies  of  Parma,  Pla¬ 
centia,  and  Guastalla,  and  in  the  ecclesiastical 
state.  A  French2  author  of  some  note  has 
proposed  to  reform  the  finances  of  his  country 
by  substituting  in  the  room  of  the  greater 
part  of  other  taxes  this  most  ruinous  of  all 
taxes.  There  is  nothing  so  absurd,  says  Cicero, 
which  has  not  sometimes  been  asserted  by 
philosophers. 

Taxes  upon  butchers’  meat  are  still  more 
common  than  those  upon  bread.  It  may 
indeed  be  doubted  whether  butchers’  meat 
is  anywhere  a  necessary  of  life.  Grain  and 
other  vegetables,  with  the  help  of  milk,  cheese, 
and  butter,  or  oil  where  butter  is  not  to  be 
had,  it  is  known  from  experience,  can,  with¬ 
out  any  butchers’  meat,  afford  the  most 
plentiful,  the  most  wholesome,  the  most 
nourishing,  and  the  most  invigorating  diet. 
Decency  nowhere  requires  that  any  man 
should  eat  butchers’  meat,  as  it  in  most 
places  requires  that  he  should  wear  a  linen 
shirt  or  a  pair  of  leather  shoes. 

Consumable  commodities,  whether  neces¬ 
saries  or  luxuries,  may  be  taxed  in  two  differ¬ 
ent  ways.  The  consumer  may  either  pay  an 
annual  sum  on  account  of  his  using  or  con¬ 
suming  goods  of  a  certain  kind,  or  the  goods 
may  be  taxed  while  they  remain  in  the  hands 
of  the  dealer,  and  before  they  are  delivered 
to  the  consumer.  The  consumable  goods  which 
last  a  considerable  time  before  they  are 
consumed  altogether  are  most  properly  taxed 
in  the  one  way;  those  of  which  the  consump¬ 
tion  is  either  immediate  or  more  speedy,  in 
the  other.  The  coach-tax  and  plate-tax  are 
examples  of  the  former  method  of  imposing: 

1 Memoires  concemant  les  droits ,  etc.,  pp.  210, 
211. 

2  Le  Rejormateur. 


the  greater  part  of  the  other  duties  of  excise 
and  customs,  of  the  latter. 

A  coach  may,  with  good  management,  last 
ten  or  twelve  years.  It  might  be  taxed,  once 
for  all,  before  it  comes  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  coachmaker.  But  it  is  certainly  more 
convenient  for  the  buyer  to  pay  four  pounds 
a  year  for  the  privilege  of  keeping  a  coach 
than  to  pay  all  at  once  forty  or  forty-eight 
pounds  additional  price  to  the  coachmaker, 
or  a  sum  equivalent  to  what  the  tax  is  likely 
to  cost  him  during  the  time  he  uses  the 
same  coach.  A  service  of  plate,  in  the  same 
manner,  may  last  more  than  a  century.  It 
is  certainly  easier  for  the  consumer  to  pay 
five  shillings  a  year  for  every  hundred  ounces 
of  plate,  near  one  per  cent  of  the  value,  than 
to  redeem  this  long  annuity  at  five-and- 
twenty  or  thirty  years’  purchase,  which  would 
enhance  the  price  at  least  five-and-twenty 
or  thirty  per  cent.  The  different  taxes  which 
affect  houses  are  certainly  more  conveniently 
paid  by  moderate  annual  payments  than  by 
a  heavy  tax  of  equal  value  upon  the  first 
building  or  sale  of  the  house. 

It  was  the  well-known  proposal  of  Sir 
Matthew  Decker  that  all  commodities,  even 
those  of  which  the  consumption  is  either 
immediate  or  very  speedy,  should  be  taxed 
in  this  manner,  the  dealer  advancing  nothing, 
but  the  consumer  paying  a  certain  annual 
sum  for  the  licence  to  consume  certain  goods. 
The  object  of  his  scheme  was  to  promote  all 
the  different  branches  of  foreign  trade,  par¬ 
ticularly  the  carrying  trade,  by  taking  away 
all  duties  upon  importation  and  exportation, 
and  thereby  enabling  the  merchant  to  employ 
his  whole  capital  and  credit  in  the  purchase 
of  goods  and  the  freight  of  ships,  no  part  of 
either  being  diverted  towards  the  advancing 
of  taxes.  The  project,  however,  of  taxing,  in 
this  manner,  goods  of  immediate  or  speedy 
consumption  seems  liable  to  the  four  follow¬ 
ing  very  important  objections.  First,  the  tax 
would  be  more  unequal,  or  not  so  well  pro¬ 
portioned  to  the  expense  and  consumption 
of  the  different  contributors  as  in  the  way 
in  which  it  is  commonly  imposed.  The  taxes 
upon  ale,  wine,  and  spirituous  liquors,  which 
are  advanced  by  the  dealers,  are  finally 
paid  by  the  different  consumers  exactly  in 
proportion  to  their  respective  consumption. 
But  if  the  tax  were  to  be  paid  by  purchasing 
a  licence  to  drink  those  liquors,  the  sober 
would,  in  proportion  to  his  consumption, 
be  taxed  much  more  heavily  than  the  drunken 
consumer.  A  family  which  exercised  great 
hospitality  would  be  taxed  much  more  lightly 
than  one  who  entertained  fewer  guests. 
Secondly,  this  mode  of  taxation,  by  paying 
for  an  annual,  half-yearly,  or  quarterly  licence 
to  consume  certain  goods,  would  diminish 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


very  much  one  of  the  principal  conveniences 
of  taxes  upon  goods  of  speedy  consumption — 
the  piecemeal  payment.  In  the  price  of  three¬ 
pence  halfpenny,  which  is  at  present  paid 
for  a  pot  of  porter,  the  different  taxes  upon 
malt,  hops,  and  beer,  together  with  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  profit  which  the  brewer  charges  for 
having  advanced  them,  may  perhaps  amount 
to  about  three  halfpence.  If  a  workman  can 
conveniently  spare  those  three  halfpence,  he 
buys  a  pot  of  porter.  If  he  cannot,  he  contents 
himself  with  a  pint,  and,  as  a  penny  saved 
is  a  penny  got,  he  thus  gains  a  farthing  by 
his  temperance.  He  pays  the  tax  piecemeal 
as  he  can  afford  to  pay  it,  and  when  he  can 
afford  to  pay  it,  and  every  act  of  payment 
is  perfectly  voluntary,  and  what  he  can  avoid 
if  he  chooses  to  do  so.  Thirdly,  such  taxes 
would  operate  less  as  sumptuary  laws.  When 
the  licence  was  once  purchased,  whether 
the  purchaser  drank  much  or  drank  little, 
his  tax  would  be  the  same.  Fourthly,  if  a 
workman  were  to  pay  all  at  once,  by  yearly, 
half-yearly,  or  quarterly  payments,  a  tax 
equal  to  what  he  at  present  pays,  with  little 
or  no  inconveniency,  upon  all  the  different 
pots  and  pints  of  porter  which  he  drinks  in 
any  such  period  of  time,  the  sum  might 
frequently  distress  him  very  much.  This  mode 
of  taxation,  therefore,  it  seems  evident,  could 
never,  without  the  most  grievous  oppression, 
produce  a  revenue  nearly  equal  to  what  is 
derived  from  the  present  mode  without  any 
oppression.  In  several  countries,  however, 
commodities  of  an  immediate  or  very  speedy 
consumption  are  taxed  in  this  manner.  In 
Holland  people  pay  so  much  a  head  for  a 
licence  to  drink  tea.  I  have  already  men¬ 
tioned  a  tax  upon  bread,  which,  so  far  as  it 
is  consumed  in  farm-houses  and  country 
villages,  is  there  levied  in  the  same  manner. 

The  duties  of  excise  are  imposed  briefly 
upon  goods  of  home  produce  destined  for 
home  consumption.  They  are  imposed  only 
upon  a  few  sorts  of  goods  of  the  most  general 
use.  There  can  never  be  any  doubt  either 
concerning  the  goods  which  are  subject  to 
those  duties,  or  concerning  the  particular 
duty  which  each  species  of  goods  is  subject 
to.  They  fall  almost  altogether  upon  what 
I  call  luxuries,  excepting  always  the  four 
duties  above  mentioned,  upon  salt,  soap, 
leather,  candles,  and,  perhaps,  that  upon 
green  glass. 

The  duties  of  customs  are  much  more 
ancient  than  those  of  excise.  They  seem  to 
have  been  called  customs  as  denoting  custom¬ 
ary  payments  which  had  been  in  use  from 
time  immemorial.  They  appear  to  have  been 
originally  considered  as  taxes  upon  the  profits 
of  merchants.  During  the  barbarous  times  of 
feudal  anarchy,  merchants,  like  all  the  other 


387 

inhabitants  of  burghs,  were  considered  as 
little  better  than  emancipated  bondmen, 
whose  persons  were  despised,  and  whose 
gains  were  envied.  The  great  nobility,  who 
had  consented  that  the  king  should  tallage 
the  profits  of  their  own  tenants,  were  not 
unwilling  that  he  should  tallage  likewise  those 
of  an  order  of  men  whom  it  was  much  less 
their  interest  to  protect.  In  those  ignorant 
times  it  was  not  understood  that  the  profits 
of  merchants  are  a  subject  not  taxable  direct¬ 
ly,  or  that  the  final  payment  of  all  such 
taxes  must  fall,  with  a  considerable  over¬ 
charge,  upon  the  consumers. 

The  gains  of  alien  merchants  were  looked 
upon  more  unfavourably  than  those  of  Eng¬ 
lish  merchants.  It  was  natural,  therefore, 
that  those  of  the  former  should  be  taxed 
more  heavily  than  those  of  the  latter.  This 
distinction  between  the  duties  upon  aliens 
and  those  upon  English  merchants,  which 
was  begun  from  ignorance,  has  been  continued 
from  the  spirit  of  monopoly,  or  in  order  to 
give  our  own  merchants  an  advantage  both 
in  the  home  and  in  the  foreign  market. 

With  this  distinction,  the  ancient  duties 
of  customs  were  imposed  equally  upon  all 
sorts  of  goods,  necessaries  as  well  as  luxuries, 
goods  exported  as  well  as  goods  imported. 
Why  should  the  dealers  in  one  sort  of  goods, 
it  seems  to  have  been  thought,  be  more 
favoured  than  those  in  another?  or  why 
should  the  merchant  exporter  be  more  fa¬ 
voured  than  the  merchant  importer? 

The  ancient  customs  were  divided  into 
three  branches.  The  first,  and  perhaps  the 
most  ancient  of  all  those  duties,  was  that 
upon  wool  and  leather.  It  seems  to  have 
been  chiefly  or  altogether  an  exportation  duty. 
When  the  woollen  manufacture  came  to  be 
established  in  England,  lest  the  king  should 
lose  any  part  of  his  customs  upon  wool 
by  the  exportation  of  woollen  cloths,  a  like 
duty  was  imposed  upon  them.  The  other 
two  branches  were,  first,  a  duty  upon  wine, 
which,  being  imposed  at  so  much  a  ton,  was 
called  a  tonnage,  and,  secondly,  a  duty  upon 
all  other  goods,  which,  being  imposed  at  so 
much  a  pound  of  their  supposed  value,  was 
called  a  poundage.  In  the  forty-seventh  year 
of  Edward  III  a  duty  of  sixpence  in  the 
pound  was  imposed  upon  all  goods  exported 
and  imported,  except  wools,  wool-fells,  leather, 
and  wines,  which  were  subject  to  particular 
duties.  In  the  fourteenth  of  Richard  II  this 
duty  was  raised  to  one  shilling  in  the  pound, 
but  three  years  afterwards  it  was  again 
reduced  to  sixpence.  It  was  raised  to  eight- 
pence  in  the  second  year  of  Henry  IV,  and 
in  the  fourth  year  of  the  same  prince  to 
one  shilling.  From  this  time  to  the  ninth 
year  of  William  III  this  duty  continued  at 


388  The  Wealth 

one  shilling  in  the  pound.  The  duties  of 
tonnage  and  poundage  were  generally  granted 
to  the  king  by  one  and  the  same  Act  of 
Parliament,  and  were  called  the  Subsidy  of 
Tonnage  and  Poundage.  The  Subsidy  of 
Poundage  having  continued  for  so  long  a 
time  at  one  shilling  in  the  pound,  or  at  five 
per  cent,  a  subsidy  came,  in  the  language 
of  the  customs,  to  denote  a  general  duty  of 
this  kind  of  five  per  cent.  This  subsidy, 
which  is  now  called  the  Old  Subsidy,  still 
continues  to  be  levied  according  to  the  book 
of  rates  established  in  the  twelfth  of  Charles 
II.  The  method  of  ascertaining,  by  a  book 
of  rates,  the  value  of  goods  subject  to  this 
duty  is  said  to  be  older  than  the  time  of 
James  I.  The  New  Subsidy  imposed  by  the 
ninth  and  tenth  of  William  III  was  an  addi¬ 
tional  five  per  cent  upon  the  greater  part  of 
goods.  The  One-third  and  the  Two-third 
Subsidy  made  up  between  them  another  five 
per  cent  of  which  they  were  proportionable 
parts.  The  Subsidy  of  1747  made  a  fourth 
five  per  cent  upon  the  greater  part  of  goods; 
and  that  of  1759  a  fifth  upon  some  particular 
sorts  of  goods.  Besides  those  five  subsidies, 
a  great  variety  of  other  duties  have  occasion¬ 
ally  been  imposed  upon  particular  sorts  of 
goods,  in  order  sometimes  to  relieve  the 
exigencies  of  the  state,  and  sometimes  to 
regulate  the  trade  of  the  country  according 
to  the  principles  of  the  mercantile  system. 

That  system  has  come  gradually  more 
and  more  into  fashion.  The  Old  Subsidy  was 
imposed  indifferently  upon  exportation  as 
well  as  importation.  The  four  subsequent 
subsidies,  as  well  as  the  other  duties  which 
have  been  occasionally  imposed  upon  par¬ 
ticular  sorts  of  goods  have,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  been  laid  altogether  upon  impor¬ 
tation.  The  greater  part  of  the  ancient  duties 
which  had  been  imposed  upon  the  exportation 
of  the  goods  of  home  produce  and  manufac¬ 
ture  have  either  been  lightened  or  taken 
away  altogether.  In  most  cases  they  have 
been  taken  away.  Bounties  have  even  been 
given  upon  the  exportation  of  some  of  them. 
Drawbacks  too,  sometimes  of  the  whole,  and, 
in  most  cases,  of  a  part  of  the  duties  which 
are  paid  upon  the  importation  of  foreign 
goods,  have  been  granted  upon  their  expor¬ 
tation.  Only  half  the  duties  imposed  by  the 
Old  Subsidy  upon  importation  are  drawn 
back  upon  exportation:  but  the  whole  of 
those  imposed  by  the  latter  subsidies  and 
other  imposts  are,  upon  the  greater  part  of 
goods,  drawn  back  in  the  same  manner.  This 
growing  favour  of  exportation,  and  dis¬ 
couragement  of  importation,  have  suffered 
only  a  few  exceptions,  which  chiefly  concern 
the  materials  of  some  manufactures.  These 
our  merchants  and  manufacturers  are  willing 


of  Nations 

should  come  as  cheap  as  possible  to  them¬ 
selves,  and  as  dear  as  possible  to  their  rivals 
and  competitors  in  other  countries.  Foreign 
materials  are,  upon  this  account,  sometimes 
allowed  to  be  imported  duty  free;  Spanish 
wool,  for  example,  flax,  and  raw  linen  yarn. 
The  exportation  of  the  materials  of  home 
produce,  and  of  those  which  are  the  particular 
produce  of  our  colonies,  has  sometimes  been 
prohibited,  and  sometimes  subjected  to  higher 
duties.  The  exportation  of  English  wool  has 
been  prohibited.  That  of  beaver  skins,  of 
beaver  wool,  and  of  gum  Senega  has  been 
subjected  to  higher  duties.  Great  Britain, 
by  the  conquest  of  Canada  and  Senegal,  hav¬ 
ing  got  almost  the  monopoly  of  those  com¬ 
modities. 

That  the  mercantile  system  has  not  been 
very  favourable  to  the  revenue  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  to  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country,  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show  in  the  fourth  book  of 
this  Inquiry.  It  seems  not  to  have  been  more 
favourable  to  the  revenue  of  the  sovereign, 
so  far  at  least  as  that  revenue  depends  upon 
the  duties  of  customs. 

In  consequence  of  that  system,  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  several  sorts  of  goods  has  been 
prohibited  altogether.  This  prohibition  has 
in  some  cases  entirely  prevented,  and  in 
others  has  very  much  diminished  the  impor¬ 
tation  of  those  commodities  by  reducing 
the  importers  to  the  necessity  of  smuggling. 
It  has  entirely  prevented  the  importation  of 
foreign  woollens,  and  it  has  very  much  di¬ 
minished  that  of  foreign  silks  and  velvets.  In 
both  cases  it  has  entirely  annihilated  the 
revenue  of  customs  which  might  have  been 
levied  upon  such  importation. 

The  high  duties  which  have  been  imposed 
upon  the  importation  of  many  different  sorts 
of  foreign  goods,  in  order  to  discourage  their 
consumption  in  Great  Britain,  have  in  many 
cases  served  only  to  encourage  smuggling, 
and  in  all  cases  have  reduced  the  revenue 
of  the  customs  below  what  more  moderate 
duties  would  have  afforded.  The  saying  of 
Dr.  Swift,  that  in  the  arithmetic  of  the 
customs  two  and  two,  instead  of  making 
four,  make  sometimes  only  one,  holds  per¬ 
fectly  true  with  regard  to  such  heavy  duties 
which  never  could  have  been  imposed  had 
not  the  mercantile  system  taught  us,  in  many 
cases,  to  employ  taxation  as  an  instrument, 
not  of  revenue,  but  of  monopoly. 

The  bounties  which  are  sometimes  given 
upon  the  exportation  of  home  produce  and 
manufactures,  and  the  drawbacks  which  are 
paid  upon  the  re-exportation  of  the  greater 
part  of  foreign  goods,  have  given  occasion 
to  many  frauds,  and  to  a  species  of  smuggling 
more  destructive  of  the  public  revenue  than 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


any  other.  In  order  to  obtain  the  bounty  or 
drawback,  the  goods,  it  is  well  known,  are 
sometimes  shipped  and  sent  to  sea,  but  soon 
afterwards  clandestinely  relanded  in  some 
other  part  of  the  country.  The  defalcation 
of  the  revenue  of  customs  occasioned  by  the 
bounties  and  drawbacks,  of  which  a  great 
part  are  obtained  fraudulently,  is  very  great. 
The  gross  produce  of  the  customs  in  the  year 
which  ended  on  the  5th  of  January  1755 
amounted  to  £5,068,000.  The  bounties  which 
were  paid  out  of  this  revenue,  though  in 
that  year  there  was  no  bounty  upon  corn, 
amounted  to  £167,800.  The  drawbacks  which 
were  paid  upon  debentures  and  certificates, 
to  £2,156,800.  Bounties  and  drawbacks  to¬ 
gether  amounted  to  £2,324,600.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  these  deductions  the  revenue  of 
the  customs  amounted  only  to  £2,743,400: 
from  which,  deducting  £287,900  for  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  management  in  salaries  and  other 
incidents,  the  net  revenue  of  the  customs  for 
that  year  comes  out  to  be  £2,455,500.  The 
expense  of  management  amounts  in  this 
manner  to  between  five  and  six  per  cent 
upon  the  gross  revenue  of  the  customs,  and 
to  something  more  than  ten  per  cent  upon 
what  remains  of  that  revenue  after  deducting 
what  is  paid  away  in  bounties  and  drawbacks. 

Heavy  duties  being  imposed  upon  almost 
all  goods  imported,  our  merchant  importers 
smuggle  as  much  and  make  entry  of  as  little 
as  they  can.  Our  merchant  exporters,  on  the 
contrary,  make  entry  of  more  than  they 
export;  sometimes  out  of  vanity,  and  to  pass 
for  great  dealers  in  goods  which  pay  no  duty, 
and  sometimes  to  gain  a  bounty  or  a  draw¬ 
back.  Our  exports,  in  consequence  of  these 
different  frauds,  appear  upon  the  custom¬ 
house  books  greatly  to  overbalance  our  im¬ 
ports,  to  the  unspeakable  comfort  of  those 
politicians  who  measure  the  national  pros¬ 
perity  by  what  they  call  the  balance  of  trade. 

All  goods  imported,  unless  particularly 
exempted,  and  such  exemptions  are  not  very 
numerous,  are  liable  to  some  duties  of  cus¬ 
toms.  If  any  goods  are  imported  not  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  book  of  rates,  they  are  taxed 
at  4s.  9y20d.  for  every  twenty  shillings  value, 
according  to  the  oath  of  the  importer,  that 
is,  nearly  at  five  subsidies,  or  five  poundage 
duties.  The  book  of  rates  is  extremely  com¬ 
prehensive,  and  enumerates  a  great  variety  of 
articles,  many  of  them  little  used,  and  there¬ 
fore  not  well  known.  It  is  upon  this  account 
frequently  uncertain  under  what  article  a 
particular  sort  of  goods  ought  to  be  classed, 
and  consequently  what  duty  they  ought  to 
pay.  Mistakes  with  regard  to  this  sometimes 
ruin  the  custom-house  officer,  and  frequently 
occasion  much  trouble,  expense,  and  vexation 
to  the  importer.  In  point  of  perspicuity,  pre¬ 


389 

cision,  and  distinctness,  therefore,  the  duties 
of  customs  are  much  more  inferior  to  those 
of  excise. 

In  order  that  the  greater  part  of  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  any  society  should  contribute  to  the 
public  revenue  in  proportion  to  their  respec¬ 
tive  expense,  it  does  not  seem  necessary  that 
every  single  article  of  that  expense  should  be 
taxed.  The  revenue  which  is  levied  by  the 
duties  of  excise  is  supposed  to  fall  as  equally 
upon  the  contributors  as  that  which  is  levied 
by  the  duties  of  customs,  and  the  duties  of 
excise  are  imposed  upon  a  few  articles  only 
of  the  most  general  use  and  consumption.  It 
has  been  the  opinion  of  many  people  that, 
by  proper  management,  the  duties  of  customs 
might  likewise,  without  any  loss  to  the  public 
revenue,  and  with  great  advantage  to  foreign 
trade,  be  confined  to  a  few  articles  only. 

The  foreign  articles  of  the  most  general 
use  and  consumption  in  Great  Britain  seem 
at  present  to  consist  chiefly  in  foreign  wines 
and  brandies;  in  some  of  the  productions  of 
America  and  the  West  Indies — sugar,  rum, 
tobacco,  cocoanuts,  etc.;  and  in  some  of  those 
of  the  East  Indies — tea,  coffee,  china-ware, 
spiceries  of  all  kinds,  several  sorts  of  piece- 
goods,  etc.  These  different  articles  afford, 
perhaps,  at  present,  the  greater  part  of  the 
revenue  which  is  drawn  from  the  duties  of 
customs.  The  taxes  which  at  present  subsist 
upon  foreign  manufactures,  if  you  except 
those  upon  the  few  contained  in  the  fore¬ 
going  enumeration,  have  the  greater  part  of 
them  been  imposed  for  the  purpose,  not  of 
revenue,  but  of  monopoly,  or  to  give  our  own 
merchants  an  advantage  in  the  home  market. 
By  removing  all  prohibitions,  and  by  sub¬ 
jecting  all  foreign  manufactures  to  such 
moderate  taxes  as  it  was  found  from  experi¬ 
ence  afforded  upon  each  article  the  greatest 
revenue  to  the  public,  our  own  workmen 
might  still  have  a  considerable  advantage  in 
the  home  market,  and  many  articles,  some 
of  which  at  present  afford  no  revenue  to 
government,  and  others  a  very  inconsiderable 
one,  might  afford  a  very  great  one. 

High  taxes,  sometimes  by  diminishing  the 
consumption  of  the  taxed  commodities,  and 
sometimes  by  encouraging  smuggling,  fre¬ 
quently  afford  a  smaller  revenue  to  govern¬ 
ment  than  what  might  be  drawn  from  more 
moderate  taxes. 

When  the  diminution  of  revenue  is  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  the  diminution  of  consumption  there 
can  be  but  one  remedy,  and  that  is  the  low¬ 
ering  of  the  tax. 

When  the  diminution  of  the  revenue  is  the 
effect  of  the  encouragement  given  to  smug¬ 
gling,  it  may  perhaps  be  remedied  in  two 
ways;  either  by  diminishing  the  temptation 
to  smuggle,  or  by  increasing  the  difficulty  of 


390  The  Wealth 

smuggling.  The  temptation  to  smuggle  can 
be  diminished  only  by  the  lowering  of  the 
tax,  and  the  difficulty  of  smuggling  can  be 
increased  only  by  establishing  that  system  of 
administration  which  is  most  proper  for  pre¬ 
venting  it. 

The  excise  laws,  it  appears,  I  believe,  from 
experience,  obstruct  and  embarrass  the  op¬ 
erations  of  the  smuggler  much  more  effec¬ 
tually  than  those  of  the  customs.  By  intro¬ 
ducing  into  the  customs  a  system  of  admin¬ 
istration  as  similar  to  that  of  the  excise  as 
the  nature  of  the  different  duties  will  admit, 
the  difficulty  of  smuggling  might  be  very 
much  increased.  This  alteration,  it  has  been 
supposed  by  many  people,  might  very  easily 
be  brought  about. 

The  importer  of  commodities  liable  to  any 
duties  of  customs,  it  has  been  said,  might  as 
his  option  be  allowed  either  to  carry  them  to 
his  own  private  warehouse,  or  to  lodge  them 
in  a  warehouse  provided  either  at  his  own  ex¬ 
pense  or  at  that  of  the  public,  but  under  the 
key  of  the  custom-house  officer,  and  never 
to  be  opened  but  in  his  presence.  If  the  mer¬ 
chant  carried  them  to  his  own  private  ware¬ 
house,  the  duties  to  be  immediately  paid,  and 
never  afterwards  to  be  drawn  back,  and  that 
warehouse  to  be  at  all  times  subject  to  the 
visit  and  examination  of  the  custom-house 
officer,  in  order  to  ascertain  how  far  the  quan¬ 
tity  contained  in  it  corresponded  with  that 
for  which  the  duty  had  been  paid.  If  he  car¬ 
ried  them  to  the  public  warehouse,  no  duty 
to  be  paid  till  they  were  taken  out  for  home 
consumption.  If  taken  out  for  exportation, 
to  be  duty  free,  proper  security  being  always 
given  that  they  should  be  so  exported. 
The  dealers  in  those  particular  commodities, 
either  by  wholesale  or  retail,  to  be  at  all  times 
subject  to  the  visit  and  examination  of  the 
custom-house  officer,  and  to  be  obliged  to 
justify  by  proper  certificates  the  payment  of 
the  duty  upon  the  whole  quantity  contained 
in  their  shops  or  warehouses.  What  are 
called  the  excise-duties  upon  rum  imported 
are  at  present  levied  in  this  manner,  and  the 
same  system  of  administration  might  per¬ 
haps  be  extended  to  all  duties  upon  goods 
imported,  provided  always  that  those  duties 
were,  like  the  duties  of  excise,  confined  to  a 
few  sorts  of  goods  of  the  most  general  use 
and  consumption.  If  they  were  extended  to 
almost  all  sorts  of  goods,  as  at  present,  public 
warehouses  of  sufficient  extent  could  not  eas¬ 
ily  be  provided,  and  goods  of  a  very  delicate 
nature,  or  of  which  the  preservation  required 
much  care  and  attention,  could  not  safely  be 
trusted  by  the  merchant  in  any  warehouse 
but  his  own. 

If  by  such  a  system  of  administration  smug¬ 
gling,  to  any  considerable  extent,  could  be 


of  Nations 

prevented  even  under  pretty  high  duties,  and 
if  every  duty  was  occasionally  either  height¬ 
ened  or  lowered  according  as  it  was  most 
likely,  either  the  one  way  or  the  other,  to 
afford  the  greatest  revenue  to  the  state,  taxa¬ 
tion  being  always  employed  as  an  instrument 
of  revenue  and  never  of  monopoly,  it  seems 
not  improbable  that  a  revenue  at  least  equal 
to  the  present  net  revenue  of  the  customs 
might  be  drawn  from  duties  upon  the  im¬ 
portation  of  only  a  few  sorts  of  goods  of  the 
most  general  use  and  consumption,  and  that 
the  duties  of  customs  might  thus  be  brought 
to  the  same  degree  of  simplicity,  certainty, 
and  precision  as  those  of  excise.  What  the 
revenue  at  present  loses  by  drawbacks  upon 
the  re-exportation  of  foreign  goods  which  are 
afterwards  relanded  and  consumed  at  home 
would  under  this  system  be  saved  altogether. 
If  to  this  saving,  which  would  alone  be  very 
considerable,  were  added  the  abolition  of  all 
bounties  upon  the  exportation  of  home  prod¬ 
uce  in  all  cases  in  which  those  bounties  were 
not  in  reality  drawbacks  of  some  duties  of 
excise  which  had  before  been  advanced,  it 
cannot  well  be  doubted  but  that  the  net  rev¬ 
enue  of  customs  might,  after  an  alteration 
of  this  kind,  be  fully  equal  to  what  it  had 
ever  been  before. 

If  by  such  a  change  of  system  the  public 
revenue  suffered  no  loss,  the  trade  and  man¬ 
ufactures  of  the  country  would  certainly  gain 
a  very  considerable  advantage.  The  trade  in 
the  commodities  not  taxed,  by  far  the  great¬ 
est  number,  would  be  perfectly  free,  and 
might  be  carried  on  to  and  from  all  parts 
of  the  world  with  every  possible  advantage. 
Among  those  commodities  would  be  compre¬ 
hended  all  the  necessaries  of  life  and  all  the 
materials  of  manufacture.  So  far  as  the  free 
importation  of  the  necessaries  of  life  reduced 
their  average  money  price  in  the  home  mar¬ 
ket  it  would  reduce  the  money  price  of  la¬ 
bour,  but  without  reducing  in  any  respect 
its  real  recompense.  The  value  of  money  is  in 
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  which  it  will  purchase.  That  of  the 
necessaries  of  life  is  altogether  independent 
of  the  quantity  of  money  which  can  be  had 
for  them.  The  reduction  in  the  money  price 
of  labour  would  necessarily  be  attended  with 
a  proportionable  one  in  that  of  all  home 
manufactures,  which  would  thereby  gain  some 
advantage  in  all  foreign  markets.  The  price 
of  some  manufactures  would  be  reduced  in  a 
still  greater  proportion  by  the  free  importa¬ 
tion  of  the  raw  materials.  If  raw  silk  could 
be  imported  from  China  and  Indostan  duty 
free,  the  silk  manufacturers  in  England  could 
greatly  undersell  those  of  both  France  and 
Italy.  There  would  be  no  occasion  to  pro¬ 
hibit  the  importation  of  foreign  silks  and 


The  Sources 

velvets.  The  cheapness  of  their  goods  would 
secure  to  our  own  workmen  not  only  the  pos¬ 
session  of  the  home,  but  a  very  great  com¬ 
mand  of  the  foreign  market.  Even  the  trade 
in  the  commodities  taxed  would  be  carried 
on  with  much  more  advantage  than  at  pres¬ 
ent.  If  those  commodities  were  delivered  out 
of  the  public  warehouse  for  foreign  exporta¬ 
tion,  being  in  this  case  exempted  from  all 
taxes,  the  trade  in  them  would  be  perfectly 
free.  The  carrying  trade  in  all  sorts  of  goods 
would  under  this  system  enjoy  every  possible 
advantage.  If  those  commodities  were  deliv¬ 
ered  out  for  home  consumption,  the  importer 
not  being  obliged  to  advance  the  tax  till  he 
had  an  opportunity  of  selling  his  goods,  either 
to  some  dealer,  or  to  some  consumer,  he  could 
always  afford  to  sell  them  cheaper  than  if  he 
had  been  obliged  to  advance  it  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  importation.  Under  the  same  taxes, 
the  foreign  trade  of  consumption  even  in  the 
taxed  commodities  might  in  this  manner  be 
carried  on  with  much  more  advantage  than 
it  can  be  at  present. 

It  was  the  object  of  the  famous  excise 
scheme  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  to  establish, 
with  regard  to  wine  and  tobacco,  a  system 
not  very  unlike  that  which  is  here  proposed. 
But  though  the  bill  which  was  then  brought 
into  Parliament  comprehended  those  two 
commodities,  only  it  was  generally  supposed 
to  be  meant  as  an  introduction  to  a  more  ex¬ 
tensive  scheme  of  the  same  kind,  faction, 
combined  with  the  interest  of  smuggling  mer¬ 
chants,  raised  so  violent,  though  so  unjust, 
a  clamour  against  that  bill,  that  the  minis¬ 
ter  thought  proper  to  drop  it,  and  from  a 
dread  of  exciting  a  clamour  of  the  same  kind, 
none  of  his  successors  have  dared  to  resume 
the  project. 

The  duties  upon  foreign  luxuries  imported 
for  home  consumption,  though  they  some¬ 
times  fall  upon  the  poor,  fall  principally  upon 
people  of  middling  or  more  than  middling 
fortune.  Such  are,  for  example,  the  duties 
upon  foreign  wines,  upon  coffee,  chocolate, 
tea,  sugar,  etc. 

The  duties  upon  the  cheaper  luxuries  of 
home  produce  destined  for  home  consump¬ 
tion  fall  pretty  equally  upon  people  of  all 
ranks  in  proportion  to  their  respective  ex¬ 
pense.  The  poor  pay  the  duties  upon  malt, 
hops,  beer,  and  ale,  upon  their  own  consump¬ 
tion:  the  rich,  upon  both  their  own  con¬ 
sumption  and  that  of  their  servants. 

The  whole  consumption  of  the  inferior 
ranks  of  people,  or  of  those  below  the  mid¬ 
dling  rank,  it  must  be  observed,  is  in  every 
country  much  greater,  not  only  in  quantity, 
but  in  value,  than  that  of  the  middling  and 
of  those  above  the  middling  rank.  The  whole 
expense  of  the  inferior  is  much  greater  than 


of  Revenue  391 

that  of  the  superior  ranks.  In  the  first  place, 
almost  the  whole  capital  of  every  country  is 
annually  distributed  among  the  inferior  ranks 
of  people  as  the  wages  of  productive  labour. 
Secondly,  a  great  part  of  the  revenue  arising 
from  both  the  rent  of  land  and  the  profits  of 
stock  is  annually  distributed  among  the  same 
rank  in  the  wages  and  maintenance  of  menial 
servants,  and  other  unproductive  labourers. 
Thirdly,  some  part  of  the  profits  of  stock  be¬ 
longs  to  the  same  rank  as  a  revenue  arising 
from  the  employment  of  their  small  capitals. 
The  amount  of  the  profits  annually  made  by 
small  shopkeepers,  tradesmen,  and  retailers 
of  all  kinds  is  everywhere  very  considerable, 
and  makes  a  very  considerable  portion  of  the 
annual  produce.  Fourthly,  and  lastly,  some 
part  even  of  the  rent  of  land  belongs  to  the 
same  rank,  a  considerable  part  of  those  who 
are  somewhat  below  the  middling  rank,  and 
a  small  part  even  to  the  lowest  rank,  com¬ 
mon  labourers  sometimes  possessing  in  prop¬ 
erty  an  acre  or  two  of  land.  Though  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  those  inferior  ranks  of  people,  there¬ 
fore,  taking  them  individually,  is  very  small, 
yet  the  whole  mass  of  it,  taking  them  col¬ 
lectively,  amounts  always  to  by  much  the 
largest  portion  of  the  whole  expense  of  the 
society;  what  remains  of  the  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country  for  the 
consumption  of  the  superior  ranks  being  al¬ 
ways  much  less,  not  only  in  quantity,  but  in 
value.  The  taxes  upon  expense,  therefore, 
which  fall  chiefly  upon  that  of  the  superior 
ranks  of  people,  upon  the  smaller  portion  of 
the  annual  produce,  are  likely  to  be  much 
less  productive  than  either  those  which  fall 
indifferently  upon  the  expense  of  all  ranks,  or 
even  those  which  fall  chiefly  upon  that  of  the 
inferior  ranks;  than  either  those  which  fall 
indifferently  upon  the  whole  annual  produce, 
or  those  which  fall  chiefly  upon  the  larger 
portion  of  it.  The  excise  upon  the  materials 
and  manufacture  of  home-made  fermented 
and  spirituous  liquors  is  accordingly,  of  all 
the  different  taxes  upon  expense,  by  far  the 
most  productive;  and  this  branch  of  the  ex¬ 
cise  falls  very  much,  perhaps  principally, 
upon  the  expense  of  the  common  people.  In 
the  year  which  ended  on  the  5th  of  July  1775, 
the  gross  produce  of  this  branch  of  the  excise 
amounted  to  £3,341,837  9s.  9d. 

It  must  always  be  remembered,  however, 
that  it  is  the  luxurious  and  not  the  necessary 
expense  of  the  inferior  ranks  of  people  that 
ought  ever  to  be  taxed.  The  final  payment 
of  any  tax  upon  their  necessary  expense  would 
fall  altogether  upon  the  superior  ranks  of 
people;  upon  the  smaller  portion  of  the 
annual  produce,  und  not  upon  the  greater. 
Such  a  tax  must  in  all  cases  either  raise  the 
wages  of  labour,  or  lessen  the  demand  for  it. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


392 

It  could  uot  raise  the  wages  of  labour  without 
throwing  the  final  payment  of  the  tax  upon 
the  superior  ranks  of  people.  It  could  not 
lessen  the  demand  for  labour  without  lessen¬ 
ing  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  la¬ 
bour  of  the  country,  the  fund  from  which 
all  taxes  must  be  finally  paid.  Whatever 
might  be  the  state  to  which  a  tax  of  this 
kind  reduced  the  demand  for  labour,  it  must 
always  raise  wages  higher  than  they  other¬ 
wise  would  be  in  that  state,  and  the  final 
payment  of  this  enhancement  of  wages  must 
in  all  cases  fall  upon  the  superior  ranks 
of  people. 

Fermented  liquors  brewed,  and  spirituous 
liquors  distilled,  not  for  sale,  but  for  private 
use,  are  not  in  Great  Britain  liable  to  any 
duties  of  excise.  This  exemption,  of  which  the 
object  is  to  save  private  families  from  the 
odious  visit  and  examination  of  the  tax- 
gatherer,  occasions  the  burden  of  those  duties 
to  fall  frequently  much  lighter  upon  the  rich 
than  upon  the  poor.  It  is  not,  indeed,  very 
common  to  distil  for  private  use,  though  it 
is  done  sometimes.  But  in  the  country  many 
middling  and  almost  all  rich  and  great  fami¬ 
lies  brew  their  own  beer.  Their  strong  beer, 
therefore,  costs  them  eight  shillings  a  barrel 
less  than  it  costs  the  common  brewer,  who 
must  have  his  profit  upon  the  tax  as  well  as 
upon  all  the  other  expense  which  he  advances. 
Such  families,  therefore,  must  drink  their 
beer  at  least  nine  or  ten  shillings  a  barrel 
cheaper  than  any  liquor  of  the  same  quality 
can  be  drunk  by  the  common  people,  to 
whom  it  is  everywhere  more  convenient  to 
buy  their  beer,  by  little  and  little,  from  the 
brewery  or  the  alehouse.  Malt,  in  the  same 
manner,  that  is  made  for  the  use  of  a  private 
family  is  not  liable  to  the  visit  or  examina¬ 
tion  of  the  tax-gatherer;  but  in  this  case  the 
family  must  compound  at  seven  shillings  and 
sixpence  a  head  for  the  tax.  Seven  shillings 
and  sixpence  are  equal  to  the  excise  upon  ten 
bushels  of  malt — a  quantity  fully  equal  to 
what  all  the  different  members  of  any  sober 
family,  men,  women,  and  children,  are  at  an 
average  likely  to  consume.  But  in  rich  and 
great  families,  where  country  hospitality  is 
much  practised,  the  malt  liquors  consumed 
by  the  members  of  the  family  make  but  a 
small  part  of  the  consumption  of  the  house. 
Either  on  account  of  this  composition,  how¬ 
ever,  or  for  other  reasons,  it  is  not  near  so 
common  to  malt  as  to  brew  for  private  use. 
It  is  difficult  to  imagine  any  equitable  reason 
why  those  who  either  brew  or  distil  for  pri¬ 
vate  use  should  not  be  subject  to  a  compo¬ 
sition  of  the  same  kind. 

A  greater  revenue  than  what  is  at  present 
drawn  from  all  the  heavy  taxes  upon  malt, 
beer,  and  ale  might  be  raised,  it  has  frequent¬ 


ly  been  said,  by  a  much  lighter  tax  upon 
malt,  the  opportunities  of  defrauding  the 
revenue  being  much  greater  in  a  brewery 
than  in  a  malt-house,  and  those  who  brew 
for  private  use  being  exempted  from  all  du¬ 
ties  or  composition  for  duties,  which  is  not 
the  case  with  those  who  malt  for  private  use. 

In  the  porter  brewery  of  London  a  quarter 
of  malt  is  commonly  brewed  into  more  than 
two  barrels  and  a  half,  sometimes  into  three 
barrels  of  porter.  The  different  taxes  upon 
malt  amount  to  six  shillings  a  quarter,  those 
upon  strong  beer  and  ale  to  eight  shillings  a 
barrel.  In  the  porter  brewery,  therefore,  the 
different  taxes  upon  malt,  beer,  and  ale 
amount  to  between  twenty-six  and  thirty 
shillings  upon  the  produce  of  a  quarter  of 
malt.  In  the  country  brewery  for  common 
country  sale  a  quarter  of  malt  is  seldom 
brewed  into  less  than  two  barrels  of  strong 
and  one  barrel  of  small  beer,  frequently  into 
two  barrels  and  a  half  of  strong  beer.  The 
different  taxes  upon  small  beer  amount  to  one 
shilling  and  fourpence  a  barrel.  In  the  coun¬ 
try  brewery,  therefore,  the  different  taxes 
upon  malt,  beer,  and  ale  seldom  amount  to 
less  than  twenty-three  shillings  and  four- 
pence,  frequently  to  twenty-six  shillings,  upon 
the  produce  of  a  quarter  of  malt.  Taking  the 
whole  kingdom  at  an  average,  therefore,  the 
whole  amount  of  the  duties'upon  malt,  beer, 
and  ale  cannot  be  estimated  at  less  than 
twenty-four  or  twenty-five  shillings  upon  the 
produce  of  a  quarter  of  malt.  But  by  taking 
off  all  the  different  duties  upon  beer  and  ale, 
and  by  tripling  the  malt-tax,  or  by  raising  it 
from  six  to  eighteen  shillings  upon  the  quar¬ 
ter  of  malt,  a  greater  revenue,  it  is  said,  might 
be  raised  by  this  single  tax  than  what  is  at 
present  drawn  from  all  those  heavier  taxes. 

Under  the  old  malt  tax,  indeed,  is  compre¬ 
hended  a  tax  of  four  shillings  upon  the  hogs¬ 
head  of  cyder,  and  another  of  ten  shillings 
upon  the  barrel  of  mum.  In  1774,  the  tax 
upon  cyder  produced  only  £3083  6s.  8d.  It 
probably  fell  somewhat  short  of  its  usual 
amount,  all  the  different  taxes  upon  cyder 
having,  that  year,  produced  less  than  ordi¬ 
nary.  The  tax  upon  mum,  though  much  heav¬ 
ier,  is  still  less  productive,  on  account  of  the 
smaller  consumption  of  that  liquor.  But  to 
balance  whatever  may  be  the  ordinary  amount 
of  those  two  taxes,  there  is  comprehended 
under  what  is  called  the  country  excise,  first, 
the  old  excise  of  six  shillings  and  eightpence 
upon  the  hogshead  of  cyder;  secondly,  a  like 
tax  of  six  shillings  and  eightpence  upon  the 
hogshead  of  verjuice;  thirdly,  another  of  eight 
shillings  and  ninepence  upon  the  hogshead 
of  vinegar;  and,  lastly,  a  fourth  tax  of  eleven¬ 
pence  upon  the  gallon  of  mead  or  metheglin: 
the  produce  of  those  different  taxes  will  prob- 


393 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


£ 

s. 

d. 

In  1772,  the  old  malt-tax  produced 

722,023 

11 

n 

The  additional 

356,776 

7 

9% 

In  1773,  the  old  tax  produced 

561,627 

3 

The  additional 

278,650 

15 

3  % 

In  1774,  the  old  tax  produced 

624,614 

17 

5% 

The  additional 

310,745 

2 

m 

In  1775,  the  old  tax  produced 

657,357 

0 

sh 

The  additional 

323,785 

12 

6M 

4)3,835,580 

12 

0  H 

Average  of  these  four  years 

958,895 

3 

oh 

In  1772,  the  country  excise  produced 

1,243,128 

5 

3 

The  London  brewery 

408,260 

7 

2% 

In  1773,  the  country  excise 

1,245,808 

3 

3 

The  London  brewery 

405,406 

17 

10  M 

In  1774,  the  country  excise 

1,246,373 

14 

5M 

The  London  brewery 

320,601 

18 

0  M 

In  1775,  the  country  excise 

1,214,583 

6 

1 

The  I.ondon  brewery 

463,670 

7 

Oh 

4)6,547,832 

19 

2  K 

Average  of  these  four  years 

1,636,958 

4 

9'A 

To  which  adding  the  average  malt-tax. 

or  958,895 

3 

Oh 

The  whole  amount  of  those  different 
taxes  comes  out  to  be 

2,595,853 

7 

But  by  tripling  the  malt-tax,  or  by  rais¬ 
ing  it  from  six  to  eighteen  shillings 
upon  the  quarter  of  malt,  that  single 
tax  would  produce 

2,876,68 5 

9 

0% 

A  sum  which  exceeds  the  foregoing  by 

280,832 

1 

ably  much  more  than  counterbalance  that  of 
the  duties  imposed  by  what  is  called  the 
annual  malt  tax  upon  cyder  and  mum. 

Malt  is  consumed  not  only  in  the  brewery 
of  beer  and  ale,  but  in  the  manufacture  of 
low  wines  and  spirits.  If  the  malt  tax  were 
to  be  raised  to  eighteen  shillings  upon  the 
quarter,  it  might  be  necessary  to  make  some 
abatement  in  the  different  excises  which  are 
imposed  upon  those  particular  sorts  of  low 
wines  and  spirits  of  which  malt  makes  any 
part  of  the  materials.  In  what  are  called  malt 
spirits  it  makes  commonly  but  a  third  part 
of  the  materials,  the  other  two-thirds  being 
either  raw  barley,  or  one-third  barley  and 
one-third  wheat.  In  the  distillery  of  malt 
spirits,  both  the  opportunity  and  the  tempta¬ 
tion  to  smuggle  are  much  greater  than  either 
in  a  brewery  or  in  a  malt-house;  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  on  account  of  the  smaller  bulk  and 
greater  value  of  the  commodity,  and  the 
temptation  on  account  of  the  superior  height 
of  the  duties,  which  amount  to  3s.  10%d.x 
upon  the  gallon  of  spirits.  By  increasing  the 

'Though  the  duties  directly  imposed  upon  proof 
spirits  amount  only  to  2s.  6d.  per  gallon,  these 
added  to  the  duties  upon  the  low  wines,  from 


duties  upon  malt,  and  reducing  those  upon 
the  distillery,  both  the  opportunities  and  the 
temptation  to  smuggle  would  be  diminished, 
which  might  occasion  a  still  further  augmenta¬ 
tion  of  revenue. 

It  has  for  some  time  past  been  the  policy 
of  Great  Britain  to  discourage  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  spirituous  liquors,  on  account  of  their 
supposed  tendency  to  ruin  the  health  and 
to  corrupt  the  morals  of  the  common  people. 
According  to  this  policy,  the  abatement  of 
the  taxes  upon  the  distillery  ought  not  to 
be  so  great  as  to  reduce,  in  any  respect, 
the  price  of  those  liquors.  Spirituous  liquors 
might  remain  as  dear  as  ever,  while  at  the 
same  time  the  wholesome  and  invigorating 
liquors  of  beer  and  ale  might  be  considerably 
reduced  in  their  price.  The  people  might  thus 
be  in  part  relieved  from  one  of  the  burdens 
of  which  they  at  present  complain  the  most, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  revenue  might 
be  considerably  augmented. 

The  objections  of  Dr.  Davenant  to  this 


which  they  are  distilled,  amount  to  3s.  10  2/3d. 
Both  low  wines  and  proof  spirits  are,  to  prevent 
frauds,  now  rated  according  to  what  they  gauge 
in  the  wash. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


394 

alteration  in  the  present  system  of  excise  du¬ 
ties  seem  to  be  without  foundation.  Those  ob¬ 
jections  are,  that  the  tax,  instead  of  dividing 
itself  as  at  present  pretty  equally  upon  the 
profit  of  the  maltster,  upon  that  of  the  brew¬ 
er,  and  upon  that  of  the  retailer,  would,  so 
far  as  it  affected  profit,  fall  altogether  upon 
that  of  the  maltster;  that  the  maltster  could 
not  so  easily  get  back  the  amount  of  the  tax 
in  the  advanced  price  of  his  malt  as  the 
brewer  and  retailer  in  the  advanced  price  of 
their  liquor;  and  that  so  heavy  a  tax  upon 
malt  might  reduce  the  rent  and  profit  of  bar¬ 
ley  land. 

No  tax  can  ever  reduce,  for  any  consider¬ 
able  time,  the  rate  of  profit  in  any  particular 
trade  which  must  always  keep  its  level  with 
other  trades  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  pres¬ 
ent  duties  upon  malt,  beer,  and  ale  do  not 
affect  the  profits  of  the  dealers  in  those  com¬ 
modities,  who  all  get  back  the  tax  with  an 
additional  profit  in  the  enhanced  price  of 
their  goods.  A  tax,  indeed,  may  render  the 
goods  upon  which  it  is  imposed  so  dear  as 
to  diminish  the  consumption  of  them.  But 
the  consumption  of  malt  is  in  malt  liquors, 
and  a  tax  of  eighteen  shillings  upon  the  quar¬ 
ter  of  malt  could  not  well  render  those  liq¬ 
uors  dearer  than  the  different  taxes,  amount¬ 
ing  to  twenty-four  or  twenty-five  shillings, 
do  at  present.  Those  liquors,  on  the  contrary, 
would  probably  become  cheaper,  and  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  them  would  be  more  likely  to  in¬ 
crease  than  to  diminish. 

It  is  not  very  easy  to  understand  why  it 
should  be  more  difficult  for  the  maltster  to 
get  back  eighteen  shillings  in  the  advanced 
price  of  his  malt  than  it  is  at  present  for  the 
brewer  to  get  back  twenty-four  or  twenty- 
five,  sometimes  thirty,  shillings  in  that  of  his 
liquor.  The  maltster,  indeed,  instead  of  a  tax 
of  six  shillings,  would  be  obliged  to  advance 
one  of  eighteen  shillings  upon  every  quarter 
of  malt.  But  the  brewer  is  at  present  obliged 
to  advance  a  tax  of  twenty-four  or  twenty- 
five,  sometimes  thirty,  shillings  upon  every 
quarter  of  malt  which  he  brews.  It  could 
not  be  more  inconvenient  for  the  maltster  to 
advance  a  lighter  tax  than  it  is  at  present 
for  the  brewer  to  advance  a  heavier  one.  The 
maltster  doth  not  always  keep  in  his  grana¬ 
ries  a  stock  of  malt  which  it  will  require  a 
longer  time  to  dispose  of  than  the  stock  of 
beer  and  ale  which  the  brewer  frequently 
keeps  in  his  cellars.  The  former,  therefore, 
may  frequently  get  the  returns  of  his  money 
as  soon  as  the  latter.  But  whatever  incon- 
veniency  might  arise  to  the  maltster  from 
being  obliged  to  advance  a  heavier  tax,  it 
could  easily  be  remedied  by  granting  him  a 
few  months’  longer  credit  than  is  at  present 
commonly  given  to  the  brewer. 


Nothing  could  reduce  the  rent  and  profit 
of  barley  land  which  did  not  reduce  the  de¬ 
mand  for  barley.  But  a  change  of  system 
which  reduced  the  duties  upon  a  quarter  of 
malt  brewed  into  beer  and  ale  from  twenty- 
four  and  twenty-five  shillings  to  eighteen 
shillings  would  be  more  likely  to  increase  than 
diminish  that  demand.  The  rent  and  profit  of 
barley  land,  besides,  must  always  be  nearly 
equal  to  those  of  other  equally  fertile  and 
equally  well -cultivated  land.  If  they  were 
less,  some  part  of  the  barley  land  would  soon 
be  turned  to  some  other  purpose;  and  if  they 
were  greater,  more  land  would  soon  be  turned 
to  the  raising  of  barley.  When  the  ordinary 
price  of  any  particular  produce  of  land  is  at 
what  may  be  called  a  monopoly  price,  a  tax 
upon  it  necessarily  reduces  the  rent  and 
profit  of  the  land  which  grows  it.  A  tax  upon 
the  produce  of  those  precious  vineyards  of 
which  the  wine  falls  so  much  short  of  the 
effectual  demand  that  its  price  is  always  above 
the  natural  proportion  to  that  of  the  produce 
of  other  equally  fertile  and  equally  well- 
cultivated  land  would  necessarily  reduce  the 
rent  and  profit  of  those  vineyards.  The  price 
of  the  wines  being  already  the  highest  that 
could  be  got  for  the  quantity  commonly  sent 
to  market,  it  could  not  be  raised  higher  with¬ 
out  diminishing  that  quantity,  and  the  quan¬ 
tity  could  not  be  diminished  without  still 
greater  loss,  because  the  lands  could  not  be 
turned  to  any  other  equally  valuable  produce. 
The  whole  weight  of  the  tax,  therefore,  would 
fall  upon  the  rent  and  profit — properly  upon 
the  rent  of  the  vineyard.  When  it  has  been 
proposed  to  lay  any  new  tax  upon  sugar,  our 
sugar  planters  have  frequently  complained 
that  the  whole  weight  of  such  taxes  fell,  not 
upon  the  consumer,  but  upon  the  producer, 
they  never  having  been  able  to  raise  the  price 
of  their  sugar  after  the  tax  higher  than  it 
was  before.  The  price  had,  it  seems,  before 
the  tax  been  a  monopoly  price,  and  the  argu¬ 
ment  adduced  to  show  that  sugar  was  an  im¬ 
proper  subject  of  taxation  demonstrated, 
perhaps,  that  it  was  a  proper  one,  the  gains 
of  monopolists,  whenever  they  can  be  come 
at,  being  certainly  of  all  subjects  the  most 
proper.  But  the  ordinary  price  of  barley  has 
never  been  a  monopoly  price,  and  the  rent 
and  profit  of  barley  land  have  never  been 
above  their  natural  proportion  to  those  of 
other  equally  fertile  and  equally  well-culti¬ 
vated  land.  The  different  taxes  which  have 
been  imposed  upon  malt,  beer,  and  ale  have 
never  lowered  the  price  of  barley,  have  never 
reduced  the  rent  and  profit  of  barley  land.  The 
price  of  malt  to  the  brewer  has  constantly 
risen  in  proportion  to  the  taxes  imposed  upon 
it,  and  those  taxes,  together  with  the  different 
duties  upon  beer  and  ale,  have  constantly 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


either  raised  the  price,  or  what  comes  to  the 
same  thing,  reduced  the  quality  of  those 
commodities  to  the  consumer.  The  final  pay¬ 
ment  of  those  taxes  has  fallen  constantly  upon 
the  consumer,  and  not  upon  the  producer. 

The  only  people  likely  to  suffer  by  the 
change  of  system  here  proposed  are  those 
who  brew  for  their  own  private  use.  But  the 
exemption  which  this  superior  rank  of  people 
at  present  enjoy  from  very  heavy  taxes  which 
are  paid  by  the  poor  labourer  and  artificer  is 
surely  most  unjust  and  unequal,  and  ought 
to  be  taken  away,  even  though  this  change 
was  never  to  take  place.  It  has  probably  been 
the  interest  of  this  superior  order  of  people, 
however,  which  has  hitherto  prevented  a 
change  of  system  that  could  not  well  fail 
both  to  increase  the  revenue  and  to  relieve 
the  people. 

Besides  such  duties  as  those  of  customs  and 
excise  above  mentioned,  there  are  several 
others  which  affect  the  price  of  goods  more 
unequally  and  more  indirectly.  Of  this  kind 
are  the  duties  which  in  French  are  called 
Peages ,  which  in  old  Saxon  times  were  called 
Duties  of  Passage,  and  which  seem  to  have 
been  originally  established  for  the  same  pur¬ 
pose  as  our  turnpike  tolls,  or  the  tolls  upon 
our  canals  and  navigable  rivers,  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  the  road  or  of  the  navigation. 
Those  duties,  when  applied  to  such  purposes, 
are  most  properly  imposed  according  to  the 
bulk  or  weight  of  the  goods.  As  they  were 
originally  local  and  provincial  duties,  applica¬ 
ble  to  local  and  provincial  purposes,  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  them  was  in  most  cases  en¬ 
trusted  to  the  particular  town,  parish,  or 
lordship  in  which  they  were  levied,  such  com¬ 
munities  being  in  some  way  or  other  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  accountable  for  the  application. 
The  sovereign,  who  is  altogether  unaccount¬ 
able,  has  in  many  countries  assumed  to  him¬ 
self  the  administration  of  those  duties,  and 
though  he  has  in  most  cases  enhanced  very 
much  the  duty,  he  has  in  many  entirely  neg¬ 
lected  the  application.  If  the  turnpike  tolls  of 
Great  Britain  should  ever  become  one  of  the 
resources  of  government,  we  may  learn,  by 
the  example  of  many  other  nations,  what 
would  probably  be  the  consequence.  Such 
tolls  are  no  doubt  finally  paid  by  the  con¬ 
sumer;  but  the  consumer  is  not  taxed  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  his  expense  when  he  pays,  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  value,  but  according  to  the 
bulk  or  weight  of  what  he  consumes.  When 
such  duties  are  imposed,  not  according  to 
the  bulk  or  weight,  but  according  to  the  sup¬ 
posed  value  of  the  goods,  they  become  prop¬ 
erly  a  sort  of  inland  customs  or  excises  which 
obstruct  very  much  the  most  important  of 
all  branches  of  commerce,  the  interior  com¬ 
merce  of  the  country. 


395 

In  some  small  states  duties  similar  to  those 
passage  duties  are  imposed  upon  goods  car¬ 
ried  across  the  territory,  either  by  land  or 
by  water,  from  one  foreign  country  to  an¬ 
other.  These  are  in  some  countries  called 
transit-duties.  Some  of  the  little  Italian  states 
which  are  situated  upon  the  Po  and  the  rivers 
which  run  into  it  derive  some  revenue  from 
duties  of  this  kind  which  are  paid  altogether 
by  foreigners,  and  which,  perhaps,  are  the 
only  duties  that  one  state  can  impose  upon 
the  subjects  of  another  without  obstructing 
in  any  respect  the  industry  or  commerce  of 
its  own.  The  most  important  transit-duty  in 
the  world  is  that  levied  by  the  King  of  Den¬ 
mark  upon  all  merchant  ships  which  pass 
through  the  Sound. 

Such  taxes  upon  luxuries  as  the  greater 
part  of  the  duties  of  customs  and  excise, 
though  they  all  fall  indifferently  upon  every 
different  species  of  revenue,  and  are  paid 
finally,  or  without  any  retribution,  by  who¬ 
ever  consumes  the  commodities  upon  which 
they  are  imposed,  yet  they  do  not  always 
fall  equally  or  proportionably  upon  the  reve¬ 
nue  of  every  individual.  As  every  man’s  hu¬ 
mour  regulates  the  degree  of  his  consump¬ 
tion,  every  man  contributes  rather  according 
to  his  humour  than  in  proportion  to  his  rev¬ 
enue;  the  profuse  contribute  more,  the  parsi¬ 
monious  less,  than  their  proper  proportion. 
During  the  minority  of  a  man  of  great  for¬ 
tune  he  contributes  commonly  very  little,  by 
his  consumption,  towards  the  support  of  that 
state  from  whose  protection  he  derives  a  great 
revenue.  Those  who  live  in  another  country 
contribute  nothing,  by  their  consumption, 
towards  the  support  of  the  government  of 
that  country  in  which  is  situated  the  source 
of  their  revenue.  If  in  this  latter  country 
there  should  be  no  land-tax,  nor  any  con¬ 
siderable  duty  upon  the  transference  either 
of  movable  or  of  immovable  property,  as  is 
the  case  in  Ireland,  such  absentees  may  de» 
rive  a  great  revenue  from  the  protection  of 
a  government  to  the  support  of  which  they 
do  not  contribute  a  single  shilling.  This  in¬ 
equality  is  likely  to  be  greatest  in  a  country 
of  which  the  government  is  in  some  respects 
subordinate  and  dependent  upon  that  of 
some  other.  The  people  who  possess  the  most 
extensive  property  in  the  dependent  will  in 
this  case  generally  choose  to  live  in  the  gov¬ 
erning  country.  Ireland  is  precisely  in  this 
situation,  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  wonder 
that  the  proposal  of  a  tax  upon  absentees 
should  be  so  very  popular  in  that  country. 
It  might,  perhaps,  be  a  little  difficult  to  as¬ 
certain  either  what  sort  or  what  degree  of 
absence  would  subject  a  man  to  be  taxed  as 
an  absentee,  or  at  what  precise  time  the  tax 
should  either  begin  or  end.  If  you  except, 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


396 

however,  this  very  peculiar  situation,  any 
inequality  in  the  contribution  of  individuals 
which  can  arise  from  such  taxes  is  much 
more  than  compensated  by  the  very  circum¬ 
stance  which  occasions  that  inequality — the 
circumstance  that  every  man's  contribution 
is  altogether  voluntary,  it  being  altogether 
in  his  power  either  to  consume  or  not  to  con¬ 
sume  the  commodity  taxed.  Where  such  taxes, 
therefore,  are  properly  assessed,  and  upon 
proper  commodities,  they  are  paid  with  less 
grumbling  than  any  other.  When  they  are 
advanced  by  the  merchant  or  manufacturer, 
the  consumer,  who  finally  pays  them,  soon 
comes  to  confound  them  with  the  price  of  the 
commodities,  and  almost  forgets  that  he  pays 
any  tax. 

Such  taxes  are  or  may  be  perfectly  certain, 
or  may  be  assessed  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt 
concerning  either  what  ought  to  be  paid,  or 
when  it  ought  to  be  paid;  concerning  either 
the  quantity  or  the  time  of  payment.  What¬ 
ever  uncertainty  there  may  sometimes  be, 
either  in  the  duties  of  customs  in  Great 
Britain,  or  in  other  duties  of  the  same  kind 
in  other  countries,  it  cannot  arise  from  the 
nature  of  those  duties,  but  from  the  inac¬ 
curate  or  unskilful  manner  in  which  the  law 
that  imposes  them  is  expressed. 

Taxes  upon  luxuries  generally  are,  and  al¬ 
ways  may  be,  paid  piecemeal,  or  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  the  contributors  have  occasion  to  pur¬ 
chase  the  goods  upon  which  they  are  im¬ 
posed.  In  the  time  and  mode  of  payment 
they  are,  or  may  be,  of  all  taxes  the  most 
convenient.  Upon  the  whole,  such  taxes, 
are,  perhaps,  as  agreeable  to  the  three  first 
of  the  four  general  maxims  concerning  taxa¬ 
tion  as  any  other.  They  offend  in  every  re¬ 
spect  against  the  fourth. 

Such  taxes,  in  proportion  to  what  they 
bring  into  the  public  treasury  of  the  state, 
always  take  out  or  keep  out  of  the  pockets 
of  the  people  more  than  almost  any  other 
taxes.  They  seem  to  do  this  in  all  the  four 
different  ways  in  which  it  is  possible  to  do  it. 

First,  the  levying  of  such  taxes,  even  when 
imposed  in  the  most  judicious  manner,  re¬ 
quires  a  great  number  of  custom-house  and 
excise  officers,  whose  salaries  and  perquisites 
are  a  real  tax  upon  the  people,  which  brings 
nothing  into  the  treasury  of  the  state.  This 
expense,  however,  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
is  more  moderate  in  Great  Britain  than  in 
most  other  countries.  In  the  year  which  ended 
on  the  5th  of  July  1775,  the  gross  produce 
of  the  different  duties,  under  the  management 
of  the  commissioners  of  excise  in  England, 
amounted  to  £5,507,308  18s.  8*4x1.,  which 
was  levied  at  an  expense  of  little  more  than 
five  and  a  half  per  cent.  From  this  gross  prod¬ 
uce,  however,  there  must  be  deducted  what 


was  paid  away  in  bounties  and  drawbacks 
upon  the  exportation  of  excisable  goods, 
which  will  reduce  the  net  produce  below  five 
millions.1  The  levying  of  the  salt  duty,  an  ex¬ 
cise  duty,  but  under  a  different  management, 
is  much  more  expensive.  The  net  revenue  of 
the  customs  does  not  amount  to  two  millions 
and  a  half,  which  is  levied  at  an  expense 
of  more  than  ten  per  cent  in  the  salaries  of 
officers,  and  other  incidents.  But  the  per¬ 
quisites  of  custom-house  officers  are  every¬ 
where  much  greater  than  their  salaries;  at 
some  ports  more  than  double  or  triple  those 
salaries.  If  the  salaries  of  officers,  and  other 
incidents,  therefore,  amount  to  more  than 
ten  per  cent  upon  the  net  revenue  of  the 
customs,  the  whole  expense  of  levying  that 
revenue  may  amount,  in  salaries  and  per¬ 
quisites  together,  to  more  than  twenty  or 
thirty  per  cent.  The  officers  of  excise  receive 
few  or  no  perquisites,  and  the  administration 
of  that  branch  of  the  revenue,  being  of  more 
recent  establishment,  is  in  general  less  cor¬ 
rupted  than  that  of  the  customs,  into  which 
length  of  time  has  introduced  and  authorized 
many  abuses.  By  charging  upon  malt  the 
whole  revenue  which  is  at  present  levied  by 
the  different  duties  upon  malt  and  malt  liq¬ 
uors,  a  saving,  it  is  supposed,  of  more  than 
fifty  thousand  pounds  might  be  made  in  the 
annual  expense  of  the  excise.  By  confining 
the  duties  of  customs  to  a  few  sorts  of  goods, 
and  by  levying  those  duties  according  to  the 
excise  laws,  a  much  greater  saving  might 
probably  be  made  in  the  annual  expense  of 
the  customs. 

Secondly,  such  taxes  necessarily  occasion 
some  obstruction  or  discouragement  to  cer¬ 
tain  branches  of  industry.  As  they  always 
raise  the  price  of  the  commodity  taxed,  they 
so  far  discourage  its  consumption,  and  con¬ 
sequently  its  production.  If  it  is  a  commod¬ 
ity  of  home  growth  or  manufacture,  less  la¬ 
bour  comes  to  be  employed  in  raising  and 
producing  it.  If  it  is  a  foreign  commodity  of 
which  the  tax  increases  in  this  manner  the 
price,  the  commodities  of  the  same  kind 
which  are  made  at  home  may  thereby,  indeed, 
gain  some  advantage  in  the  home  market, 
and  a  greater  quantity  of  domestic  industry 
may  thereby  be  turned  toward  preparing 
them.  But  though  this  rise  of  price  in  a  for¬ 
eign  commodity  may  encourage  domestic  in¬ 
dustry  in  one  particular  branch,  it  necessa¬ 
rily  discourages  that  industry  in  almost  every 
other.  The  dearer  the  Birmingham  manufac¬ 
turer  buys  his  foreign  wine,  the  cheaper  he 
necessarily  sells  that  part  of  his  hardware 
with  which,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 

’The  net  produce  of  that  year,  after  deducting 
all  expenses  and  allowances,  amounted  to  £4,- 
975,652  19s.  6d. 


The  Sources  of  Revenue 


with  the  price  of  which  he  buys  it.  That  part 
of  his  hardware,  therefore,  becomes  of  less 
value  to  him,  and  he  has  less  encouragement 
to  work  at  it.  The  dearer  the  consumers  in 
one  country  pay  for  the  surplus  produce  of 
another,  the  cheaper  they  necessarily  sell  that 
part  of  their  own  surplus  produce  with  which, 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  with  the 
price  of  which  they  buy  it.  That  part  of  their 
own  surplus  produce  becomes  of  less  value 
to  them,  and  they  have  less  encouragement 
to  increase  its  quantity.  All  taxes  upon  con¬ 
sumable  commodities,  therefore,  tend  to  re¬ 
duce  the  quantity  of  productive  labour  below 
what  it  otherwise  would  be,  either  in  prepar¬ 
ing  the  commodities  taxed,  if  they  are  home 
commodities,  or  in  preparing  those  with  which 
they  are  purchased,  if  they  are  foreign  com¬ 
modities.  Such  taxes,  too,  always  alter,  more 
or  less,  the  natural  direction  of  national  in¬ 
dustry,  and  turn  it  into  a  channel  always 
different  from,  and  generally  less  advan¬ 
tageous  than  that  in  which  it  would  have 
run  of  its  own  accord. 

Thirdly,  the  hope  of  evading  such  taxes  by 
smuggling  gives  frequent  occasion  to  forfei¬ 
tures  and  other  penalties  which  entirely  ruin 
the  smuggler;  a  person  who,  though  no  doubt 
highly  blamable  for  violating  the  laws  of  his 
country,  is  frequently  incapable  of  violating 
those  of  natural  justice,  and  would  have  been, 
in  every  respect,  an  excellent  citizen  had  not 
the  laws  of  his  country  made  that  a  crime 
which  nature  never  meant  to  be  so.  In  those 
corrupted  governments  where  there  is  at 
least  a  general  suspicion  of  much  unnecessary 
expense,  and  great  misapplication  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  revenue,  the  laws  which  guard  it  are  little 
respected.  Not  many  people  are  scrupulous 
about  smuggling  when,  without  perjury,  they 
can  find  any  easy  and  safe  opportunity  of 
doing  so.  To  pretend  to  have  any  scruple 
about  buying  smuggled  goods,  though  a  man¬ 
ifest  encouragement  to  the  violation  of  the 
revenue  laws,  and  to  the  perjury  which  al¬ 
most  always  attends  it,  would  in  most  coun¬ 
tries  be  regarded  as  one  of  those  pedantic 
pieces  of  hypocrisy  which,  instead  of  gaining 
credit  with  anybody,  serve  only  to  expose 
the  person  who  affects  to  practise  them  to  the 
suspicion  of  being  a  greater  knave  than  most 
of  his  neighbours.  By  this  indulgence  of  the 
public,  the  smuggler  is  often  encouraged  to 
continue  a  trade  which  he  is  thus  taught  to 
consider  as  in  some  measure  innocent,  and 
when  the  severity  of  the  revenue  laws  is  ready 
to  fall  upon  him,  he  is  frequently  disposed  to 
defend  with  violence  what  he  has  been  accus¬ 
tomed  to  regard  as  his  just  property.  From 
being  at  first,  perhaps,  rather  imprudent  than 
criminal,  he  at  last  too  often  becomes  one  of 
the  hardiest  and  most  determined  violators 


397 

of  the  laws  of  society.  By  the  ruin  of  the 
smuggler,  his  capital,  which  had  before  been 
employed  in  maintaining  productive  labour, 
is  absorbed  either  in  the  revenue  of  the  state 
or  in  that  of  the  revenue  officer,  and  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  maintaining  unproductive,  to  the 
diminution  of  the  general  capital  of  the  so¬ 
ciety  and  of  the  useful  industry  which  it 
might  otherwise  have  maintained. 

Fourthly,  such  taxes,  by  subjecting  at  least 
the  dealers  in  the  taxed  commodities  to  the 
frequent  visits  and  odious  examination  of  the 
tax-gatherers,  expose  them  sometimes,  no 
doubt,  to  some  degree  of  oppression,  and  al¬ 
ways  to  much  trouble  and  vexation;  and 
though  vexation,  as  has  already  been  said,  is 
not,  strictly  speaking,  expense,  it  is  certainly 
equivalent  to  the  expense  at  which  every 
man  would  be  willing  to  redeem  himself  from 
it.  The  laws  of  excise,  though  more  effectual 
for  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  insti¬ 
tuted,  are,  in  this  respect,  more  vexatious 
than  those  of  the  customs.  When  a  merchant 
has  imported  goods  subject  to  certain  duties 
of  customs,  when  he  has  paid  those  duties, 
and  lodged  the  goods  in  his  warehouse,  he  is 
not  in  most  cases  liable  to  any  further  trouble 
or  vexation  from  the  custom-house  officer.  It 
is  otherwise  with  goods  subject  to  duties  of 
excise.  The  dealers  have  no  respite  from  the 
continual  visits  and  examination  of  the  excise 
officers.  The  duties  of  excise  are,  upon  this  ac¬ 
count,  more  unpopular  than  those  of  the  cus¬ 
toms;  and  so  are  the  officers  who  levy  them. 
Those  officers,  it  is  pretended,  though  in  gen¬ 
eral,  perhaps,  they  do  their  duty  fully  as  well 
as  those  of  the  customs,  yet  as  that  duty 
obliges  them  to  be  frequently  very  trouble¬ 
some  to  some  of  their  neighbours,  commonly 
contract  a  certain  hardness  of  character 
which  the  others  frequently  have  not.  This 
observation,  however,  may  very  probably  be 
the  mere  suggestion  of  fraudulent  dealers 
whose  smuggling  is  either  prevented  or  de¬ 
tected  by  their  diligence. 

The  inconveniencies,  however,  which  are, 
perhaps,  in  some  degree  inseparable  from 
taxes  upon  consumable  commodities,  fall  as 
light  upon  the  people  of  Great  Britain  as  upon 
those  of  any  other  country  of  which  the  gov¬ 
ernment  is  nearly  as  expensive.  Our  state  is 
not  perfect,  and  might  be  mended,  but  it  is 
as  good  or  better  than  that  of  most  of  our 
neighbours. 

In  consequence  of  the  notion  that  duties 
upon  consumable  goods  were  taxes  upon  the 
profits  of  merchants,  those  duties  have, 
in  some  countries,  been  repeated  upon  every 
successive  sale  of  the  goods.  If  the  profits  of 
the  merchant  importer  or  merchant  manu¬ 
facturer  were  taxed,  equality  seemed  to  re¬ 
quire  that  those  of  all  the  middle  buyers  who 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


398 

intervened  between  either  of  them  and  the 
consumer  should  likewise  be  taxed.  The  fa¬ 
mous  alcavala  of  Spain  seems  to  have  been 
established  upon  this  principle.  It  was  at  first 
a  tax  of  ten  per  cent,  afterwards  of  fourteen 
per  cent,  and  is  at  present  of  only  six  per 
cent  upon  the  sale  of  every  sort  of  property 
whether  movable  or  immovable,  and  it  is  re¬ 
peated  every  time  the  property  is  sold.1  The 
levying  of  this  tax  requires  a  multitude  of 
revenue  officers  sufficient  to  guard  the  trans¬ 
portation  of  goods,  not  only  from  one  prov¬ 
ince  to  another,  but  from  one  shop  to  an¬ 
other.  It  subjects  not  only  the  dealers  in  some 
sorts  of  goods,  but  those  in  all  sorts,  every 
farmer,  every  manufacturer,  every  merchant 
and  shopkeeper,  to  the  continual  visits  and 
examination  of  the  tax-gatherers.  Through  the 
greater  part  of  a  country  in  which  a  tax  of 
this  kind  is  established  nothing  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  for  distant  sale.  The  produce  of  every 
part  of  the  country  must  be  proportioned 
to  the  consumption  of  the  neighborhood. 
It  is  to  the  alcavala,  accordingly,  that  Ustar- 
itz  imputes  the  ruin  of  the  manufactures  of 
Spain.  He  might  have  imputed  to  it  likewise 
the  declension  of  agriculture,  it  being  imposed 
not  only  upon  manufactures,  but  upon  the 
rude  produce  of  the  land. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Naples  there  is  a  similar 
tax  of  three  per  cent  upon  the  value  of  all 
contracts,  and  consequently  upon  that  of  all 
contracts  of  sale.  It  is  both  lighter  than  the 
Spanish  tax,  and  the  greater  part  of  towns 
and  parishes  are  allowed  to  pay  a  composition 
in  lieu  of  it.  They  levy  this  composition  in 
what  manner  they  please,  generally  in  a  way 
that  gives  no  interruption  to  the  interior 
commerce  of  the  place.  The  Neapolitan  tax, 
therefore,  is  not  near  so  ruinous  as  the  Spanish 
one. 

The  uniform  system  of  taxation  which, 
with  a  few  exceptions  of  no  great  consequence, 
takes  place  in  all  the  different  parts  of  the 
United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain,  leaves  the 
interior  commerce  of  the  country,  the  inland 
and  coasting  trade,  almost  entirely  free.  The 
inland  trade  is  almost  perfectly  free,  and  the 
greater  part  of  goods  may  be  carried  from 
one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  the  other  without 
requiring  any  permit  or  let-pass,  without 
being  subject  to  question,  visit,  or  examina¬ 
tion  from  the  revenue  officers.  There  are  a 
few  exceptions,  but  they  are  such  as  can  give 
no  interruption  to  any  important  branch 
of  the  inland  commerce  of  the  country.  Goods 
carried  coastwise,  indeed,  require  certificates 
or  coast-cockets.  If  you  except  coals,  however, 
the  rest  are  almost  all  duty-free.  This  freedom 
of  interior  commerce,  the  effect  of  the  uni- 

1 Memoircs  concernant  les  droits,  etc.,  vol.  i., 
p.  455. 


formity  of  the  system  of  taxation,  is  perhaps 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  prosperity 
of  Great  Britain,  every  great  country  being 
necessarily  the  best  and  most  extensive  mar¬ 
ket  for  the  greater  part  of  the  productions 
of  its  own  industry.  If  the  same  freedom, 
in  consequence  of  the  same  uniformity,  could 
be  extended  to  Ireland  and  the  plantations, 
both  the  grandeur  of  the  state  and  the 
prosperity  of  every  part  of  the  empire  would 
probably  be  still  greater  than  at  present. 

In  France,  the  different  revenue  laws 
which  take  place  in  the  different  provinces 
require  a  multitude  of  revenue  officers  to 
surround  not  only  the  frontiers  of  the  king¬ 
dom,  but  those  of  almost  each  particular 
province,  in  order  either  to  prevent  the  im¬ 
portation  of  certain  goods,  or  to  subject  it 
to  the  payment  of  certain  duties,  to  the 
no  small  interruption  of  the  interior  com¬ 
merce  of  the  country.  Some  provinces  are 
allowed  to  compound  for  the  gabelle  or 
salt-tax.  Others  are  exempted  from  it  alto¬ 
gether.  Some  provinces  are  exempted  from 
the  exclusive  sale  of  tobacco,  which  the 
farmers-general  enjoy  through  the  greater 
part  of  the  kingdom.  The  aides,  which  cor¬ 
respond  to  the  excise  in  England,  are  very 
different  in  different  provinces.  Some  prov¬ 
inces  are  exempted  from  them,  and  pay  a 
composition  or  equivalent.  In  those  in  which 
they  take  place  and  are  in  farm  there  are 
many  local  duties  which  do  not  extend  be¬ 
yond  a  particular  town  or  district.  The 
traites,  which  correspond  to  our  customs, 
divide  the  kingdom  into  three  great  parts; 
first,  the  provinces  subject  to  the  tariff  of 
1664,  which  are  called  the  provinces  of  the 
five  great  farms,  and  under  which  are  compre¬ 
hended  Picardy,  Normandy,  and  the  greater 
part  of  the  interior  provinces  of  the  kingdom; 
secondly,  the  provinces  subject  to  the  tariff 
of  1667,  which  are  called  the  provinces  reck¬ 
oned  foreign,  and  under  which  are  compre¬ 
hended  the  greater  part  of  the  frontier 
provinces;  and,  thirdly,  those  provinces  which 
are  said  to  be  treated  as  foreign,  or  which, 
because  they  are  allowed  a  free  commerce 
with  foreign  countries,  are  in  their  commerce 
with  other  provinces  of  France  subjected 
to  the  same  duties  as  other  foreign  countries. 
These  are  Alsace,  the  three  bishoprics  of 
Metz,  Toul,  and  Verdun,  and  the  three  cities 
of  Dunkirk,  Bayonne,  and  Marseilles.  Both 
in  the  provinces  of  the  five  great  farms 
(called  so  on  account  of  an  ancient  division 
of  the  duties  of  customs  into  five  great 
branches,  each  of  which  was  originally  the 
subject  of  a  particular  farm,  though  they 
are  now  all  united  into  one) ,  and  in  those 
which  are  said  to  be  reckoned  foreign,  there 
are  many  local  duties  which  do  not  extend 


The  Sources 

beyond  a  particular  town  or  district.  There 
are  some  such  even  in  the  provinces  which 
are  said  to  be  treated  as  foreign,  particularly 
in  the  city  of  Marseilles.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  observe  how  much  both  the  restraints 
upon  the  interior  commerce  of  the  country 
and  the  number  of  the  revenue  officers  must 
be  multiplied  in  order  to  guard  the  frontiers 
of  those  different  provinces  and  districts 
which  are  subject  to  such  different  systems 
of  taxation. 

Over  and  above  the  general  restraints 
arising  from  this  complicated  system  of  rev¬ 
enue  laws,  the  commerce  of  wine,  after  corn 
perhaps  the  most  important  production  of 
France,  is  in  the  greater  part  of  the  provinces 
subject  to  particular  restraints,  arising  from 
the  favour  which  has  been  shown  to  the 
vineyards  of  particular  provinces  and  dis¬ 
tricts,  above  those  of  others.  The  provinces 
most  famous  for  their  wines,  it  will  be  found, 

I  believe,  are  those  in  which  the  trade  in 
that  article  is  subject  to  the  fewest  restraints 
of  this  kind.  The  extensive  market  which 
such  provinces  enjoy,  encourages  good  man¬ 
agement  both  in  the  cultivation  of  their 
vineyards,  and  in  the  subsequent  preparation 
of  their  wines. 

Such  various  and  complicated  revenue  laws 
are  not  peculiar  to  France.  The  little  duchy 
of  Milan  is  divided  into  six  provinces,  in 
each  of  which  there  is  a  different  system  of 
taxation  with  regard  to  several  different  sorts 
of  consumable  goods.  The  still  smaller  ter¬ 
ritories  of  the  Duke  of  Parma  are  divided 
into  three  or  four,  each  of  which  has,  in  the 
same  manner,  a  system  of  its  own.  Under 
such  absurd  management,  nothing  but  the 
great  fertility  of  the  soil  and  happiness  of 
the  climate  could  preserve  such  countries 
from  soon  relapsing  into  the  lowest  state 
of  poverty  and  barbarism. 

Taxes  upon  consumable  commodities  may 
either  be  levied  by  an  administration  of 
which  the  officers  are  appointed  by  govern¬ 
ment  and  are  immediately  accountable  to 
government,  of  which  the  revenue  must  in 
this  case  vary  from  year  to  year  according 
to  the  occasional  variations  in  the  produce 
of  the  tax,  or  they  may  be  let  in  farm  for 
a  rent  certain,  the  farmer  being  allowed  to 
appoint  his  own  officers,  who,  though  obliged 
to  levy  the  tax  in  the  manner  directed  by 
the  law,  are  under  his  immediate  inspection, 
and  are  immediately  accountable  to  him. 
The  best  and  most  frugal  way  of  levying 
a  tax  can  never  be  by  farm.  Over  and  above 
what  is  necessary  for  paying  the  stipulated 
rent,  the  salaries  of  the  officers,  and  the  whole 
expense  of  administration,  the  farmer  must 
always  draw  from  the  produce  of  the  tax 
a  certain  profit  proportioned  at  least  to  the 


of  Revenue  399 

advance  which  he  makes,  to  the  risk  which 
he  runs,  to  the  trouble  which  he  is  at,  and  to 
the  knowledge  and  skill  which  it  requires 
to  manage  so  very  complicated  a  concern. 
Government,  by  establishing  an  administra¬ 
tion  under  their  own  immediate  inspection 
of  the  same  kind  with  that  which  the  farmer 
establishes,  might  at  least  save  this  profit, 
which  is  almost  always  exorbitant.  To  farm 
any  considerable  branch  of  the  public  rev¬ 
enue  requires  either  a  great  capital  or  a  great 
credit;  circumstances  which  would  alone  re¬ 
strain  the  competition  for  such  an  undertak¬ 
ing  to  a  very  small  number  of  people.  Of 
the  few  who  have  this  capital  or  credit,  a 
still  smaller  number  have  the  necessary 
knowledge  or  experience;  another  circum¬ 
stance  which  restrains  the  competition  still 
further.  The  very  few,  who  are  in  condition 
to  become  competitors,  find  it  more  for  their 
interest  to  combine  together;  to  become  co¬ 
partners  instead  of  competitors,  and  when 
the  farm  is  set  up  to  auction,  to  offer  no 
rent  but  what  is  much  below  the  real  value. 
In  countries  where  the  public  revenues  are 
in  farm,  the  farmers  are  generally  the  most 
opulent  people.  Their  wealth  would  alone 
excite  the  public  indignation,  and  the  vanity 
which  almost  always  accompanies  such  up¬ 
start  fortunes,  the  foolish  ostentation  with 
which  they  commonly  display  that  wealth, 
excites  that  indignation  still  more. 

The  farmers  of  the  public  revenue  never 
find  the  laws  too  severe  which  punish  any 
attempt  to  evade  the  payment  of  a  tax. 
They  have  no  bowels  for  the  contributors, 
who  are  not  their  subjects,  and  whose  uni¬ 
versal  bankruptcy,  if  it  should  happen  the 
day  after  their  farm  is  expired,  would  not 
much  affect  their  interest.  In  the  greatest 
exigencies  of  the  state,  when  the  anxiety  of 
the  sovereign  for  the  exact  payment  ot  his 
revenue  is  necessarily  the  greatest,  they  sel¬ 
dom  fail  to  complain  that  without  laws  more 
rigorous  than  those  which  actually  take 
place,  it  will  be  impossible  for  them  to  pay 
even  the  usual  rent.  In  those  moments  of 
public  distress  their  demands  cannot  be  dis¬ 
puted.  The  revenue  laws,  therefore,  become 
gradually  more  and  more  severe.  The  most 
sanguinary  are  always  to  be  found  in  countries 
where  the  greater  part  of  the  public  revenue 
is  in  farm;  the  mildest,  in  countries  where  it 
is  levied  under  the  immediate  inspection  of 
the  sovereign.  Even  a  bad  sovereign  feels 
more  compassion  for  his  people  than  can 
ever  be  expected  from  the  farmers  of  his 
revenue.  He  knows  that  the  permanent  gran¬ 
deur  of  his  family  depends  upon  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  his  people,  and  he  will  never 
knowingly  ruin  that  prosperity  for  the  sake 
of  any  momentary  interest  of  his  own.  It 


400  The  Wealth 

is  otherwise  with  the  farmers  of  his  revenue, 
whose  grandeur  may  frequently  be  the  effect 
of  the  ruin,  and  not  of  the  prosperity  of  his 
people. 

A  tax  is  sometimes  not  only  farmed  for 
a  certain  rent,  but  the  farmer  has,  besides, 
the  monopoly  of  the  commodity  taxed.  In 
France,  the  duties  upon  tobacco  and  salt 
are  levied  in  this  manner.  In  such  cases  the 
farmer,  instead  of  one,  levies  two  exorbitant 
profits  upon  the  people;  the  profit  of  the 
farmer,  and  the  still  more  exorbitant  one 
of  the  monopolist.  Tobacco  being  a  luxury, 
every  man  is  allowed  to  buy  or  not  to  buy 
as  he  chooses.  But  salt  being  a  necessary, 
every  man  is  obliged  to  buy  of  the  farmer 
a  certain  quantity  of  it;  because,  if  he  did 
not  buy  this  quantity  of  the  farmer,  he 
would,  it  is  presumed,  buy  it  of  some  smug¬ 
gler.  The  taxes  upon  both  commodities  are 
exorbitant.  The  temptation  to  smuggle  con¬ 
sequently  is  to  many  people  irresistible,  while 
at  the  same  time  the  rigour  of  the  law,  and 
the  vigilance  of  the  farmer’s  officers,  render 
the  yielding  to  that  temptation  almost  cer¬ 
tainly  ruinous.  The  smuggling  of  salt  and 
tobacco  sends  every  year  several  hundred 
people  to  the  galleys,  besides  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  number  whom  it  sends  to  the  gibbet. 
Those  taxes  levied  in  this  manner  yield  a 
very  considerable  revenue  to  government. 
In  1767,  the  farm  of  tobacco  was  let  for 
twenty-two  millions  five  hundred  and  forty- 
one  thousand  two  hundred  and  seventy-eight 
livres  a  year.  That  of  salt,  for  thirty-six 
millions  four  hundred  and  ninety-four  thou¬ 
sand  four  hundred  and  four  livres.  The  farm 
in  both  cases  was  to  commence  in  1768,  and 
to  last  for  six  years.  Those  who  consider 
the  blood  of  the  people  as  nothing  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  revenue  of  the  prince,  may 
perhaps  approve  of  this  method  of  levying 
taxes.  Similar  taxes  and  monopolies  of  salt 
and  tobacco  have  been  established  in  many 
other  countries;  particularly  in  the  Austrian 
and  Prussian  dominions,  and  in  the  greater 
part  of  the  states  of  Italy. 

In  France,  the  greater  part  of  the  actual 
revenue  of  the  crown  is  derived  from  eight 
different  sources;  the  taille,  the  capitation, 
the  two  vingtiemes ,  the  gabelles,  the  aides , 
the  traites ,  the  domaine ,  and  the  farm  of 
tobacco.  The  five  last  are,  in  the  greater 
part  of  the  provinces,  under  farm.  The  three 
first  are  everywhere  levied  by  an  adminis¬ 
tration  under  the  immediate  inspection  and 
direction  of  government,  and  it  is  universally 
acknowledged  that,  in  proportion  to  what  they 
take  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people,  they 
bring  more  into  the  treasury  of  the  prince 
than  the  other  five,  of  which  the  administra¬ 
tion  is  much  more  wasteful  and  expensive. 


of  Nations 

The  finances  of  France  seem,  in  their 
present  state,  to  admit  of  three  very  obvious 
reformations.  First,  by  abolishing  the  taille 
and  the  capitation,  and  by  increasing  the 
number  of  vingtiemes ,  so  as  to  produce  an 
additional  revenue  equal  to  the  amount  of 
those  other  taxes,  the  revenue  of  the  crown 
might  be  preserved;  the  expense  of  collection 
might  be  much  diminished;  the  vexation  of 
the  inferior  ranks  of  people,  which  the  taille 
and  capitation  occasion,  might  be  entirely 
prevented;  and  the  superior  ranks  might  not 
be  more  burdened  than  the  greater  part  of 
them  are  at  present.  The  vingtieme,  I  have 
already  observed,  is  a  tax  very  nearly  of 
the  same  kind  with  what  is  called  the  land- 
tax  of  England.  The  burden  of  the  taille, 
it  is  acknowledged,  falls  finally  upon  the 
proprietors  of  land;  and  as  the  greater  part 
of  the  capitation  is  assessed  upon  those  who 
are  subject  to  the  taille  at  so  much  a  pound 
of  that  other  tax,  the  final  payment  of  the 
greater  part  of  it  must  likewise  fall  upon  the 
same  order  of  people.  Though  the  number 
of  the  vingtiemes ,  therefore,  was  increased 
so  as  to  produce  an  additional  revenue  equal 
to  the  amount  of  both  those  taxes,  the 
superior  ranks  of  people  might  not  be  more 
burdened  than  they  are  at  present.  Many 
individuals  no  doubt  would,  on  account  of 
the  great  inequalities  with  which  the  taille 
is  commonly  assessed  upon  the  estates  and 
tenants  of  different  individuals.  The  interest 
and  opposition  of  such  favoured  subjects  are 
the  obstacles  most  likely  to  prevent  this  or 
any  other  reformation  of  the  same  kind. 
Secondly,  by  rendering  the  gabelle,  the  aides, 
the  traites,  the  taxes  upon  tobacco,  all  the 
different  customs  and  excises,  uniform  in  all 
the  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  those 
taxes  might  be  levied  at  much  less  expense, 
and  the  interior  commerce  of  the  kingdom 
might  be  rendered  as  free  as  that  of  England. 
Thirdly,  and  lastly,  by  subjecting  all  those 
taxes  to  an  administration  under  the  imme¬ 
diate  inspection  and  direction  of  government, 
the  exorbitant  profits  of  the  farmers-general 
might  be  added  to  the  revenue  of  the  state. 
The  opposition  arising  from  the  private  in¬ 
terest  of  individuals  is  likely  to  be  as  effectual 
for  preventing  the  two  last  as  the  first- 
mentioned  scheme  of  reformation. 

The  French  system  of  taxation  seems,  in 
every  respect,  inferior  to  the  British.  In  Great 
Britain  ten  millions  sterling  are  annually 
levied  upon  less  than  eight  millions  of  people 
without  its  being  possible  to  say  that  any 
particular  order  is  oppressed.  From  the  col¬ 
lections  of  the  Abbe  Expilly,  and  the  obser¬ 
vations  of  the  author  of  the  Essay  upon 
the  legislation  and  commerce  of  corn,  it  ap¬ 
pears  probable  that  France,  including  the 


Public  Debts 


401 


provinces  of  Lorraine  and  Bar,  contains  about 
twenty-three  or  twenty-four  millions  of  people 
— three  times  the  number  perhaps  contained 
in  Great  Britain.  The  soil  and  climate  of 
France  are  better  than  those  of  Great  Britain. 
The  country  has  been  much  longer  in  a 
state  of  improvement  and  cultivation,  and 
is,  upon  that  account,  better  stocked  with 
all  those  things  which  it  requires  a  long  time 
to  raise  up  and  accumulate,  such  as  great 
towns,  and  convenient  and  well-built  houses, 
both  in  town  and  country.  With  these  ad¬ 
vantages  it  might  be  expected  that  in  France 
a  revenue  of  thirty  millions  might  be  levied 
for  the  support  of  the  state  with  as  little 
inconveniency  as  a  revenue  of  ten  millions 
is  in  Great  Britain.  In  1765  and  1766,  the 
whole  revenue  paid  into  the  treasury  of 
France,  according  to  the  best,  though,  I  ac¬ 
knowledge,  very  imperfect,  accounts  which  I 
could  get  of  it,  usually  run  between  308  and 
325  millions  of  livres;  that  is,  it  did  not 
amount  to  fifteen  millions  sterling;  not  the 
half  of  what  might  have  been  expected  had 
the  people  contributed  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  numbers  as  the  people  of  Great 
Britain.  The  people  of  France,  however,  it 
is  generally  acknowledged,  are  much  more 
oppressed  by  taxes  than  the  people  of  Great 
Britain.  France,  however,  is  certainly  the 
great  empire  in  Europe  which,  after  that 
of  Great  Britain,  enjoys  the  mildest  and 
most  indulgent  government. 

In  Holland  the  heavy  taxes  upon  the  nec¬ 
essaries  of  life  have  ruined,  it  is  said,  their 
principal  manufactures,  and  are  likely  to 
discourage  gradually  even  their  fisheries  and 
their  trade  in  shipbuilding.  The  taxes  upon 
the  necessaries  of  life  are  inconsiderable  in 
Great  Britain,  and  no  manufacture  has  hith¬ 
erto  been  ruined  by  them.  The  British  taxes 
which  bear  hardest  on  manufactures  are  some 
duties  upon  the  importation  of  raw  materials, 
particularly  upon  that  of  raw  silk.  The  rev¬ 
enue  of  the  states-general  and  of  the  different 
cities,  however,  is  said  to  amount  to  more 
than  five  millions  two  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  pounds  sterling;  and  as  the  inhab¬ 
itants  of  the  United  Provinces  cannot  well 
be  supposed  to  amount  to  more  than  a  third 
part  of  those  of  Great  Britain,  they  must,  in 
proportion  to  their  number,  be  much  more 
heavily  taxed. 

After  all  the  proper  subjects  of  taxation 
have  been  exhausted,  if  the  exigencies  of  the 
state  still  continue  to  require  new  taxes, 
they  must  be  imposed  upon  improper  ones. 
The  taxes  upon  the  necessaries  of  life,  there¬ 
fore,  may  be  no  impeachment  of  the  wisdom 
of  that  republic  which,  in  order  to  acquire 
and  to  maintain  its  independency,  has,  in 
spite  of  its  great  frugality,  been  involved  in 


such  expensive  wars  as  have  obliged  it  to 
contract  great  debts.  The  singular  countries 
of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  besides,  require  a 
considerable  expense  even  to  preserve  their 
existence,  or  to  prevent  their  being  swallowed 
up  by  the  sea,  which  must  have  contributed 
to  increase  considerably  the  load  of  taxes  in 
those  two  provinces.  The  republican  form 
of  government  seems  to  be  the  principal 
support  of  the  present  grandeur  of  Holland. 
The  owners  of  great  capitals,  the  great  mer¬ 
cantile  families,  have  generally  either  some 
direct  share  or  some  indirect  influence  in  the 
administration  of  that  government.  For  the 
sake  of  the  respect  and  authority  which 
they  derive  from  this  situation,  they  are 
willing  to  live  in  a  country  where  their  capital, 
if  they  employ  it  themselves,  will  bring  them 
less  profit,  and  if  they  lend  it  to  another, 
less  interest;  and  where  the  very  moderate 
revenue  which  they  can  draw  from  it  will 
purchase  less  of  the  necessaries  and  conven¬ 
iences  of  life  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe. 
The  residence  of  such  wealthy  people  neces¬ 
sarily  keeps  alive,  in  spite  of  all  disadvantages, 
a  certain  degree  of  industry  in  the  country. 
Any  public  calamity  which  should  destroy 
the  republican  form  of  government,  which 
should  throw  the  whole  administration  into 
the  hands  of  nobles  and  of  soldiers,  which 
should  annihilate  altogether  the  importance 
of  those  wealthy  merchants,  would  soon 
render  it  disagreeable  to  them  to  live  in  a 
country  where  they  were  no  longer  likely  to 
be  much  respected.  They  would  remove  both 
their  residences  and  their  capitals  to  some 
other  country,  and  the  industry  and  com¬ 
merce  of  Holland  would  soon  follow  the 
capitals  which  supported  them. 

Chapter  III 

Of  Public  Debts 

In  that  rude  state  of  society  which  pre¬ 
cedes  the  extension  of  commerce  and  the 
improvement  of  manufactures,  when  those 
expensive  luxuries  which  commerce  and  manu¬ 
factures  can  alone  introduce  are  altogether 
unknown,  the  person  who  possesses  a  large 
revenue,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in 
the  third  book  of  this  Inquiry,  can  spend  or 
enjoy  that  revenue  in  no  other  way  than  by 
maintaining  nearly  as  many  people  as  it  can 
maintain.  A  large  revenue  may  at  all  times 
be  said  to  consist  in  the  command  of  a  large 
quantity  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  In  that 
rude  state  of  things  it  is  commonly  paid 
in  a  large  quantity  of  those  necessaries,  in 
the  materials  of  plain  food  and  coarse  cloth¬ 
ing,  in  corn  and  cattle,  in  wool  and  raw  hides. 
When  neither  commerce  nor  manufactures 
furnish  anything  for  which  the  owner  can 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


402 

exchange  the  greater  part  of  those  materials 
which  are  over  and  above  his  own  consump¬ 
tion,  he  can  do  nothing  with  the  surplus  but 
feed  and  clothe  nearly  as  many  people  as  it 
will  feed  and  clothe.  A  hospitality  in  which 
there  is  no  luxury,  and  a  liberality  in  which 
there  is  no  ostentation,  occasion,  in  this  situ¬ 
ation  of  things,  the  principal  expenses  of 
the  rich  and  the  great.  But  these,  I  have 
likewise  endeavoured  to  show  in  the  same 
book,  are  expenses  by  which  people  are  not 
very  apt  to  ruin  themselves.  There  is  not, 
perhaps,  any  selfish  pleasure  so  frivolous  of 
which  the  pursuit  has  not  sometimes  ruined 
even  sensible  men.  A  passion  for  cock-fighting 
has  ruined  many.  But  the  instances,  I  believe, 
are  not  very  numerous  of  people  who  have 
been  ruined  by  a  hospitality  or  liberality 
of  this  kind,  though  the  hospitality  of  luxury 
and  the  liberality  of  ostentation  have  ruined 
many.  Among  our  feudal  ancestors,  the  long 
time  during  which  estates  used  to  continue 
in  the  same  family  sufficiently  demonstrates 
the  general  disposition  of  people  to  live 
within  their  income.  Though  the  rustic  hos¬ 
pitality  constantly  exercised  by  the  great 
land-holders  may  not,  to  us  in  the  present 
times,  seem  consistent  with  that  order  which 
we  are  apt  to  consider  as  inseparably  con¬ 
nected  with  good  economy,  yet  we  must 
certainly  allow  them  to  have  been  at  least 
so  far  frugal  as  not  commonly  to  have  spent 
their  whole  income.  A  part  of  their  wool 
and  raw  hides  they  had  generally  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  selling  for  money.  Some  part  of 
this  money,  perhaps,  they  spent  in  purchas¬ 
ing  the  few  objects  of  vanity  and  luxury 
with  which  the  circumstances  of  the  times 
could  furnish  them;  but  some  part  of  it 
they  seem  commonly  to  have  hoarded.  They 
could  not  well,  indeed,  do  anything  else  but 
hoard  whatever  money  they  saved.  To  trade 
was  disgraceful  to  a  gentleman,  and  to  lend 
money  at  interest,  which  at  that  time  was 
considered  as  usury  and  prohibited  by  law, 
would  have  been  still  more  so.  In  those  times 
of  violence  and  disorder,  besides,  it  was 
convenient  to  have  a  hoard  of  money  at 
hand,  that  in  case  they  should  be  driven  from 
their  own  home  they  might  have  something 
of  known  value  to  carry  with  them  to  some 
place  of  safety.  The  same  violence  which 
made  it  convenient  to  hoard  made  it  equally 
convenient  to  conceal  the  hoard.  The  fre¬ 
quency  of  treasure- trove,  or  of  treasure  found 
of  which  no  owner  was  known,  sufficiently 
demonstrates  the  frequency  in  those  times 
both  of  hoarding  and  of  concealing  the  hoard. 
Treasure- trove  was  then  considered  as  an 
important  branch  of  the  revenue  of  the 
sovereign.  All  the  treasure-trove  of  the  king¬ 
dom  would  scarce  perhaps  in  the  present 


times  make  an  important  branch  of  the 
revenue  of  a  private  gentleman  of  a  good 
estate. 

The  same  disposition  to  save  and  to  hoard 
prevailed  in  the  sovereign  as  well  as  in  the 
subjects.  Among  nations  to  whom  commerce 
and  manufactures  are  little  known,  the  sover¬ 
eign,  it  has  already  been  observed  in  the 
fourth  book,  is  in  a  situation  which  naturally 
disposes  him  to  the  parsimony  requisite  for 
accumulation.  In  that  situation  the  expense 
even  of  a  sovereign  cannot  be  directed  by 
that  vanity  which  delights  in  the  gaudy 
finery  of  a  court.  The  ignorance  of  the  times 
affords  but  few  of  the  trinkets  in  which  that 
finery  consists.  Standing  armies  are  not  then 
necessary,  so  that  the  expense  even  of  a 
sovereign,  like  that  of  any  other  great  lord, 
can  be  employed  in  scarce  anything  but 
bounty  to  his  tenants  and  hospitality  to 
his  retainers.  But  bounty  and  hospitality  very 
seldom  lead  to  extravagance;  though  vanity 
almost  always  does.  All  the  ancient  sovereigns 
of  Europe  accordingly,  it  has  already  been 
observed,  had  treasures.  Every  Tartar  chief 
in  the  present  times  is  said  to  have  one. 

In  a  commercial  country  abounding  with 
every  sort  of  expensive  luxury,  the  sovereign, 
in  the  same  manner  as  almost  all  the  great 
proprietors  in  his  dominions,  naturally  spends 
a  great  part  of  his  revenue  in  purchasing 
those  luxuries.  His  own  and  the  neighbouring 
countries  supply  him  abundantly  with  all 
the  costly  trinkets  which  compose  the  splen¬ 
did  but  insignificant  pageantry  of  a  court. 
For  the  sake  of  an  inferior  pageantry  of  the 
same  kind,  his  nobles  dismiss  their  retainers, 
make  their  tenants  independent,  and  become 
gradually  themselves  as  insignificant  as  the 
greater  part  of  the  wealthy  burghers  in  his 
dominions.  The  same  frivolous  passions  which 
influence  their  conduct  influence  his.  How  can 
it  be  supposed  that  he  should  be  the  only 
rich  man  in  his  dominions  who  is  insensible 
to  pleasures  of  this  kind?  If  he  does  not,  what 
he  is  very  likely  to  do,  spend  upon  those 
pleasures  so  great  a  part  of  his  revenue  as 
to  debilitate  very  much  the  defensive  power 
of  the  state,  it  cannot  well  be  expected  that 
he  should  not  spend  upon  them  all  that  part 
of  it  which  is  over  and  above  what  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  supporting  that  defensive  power. 
His  ordinary  expense  becomes  equal  to  his 
ordinary  revenue,  and  it  is  well  if  it  does 
not  frequently  exceed  it.  The  amassing  of 
treasure  can  no  longer  be  expected,  and  when 
extraordinary  exigencies  require  extraordinary 
expenses,  he  must  necessarily  call  upon  his 
subjects  for  an  extraordinary  aid.  The  present 
and  the  late  king  of  Prussia1  are  the  only 
1  Frederick  William  I  and  his  son,  Frederick 
II  the  Great. — Ed. 


Public  Debts 


great  princes  of  Europe  who,  since  the  death 
of  Henry  IV  of  France  in  1610,  are  supposed 
to  have  amassed  any  considerable  treasure. 
The  parsimony  which  leads  to  accumulation 
has  become  almost  as  rare  in  republican  as 
in  monarchical  governments.  The  Italian  re¬ 
publics,  the  United  Provinces  of  the  Nether¬ 
lands,  are  all  in  debt.  The  canton  of  Berne 
is  the  single  republic  in  Europe  which  has 
amassed  any  considerable  treasure.  The  other 
Swiss  republics  have  not.  The  taste  for  some 
sort  of  pageantry,  for  splendid  buildings,  at 
least,  and  other  public  ornaments,  frequently 
prevails  as  much  in  the  apparently  sober 
senate-house  of  a  little  republic  as  in  the 
dissipated  court  of  the  greatest  king. 

The  want  of  parsimony  in  time  of  peace 
imposes  the  necessity  of  contracting  debt  in 
time  of  war.  When  war  comes,  there  is  no 
money  in  the  treasury  but  what  is  necessary 
for  carrying  on  the  ordinary  expense  of  the 
peace  establishment.  In  war  an  establishment 
of  three  of  four  times  that  expense  becomes 
necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  state,  and 
consequently  a  revenue  three  or  four  times 
greater  than  the  peace  revenue.  Supposing 
that  the  sovereign  should  have,  what  he  scarce 
ever  has,  the  immediate  means  of  augment¬ 
ing  his  revenue  in  proportion  to  the  augmen¬ 
tation  of  his  expense,  yet  still  the  produce 
of  the  taxes,  from  which  this  increase  of 
revenue  must  be  drawn,  will  not  begin  to 
come  into  the  treasury  till  perhaps  ten  or 
twelve  months  after  they  are  imposed.  But 
the  moment  in  which  war  begins,  or  rather 
the  moment  in  which  it  appears  likely  to 
begin,  the  army  must  be  augmented,  the 
fleet  must  be  fitted  out,  the  garrisoned  towns 
must  be  put  into  a  posture  of  defence;  that 
army,  that  fleet,  those  garrisoned  towns  must 
be  furnished  with  arms,  ammunition,  and 
provisions.  An  immediate  and  great  expense 
must  be  incurred  in  that  moment  of  imme¬ 
diate  danger,  which  will  not  wait  for  the  grad¬ 
ual  and  slow  returns  of  the  new  taxes.  In 
this  exigency  government  can  have  no  other 
resource  but  in  borrowing. 

The  same  commercial  state  of  society 
which,  by  the  operation  of  moral  causes, 
brings  government  in  this  manner  into  the 
necessity  of  borrowing,  produces  in  the  sub¬ 
jects  both  an  ability  and  an  inclination  to 
lend.  If  it  commonly  brings  along  with  it 
the  necessity  of  borrowing,  it  likewise  brings 
along  with  it  the  facility  of  doing  so. 

A  country  abounding  with  merchants  and 
manufacturers  necessarily  abounds  with  a 
set  of  people  through  whose  hands  not  only 
their  own  capitals,  but  the  capitals  of  all  those 
who  either  lend  them  money,  or  trust  them 
with  goods,  pass  as  frequently,  or  more  fre¬ 
quently,  than  the  revenue  of  a  private  man, 


403 

who,  without  trade  or  business,  lives  upon 
his  income,  passes  through  his  hands.  The 
revenue  of  such  a  man  can  regularly  pass 
through  his  hands  only  once  in  a  year.  But 
the  whole  amount  of  the  capital  and  credit 
of  a  merchant,  who  deals  in  a  trade  of  which 
the  returns  are  very  quick,  may  sometimes 
pass  through  his  hands  two,  three,  or  four 
times  a  year.  A  country  abounding  with 
merchants  and  manufacturers,  therefore,  nec¬ 
essarily  abounds  with  a  set  of  people  who 
have  it  at  all  times  in  their  power  to  advance, 
if  they  choose  to  do  so,  a  very  large  sum  of 
money  to  government.  Hence  the  ability  in 
the  subjects  of  a  commercial  state  to  lend. 

Commerce  and  manufactures  can  seldom 
flourish  long  in  any  state  which  does  not 
enjoy  a  regular  administration  of  justice,  in 
which  the  people  do  not  feel  themselves 
secure  in  the  possession  of  their  property, 
in  which  the  faith  of  contracts  is  not  sup¬ 
ported  by  law,  and  in  which  the  authority 
of  the  state  is  not  supposed  to  be  regularly 
employed  in  enforcing  the  payment  of  debts 
from  all  those  who  are  able  to  pay.  Commerce 
and  manufactures,  in  short,  can  seldom  flour¬ 
ish  in  any  state  in  which  there  is  not  a 
certain  degree  of  confidence  in  the  justice 
of  government.  The  same  confidence  which 
disposes  great  merchants  and  manufacturers, 
upon  ordinary  occasions,  to  trust  their  prop¬ 
erty  to  the  protection  of  a  particular  govern¬ 
ment,  disposes  them,  upon  extraordinary 
occasions,  to  trust  that  government  with  the 
use  of  their  property.  By  lending  money  to 
government,  they  do  not  even  for  a  moment 
diminish  their  ability  to  carry  on  their  trade 
and  manufactures.  On  the  contrary,  they 
commonly  augment  it.  The  necessities  of 
the  state  render  government  upon  most 
occasions  willing  to  borrow  upon  terms 
extremely  advantageous  to  the  lender.  The 
security  which  it  grants  to  the  original  credi¬ 
tor  is  made  transferable  to  any  other  creditor, 
and,  from  the  universal  confidence  in  the 
justice  of  the  state,  generally  sells  in  the 
market  for  more  than  was  originally  paid 
for  it.  The  merchant  or  monied  man  makes 
money  by  lending  money  to  government,  and 
instead  of  diminishing,  increases  his  trading 
capital.  He  generally  considers  it  as  a  favour, 
therefore,  when  the  administration  admits 
him  to  a  share  in  the  first  subscription  for 
a  new  loan.  Hence  the  inclination  or  willing¬ 
ness  in  the  subjects  of  a  commercial  state 
to  lend. 

The  government  of  such  a  state  is  very 
apt  to  repose  itself  upon  this  ability  and 
willingness  of  its  subjects  to  lend  it  their 
money  on  extraordinary  occasions.  It  fore¬ 
sees  the  facility  of  borrowing,  and  therefore 
dispenses  itself  from  the  duty  of  saving. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


404 

In  a  rude  state  of  society  there  are  no 
great  mercantile  or  manufacturing  capitals. 
The  individuals  who  hoard  whatever  money 
they  can  save,  and  who  conceal  their  hoard, 
do  so  from  a  distrust  of  the  justice  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  from  a  fear  that  if  it  was  known 
that  they  had  a  hoard,  and  where  that  hoard 
was  to  be  found,  they  would  quickly  be 
plundered.  In  such  a  state  of  things  few 
people  would  be  able,  and  nobody  would  be 
willing,  to  lend  their  money  to  government 
on  extraordinary  exigencies.  The  sovereign 
feels  that  he  must  provide  for  such  exigencies 
by  saving  because  he  foresees  the  absolute 
impossibility  of  borrowing.  This  foresight  in¬ 
creases  still  further  his  natural  disposition 
to  save. 

The  progress  of  the  enormous  debts  which 
at  present  oppress,  and  will  in  the  long-run 
probably  ruin,  all  the  great  nations  of  Europe 
has  been  pretty  uniform.  Nations,  like  private 
men,  have  generally  begun  to  borrow  upon 
what  may  be  called  personal  credit,  without 
assigning  or  mortgaging  any  particular  fund 
for  the  payment  of  the  debt;  and  when  this 
resource  has  failed  them,  they  have  gone 
on  to  borrow  upon  assignments  or  mort¬ 
gages  of  particular  funds. 

What  is  called  the  unfunded  debt  of  Great 
Britain  is  contracted  in  the  former  of  those 
two  ways.  It  consists  partly  in  a  debt  which 
bears,  or  is  supposed  to  bear,  no  interest,  and 
which  resembles  the  debts  that  a  private  man 
contracts  upon  account,  and  partly  in  a  debt 
which  bears  interest,  and  which  resembles 
what  a  private  man  contracts  upon  his  bill 
or  promissory  note.  The  debts  which  are 
due  either  for  extraordinary  services,  or  for 
services  either  not  provided  for,  or  not  paid 
at  the  time  when  they  are  performed,  part 
of  the  extrordinaries  of  the  army,  navy, 
and  ordnance,  the  arrears  of  subsidies  to 
foreign  princes,  those  of  seamen's  wages,  etc., 
usually  constitute  a  debt  of  the  first  kind, 
sometimes  in  payment  of  a  part  of  such 
Navy  and  exchequer  bills,  which  are  issued 
sometimes  in  payment  of  a  part  of  such 
debts  and  sometimes  for  other  purposes,  con¬ 
stitute  a  debt  of  the  second  kind — exchequer 
bills  bearing  interest  from  the  day  on  which 
they  are  issued,  and  navy  bills  six  months 
after  they  are  issued.  The  Bank  of  England, 
either  by  voluntarily  discounting  those  bills 
at  their  current  value,  or  by  agreeing  with 
government  for  certain  considerations  to  cir¬ 
culate  exchequer  bills,  that  is,  to  receive 
them  at  par,  paying  the  interest  which  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  due  upon  them,  keeps  up  their 
value  and  facilitates  their  circulation,  and 
thereby  frequently  enables  government  to 
contract  a  very  large  debt  of  this  kind.  In 
France,  where  there  is  no  bank,  the  state 


bills  ( billets  d'etat1)  have  sometimes  sold  at 
sixty  and  seventy  per  cent  discount.  During 
the  great  recoinage  in  King  William’s  time, 
when  the  Bank  of  England  thought  proper 
to  put  a  stop  to  its  usual  transactions,  ex¬ 
chequer  bills  and  tallies  are  said  to  have  sold 
from  twenty-five  to  sixty  per  cent  discount; 
owing  partly,  no  doubt,  to  the  supposed 
instability  of  the  new  government  established 
by  the  Revolution,  but  partly,  too,  to  the 
want  of  the  support  of  the  Bank  of  England. 

When  this  resource  is  exhausted,  and  it 
becomes  necessary,  in  order  to  raise  money, 
to  assign  or  mortgage  some  particular  branch 
of  the  public  revenue  for  the  payment  of 
the  debt,  government  has  upon  different 
occasions  done  this  in  two  different  ways. 
Sometimes  it  has  made  this  assignment  or 
mortgage  for  a  short  period  of  time  only, 
a  year,  or  a  few  years,  for  example;  and  some¬ 
times  for  perpetuity.  In  the  one  case  the 
fund  was  supposed  sufficient  to  pay,  within 
the  limited  time,  both  principal  and  interest 
of  the  money  borrowed.  In  the  other  it  was 
supposed  sufficient  to  pay  the  interest  only, 
or  a  perpetual  annuity  equivalent  to  the 
interest,  government  being  at  liberty  to  re¬ 
deem  at  any  time  this  annuity  upon  paying 
back  the  principal  sum  borrowed.  When 
money  was  raised  in  the  one  way,  it  was  said 
to  be  raised  by  anticipation;  when  in  the 
other,  by  perpetual  funding,  or,  more  shortly, 
by  funding. 

In  Great  Britain  the  annual  land  and  malt 
taxes  are  regularly  anticipated  every  year, 
by  virtue  of  a  borrowing  clause  constantly 
inserted  into  the  acts  which  impose  them. 
The  Bank  of  England  generally  advances  at 
an  interest,  which  since  the  Revolution  has 
varied  from  eight  to  three  per  cent,  the  sums 
for  which  those  taxes  are  granted,  and  receives 
payment  as  their  produce  gradually  comes  in. 
If  there  is  a  deficiency,  which  there  always 
is,  it  is  provided  for  in  the  supplies  of  the 
ensuing  year.  The  only  considerable  branch 
of  the  public  revenue  which  yet  remains 
unmortgaged  is  thus  regularly  spent  before 
it  comes  in.  Like  an  improvident  spendthrift, 
whose  pressing  occasions  will  not  allow  him 
to  wait  for  the  regular  payment  of  his  rev¬ 
enue,  the  state  is  in  the  constant  practice  of 
borrowing  of  its  own  factors  and  agents,  and 
of  paying  interest  for  the  use  of  its  own 
money. 

In  the  reign  of  King  William,  and  during 
a  great  part  of  that  of  Queen  Anne,  before 
we  had  become  so  familiar  as  we  are  now 
with  the  practice  of  perpetual  funding,  the 
greater  part  of  the  new  taxes  were  imposed 
but  for  a  short  period  of  time  (for  four,  five, 

1  See  Examen  des  reflexions  politiques  sur  les 
finances . 


Public  Debts 


six,  or  seven  years  only) ,  and  a  great  part 
of  the  grants  of  every  year  consisted  in  loans 
upon  anticipations  of  the  produce  of  those 
taxes.  The  produce  being  frequently  insuffi¬ 
cient  for  paying  within  the  limited  term  the 
principal  and  interest  of  the  money  borrowed, 
deficiencies  arose,  to  make  good  which  it 
became  necessary  to  prolong  the  term. 

In  1G97,  by  the  8th  of  William  III,  c.  20, 
the  deficiencies  of  several  taxes  were  charged 
upon  what  was  then  called  the  first  general 
mortgage  or  fund,  consisting  of  a  prolonga¬ 
tion  to  the  first  of  August  1706  of  several 
different  taxes  which  would  have  expired 
within  a  shorter  term,  and  of  which  the  prod¬ 
uce  was  accumulated  into  one  general  fund. 
The  deficiencies  charged  upon  this  prolonged 
term  amounted  to  £5,160,459  14s.  91/4d. 

In  1701,  those  duties,  with  some  others, 
were  still  further  prolonged  for  the  like  pur¬ 
poses  till  the  first  of  August  1710,  and  were 
called  the  second  general  mortgage  or  fund. 
The  deficiencies  charged  upon  it  amounted  to 
£2,055,999  7s.  ll%d. 

In  1707,  those  duties  were  still  further 
prolonged,  as  a  fund  for  new  loans,  to  the 
first  of  August  1712,  and  were  called  the  third 
general  mortgage  or  fund.  The  sum  borrowed 
upon  it  was  £983,254  11s.  91/4d. 

In  1708,  those  duties  were  all  (except  the 
Old  Subsidy  of  Tonnage  and  Poundage,  of 
which  one  moiety  only  was  made  a  part  of 
this  fund,  and  a  duty  upon  the  importation 
of  Scotch  linen,  which  had  been  taken  off 
by  the  Articles  of  Union)  still  further  con¬ 
tinued,  as  a  fund  for  new  loans,  to  the  first 
of  August  1714,  and  were  called  the  fourth 
general  mortgage  or  fund.  The  sum  borrowed 
upon  it  was  £925,176  9s.  2%d. 

In  1709,  those  cities  were  all  (except  the 
Old  Subsidy  of  Tonnage  and  Poundage,  which 
was  now  left  out  of  this  fund  altogether) 
still  further  continued  for  the  same  purpose 
to  the  first  of  August  1716,  and  were  called 
the  fifth  general  mortgage  or  fund.  The  sum 
borrowed  upon  it  was  £922,029  6s. 

In  1710,  those  duties  were  again  prolonged 
to  the  first  of  August  1720,  and  were  called 
the  sixth  general  mortgage  or  fund.  The  sum 
borrowed  upon  it  was  £1,296,552  9s.  ll%d. 

In  1711,  the  same  duties  (which  at  this 
time  were  thus  subject  to  four  different  antic¬ 
ipations)  together  with  several  others  were 
continued  for  ever,  and  made  a  fund  for 
paying  the  interest  of  the  capital  of  the 
South  Sea  Company,  which  had  that  year 
advanced  to  government,  for  paying  debts 
and  making  good  deficiencies,  the  sum  of 
£9,177,967  15s.  4d.;  the  greatest  loan  which 
at  that  time  had  ever  been  made. 

Before  this  period,  the  principal,  so  far 
as  I  have  been  able  to  observe,  the  only  taxes 


405 

which  in  order  to  pay  the  interest  of  a  debt 
had  been  imposed  for  perpetuity,  were  those 
for  paying  the  interest  of  the  money  which 
had  been  advanced  to  government  by  the 
Bank  and  the  East  India  Company,  and  of 
what  it  was  expected  would  be  advanced,  but 
which  was  never  advanced,  by  a  projected 
land  bank.  The  bank  fund  at  this  time 
amounted  to  £3,375,027  17s.  10y2d.,  for  which 
was  paid  an  annuity  or  interest  of  £206,501 
13s.  5d.  The  East  India  fund  amounted  to 
£3,200,000,  for  which  was  paid  an  annuity 
or  interest  of  £160,000 — the  bank  fund  being 
at  six  per  cent,  the  East  India  fund  at  five 
per  cent  interest. 

In  1715,  by  the  1st  of  George  I,  c.  12,  the 
different  taxes  which  had  been  mortgaged 
for  paying  the  bank  annuity,  together  with 
several  others  which  by  this  act  were  likewise 
rendered  perpetual,  were  accumulated  into 
one  common  fund  called  The  Aggregate  Fund, 
which  was  charged  not  only  with  the  pay¬ 
ments  of  the  bank  annuity,  but  with  several 
other  annuities  and  burdens  of  different  kinds. 
This  fund  was  afterwards  augmented  by  the 
3rd  of  George  I,  c.  8,  and  by  the  5th  of 
George  I,  c.  3,  and  the  different  duties  which 
were  then  added  to  it  were  likewise  rendered 
perpetual. 

In  1717,  by  the  3rd  of  George  I,  c.  7, 
several  other  taxes  were  rendered  perpetual, 
and  accumulated  into  another  common  fund, 
called  The  General  Fund,  for  the  payment  of 
certain  annuities,  amounting  in  the  whole  to 
£724,849  6s.  10y>d. 

In  consequence  of  those  different  acts,  the 
greater  part  of  the  taxes  which  before  had 
been  anticipated  only  for  a  short  term  of 
years  were  rendered  perpetual  as  a  fund  for 
paying,  not  the  capital,  but  the  interest  only, 
of  the  money  which  had  been  borrowed  upon 
them  by  different  successive  anticipations. 

Had  money  never  been  raised  but  by  an¬ 
ticipation,  the  course  of  a  few  years  would 
have  liberated  the  public  revenue  without 
any  other  attention  of  government  besides 
that  of  not  overloading  the  fund  by  charging 
it  with  more  debt  than  it  could  pay  within 
the  limited  term,  and  of  not  anticipating  a 
second  time  before  the  expiration  of  the  first 
anticipation.  But  the  greater  part  of  European 
governments  have  been  incapable  of  those 
attentions.  They  have  frequently  overloaded 
the  fund  even  upon  the  first  anticipation, 
and  when  this  happened  not  to  be  the  case, 
they  have  generally  taken  care  to  overload 
it  by  anticipating  a  second  and  a  third  time 
before  the  expiration  of  the  first  anticipation. 
The  fund  becoming  in  this  manner  altogether 
insufficient  for  paying  both  principal  and 
interest  of  the  money  borrowed  upon  it,  it 
became  necessary  to  charge  it  with  the  inter- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


406 

est  only,  or  a  perpetual  annuity  equal  to 
the  interest,  and  such  unprovident  anticipa¬ 
tions  necessarily  gave  birth  to  the  more 
ruinous  practice  of  perpetual  funding.  But 
though  this  practice  necessarily  puts  off  the 
liberation  of  the  public  revenue  from  a  fixed 
period  to  one  so  indefinite  that  it  is  not 
very  likely  ever  to  arrive,  yet  as  a  greater 
sum  can  in  all  cases  be  raised  by  this  new 
practice  than  by  the  old  one  of  anticipa¬ 
tions,  the  former,  when  men  have  once  be¬ 
come  familiar  with  it,  has  in  the  great 
exigencies  of  the  state  been  universally  pre¬ 
ferred  to  the  latter.  To  relieve  the  present 
exigency  is  always  the  object  which  princi¬ 
pally  interests  those  immediately  concerned  in 
the  administration  of  public  affairs.  The 
future  liberation  of  the  public  revenue  they 
leave  to  the  care  of  posterity. 

During  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  the 
market  rate  of  interest  had  fallen  from  six 
to  five  per  cent,  and  in  the  twelfth  year  of 
her  reign  five  per  cent  was  declared  to  be 
the  highest  rate  which  could  lawfully  be  taken 
for  money  borrowed  upon  private  security. 
Soon  after  the  greater  part  of  the  temporary 
taxes  of  Great  Britain  had  been  rendered 
perpetual,  and  distributed  into  the  Aggregate, 
South  Sea,  and  General  Funds,  the  creditors 
of  the  public,  like  those  of  private  persons, 
were  induced  to  accept  of  five  per  cent  for 
the  interest  of  their  money,  which  occasioned 
a  saving  of  one  per  cent  upon  the  capital  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  debts  which  had  been 
thus  funded  for  perpetuity,  or  of  one-sixth 
of  the  greater  part  of  the  annuities  which 
were  paid  out  of  the  three  great  funds  above 
mentioned.  This  saving  left  a  considerable 
surplus  in  the  produce  of  the  different  taxes 
which  had  been  accumulated  into  those  funds 
over  and  above  what  was  necessary  for 
paying  the  annuities  which  were  now  charged 
upon  them,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  what 
has  since  been  called  the  Sinking  Fund.  In 
1717,  it  amounted  to  £323,434  7s.  7V2cL  In 
1727,  the  interest  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
public  debts  was  still  further  reduced  to  four 
per  cent;  and  in  1753  and  1757,  to  three  and 
a  half  and  three  per  cent;  which  reductions 
still  further  augmented  the  sinking  fund. 

A  sinking  fund,  though  instituted  for  the 
payment  of  old,  facilitates  very  much  the 
contracting  of  new  debts.  It  is  a  subsidiary 
fund  always  at  hand  to  be  mortgaged  in  aid 
of  any  other  doubtful  fund  upon  which  money 
is  proposed  to  be  raised  in  an  exigency  of  the 
state.  Whether  the  sinking  fund  of  Great 
Britain  has  been  more  frequently  applied 
to  the  one  or  to  the  other  of  those  two  pur¬ 
poses  will  sufficiently  appear  by  and  by. 

Besides  those  two  methods  of  borrowing, 
by  anticipations  and  by  perpetual  funding, 


there  are  two  other  methods  which  hold  a 
sort  of  middle  place  between  them.  These  are, 
that  of  borrowing  upon  annuities  for  terms 
of  years,  and  that  of  borrowing  upon  annu¬ 
ities  for  lives. 

During  the  reigns  of  King  William  and 
Queen  Anne,  large  sums  were  frequently 
borrowed  upon  annuities  for  terms  of  years, 
which  were  sometimes  longer  and  sometimes 
shorter.  In  1693,  an  act  was  passed  for  bor¬ 
rowing  one  million  upon  an  annuity  of  four¬ 
teen  per  cent,  or  of  £140,000  a  year  for 
sixteen  years.  In  1691,  an  act  was  passed  for 
borrowing  a  million  upon  annuities  for  lives, 
upon  terms  which  in  the  present  times  would 
appear  very  advantageous.  But  the  subscrip¬ 
tion  was  not  filled  up.  In  the  following  year 
the  deficiency  was  made  good  by  borrowing 
upon  annuities  for  lives  at  fourteen  per  cent, 
or  at  little  more  than  seven  years’  purchase. 
In  1695,  the  persons  who  had  purchased 
those  annuities  were  allowed  to  exchange 
them  for  others  of  ninety-six  years  upon 
paying  into  the  Exchequer  sixty-three  pounds 
in  the  hundred;  that  is,  the  difference  between 
fourteen  per  cent  for  life,  and  fourteen  per 
cent  for  ninety-six  years,  was  sold  for  sixty- 
three  pounds,  or  for  four  and  a  half  years’ 
purchase.  Such  was  the  supposed  instability 
of  government  that  even  these  terms  procured 
few  purchasers.  In  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne 
money  was  upon  different  occasions  borrowed 
both  upon  annuities  for  lives,  and  upon  an¬ 
nuities  for  terms  of  thirty-two,  of  eighty-nine, 
of  ninety-eight,  and  of  ninety-nine  years.  In 
1719,  the  proprietors  of  the  annuities  for 
thirty-two  years  were  induced  to  accept 
in  lieu  of  them  South  Sea  stock  to  the  amount 
of  eleven  and  a  half  years’  purchase  of  the 
annuities,  together  with  an  additional  quan¬ 
tity  of  stock  equal  to  the  arrears  which  hap¬ 
pened  then  to  be  due  upon  them.  In  1720, 
the  greater  part  of  the  other  annuities  for 
terms  of  years  both  long  and  short  were 
subscribed  into  the  same  fund.  The  long 
annuities  at  that  time  amounted  to  £666,821 
8s.  3%d.  a  year.  On  the  5th  of  January  1775, 
the  remainder  of  them,  or  what  was  not  sub¬ 
scribed  at  that  time,  amounted  only  to 
£136,453  12s.  8d. 

During  the  two  wars  which  began  in  1739 
and  in  1755,  little  money  was  borrowed  either 
upon  annuities  for  terms  of  years,  or  upon 
those  for  lives.  An  annuity  for  ninety-eight 
or  ninety-nine  years,  however,  is  worth  nearly 
as  much  money  as  a  perpetuity,  and  should, 
therefore,  one  might  think,  be  a  fund  for 
borrowing  nearly  as  much.  But  those  who,  in 
order  to  make  family  settlements,  and  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  remote  futurity,  buy  into  the  public 
stocks,  would  not  care  to  purchase  into  one 
of  which  the  value  was  continually  diminish- 


Public  Debts 


±07 


ing;  and  such  people  make  a  very  considerable 
proportion  both  of  the  proprietors  and  pur¬ 
chasers  of  stock.  An  annuity  for  a  long  term 
of  years,  therefore,  though  its  intrinsic  value 
may  be  very  nearly  the  same  with  that  of 
a  perpetual  annuity,  will  not  find  nearly  the 
same  number  of  purchasers.  The  subscribers 
to  a  new  loan,  who  mean  generally  to  sell 
their  subscriptions  as  soon  as  possible,  prefer 
greatly  a  perpetual  annuity  redeemable  by 
Parliament  to  an  irredeemable  annuity  for 
a  long  term  of  years  of  only  equal  amount. 
The  value  of  the  former  may  be  supposed 
always  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same, 
and  it  makes,  therefore,  a  more  convenient 
transferable  stock  than  the  latter. 

During  the  two  last-mentioned  wars,  an¬ 
nuities,  either  for  terms  of  years  or  for  lives, 
were  seldom  granted  but  as  premiums  to 
the  subscribers  to  a  new  loan  over  and  above 
the  redeemable  annuity  or  interest  upon  the 
credit  of  which  the  loan  was  supposed  to  be 
made.  They  were  granted,  not  as  the  proper 
fund  upon  which  the  money  was  borrowed, 
but  as  an  additional  encouragement  to  the 
lender. 

Annuities  for  lives  have  occasionally  been 
granted  in  two  different  ways;  either  upon 
separate  lives,  or  upon  lots  of  lives,  which 
in  French  are  called  Tontines,  from  the  name 
of  their  inventor.  When  annuities  are  granted 
upon  separate  lives,  the  death  of  every  in¬ 
dividual  annuitant  disburthens  the  public 
revenue  so  far  as  it  was  affected  by  his  an¬ 
nuity.  When  annuities  are  granted  upon  ton¬ 
tines,  the  liberation  of  the  public  revenue 
does  not  commence  till  the  death  of  all  an¬ 
nuitants  comprehended  in  one  lot,  which  may 
sometimes  consist  of  twenty  or  thirty  persons, 
of  whom  the  survivors  succeed  to  the  annui¬ 
ties  of  all  those  who  die  before  them,  the  last 
survivor  succeeding  to  the  annuities  of  the 
whole  lot.  Upon  the  same  revenue  more 
money  can  always  be  raised  by  tontines  than 
by  annuities  for  separate  lives.  An  annuity, 
with  a  right  of  survivorship,  is  really  worth 
more  than  an  equal  annuity  for  a  separate 
life,  and  from  the  confidence  which  every 
man  naturally  has  in  his  own  good  fortune, 
the  principle  upon  which  is  founded  the  suc¬ 
cess  of  all  lotteries,  such  an  annuity  generally 
sells  for  something  more  than  it  is  worth. 
In  countries  where  it  is  usual  for  government 
to  raise  money  by  granting  annuities,  tontines 
are  upon  this  account  generally  preferred  to 
annuities  for  separate  lives.  The  expedient 
which  will  raise  most  money  is  almost  always 
preferred  to  that  which  is  likely  to  bring 
about  in  the  speediest  manner  the  liberation 
of  the  public  revenue. 

In  France  a  much  greater  proportion  of  the 
public  debts  consists  in  annuities  for  lives 


than  in  England.  According  to  a  memoir 
presented  by  the  Parliament  of  Bordeaux  to 
the  king  in  1764,  the  whole  public  debt  of 
France  is  estimated  at  twenty-four  hundred 
millions  of  livres,  of  which  the  capital  for 
which  annuities  for  lives  had  been  granted 
is  supposed  to  amount  to  three  hundred  mil¬ 
lions,  the  eighth  part  of  the  whole  public 
debt.  The  annuities  themselves  are  com¬ 
puted  to  amount  to  thirty  millions  a  year, 
the  fourth  part  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
millions,  the  supposed  interest  of  that  whole 
debt.  These  estimations,  I  know  very  well, 
are  not  exact,  but  having  been  presented  by 
so  very  respectable  a  body  as  approximations 
to  the  truth,  they  may,  I  apprehend,  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  such.  It  is  not  the  different  de¬ 
grees  of  anxiety  in  the  two  governments  of 
France  and  England  for  the  liberation  of  the 
public  revenue  which  occasions  this  difference 
in  their  respective  modes  of  borrowing.  It 
arises  altogether  from  the  different  views  and 
interests  of  the  lenders. 

In  England,  the  seat  of  government  being 
in  the  greatest  mercantile  city  in  the  world, 
the  merchants  are  generally  the  people  who 
advance  money  to  government.  By  advanc¬ 
ing  it  they  do  not  mean  to  diminish,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  to  increase  their  mercantile 
capitals,  and  unless  they  expected  to  sell 
with  some  profit  their  share  in  the  subscrip¬ 
tion  for  a  new  loan,  they  never  would  sub¬ 
scribe.  But  if  by  advancing  their  money  they 
were  to  purchase,  instead  of  perpetual  an¬ 
nuities,  annuities  for  lives  only,  whether  their 
own  or  those  of  other  people,  they  would  not 
always  be  so  likely  to  sell  them  with  a  profit. 
Annuities  upon  their  own  lives  they  would 
always  sell  with  loss,  because  no  man  will 
give  for  an  annuity  upon  the  life  of  another, 
whose  age  and  state  of  health  are  nearly  the 
same  with  his  own,  the  same  price  which  he 
would  give  for  one  upon  his  own.  An  annuity 
upon  the  life  of  a  third  person,  indeed,  is,  no 
doubt,  of  equal  value  to  the  buyer  and  the 
seller;  but  its  real  value  begins  to  diminish 
from  the  moment  it  is  granted,  and  continues 
to  do  so  more  and  more  as  long  as  it  subsists. 
It  can  never,  therefore,  make  so  convenient 
a  transferable  stock  as  a  perpetual  annuity, 
of  which  the  real  value  may  be  supposed  al¬ 
ways  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same. 

In  France,  the  seat  of  government  not  be¬ 
ing  in  a  great  mercantile  city,  merchants  do 
not  make  so  great  a  proportion  of  the  people 
who  advance  money  to  government.  The  peo¬ 
ple  concerned  in  the  finances,  the  farmers- 
general,  the  receivers  of  the  taxes  which  are 
not  in  farm,  the  court  bankers,  etc.,  make  the 
greater  part  of  those  who  advance  their 
money  in  all  public  exigencies.  Such  people 
are  commonly  men  of  mean  birth,  but  of 


4-08  The  Wealth 

great  wealth,  and  frequently  of  great  pride. 
They  are  too  proud  to  marry  their  equals, 
and  women  of  quality  disdain  to  marry  them. 
They  frequently  resolve,  therefore,  to  live 
bachelors,  and  having  neither  any  families 
of  their  own,  nor  much  regard  for  those  of 
their  relations,  whom  they  are  not  always 
very  fond  of  acknowledging,  they  desire  only 
to  live  in  splendour  during  their  own  time, 
and  are  not  unwilling  that  their  fortune 
should  end  with  themselves.  The  number  of 
rich  people,  besides,  who  are  either  averse  to 
marry,  or  whose  condition  of  life  renders  it 
either  improper  or  inconvenient  for  them  to 
do  so,  is  much  greater  in  France  than  in  Eng¬ 
land.  To  such  people,  who  have  little  or  no 
care  for  posterity,  nothing  can  be  more  con¬ 
venient  than  to  exchange  their  capital  for  a 
revenue  which  is  to  last  just  as  long,  and 
no  longer,  than  they  wish  it  to  do. 

The  ordinary  expense  of  the  greater  part  of 
modern  governments  in  time  of  peace  being 
equal  or  nearly  equal  to  their  ordinary  reve¬ 
nue,  when  war  comes  they  are  both  unwill¬ 
ing  and  unable  to  increase  their  revenue  in 
proportion  to  the  increase  of  their  expense. 
They  are  unwilling  for  fear  of  offending  the 
people,  who,  by  so  great  and  so  sudden  an 
increase  of  taxes,  would  soon  be  disgusted 
with  the  war;  and  they  are  unable  from  not 
well  knowing  what  taxes  would  be  sufficient 
to  produce  the  revenue  wanted.  The  facility 
of  borrowing  delivers  them  from  the  embar¬ 
rassment  which  this  fear  and  inability  would 
otherwise  occasion.  By  means  of  borrowing 
they  are  enabled,  with  a  very  moderate  in¬ 
crease  of  taxes,  to  raise,  from  year  to  year, 
money  sufficient  for  carrying  on  the  war,  and 
by  the  practice  of  perpetually  funding  they 
are  enabled,  with  the  smallest  possible  in¬ 
crease  of  taxes,  to  raise  annually  the  largest 
possible  sum  of  money.  In  great  empires  the 
people  who  live  in  the  capital,  and  in  the 
provinces  remote  from  the  scene  of  action, 
feel,  many  of  them,  scarce  any  inconveniency 
from  the  war;  but  enjoy,  at  their  ease,  the 
amusement  of  reading  in  the  newspapers  the 
exploits  of  their  own  fleets  and  armies.  To 
them  this  amusement  compensates  the  small 
difference  between  the  taxes  which  they  pay 
on  account  of  the  war,  and  those  which  they 
had  been  accustomed  to  pay  in  time  of  peace. 
They  are  commonly  dissatisfied  with  the  re¬ 
turn  of  peace,  which  puts  an  end  to  their 
amusement,  and  to  a  thousand  visionary 
hopes  of  conquest  and  national  glory  from 
a  longer  continuance  of  the  war. 

The  return  of  peace,  indeed,  seldom  re¬ 
lieves  them  from  the  greater  part  of  the  taxes 
imposed  during  the  war.  These  are  mort¬ 
gaged  for  the  interest  of  the  debt  contracted 
in  order  to  carry  it  on.  If,  over  and  above 


of  Nations 

paying  the  interest  of  this  debt,  and  defray¬ 
ing  the  ordinary  expense  of  government,  the 
old  revenue,  together  with  the  new  taxes, 
produce  some  surplus  revenue,  it  may  per¬ 
haps  be  converted  into  a  sinking  fund  for 
paying  off  the  debt.  But,  in  the  first  place, 
this  sinking  fund,  even  supposing  it  should 
be  applied  to  no  other  purpose,  is  generally 
altogether  inadequate  for  paying,  in  the 
course  of  any  period  during  which  it  can 
reasonably  be  expected  that  peace  should 
continue,  the  whole  debt  contracted  during 
the  war;  and,  in  the  second  place,  this  fund 
is  almost  always  applied  to  other  purposes. 

The  new  taxes  were  imposed  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  paying  the  interest  of  the  money 
borrowed  upon  them.  If  they  produce  more, 
it  is  generally  something  which  was  neither 
intended  nor  expected,  and  is  therefore  sel¬ 
dom  very  considerable.  Sinking  funds  have 
generally  arisen  not  so  much  from  any  sur¬ 
plus  of  the  taxes  which  was  over  and  above 
what  was  necessary  for  paying  the  interest 
or  annuity  originally  charged  upon  them,  as 
from  a  subsequent  reduction  of  that  interest. 
That  of  Holland  in  1655,  and  that  of  the 
ecclesiastical  state  in  1685,  were  both  formed 
in  this  manner.  Hence  the  usual  insufficiency 
of  such  funds. 

During  the  most  profound  peace  various 
events  occur  which  require  an  extraordinary 
expense,  and  government  finds  it  always  more 
convenient  to  defray  this  expense  by  mis¬ 
applying  the  sinking  fund  than  by  imposing 
a  new  tax.  Every  new  tax  is  immediately  felt 
more  or  less  by  the  people.  It  occasions  al¬ 
ways  some  murmur,  and  meets  with  some 
opposition.  The  more  taxes  may  have  been 
multiplied,  the  higher  they  may  have  been 
raised  upon  every  different  subject  of  taxa¬ 
tion;  the  more  loudly  the  people  complain 
of  every  new  tax,  the  more  difficult  it  be¬ 
comes,  too,  either  to  find  out  new  subjects  of 
taxation,  or  to  raise  much  higher  the  taxes 
already  imposed  upon  the  old.  A  momentary 
suspension  of  the  payment  of  debt  is  not  im¬ 
mediately  felt  by  the  people,  and  occasions 
neither  murmur  nor  complaint.  To  borrow 
of  the  sinking  fund  is  always  an  obvious  and 
easy  expedient  for  getting  out  of  the  present 
difficulty.  The  more  the  public  debts  may 
have  been  accumulated,  the  more  necessary 
it  may  have  become  to  study  to  reduce  them, 
the  more  dangerous,  the  more  ruinous  it  may 
be  to  misapply  any  part  of  the  sinking  fund; 
the  less  likely  is  the  public  debt  to  be  re¬ 
duced  to  any  considerable  degree,  the  more 
likely,  the  more  certainly  is  the  sinking  fund 
to  be  misapplied  towards  defraying  all  the 
extraordinary  expenses  which  occur  in  time 
of  peace.  When  a  nation  is  already  over¬ 
burdened  with  taxes,  nothing  but  the  neces- 


Public  Debts 


sities  of  a  new  war,  nothing  but  either  the 
animosity  of  national  vengeance,  or  the  anx¬ 
iety  for  national  security,  can  induce  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  submit,  with  tolerable  patience,  to  a 
new  tax.  Hence  the  usual  misapplication  of 
the  sinking  fund. 

In  Great  Britain,  from  the  time  that  we  had 
first  recourse  to  the  ruinous  expedient  of 
perpetual  funding,  the  reduction  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  debt  in  time  of  peace  has  never  borne  any 
proportion  to  its  accumulation  in  time  of 
war.  It  was  in  the  war  which  began  in  1688, 
and  was  concluded  by  the  Treaty  of  Ryswick 
in  1697,  that  the  foundation  of  the  present 
enormous  debt  of  Great  Britain  was  first 
laid. 

On  the  31st  of  December  1697,  the  public 
debts  of  Great  Britain,  funded  and  unfunded, 
amounted  to  £21,515,742  13s.  8%d.  A  great 
part  of  those  debts  had  been  contracted  upon 
short  anticipations,  and  some  part  upon  an^ 
nuities  for  lives,  so  that  before  the  31st  of 
December  1701,  in  less  than  four  years,  there 
had  partly  been  paid  off,  and  partly  reverted 
to  the  public,  the  sum  of  £5,121,041  12s.  0%d.; 
a  greater  reduction  of  the  public  debt  than 
has  ever  since  been  brought  about  in  so  short 
a  periodvof  time.  The  remaining  debt,  there¬ 
fore,  amounted  only  to  £16,394,701  Is.  71/4d. 

In  the  war  which  began  in  1702,  and  which 
was  concluded  by  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  the 
public  debts  were  still  more  accumulated.  On 
the  31st  of  December  1714,  they  amounted 
to  £53,681,076  5s.  6M 2d.  The  subscription 
into  the  South  Sea  fund  of  the  short  and  long 
annuities  increased  the  capital  of  the  public 
debts,  so  that  on  the  31st  of  December  1722 
it  amounted  to  £55,282,978  Is.  3%d.  The 
reduction  of  the  debt  began  in  1723,  and  went 
on  so  slowly  that,  on  the  31st  of  December 
1739,  during  seventeen  years  of  profound 
peace,  the  whole  sum  paid  off  was  no  more 
than  £8,328,354  17s.  ll%2d.,  the  capital  of 
the  public  debt  at  that  time  amounting  to 
£46,954,623  3s.  4%2d. 

The  Spanish  war,  which  began  in  1739,  and 
the  French  war  which  soon  followed  it  oc¬ 
casioned  further  increase  of  the  debt,  which, 
on  the  31st  of  December  1748,  after  the  war 
had  been  concluded  by  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la- 
Chapelle,  amounted  to  £78,293,313  Is.  10%d. 
The  most  profound  peace  of  seventeen  years’ 
continuance  had  taken  no  more  than  £8,328,354 
17s.  ll%2d.  from  it.  A  war  of  less  than  nine 
years’  continuance  added  £31,338,689  18s. 
6Vad.  to  it.1 

During  the  administration  of  Mr.  Pelham, 
the  interest  of  the  public  debt  was  reduced, 
or  at  least  measures  were  taken  for  reducing 

1See  James  Postlethwaite’s  History  of  the  Pub¬ 
lic  Revenue. 


409 

it,  from  four  to  three  per  cent;  the  sinking 
fund  was  increased,  and  some  part  of  the 
public  debt  was  paid  off.  In  1755,  before  the 
breaking  out  of  the  late  war,  the  funded  debt 
of  Great  Britain  amounted  to  £72,289,673. 
On  the  5th  of  January  1763,  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  peace,  the  funded  debt  amounted  to 
£122,603,336  8s.  2%d.  The  unfunded  debt 
has  been  stated  at  £13,927,589  2s.  2d.  But 
the  expense  occasioned  by  the  war  did  not 
end  with  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  so  that 
though,  on  the  5th  of  January  1764,  the 
funded  debt  was  increased  (partly  by  a  new 
loan,  and  partly  by  funding  a  part  of  the 
unfunded  debt)  to  £129,586,789  10s.  l%d., 
there  still  remained  (according  to  the  very 
well  informed  author  of  the  Considerations 
on  the  Trade  and  Finances  of  Great  Britain) 
an  unfunded  debt  which  was  brought  to  ac¬ 
count  in  that  and  the  following  year  of 
£9,975,017  12s.  215/^4d.  In  1764,  therefore, 
the  public  debt  of  Great  Britain,  funded  and 
unfunded  together,  amounted,  according  to 
this  author,  to  £139,516,807  2s.  4d.  The 
annuities  for  lives,  too,  which  had  been 
granted  as  premiums  to  the  subscribers  to 
the  new  loans  in  1757,  estimated  at  fourteen 
years’  purchase,  were  valued  at  £472,500;  and 
the  annuities  for  long  terms  of  years,  granted 
as  premiums  likewise  in  1761  and  1762, 
estimated  at  twenty-seven  and  a  half  years’ 
purchase,  were  valued  at  £6,826,875.  During 
a  peace  of  about  seven  years’  continuance, 
the  prudent  and  truly  patriot  administration 
of  Mr.  Pelham  was  not  able  to  pay  off  an 
old  debt  of  six  millions.  During  a  war  of 
nearly  the  same  continuance,  a  new  debt  of 
more  than  seventy-five  millions  was  con¬ 
tracted. 

On  the  5th  of  January  1775,  the  funded  debt 
of  Great  Britain  amounted  to  £124,996,086 
Is.  The  unfunded,  exclusive  of  a  large 

civil  list  debt,  to  £4,150,263  3s.  ll%d.  Both 
together,  to  £129,146,322  5s.  6d.  According  to 
this  account  the  whole  debt  paid  off  during 
eleven  years’  profound  peace  amounted  only 
to  £10,415,474  16s.  9%d.  Even  this  small  re¬ 
duction  of  debt,  however,  has  not  been  all 
made  from  the  savings  out  of  the  ordinary 
revenue  of  the  state.  Several  extraneous  sums, 
altogether  independent  of  that  ordinary  reve¬ 
nue,  have  contributed  towards  it.  Amongst 
these  we  may  reckon  an  additional  shilling  in 
the  pound  land-tax  for  three  years;  the  two 
millions  received  from  the  East  India  Com¬ 
pany  as  indemnification  for  their  territorial 
acquisitions;  and  the  one  hundred  and  ten 
thousand  pounds  received  from  the  bank  for 
the  renewal  of  their  charter.  To  these  must 
be  added  several  other  sums  which,  as  they 
arose  out  of  the  late  war,  ought  perhaps  to  be 


410 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


considered  as  deductions  from  the  expenses 
of  it.  The  principal  are, 

£  s.  d. 

The  produce  of  French  prizes  690,449  18  9 

Composition  for  French 

prisoners  670,000  0  0 

What  has  been  received  from 

the  sale  of  the  ceded  islands  95,500  0  0 


Total  .0,455,949  18  9 


If  we  add  to  this  sum  the  balance  of  the 
Earl  of  Chatham’s  and  Mr.  Calcraft’s  ac¬ 
counts,  and  other  army  savings  of  the  same 
kind,  together  with  what  has  been  received 
from  the  bank,  the  East  India  Company,  and 
the  additional  shilling  in  the  pound  land-tax, 
the  whole  must  be  a  good  deal  more  than 
five  millions.  The  debt,  therefore,  which 
since  the  peace  has  been  paid  out  of  the  sav¬ 
ings  from  the  ordinary  revenue  of  the  state, 
has  not,  one  year  with  another,  amounted  to 
half  a  million  a  year.  The  sinking  fund  has, 
no  doubt,  been  considerably  augmented  since 
the  peace,  by  the  debt  which  has  been  paid 
off,  by  the  reduction  of  the  redeemable  four 
per  cents  to  three  per  cents,  and  by  the  an¬ 
nuities  for  lives  which  have  fallen  in,  and, 
if  peace  were  to  continue,  a  million,  perhaps, 
might  now  be  annually  spared  out  of  it  to¬ 
wards  the  discharge  of  the  debt.  Another 
million,  accordingly,  was  paid  in  the  course 
of  last  year;  but,  at  the  same  time,  a  large 
civil  list  debt  was  left  unpaid,  and  we  are 
now  involved  in  a  new  war  which,  in  its 
progress,  may  prove  as  expensive  as  any  of 
our  former  wars.1  The  new  debt  which  will 
probably  be  contracted  before  the  end  of  the 
next  campaign  may  perhaps  be  nearly  equal 
to  all  the  old  debt  which  has  been  paid  off 
from  the  savings  out  of  the  ordinary  revenue 
of  the  state.  It  would  be  altogether  chimeri¬ 
cal,  therefore,  to  expect  that  the  public  debt 
should  ever  be  completely  discharged  by  any 
savings  which  are  likely  to  be  made  from 
that  ordinary  revenue  as  it  stands  at  present. 

The  public  funds  of  the  different  indebted 
nations  of  Europe,  particularly  those  of  Eng¬ 
land,  have  by  one  author  been  represented 
as  the  accumulation  of  a  great  capital  super- 
added  to  the  other  capital  of  the  country,  by 
means  of  which  its  trade  is  extended,  its 
manufactures  multiplied,  and  its  lands  culti¬ 
vated  and  improved  much  beyond  what  they 
could  have  been  by  means  of  that  other  capi- 

1  It  has  proved  more  expensive  than  any  of 
our  former  wars;  and  has  involved  us  in  an 
additional  debt  of  more  than  one  hundred  mil¬ 
lions.  During  a  profound  peace  of  eleven  years, 
little  more  than  ten  millions  of  debt  was  paid; 
during  a  war  of  seven  years,  more  than  one 
hundred  millions  was  contracted. 


tal  only.  He  does  not  consider  that  the  capital 
which  the  first  creditors  of  the  public  ad¬ 
vanced  to  government  was,  from  the  mo¬ 
ment  in  which  they  advanced  it,  a  certain 
portion  of  the  annual  produce  turned  away 
from  serving  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to 
serve  in  that  of  a  revenue;  from  maintaining 
productive  labourers  to  maintain  unproduc¬ 
tive  ones,  and  to  be  spent  and  wasted,  gen¬ 
erally  in  the  course  of  the  year,  without  even 
the  hope  of  any  future  reproduction.  In  re¬ 
turn  for  the  capital  which  they  advanced 
they  obtained,  indeed,  an  annuity  in  the  pub¬ 
lic  funds  in  most  cases  of  more  than  equal 
value.  This  annuity,  no  doubt,  replaced  to 
them  their  capital,  and  enabled  them  to 
carry  on  their  trade  and  business  to  the  same 
or  perhaps  to  a  greater  extent  than  before; 
that  is,  they  were  enabled  either  to  borrow 
of  other  people  a  new  capital  upon  the  credit 
of  this  annuity,  or  by  selling  it  to  get  from 
other  people  a  new  capital  of  their  own  equal 
or  superior  to  that  which  they  had  advanced 
to  government.  This  new  capital,  however, 
which  they  in  this  manner  either  bought  or 
borrowed  of  other  people,  must  have  existed 
in  the  country  before,  and  must  have  been 
employed,  as  all  capitals  are,  in  maintaining 
productive  labour.  When  it  came  into  the 
hands  of  those  who  had  advanced  their 
money  to  government,  though  it  was  in  some 
respects  a  new  capital  to  them,  it  was  not 
so  to  the  country,  but  was  only  a  capital 
withdrawn  from  certain  employments  in  or¬ 
der  to  be  turned  towards  others.  Though  it 
replaced  to  them  what  they  had  advanced 
to  government,  it  did  not  replace  it  to  the 
country.  Had  they  not  advanced  this  capital 
to  government,  there  would  have  been  in  the 
country  two  capitals,  two  portions  of  the  an¬ 
nual  produce,  instead  of  one,  employed  in 
maintaining  productive  labour. 

When  for  defraying  the  expense  of  govern¬ 
ment  a  revenue  is  raised  within  the  year  from 
the  produce  of  free  or  unmortgaged  taxes,  a 
certain  portion  of  the  revenue  of  private  peo¬ 
ple  is  only  turned  away  from  maintaining 
one  species  of  unproductive  labour  towards 
maintaining  another.  Some  part  of  what  they 
pay  in  those  taxes  might  no  doubt  have  been 
accumulated  into  capital,  and  consequently 
employed  in  maintaining  productive  labour; 
but  the  greater  part  would  probably  have 
been  spent  and  consequently  employed  in 
maintaining  unproductive  labour.  The  public 
expense,  however,  when  defrayed  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  no  doubt  hinders  more  or  less  the  further 
accumulation  of  new  capital;  but  it  does  not 
necessarily  occasion  the  destruction  of  any 
actually  existing  capital. 

When  the  public  expense  is  defrayed  by 
funding,  it  is  defrayed  by  the  annual  destrue- 


Public  Debts 


tion  of  some  capital  which  had  before  existed 
in  the  country;  by  the  perversion  of  some 
portion  of  the  annual  produce  which  had  be¬ 
fore  been  destined  for  the  maintenance  of 
productive  labour  towards  that  of  unpro¬ 
ductive  labour.  As  in  this  case,  however,  the 
taxes  are  lighter  than  they  would  have  been 
had  a  revenue  sufficient  for  defraying  the 
same  expense  been  raised  within  the  year, 
the  private  revenue  of  individuals  is  neces¬ 
sarily  less  burdened,  and  consequently  their 
ability  to  save  and  accumulate  some  part  of 
that  revenue  into  capital  is  a  good  deal  less 
impaired.  If  the  method  of  funding  destroys 
more  old  capital,  it  at  the  same  time  hinders 
less  the  accumulation  or  acquisition  of  new 
capital  than  that  of  defraying  the  public  ex¬ 
pense  by  a  revenue  raised  within  the  year. 
Under  the  system  of  funding,  the  frugality 
and  industry  of  private  people  can  more 
easily  repair  the  breaches  which  the  waste 
and  extravagance  of  government  may  oc¬ 
casionally  make  in  the  general  capital  of  the 
society. 

It  is  only  during  the  continuance  of  war, 
however,  that  the  system  of  funding  has  this 
advantage  over  the  other  system.  Were  the 
expense  of  war  to  be  defrayed  always  by  a 
revenue  raised  within  the  year,  the  taxes 
from  which  that  extraordinary  revenue  was 
drawn  would  last  no  longer  than  the  war. 
The  ability  of  private  people  to  accumulate, 
though  less  during  the  war,  would  have  been 
greater  during  the  peace  than  under  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  funding.  War  would  not  necessarily 
have  occasioned  the  destruction  of  any  old 
capitals,  and  peace  would  have  occasioned 
the  accumulation  of  many  more  new.  Wars 
would  in  general  be  more  speedily  concluded, 
and  less  wantonly  undertaken.  The  people 
feeling,  during  the  continuance  of  the  war, 
the  complete  burden  of  it,  would  soon  grow 
weary  of  it,  and  government,  in  order  to 
humour  them,  would  not  be  under  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  carrying  it  on  longer  than  it  was 
necessary  to  do  so.  The  foresight  of  the 
heavy  and  unavoidable  burdens  of  war  would 
hinder  the  people  from  wantonly  calling  for 
it  when  there  was  no  real  or  solid  interest  to 
fight  for.  The  seasons  during  which  the 
ability  of  private  people  to  accumulate  was 
somewhat  impaired  would  occur  more  rarely, 
and  be  of  shorter  continuance.  Those,  on  the 
contrary,  during  which  the  ability  was  in  the 
highest  vigour  would  be  of  much  longer  dura¬ 
tion  than  they  can  well  be  under  the  system 
of  funding. 

When  funding,  besides,  has  made  a  certain 
progress,  the  multiplication  of  taxes  which  it 
brings  along  with  it  sometimes  impairs  as 
much  the  ability  of  private  people  to  accumu¬ 
late  even  in  time  of  peace  as  the  other  system 


411 

would  in  time  of  war.  The  peace  revenue  of 
Great  Britain  amounts  at  present  to  more 
than  ten  millions  a  year.  If  free  and  un¬ 
mortgaged,  it  might  be  sufficient,  with  proper 
management  and  without  contracting  a  shil¬ 
ling  of  new  debt,  to  carry  on  the  most  vigor¬ 
ous  war.  The  private  revenue  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  Great  Britain  is  at  present  as 
much  encumbered  in  time  of  peace,  their 
ability  to  accumulate  is  as  much  impaired  as 
it  would  have  been  in  the  time  of  the  most 
expensive  war  had  the  pernicious  system  of 
funding  never  been  adopted. 

In  the  payment  of  the  interest  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  debt,  it  has  been  said,  it  is  the  right  hand 
which  pays  the  left.  The  money  does  not  go 
out  of  the  country.  It  is  only  a  part  of  the 
revenue  of  one  set  of  the  inhabitants  which 
is  transferred  to  another,  and  the  nation  is 
not  a  farthing  the  poorer.  This  apology  is 
founded  altogether  in  the  sophistry  of  the 
mercantile  system,  and  after  the  long  exami¬ 
nation  which  I  have  already  bestowed  upon 
that  system,  it  may  perhaps  be  unnecessary 
to  say  anything  further  about  it.  It  sup¬ 
poses,  besides,  that  the  whole  public  debt  is 
owing  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country, 
which  happens  not  to  be  true;  the  Dutch,  as 
well  as  several  other  foreign  nations,  having 
a  very  considerable  share  in  our  public  funds. 
But  though  the  whole  debt  were  owing  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  it  would  not 
upon  that  account  be  less  pernicious. 

Land  and  capital  stock  are  the  two  original 
sources  of  all  revenue  both  private  and  pub¬ 
lic.  Capital  stock  pays  the  wages  of  produc¬ 
tive  labour,  whether  employed  in  agriculture, 
manufactures,  or  commerce.  The  manage¬ 
ment  of  those  two  original  sources  of  revenue 
belong  to  two  different  sets  of  people;  the 
proprietors  of  land,  and  the  owners  or  em¬ 
ployers  of  capital  stock. 

The  proprietor  of  land  is  interested  for  the 
sake  of  his  own  revenue  to  keep  his  estate 
in  as  good  condition  as  he  can,  by  building 
and  repairing  his  tenants’  houses,  by  making 
and  maintaining  the  necessary  drains  and  en¬ 
closures,  and  all  those  other  expensive  im¬ 
provements  which  it  properly  belongs  to  the 
landlord  to  make  and  maintain.  But  by  dif¬ 
ferent  land-taxes  the  revenue  of  the  landlord 
may  be  so  much  diminished,  and  by  different 
duties  upon  the  necessaries  and  conveniences 
of  life  that  diminished  revenue  may  be  ren¬ 
dered  of  so  little  real  value,  that  he  may  find 
himself  altogether  unable  to  make  or  main¬ 
tain  those  expensive  improvements.  When 
the  landlord,  however,  ceases  to  do  his  part, 
it  is  altogether  impossible  that  the  tenant 
should  continue  to  do  his.  As  the  distress 
of  the  landlord  increases,  the  agriculture  of 
the  country  must  necessarily  decline. 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


412 

When,  by  different  taxes  upon  the  neces¬ 
saries  and  conveniences  of  life,  the  owners 
and  employers  of  capital  stock  find  that 
whatever  revenue  they  derive  from  it  will  not, 
in  a  particular  country,  purchase  the  same 
quantity  of  those  necessaries  and  conven¬ 
iences  which  an  equal  revenue  would  in  al¬ 
most  any  other,  they  will  be  disposed  to  re¬ 
move  to  some  other.  And  when,  in  order  to 
raise  those  taxes,  all  or  the  greater  part  of 
merchants  and  manufacturers,  that  is,  all  or 
the  greater  part  of  the  employers  of  great 
capitals,  come  to  be  continually  exposed  to 
the  mortifying  and  vexatious  visits  of  the 
tax-gatherers,  the  disposition  to  remove  will 
soon  be  changed  into  an  actual  removal.  The 
industry  of  the  country  will  necessarily  fall 
with  the  removal  of  the  capital  which  sup¬ 
ported  it,  and  the  ruin  of  trade  and  manu¬ 
factures  will  follow  the  declension  of  agri¬ 
culture. 

To  transfer  from  the  owners  of  those  two 
great  sources  of  revenue,  land  and  capital 
stock,  from  the  persons  immediately  inter¬ 
ested  in  the  good  condition  of  every  particu¬ 
lar  portion  of  land,  and  in  the  good  manage¬ 
ment  of  every  particular  portion  of  capital 
stock,  to  another  set  of  persons  (the  creditors 
of  the  public,  who  have  no  such  particular 
interest) ,  the  greater  part  of  the  revenue 
arising  from  either  must,  in  the  long-run, 
occasion  both  the  neglect  of  land,  and  the 
waste  or  removal  of  capital  stock.  A  creditor 
of  the  public  has  no  doubt  a  general  interest 
in  the  prosperity  of  the  agriculture,  manu¬ 
factures,  and  commerce  of  the  country,  and 
consequently  in  the  good  condition  of  its 
lands,  and  in  the  good  management  of  its 
capital  stock.  Should  there  be  any  general 
failure  or  declension  in  any  of  these  things, 
the  produce  of  the  different  taxes  might  no 
longer  be  sufficient  to  pay  him  the  annuity 
or  interest  which  is  due  to  him.  But  a  cred¬ 
itor  of  the  public,  considered  merely  as  such, 
has  no  interest  in  the  good  condition  of  any 
particular  portion  of  land,  or  in  the  good 
management  of  any  particular  portion  of 
capital  stock.  As  a  creditor  of  the  public  he 
has  no  knowledge  of  any  such  particular  por¬ 
tion.  He  has  no  inspection  of  it.  He  can 
have  no  care  about  it.  Its  ruin  may  in  some 
cases  be  unknown  to  him,  and  cannot  directly 
affect  him. 

The  practice  of  funding  has  gradually  en¬ 
feebled  every  state  which  has  adopted  it. 
The  Italian  republics  seem  to  have  begun  it. 
Genoa  and  Venice,  the  only  two  remaining 
which  can  pretend  to  an  independent  exist¬ 
ence,  have  both  been  enfeebled  by  it.  Spain 
seems  to  have  learned  the  practice  from  the 
Italian  republics,  and  (its  taxes  being  prob¬ 
ably  less  judicious  than  theirs)  it  has,  in  pro¬ 


portion  to  its  natural  strength,  been  still  more 
enfeebled.  The  debts  of  Spain  are  of  very 
old  standing.  It  was  deeply  in  debt  before 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  about  a 
hundred  years  before  England  owed  a  shil¬ 
ling.  France,  notwithstanding  all  its  natural 
resources,  languishes  under  an  oppressive 
load  of  the  same  kind.  The  republic  of  the 
United  Provinces  is  as  much  enfeebled  by  its 
debts  as  either  Genoa  or  Venice.  Is  it  likely 
that  in  Great  Britain  alone  a  practice  which 
has  brought  either  weakness  or  desolation 
into  every  other  country  should  prove  alto¬ 
gether  innocent? 

The  system  of  taxation  established  in  those 
different  countries,  it  may  be  said,  is  inferior 
to  that  of  England.  I  believe  it  is  so.  But  it 
ought  to  be  remembered  that,  when  the  wis¬ 
est  government  has  exhausted  all  the  proper 
subjects  of  taxation,  it  must,  in  cases  of  ur¬ 
gent  necessity,  have  recourse  to  improper 
ones.  The  wise  republic  of  Holland  has  upon 
some  occasions  been  obliged  to  have  recourse 
to  taxes  as  inconvenient  as  the  greater  part 
of  those  of  Spain.  Another  war  begun  before 
any  considerable  liberation  of  the  public  reve¬ 
nue  had  been  brought  about,  and  growing  in 
its  progress  as  expensive  as  the  last  war,  may, 
from  irresistible  necessity,  render  the  British 
system  of  taxation  as  oppressive  as  that  of 
Holland,  or  even  as  that  of  Spain.  To  the 
honour  of  our  present  system  of  taxation,  in¬ 
deed,  it  has  hitherto  given  so  little  embarrass¬ 
ment  to  industry  that,  during  the  course  even 
of  the  most  expensive  wars,  the  frugality  and 
good  conduct  of  individuals  seem  to  have 
been  able,  by  saving  and  accumulation,  to 
repair  all  the  breaches  which  the  waste  and 
extravagance  of  government  had  made  in  the 
general  capital  of  the  society.  At  the  conclu¬ 
sion  of  the  late  war,  the  most  expensive  that 
Great  Britain  ever  waged,  her  agriculture  was 
as  flourishing,  her  manufacturers  as  numer¬ 
ous  and  as  fully  employed,  and  her  com¬ 
merce  as  extensive  as  they  had  ever  been  be¬ 
fore.  The  capital,  therefore,  which  supported 
all  those  different  branches  of  industry  must 
have  been  equal  to  what  it  had  ever  been 
before.  Since  the  peace,  agriculture  has  been 
still  further  improved,  the  rents  of  houses 
have  risen  in  every  town  and  village  of  the 
country — a  proof  of  the  increasing  wealth  and 
revenue  of  the  people;  and  the  annual  amount 
of  the  greater  part  of  the  old  taxes,  of  the 
principal  branches  of  the  excise  and  customs 
in  particular,  has  been  continually  increasing 
— an  equally  clear  proof  of  an  increasing 
consumption,  and  consequently  of  an  increas¬ 
ing  produce  which  could  alone  support  that 
consumption.  Great  Britain  seems  to  sup¬ 
port  with  ease  a  burden  which,  half  a  century 
ago,  nobody  believed  her  capable  of  support- 


Public 

ing.  Let  us  not,  however,  upon  this  account 
rashly  conclude  that  she  is  capable  of  sup¬ 
porting  any  burden,  nor  even  be  too  confi¬ 
dent  that  she  could  support,  without  great 
distress,  a  burden  a  little  greater  than  what 
has  already  been  laid  upon  her. 

When  national  debts  have  once  been  ac¬ 
cumulated  to  a  certain  degree,  there  is  scarce, 
I  believe,  a  single  instance  of  their  having 
been  fairly  and  completely  paid.  The  libera¬ 
tion  of  the  public  revenue,  if  it  has  ever  been 
brought  about  at  all,  has  always  been  brought 
about  by  a  bankruptcy;  sometimes  by  an 
avowed  one,  but  always  by  a  real  one,  though 
frequently  by  a  pretended  payment. 

The  raising  of  the  denomination  of  the  coin 
has  been  the  most  usual  expedient  by  which 
a  real  public  bankruptcy  has  been  disguised 
under  the  appearance  of  a  pretended  pay¬ 
ment.  If  a  sixpence,  for  example,  should 
either  by  Act  of  Parliament  or  Royal  Proc¬ 
lamation  be  raised  to  the  denomination  of 
a  shilling,  and  twenty  sixpences  to  that  of  a 
pound  sterling,  the  person  who  under  the  old 
denomination  had  borrowed  twenty  shillings, 
or  near  four  ounces  of  silver,  would,  under 
the  new,  pay  with  twenty  sixpences,  or  with 
something  less  than  two  ounces.  A  national 
debt  of  about  a  hundred  and  twenty-eight 
millions,  nearly  the  capital  of  the  funded  and 
unfunded  debt  of  Great  Britain,  might  in  this 
manner  be  paid  with  about  sixty-four  mil¬ 
lions  of  our  present  money.  It  would  indeed 
be  a  pretended  payment  only,  and  the  credi¬ 
tors  of  the  public  would  really  be  defrauded 
of  ten  shillings  in  the  pound  of  what  was  due 
to  them.  The  calamity,  too,  would  extend 
much  further  than  to  the  creditors  of  the 
public,  and  those  of  every  private  person 
would  suffer  a  proportionable  loss;  and  this 
without  any  advantage,  but  in  most  cases 
with  a  great  additional  loss,  to  the  creditors 
of  the  public.  If  the  creditors  of  the  public, 
indeed,  were  generally  much  in  debt  to  other 
people,  they  might  in  some  measure  com¬ 
pensate  their  loss  by  paying  their  creditors 
in  the  same  coin  in  which  the  public  had 
paid  them.  But  in  most  countries  the  credi¬ 
tors  of  the  public  are,  the  greater  part  of 
them,  wealthy  people,  who  stand  more  in  the 
relation  of  creditors  than  in  that  of  debtors 
towards  the  rest  of  their  fellow-citizens.  A 
pretended  payment  of  this  kind,  therefore, 
instead  of  alleviating,  aggravates  in  most 
cases  the  loss  of  the  creditors  of  the  public, 
and  without  any  advantage  to  the  public, 
extends  the  calamity  to  a  great  number  of 
other  innocent  people.  It  occasions  a  general 
and  most  pernicious  subversion  of  the  for¬ 
tunes  of  private  people,  enriching  in  most 
cases  the  idle  and  profuse  debtor  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  industrious  and  frugal  creditor, 


Debts  413 

and  transporting  a  great  part  of  the  national 
capital  from  the  hands  which  were  likely  to 
increase  and  improve  it  to  those  which  are 
likely  to  dissipate  and  destroy  it.  When  it 
becomes  necessary  for  a  state  to  declare  it¬ 
self  bankrupt,  in  the  same  manner  as  when  it 
becomes  necessary  for  an  individual  to  do  so, 
a  fair,  open,  and  avowed  bankruptcy  is  al¬ 
ways  the  measure  which  is  both  least  dis¬ 
honourable  to  the  debtor  and  least  hurtful 
to  the  creditor.  The  honour  of  a  state  is 
surely  very  poorly  provided  for  when,  in 
order  to  cover  the  disgrace  of  a  real  bank¬ 
ruptcy,  it  has  recourse  to  a  juggling  trick  of 
this  kind,  so  easily  seen  through,  and  at  the 
same  time  so  extremely  pernicious. 

Almost  all  states,  however,  ancient  as  well 
as  modern,  when  reduced  to  this  necessity 
have,  upon  some  occasions,  played  this  very 
juggling  trick.  The  Romans,  at  the  end  of 
the  first  Punic  war,  reduced  the  As,  the  coin 
or  denomination  by  which  they  computed  the 
value  of  all  their  other  coins,  from  containing 
twelve  ounces  of  copper  to  contain  only  two 
ounces;  that  is,  they  raised  two  ounces  of 
copper  to  a  denomination  which  had  always 
before  expressed  the  value  of  twelve  ounces. 
The  republic  was,  in  this  manner,  enabled  to 
pay  the  great  debts  which  it  had  contracted 
with  the  sixth  part  of  what  it  really  owed. 
So  sudden  and  so  great  a  bankruptcy,  we 
should  in  the  present  times  be  apt  to  imagine, 
must  have  occasioned  a  very  violent  popular 
clamour.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  occa¬ 
sioned  any.  The  law  which  enacted  it  was, 
like  all  other  laws  relating  to  the  coin,  intro¬ 
duced  and  carried  through  the  assembly  of 
the  people  by  a  tribune,  and  was  probably  a 
very  popular  law.  In  Rome,  as  in  all  the  other 
ancient  republics,  the  poor  people  were  con¬ 
stantly  in  debt  to  the  rich  and  the  great,  who 
in  order  to  secure  their  votes  at  the  annual 
elections,  used  to  lend  them  money  at  ex¬ 
orbitant  interest,  which,  being  never  paid, 
soon  accumulated  into  a  sum  too  great  either 
for  the  debtor  to  pay,  or  for  anybody  else  to 
pay  for  him.  The  debtor,  for  fear  of  a  very 
severe  execution,  was  obliged,  without  any 
further  gratuity,  to  vote  for  the  candidate 
whom  the  creditor  recommended.  In  spite  of 
all  the  laws  against  bribery  and  corruption, 
the  bounty  of  the  candidates,  together  with 
the  occasional  distributions  of  corn  which 
were  ordered  by  the  senate,  were  the  princi¬ 
pal  funds  from  which,  during  the  latter  times 
of  the  Roman  republic,  the  poorer  citizens 
derived  their  subsistence.  To  deliver  them¬ 
selves  from  this  subjection  to  their  creditors, 
the  poorer  citizens  were  continually  calling 
out  either  for  an  entire  abolition  of  debts,  or 
for  what  they  called  New  Tables;  that  is,  for 
a  law  which  should  entitle  them  to  a  com- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


414 

plete  acquittance  upon  paying  only  a  certain 
proportion  of  their  accumulated  debts.  The 
law  which  reduced  the  coin  of  all  denomina¬ 
tions  to  a  sixth  part  of  its  former  value,  as 
it  enabled  them  to  pay  their  debts  with  a 
sixth  part  of  what  they  really  owed,  was 
equivalent  to  the  most  advantageous  New 
Tables.  In  order  to  satisfy  the  people,  the 
rich  and  the  great  were,  upon  several  differ¬ 
ent  occasions,  obliged  to  consent  to  laws  both 
for  abolishing  debts,  and  for  introducing  New 
Tables;  and  they  probably  were  induced  to 
consent  to  this  law  partly  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  and  partly  that,  by  liberating  the  public 
revenue,  they  might  restore  vigour  to  that 
government  of  which  they  themselves  had 
the  principal  direction.  An  operation  of  this 
kind  would  at  once  reduce  a  debt  of  a  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty-eight  millions  to  twenty-one 
millions  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  thou¬ 
sand  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  pounds 
six  shillings  and  eightpence.  In  the  course  of 
the  second  Punic  war  the  As  was  still  further 
reduced,  first,  from  two  ounces  of  copper  to 
one  ounce,  and  afterwards  from  one  ounce  to 
half  an  ounce;  that  is,  to  the  twenty-fourth 
part  of  its  original  value.  By  combining  the 
three  Roman  operations  into  one,  a  debt  of 
a  hundred  and  twenty-eight  millions  of  our 
present  money  might  in  this  manner  be  re¬ 
duced  all  at  once  to  a  debt  of  five  millions 
three  hundred  and  thirty-three  thousand  three 
hundred  and  thirty-three  pounds  six  shillings 
and  eightpence.  Even  the  enormous  debts  of 
Great  Britain  might  in  this  manner  soon  be 
paid. 

By  means  of  such  expedients  the  coin  of, 
I  believe,  all  nations  has  been  gradually  re¬ 
duced  more  and  more  below  its  original  value, 
and  the  same  nominal  sum  has  been  grad¬ 
ually  brought  to  contain  a  smaller  and  a 
smaller  quantity  of  silver. 

Nations  have  sometimes,  for  the  same  pur¬ 
pose,  adulterated  the  standard  of  their  coin; 
that  is,  have  mixed  a  greater  quantity  of 
alloy  in  it.  If  in  the  pound  weight  of  our 
silver  coin,  for  example,  instead  of  eighteen 
pennyweight,  according  to  the  present  stand¬ 
ard,  there  was  mixed  eight  ounces  of  alloy,  a 
pound  sterling,  or  twenty  shillings  of  such 
coin,  would  be  worth  little  more  than  six 
shillings  and  eightpence  of  our  present  money. 
The  quantity  of  silver  contained  in  six  shil¬ 
lings  and  eightpence  of  our  present  money 
would  thus  be  raised  very  nearly  to  the  de¬ 
nomination  of  a  pound  sterling.  The  adul¬ 
teration  of  the  standard  has  exactly  the  same 
effect  with  what  the  French  call  an  augmen¬ 
tation,  or  a  direct  raising  of  the  denomination 
of  the  coin. 

An  augmentation,  or  a  direct  raising  of  the 
coin,  always  is,  and  from  its  nature  must  be, 


an  open  and  avowed  operation.  By  means  of 
it  pieces  of  a  smaller  weight  and  bulk  are 
called  by  the  same  name  which  had  before 
been  given  to  pieces  of  a  greater  weight  and 
bulk.  The  adulteration  of  the  standard,  on 
the  contrary,  has  generally  been  a  concealed 
operation.  By  means  of  it  pieces  were  issued 
from  the  mint  of  the  same  denominations,  and, 
as  nearly  as  could  be  contrived,  of  the  same 
weight,  bulk,  and  appearance  with  pieces 
which  had  been  current  before  of  much 
greater  value.  When  King  John  of  France,1 
in  order  to  pay  his  debts,  adulterated  his 
coin,  all  the  officers  of  his  mint  were  sworn 
to  secrecy.  Both  operations  are  unjust.  But 
a  simple  augmentation  is  an  injustice  of  open 
violence,  whereas  the  adulteration  is  an  in¬ 
justice  of  treacherous  fraud.  This  latter 
operation,  therefore,  as  soon  as  it  has  been 
discovered,  and  it  could  never  be  concealed 
very  long,  has  always  excited  much  greater 
indignation  than  the  former.  The  coin  after 
any  considerable  augmentation  has  very  sel¬ 
dom  been  brought  back  to  its  former  weight; 
but  after  the  greater  adulterations  it  has  al¬ 
most  always  been  brought  back  to  its  former 
fineness.  It  has  scarce  ever  happened  that 
the  fury  and  indignation  of  the  people  could 
otherwise  be  appeased. 

In  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII  and 
in  the  beginning  of  that  of  Edward  VI  the 
English  coin  was  not  only  raised  in  its  de¬ 
nomination,  but  adulterated  in  its  standard. 
The  like  frauds  were  practised  in  Scotland 
during  the  minority  of  James  VI.  They  have 
occasionally  been  practised  in  most  other 
countries. 

That  the  public  revenue  of  Great  Britain 
can  never  be  completely  liberated,  or  even 
that  any  considerable  progress  can  ever  be 
made  towards  that  liberation,  while  the  sur¬ 
plus  of  that  revenue,  or  what  is  over  and 
above  defraying  the  annual  expense  of  the 
peace  establishment,  is  so  very  small,  it  seems 
altogether  in  vain  to  expect.  That  liberation, 
it  is  evident,  can  never  be  brought  about 
without  either  some  very  considerable  aug¬ 
mentation  of  the  public  revenue,  or  some 
equally  considerable  reduction  of  the  public 
expense. 

A  more  equal  land-tax,  a  more  equal  tax 
upon  the  rent  of  houses,  and  such  alterations 
in  the  present  system  of  customs  and  excise 
as  those  which  have  been  mentioned  in  the 
foregoing  chapter  might,  perhaps,  without  in¬ 
creasing  the  burden  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
people,  but  only  distributing  the  weight  of  it 
more  equally  upon  the  whole,  produce  a 
considerable  augmentation  of  revenue.  The 
most  sanguine  projector,  however,  could  scarce 

1  See  I)u  Cange,  Glossary,  s.  v.  "moneta’;  the 
Benedictine  edition. 


Public  Debts 


415 


flatter  himself  that  any  augmentation  of  this 
kind  would  he  such  as  could  give  any  reason¬ 
able  hopes  either  of  liberating  the  public 
revenue  altogether,  or  even  of  making  such 
progress  towards  that  liberation  in  time  of 
peace  as  either  to  prevent  or  to  compensate 
the  further  accumulation  of  the  public  debt 
in  the  next  war. 

By  extending  the  British  system  of  taxa¬ 
tion  to  all  the  different  provinces  of  the  em¬ 
pire  inhabited  by  people  of  either  British  or 
European  extraction,  a  much  greater  aug¬ 
mentation  of  revenue  might  be  expected. 
This,  however,  could  scarce,  perhaps,  be  done, 
consistently  with  the  principles  of  the  British 
constitution,  without  admitting  into  the  Brit¬ 
ish  Parliament,  or  if  you  will  into  the  states- 
general  of  the  British  empire,  a  fair  and 
equal  representation  of  all  those  different 
provinces,  that  of  each  province  bearing  the 
same  proportion  to  the  produce  of  its  taxes 
as  the  representation  of  Great  Britain  might 
bear  to  the  produce  of  the  taxes  levied  upon 
Great  Britain.  The  private  interest  of  many 
powerful  individuals,  the  confirmed  preju¬ 
dices  of  great  bodies  of  people  seem,  indeed, 
at  present,  to  oppose  to  so  great  a  change 
such  obstacles  as  it  may  be  very  difficult, 
perhaps  altogether  impossible,  to  surmount. 
Without,  however,  pretending  to  determine 
whether  such  a  union  be  practicable  or  im¬ 
practicable,  it  may  not,  perhaps,  be  improper, 
in  a  speculative  work  of  this  kind,  to  consider 
how  far  the  British  system  of  taxation  might 
be  applicable  to  all  the  different  provinces 
of  the  empire,  what  revenue  might  be  ex¬ 
pected  from  it  if  so  applied,  and  in  what 
manner  a  general  union  of  this  kind  might  be 
likely  to  affect  the  happiness  and  prosperity 
of  the  different  provinces  comprehended  with¬ 
in  it.  Such  a  speculation  can  at  worst  be 
regarded  but  as  a  new  Utopia,  less  amusing 
certainly,  but  not  more  useless  and  chimerical 
than  the  old  one. 

The  land-tax,  the  stamp-duties,  and  the 
different  duties  of  customs  and  excise  consti¬ 
tute  the  four  principal  branches  of  the  Brit¬ 
ish  taxes. 

Ireland  is  certainly  as  able,  and  our  Ameri¬ 
can  and  West  Indian  plantations  more  able 
to  pay  a  land-tax  than  Great  Britain.  Where 
the  landlord  is  subject  neither  to  tithe  nor 
poor-rate,  he  must  certainly  be  more  able 
to  pay  such  a  tax  than  where  he  is  subject 
to  both  those  other  burdens.  The  tithe, 
where  there  is  no  modus,  and  where  it  is 
levied  in  kind,  diminishes  more  what  would 
otherwise  be  the  rent  of  the  landlord  than  a 
land-tax  which  really  amounted  to  five  shil¬ 
lings  in  the  pound.  Such  a  tithe  will  be  found 
in  most  cases  to  amount  to  more  than  a 
fourth  part  of  the  real  rent  of  the  land,  or  of 


what  remains  after  replacing  completely  the 
capital  of  the  farmer,  together  with  his  rea¬ 
sonable  profit.  If  all  moduses  and  all  im¬ 
propriations  were  taken  away,  the  complete 
church  tithe  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
could  not  well  be  estimated  at  less  than  six 
or  seven  millions.  If  there  was  no  tithe 
either  in  Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  the  land¬ 
lords  could  afford  to  pay  six  or  seven  millions 
additional  land-tax  without  being  more  bur¬ 
dened  than  a  very  great  part  of  them  are  at 
present.  America  pays  no  tithe,  and  could 
therefore  very  well  afford  to  pay  a  land-tax. 
The  lands  in  America  and  the  West  Indies, 
indeed,  are  in  general  not  tenanted  nor  leased 
out  to  farmers.  They  could  not  therefore  be 
assessed  according  to  any  rent-roll.  But 
neither  were  the  lands  of  Great  Britain,  in 
the  4th  of  William  and  Mary,  assessed  ac¬ 
cording  to  any  rent-roll,  but  according  to  a 
very  loose  and  inaccurate  estimation.  The 
lands  in  America  might  be  assessed  either  in 
the  same  manner,  or  according  to  an  equi¬ 
table  valuation  in  consequence  of  an  accurate 
survey  like  that  which  was  lately  made  in  the 
Milanese,  and  in  the  dominions  of  Austria, 
Prussia,  and  Sardinia. 

Stamp-duties,  it  is  evident,  might  be  levied 
without  any  variation  in  all  countries  where 
the  forms  of  law  process,  and  the  deeds  by 
which  property  both  real  and  personal  is 
transferred,  are  the  same  or  nearly  the  same. 

The  extension  of  the  custom-house  laws  of 
Great  Britain  to  Ireland  and  the  plantations, 
provided  it  was  accompanied,  as  in  justice  it 
ought  to  be,  with  an  extension  of  the  free¬ 
dom  of  trade,  would  be  in  the  highest  degree 
advantageous  to  both.  All  the  invidious  re¬ 
straints  which  at  present  oppress  the  trade 
of  Ireland,  the  distinction  between  the  enu¬ 
merated  and  non-enumerated  commodities  of 
America,  would  be  entirely  at  an  end.  The 
countries  north  of  Cape  Finisterre  would  be 
as  open  to  every  part  of  the  produce  of 
America  as  those  south  of  that  Cape  are  to 
some  parts  of  that  produce  at  present.  The 
trade  between  all  the  different  parts  of  the 
British  empire  would,  in  consequence  of  this 
uniformity  in  the  custom-house  laws,  be  as 
free  as  the  coasting  trade  of  Great  Britain  is 
at  present.  The  British  empire  would  thus 
afford  within  itself  an  immense  internal  mar¬ 
ket  for  every  part  of  the  produce  of  all  its 
different  provinces.  So  great  an  extension  of 
market  would  soon  compensate  both  to  Ire¬ 
land  and  the  plantations  all  that  they  could 
suffer  from  the  increase  of  the  duties  of 
customs. 

The  excise  is  the  only  part  of  the  British 
system  of  taxation  which  would  require  to  be 
varied  in  any  respect  according  as  it  was 
applied  to  the  different  provinces  of  the  em- 


416  The  Wealth 

pire.  It  might  be  applied  to  Ireland  without 
any  variation,  the  produce  and  consumption 
of  that  kingdom  being  exactly  of  the  same 
nature  with  those  of  Great  Britain.  In  its 
application  to  America  and  the  West  Indies, 
of  which  the  produce  and  consumption  are  so 
very  different  from  those  of  Great  Britain, 
some  modification  might  be  necessary  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  its  application  to  the 
cyder  and  beer  counties  of  England. 

A  fermented  liquor,  for  example,  which  is 
called  beer,  but  which,  as  it  is  made  of 
molasses,  bears  very  little  resemblance  to  our 
beer,  makes  a  considerable  part  of  the  com¬ 
mon  drink  of  the  people  in  America.  This 
liquor,  as  it  can  be  kept  only  for  a  few  days, 
cannot,  like  our  beer,  be  prepared  and  stored 
up  for  sale  in  great  breweries;  but  every  pri¬ 
vate  family  must  brew  it  for  their  own  use, 
in  the  same  manner  as  they  cook  their  vict¬ 
uals.  But  to  subject  every  private  family  to 
the  odious  visits  and  examination  of  the  tax- 
gatherers,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  subject 
the  keepers  of  alehouses  and  the  brewers  for 
public  sale,  would  be  altogether  inconsistent 
with  liberty.  If  for  the  sake  of  equality  it  was 
thought  necessary  to  lay  a  tax  upon  this 
liquor,  it  might  be  taxed  by  taxing  the  ma¬ 
terial  of  which  it  is  made,  either  at  the  place 
of  manufacture,  or,  if  the  circumstances  of 
the  trade  rendered  such  an  excise  improper, 
by  laying  a  duty  upon  its  importation  into 
the  colony  in  which  it  was  to  be  consumed. 
Besides  the  duty  of  one  penny  a  gallon  im¬ 
posed  by  the  British  Parliament  upon  the 
importation  of  molasses  into  America,  there 
is  a  provincial  tax  of  this  kind  upon  their 
importation  into  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  ships 
belonging  to  any  other  colony,  of  eightpence 
the  hogshead;  and  another  upon  their  im¬ 
portation,  from  the  northern  colonies  into 
South  Carolina,  of  fivepence  the  gallon.  Or 
if  neither  of  these  methods  was  found  con¬ 
venient,  each  family  might  compound  for  its 
consumption  of  this  liquor,  either  according 
to  the  number  of  persons  of  which  it  con¬ 
sisted,  in  the  same  manner  as  private  fami¬ 
lies  compound  for  the  malt-tax  in  England; 
or  according  to  the  different  ages  and  sexes 
of  those  persons,  in  the  same  manner  as 
several  different  taxes  are  levied  in  Holland; 
or  nearly  as  Sir  Matthew  Decker  proposes 
that  all  taxes  upon  consumable  commodities 
should  be  levied  in  England.  This  mode  of 
taxation,  it  has  already  been  observed,  when 
applied  to  objects  of  a  speedy  consumption 
is  not  a  very  convenient  one.  It  might  be 
adopted,  however,  in  cases  where  no  better 
could  be  done. 

Sugar,  rum,  and  tobacco  are  commodities 
which  arc  nowhere  necessaries  of  life,  which 
arc  become  objects  of  almost  universal  con¬ 


of  Nations 

sumption,  and  which  are  therefore  extremely 
proper  subjects  of  taxation.  If  a  union  with 
the  colonies  were  to  take  place,  those  com¬ 
modities  might  be  taxed  either  before  they 
go  out  of  the  hands  of  the  manufacturer  or 
grower,  or  if  this  mode  of  taxation  did  not 
suit  the  circumstances  of  those  persons,  they 
might  be  deposited  in  public  warehouses  both 
at  the  place  of  manufacture,  and  at  all  the 
different  ports  of  the  empire  to  which  they 
might  afterwards  be  transported,  to  remain 
there,  under  the  joint  custody  of  the  owner 
and  the  revenue  officer,  till  such  time  as  they 
should  be  delivered  out  either  to  the  con¬ 
sumer,  to  the  merchant  retailer  for  home  con¬ 
sumption,  or  to  the  merchant  exporter,  the 
tax  not  to  be  advanced  till  such  delivery. 
When  delivered  out  for  exportation,  to  go 
duty  free  upon  proper  security  being  given 
that  they  should  really  be  exported  out  of 
the  empire.  These  are  perhaps  the  principal 
commodities  with  regard  to  which  a  union 
with  the  colonies  might  require  some  consid¬ 
erable  change  in  the  present  system  of  Brit¬ 
ish  taxation. 

What  might  be  the  amount  of  the  revenue 
which  this  system  of  taxation  extended  to  all 
the  different  provinces  of  the  empire  might 
produce,  it  must,  no  doubt,  be  altogether  im¬ 
possible  to  ascertain  with  tolerable  exactness. 
By  means  of  this  system  there  is  annually 
levied  in  Great  Britain,  upon  less  than  eight 
millions  of  people,  more  than  ten  millions  of 
revenue.  Ireland  contains  more  than  two  mil¬ 
lions  of  people,  and  according  to  the  accounts 
laid  before  the  congress,  the  twelve  associ¬ 
ated  provinces  of  America  contain  more  than 
three.  Those  accounts,  however,  may  have 
been  exaggerated,  in  order,  perhaps,  either 
to  encourage  their  own  people,  or  to  intimi¬ 
date  those  of  this  country,  and  we  shall  sup¬ 
pose,  therefore,  that  our  North  American  and 
West  Indian  colonies  taken  together  contain 
no  more  than  three  millions;  or  that  the  whole 
British  empire,  in  Europe  and  America,  con¬ 
tains  no  more  than  thirteen  millions  of  in¬ 
habitants.  If  upon  less  than  eight  millions  of 
inhabitants  this  system  of  taxation  raises  a 
revenue  of  more  than  ten  millions  sterling,  it 
ought  upon  thirteen  millions  of  inhabitants 
to  raise  a  revenue  of  more  than  sixteen  mil¬ 
lions  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds 
sterling.  From  this  revenue,  supposing  that 
this  system  could  produce  it,  must  be  de¬ 
ducted  the  revenue  usually  raised  in  Ireland 
and  the  plantations  for  defraying  the  expense 
of  their  respective  civil  governments.  The  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  civil  and  military  establishment 
of  Ireland,  together  with  the  interest  of  the 
public  debt,  amounts,  at  a  medium  of  the 
two  years  which  ended  March  1775,  to  some¬ 
thing  less  than  seven  hundred  and  fifty  thou- 


Public 

sand  pounds  a  year.  By  a  very  exact  account 
of  the  revenue  of  the  principal  colonies  of 
America  and  the  West  Indies,  it  amounted, 
before  the  commencement  of  the  present  dis¬ 
turbances,  to  a  hundred  and  forty-one  thou¬ 
sand  eight  hundred  pounds.  In  this  account, 
however,  the  revenue  of  Maryland,  of  North 
Carolina,  and  of  all  our  late  acquisitions  both 
upon  the  continent  and  in  the  islands  is  omit¬ 
ted,  which  may  perhaps  make  a  difference  of 
thirty  or  forty  thousand  pounds.  For  the  sake 
of  even  numbers,  therefore,  let  us  suppose 
that  the  revenue  necessary  for  supporting  the 
civil  government  of  Ireland  and  the  planta¬ 
tions  may  amount  to  a  million.  There  would 
remain  consequently  a  revenue  of  fifteen  mil¬ 
lions  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds 
to  be  applied  towards  defraying  the  general 
expense  of  the  empire,  and  towards  paying 
the  public  debt.  But  if  from  the  present  rev¬ 
enue  of  Great  Britain  a  million  could  in  peace¬ 
able  times  be  spared  towards  the  payment  of 
that  debt,  six  millions  two  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  pounds  could  very  well  be  spared 
from  this  improved  revenue.  This  great  sink¬ 
ing  fund,  too,  might  be  augmented  every  year 
by  the  interest  of  the  debt  which  had  been 
discharged  the  year  before,  and  might  in  this 
manner  increase  so  very  rapidly  as  to  be  suf¬ 
ficient  in  a  few  years  to  discharge  the  whole 
debt,  and  thus  to  restore  completely  the  at 
present  debilitated  and  languishing  vigour  of 
the  empire.  In  the  meantime  the  people  might 
be  relieved  from  some  of  the  most  burden¬ 
some  taxes;  from  those  which  are  imposed 
either  upon  the  necessaries  of  life,  or  upon  the 
materials  of  manufacture.  The  labouring  poor 
would  thus  be  enabled  to  live  better,  to  work 
cheaper,  and  to  send  their  goods  cheaper  to 
market.  The  cheapness  of  their  goods  would 
increase  the  demand  for  them,  and  conse¬ 
quently  for  the  labour  of  those  who  produced 
them.  This  increase  in  the  demand  for  labour 
would  both  increase  the  numbers  and  im¬ 
prove  the  circumstances  of  the  labouring 
poor.  Their  consumption  would  increase,  and 
together  with  it  the  revenue  arising  from  all 
those  articles  of  their  consumption  upon 
which  the  taxes  might  be  allowed  to  remain. 

The  revenue  arising  from  this  system  of 
taxation,  however,  might  not  immediately 
increase  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  who  were  subjected  to  it.  Great  indul¬ 
gence  would  for  some  time  be  due  to  those 
provinces  of  the  empire  which  were  thus  sub¬ 
jected  to  burdens  to  which  they  had  not  be¬ 
fore  been  accustomed,  and  even  when  the 
same  taxes  came  to  be  levied  everywhere  as 
exactly  as  possible,  they  would  not  every¬ 
where  produce  a  revenue  proportioned  to  the 
numbers  of  the  people.  In  a  poor  country 
the  consumption  of  the  principal  commodities 


Debts  417 

subject  to  the  duties  of  customs  and  excise  is 
very  small,  and  in  a  thinly  inhabited  country 
the  opportunities  of  smuggling  are  very  great. 
The  consumption  of  malt  liquors  among  the 
inferior  ranks  of  people  in  Scotland  is  very 
small,  and  the  excise  upon  malt,  beer,  and 
ale  produces  less  there  than  in  England  in 
proportion  to  the  numbers  of  the  people  and 
the  rate  of  the  duties,  which  upon  malt  is  dif¬ 
ferent  on  account  of  a  supposed  difference  of 
quality.  In  these  particular  branches  of  the 
excise  there  is  not,  I  apprehend,  much  more 
smuggling  in  the  one  country  than  in  the 
other.  The  duties  upon  the  distillery,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  duties  of  customs,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  numbers  of  people  in  the  re¬ 
spective  countries,  produce  less  in  Scotland 
than  in  England,  not  only  on  account  of  the 
smaller  consumption  of  the  taxed  commodi¬ 
ties,  but  of  the  much  greater  facility  of  smug¬ 
gling.  In  Ireland  the  inferior  ranks  of  people 
are  still  poorer  than  in  Scotland,  and  many 
parts  of  the  country  are  almost  as  thinly  in¬ 
habited.  In  Ireland,  therefore,  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  the  taxed  commodities  might,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  number  of  the  people,  be  still 
less  than  Scotland,  and  the  facility  of  smug¬ 
gling  nearly  the  same.  In  America  and  the 
West  Indies  the  white  people  even  of  the 
lowest  rank  are  in  much  better  circumstances 
than  those  of  the  same  rank  in  England,  and 
their  consumption  of  all  the  luxuries  in  which 
they  usually  indulge  themselves  is  probably 
much  greater.  The  blacks,  indeed,  who  make 
the  greater  part  of  the  inhabitants  both  of 
the  southern  colonies  upon  the  continent  and 
of  the  West  India  islands,  as  they  are  in  a 
state  of  slavery,  are,  no  doubt,  in  a  worse 
condition  than  the  poorest  people  either  in 
Scotland  or  Ireland.  We  must  not,  however, 
upon  that  account,  imagine  that  they  are 
worse  fed,  or  that  their  consumption  of  ar¬ 
ticles  which  might  be  subjected  to  moderate 
duties  is  less  than  that  even  of  the  lower 
ranks  of  people  in  England.  In  order  that 
they  may  work  well,  it  is  the  interest  of  their 
master  that  they  should  be  fed  well  and  kept 
in  good  heart  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  his 
interest  that  his  working  cattle  should  be  so. 
The  blacks  accordingly  have  almost  every¬ 
where  their  allowance  of  rum  and  molasses 
or  spruce  beer  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
white  servants,  and  this  allowance  would  not 
probably  be  withdrawn  though  those  article* 
should  be  subjected  to  moderate  duties.  The 
consumption  of  the  taxed  commodities,  there¬ 
fore,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  inhab¬ 
itants,  would  probably  be  as  great  in  America 
and  the  West  Indies  as  in  any  part  of  the 
British  empire.  The  opportunities  of  smug¬ 
gling,  indeed,  would  be  much  greater;  Amer¬ 
ica,  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  coun- 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


418 

try,  being  much  more  thinly  inhabited  than 
either  Scotland  or  Ireland.  If  the  revenue, 
however,  which  is  at  present  raised  by  the 
different  duties  upon  malt  and  malt  liquors 
were  to  be  levied  by  a  single  duty  upon  malt, 
the  opportunity  of  smuggling  in  the  most 
important  branch  of  the  excise  would  be  al¬ 
most  entirely  taken  away:  and  if  the  duties 
of  customs,  instead  of  being  imposed  upon 
almost  all  the  different  articles  of  importa¬ 
tion,  were  confined  to  a  few  of  the  most  gen¬ 
eral  use  and  consumption,  and  if  the  levying 
of  those  duties  were  subjected  to  the  excise 
laws,  the  opportunity  of  smuggling,  though 
not  so  entirely  taken  away,  would  be  very 
much  diminished.  In  consequence  of  those 
two,  apparently,  very  simple  and  easy  altera¬ 
tions,  the  duties  of  customs  and  excise  might 
probably  produce  a  revenue  as  great  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  consumption  of  the  most  thin¬ 
ly  inhabited  province  as  they  do  at  present  in 
proportion  to  that  of  the  most  populous. 

The  Americans,  it  has  been  said,  indeed, 
have  no  gold  or  silver  money;  the  interior 
commerce  of  the  country  being  carried  on  by 
a  paper  currency,  and  the  gold  and  silver 
which  occasionally  come  among  them  being 
all  sent  to  Great  Britain  in  return  for  the 
commodities  which  they  receive  from  us.  But 
without  gold  and  silver,  it  is  added,  there  is 
no  possibility  of  paying  taxes.  We  already 
get  all  the  gold  and  silver  which  they  have. 
How  is  it  possible  to  draw  from  them  what 
they  have  not? 

The  present  scarcity  of  gold  and  silver 
money  in  America  is  not  the  effect  of  the 
poverty  of  that  country,  or  of  the  inability 
of  the  people  there  to  purchase  those  metals. 
In  a  country  where  the  wages  of  labour  are 
so  much  higher,  and  the  price  of  provisions 
so  much  lower  than  in  England,  the  greater 
part  of  the  people  must  surely  have  where¬ 
withal  to  purchase  a  greater  quantity  if  it 
were  either  necessary  or  convenient  for  them 
to  do  so.  The  scarcity  of  those  metals,  there¬ 
fore,  must  be  the  effect  of  choice,  and  not  of 
necessity. 

It  is  for  transacting  either  domestic  or  for¬ 
eign  business  that  gold  and  silver  money  is 
either  necessary  or  convenient. 

The  domestic  business  of  every  country, 
it  has  been  shown  in  the  second  book  of  this 
Inquiry,  may,  at  least  in  peaceable  times,  be 
transacted  by  means  of  a  paper  currency 
with  nearly  the  same  degree  of  conveniency 
as  by  gold  and  silver  money.  It  is  convenient 
for  the  Americans,  who  could  always  employ 
with  profit  in  the  improvement  of  their  lands 
a  greater  stock  than  they  can  easily  get,  to 
save  as  much  as  possible  the  expense  of  so 
costly  an  instrument  of  commerce  as  gold 
and  silver,  and  rather  to  employ  that  part  of 


their  surplus  produce  which  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  for  purchasing  those  metals  in  purchas¬ 
ing  the  instruments  of  trade,  the  materials 
of  clothing,  several  parts  of  household  furni¬ 
ture,  and  the  ironwork  necessary  for  building 
and  extending  their  settlements  and  planta¬ 
tions;  in  purchasing,  not  dead  stock,  but  ac¬ 
tive  and  productive  stock.  The  colony  gov¬ 
ernments  find  it  for  their  interest  to  supply 
the  people  with  such  a  quantity  of  paper- 
money  as  is  fully  sufficient  and  generally 
more  than  sufficient  for  transacting  their  do¬ 
mestic  business.  Some  of  those  governments, 
that  of  Pennsylvania  particularly,  derive  a 
revenue  from  lending  this  paper-money  to 
their  subjects  at  an  interest  of  so  much  per 
cent.  Others,  like  that  of  Massachusetts  Bay, 
advance  upon  extraordinary  emergencies  a 
paper-money  of  this  kind  for  defraying  the 
public  expense,  and  afterwards,  when  it  suits 
the  conveniency  of  the  colony,  redeem  it  at 
the  depreciated  value  to  which  it  gradually 
falls.  In  1747,1  that  colony  paid,  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  the  greater  part  of  its  public  debts  with 
the  tenth  part  of  the  money  for  which  its 
bills  had  been  granted.  It  suits  the  conven¬ 
iency  of  the  planters  to  save  the  expense  of 
employing  gold  and  silver  money  in  their  do¬ 
mestic  transactions,  and  it  suits  the  conven¬ 
iency  of  the  colony  governments  to  supply 
them  with  a  medium  which,  though  attended 
with  some  very  considerable  disadvantages, 
enables  them  to  save  that  expense.  The  re¬ 
dundancy  of  paper-money  necessarily  ban¬ 
ishes  gold  and  silver  from  the  domestic  trans¬ 
actions  of  the  colonies,  for  the  same  reason 
that  it  has  banished  those  metals  from  the 
greater  part  of  the  domestic  transactions  in 
Scotland;  and  in  both  countries  it  is  not  the 
poverty,  but  the  enterprising  and  projecting 
spirit  of  the  people,  their  desire  of  employing 
all  the  stock  which  they  can  get  as  active  and 
productive  stock,  which  has  occasioned  this 
redundancy  of  paper-money. 

In  the  exterior  commerce  which  the  dif¬ 
ferent  colonies  carry  on  with  Great  Britain, 
gold  and  silver  are  more  or  less  employed 
exactly  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  or  less 
necessary.  Where  those  metals  are  not  neces¬ 
sary  they  seldom  appear.  Where  they  are 
necessary  they  are  generally  found. 

In  the  commerce  between  Great  Britain 
and  the  tobacco  colonies  the  British  goods 
are  generally  advanced  to  the  colonists  at  a 
pretty  long  credit,  and  are  afterwards  paid 
for  in  tobacco,  rated  at  a  certain  price.  It  is 
more  convenient  for  the  colonists  to  pay  in 
tobacco  than  in  gold  and  silver.  It  would  be 
more  convenient  for  any  merchant  to  pay  for 
the  goods  which  his  correspondents  had  sold 

1See  Hutchinson’s  Il’istory  of  Massachusetts 
Bay,  vol.  ii,  p.  436,  et  seq. 


Public  Debts 


419 


to  him  in  some  other  sort  of  goods  which  he 
might  happen  to  deal  in  than  in  money.  Such 
a  merchant  would  have  no  occasion  to  keep 
any  part  of  his  stock  by  him  unemployed, 
and  in  ready  money,  for  answering  occasional 
demands.  He  could  have,  at  all  times,  a  larger 
quantity  of  goods  in  his  shop  or  warehouse, 
and  he  could  deal  to  a  greater  extent.  But  it 
seldom  happens  to  be  convenient  for  all  the 
correspondents  of  a  merchant  to  receive  pay¬ 
ment  for  the  goods  which  they  sell  to  him  in 
goods  of  some  other  kind  which  he  happens 
to  deal  in.  The  British  merchants  who  trade 
to  Virginia  and  Maryland  happen  to  be  a  par¬ 
ticular  set  of  correspondents,  to  whom  it  is 
more  convenient  to  receive  payment  for  the 
goods  which  they  sell  to  those  colonies  in  to¬ 
bacco  than  in  gold  and  silver.  They  expect 
to  make  a  profit  by  the  sale  of  the  tobacco. 
They  could  make  none  by  that  of  the  gold 
and  silver.  Gold  and  silver,  therefore,  very 
seldom  appear  in  the  commerce  between 
Great  Britain  and  the  tobacco  colonies.  Mary¬ 
land  and  Virginia  have  as  little  occasion  for 
those  metals  in  their  foreign  as  in  their  do¬ 
mestic  commerce.  They  are  said,  accordingly, 
to  have  less  gold  and  silver  money  than  any 
other  colonies  in  America.  They  are  reckoned, 
however,  as  thriving,  and  consequently  as 
rich,  as  any  of  their  neighbours. 

In  the  northern  colonies,  Pennsylvania, 
New  York,  New  Jersey,  the  four  governments 
of  New  England,  etc.,  the  value  of  their  own 
produce  which  they  export  to  Great  Britain 
is  not  equal  to  that  of  the  manufactures 
which  they  import  for  their  own  use,  and 
for  that  of  some  of  the  other  colonies  to 
which  they  are  the  carriers.  A  balance, 
therefore,  must  be  paid  to  the  mother  coun¬ 
try  in  gold  and  silver,  and  this  balance  they 
generally  find. 

In  the  sugar  colonies  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uce  annually  exported  to  Great  Britain  is 
much  greater  than  that  of  all  the  goods  im¬ 
ported  from  thence.  If  the  sugar  and  rum 
annually  sent  to  the  mother  country  were 
paid  for  in  those  colonies,  Great  Britain  would 
be  obliged  to  send  out  every  year  a  very  large 
balance  in  money,  and  the  trade  to  the  West 
Indies  would,  by  a  certain  species  of  poli¬ 
ticians,  be  considered  as  extremely  disadvan¬ 
tageous.  But  it  so  happens  that  many  of  the 
principal  proprietors  of  the  sugar  plantations 
reside  in  Great  Britain.  Their  rents  are  re¬ 
mitted  to  them  in  sugar  and  rum,  the  produce 
of  their  estates.  The  sugar  and  rum  which  the 
West  India  merchants  purchase  in  those  col¬ 
onies  upon  their  own  account  are  not  equal 
in  value  to  the  goods  which  they  annually 
sell  there.  A  balance,  therefore,  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  paid  to  them  in  gold  and  silver,  and 
this  balance,  too,  is  generally  found. 


The  difficulty  and  irregularity  of  payment 
from  the  different  colonies  to  Great  Britain 
have  not  been  at  all  in  proportion  to  the 
greatness  or  smallness  of  the  balances  which 
were  respectively  due  from  them.  Payments 
have  in  general  been  more  regular  from  the 
northern  than  from  the  tobacco  colonies, 
though  the  former  have  generally  paid  a 
pretty  large  balance  in  money,  while  the  lat¬ 
ter  have  either  paid  no  balance,  or  a  much 
smaller  one.  The  difficulty  of  getting  pay¬ 
ment  from  our  different  sugar  colonies  has 
been  greater  or  less  in  proportion,  not  so 
much  to  the  extent  of  the  balances  respec¬ 
tively  due  from  them,  as  to  the  quantity  of 
uncultivated  land  which  they  contained;  that 
is,  to  the  greater  or  smaller  temptation  which 
the  planters  have  been  under  of  overtrading, 
or  of  undertaking  the  settlement  and  planta¬ 
tion  of  greater  quantities  of  waste  land  than 
suited  the  extent  of  their  capitals.  The  re¬ 
turns  from  the  great  island  of  Jamaica,  where 
there  is  still  much  uncultivated  land,  have, 
upon  this  account,  been  in  general  more  ir¬ 
regular  and  uncertain  than  those  from  the 
smaller  islands  of  Barbadoes,  Antigua,  and 
St.  Christophers,  which  have  for  these  many 
years  been  completely  cultivated,  and  have, 
upon  that  account,  afforded  less  field  for  the 
speculations  of  the  planter.  The  new  acqui¬ 
sitions  of  Grenada,  Tobago,  St.  Vincents,  and 
Dominica  have  opened  a  new  field  for  specu¬ 
lations  of  this  kind,  and  the  returns  from  those 
islands  have  of  late  been  as  irregular  and  un¬ 
certain  as  those  from  the  great  island  of 
Jamaica. 

It  is  not.  therefore,  the  poverty  of  the  col¬ 
onies  which  occasions,  in  the  greater  part  of 
them,  the  present  scarcity  of  gold  and  silver 
money.  Their  great  demand  for  active  and 
productive  stock  makes  it  convenient  for 
them  to  have  as  little  dead  stock  as  possible, 
and  disposes  them  upon  that  account  to  con¬ 
tent  themselves  with  a  cheaper  though  less 
commodious  instrument  of  commerce  than 
gold  and  silver.  They  are  thereby  enabled  to 
convert  the  value  of  that  gold  and  silver  into 
the  instruments  of  trade,  into  the  materials 
of  clothing,  into  household  furniture,  and 
into  the  ironwork  necessary  for  building  and 
extending  their  settlements  and  plantations. 
In  those  branches  of  business  which  cannot 
be  transacted  without  gold  and  silver  money, 
it  appears  that  they  can  always  find  the  nec¬ 
essary  quantity  of  those  metals;  and  if  they 
frequently  do  not  find  it,  their  failure  is  gen¬ 
erally  the  effect,  not  of  their  necessary  pov¬ 
erty,  but  of  their  unnecessary  and  excessive 
enterprise.  It  is  not  because  they  are  poor  that 
their  payments  are  irregular  and  uncertain, 
but  because  they  are  too  eager  to  become  ex¬ 
cessively  rich.  Though  all  that  part  of  the 


420 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 


produce  of  the  colony  taxes  which  was  over 
and  above  what  was  necessary  for  defraying 
the  expense  of  their  own  civil  and  military 
establishments  were  to  be  remitted  to  Great 
Britain  in  gold  and  silver,  the  colonies  have 
abundantly  wherewithal  to  purchase  the  req¬ 
uisite  quantity  of  those  metals.  They  would 
in  this  case  be  obliged,  indeed,  to  exchange 
a  part  of  their  surplus  produce,  with  which 
they  now  purchase  active  and  productive 
stock,  for  dead  stock.  In  transacting  their  do¬ 
mestic  business  they  would  be  obliged  to  em¬ 
ploy  a  costly  instead  of  a  cheap  instrument 
of  commerce,  and  the  expense  of  purchasing 
this  costly  instrument  might  damp  somewhat 
the  vivacity  and  ardour  of  their  excessive  en¬ 
terprise  in  the  improvement  of  land.  It  might 
not,  however,  be  necessary  to  remit  any  part 
of  the  American  revenue  in  gold  and  silver. 
It  might  be  remitted  in  bills  drawn  upon  and 
accepted  by  particular  merchants  or  com¬ 
panies  in  Great  Britain  to  whom  a  part  of  the 
surplus  produce  of  America  had  been  con¬ 
signed,  who  would  pay  into  the  treasury  the 
American  revenue  in  money,  after  having 
themselves  received  the  value  of  it  in  goods; 
and  the  whole  business  might  frequently  be 
transacted  without  exporting  a  single  ounce 
of  gold  or  silver  from  America. 

It  is  not  contrary  to  justice  that  both  Ire¬ 
land  and  America  should  contribute  towards 
the  discharge  of  the  public  debt  of  Great 
Britain.  That  debt  has  been  contracted  in 
support  of  the  government  established  by  the 
Revolution,  a  government  to  which  the  Prot¬ 
estants  of  Ireland  owe,  not  only  the  whole 
authority  which  they  at  present  enjoy  in  their 
own  country,  but  every  security  which  they 
possess  for  their  liberty,  their  property,  and 
their  religion;  a  government  to  which  several 
of  the  colonies  of  America  owe  their  present 
charters,  and  consequently  their  present  con¬ 
stitution,  and  to  which  all  the  colonies  of 
America  owe  the  liberty,  security,  and  prop¬ 
erty  which  they  have  ever  since  enjoyed.  That 
public  debt  has  been  contracted  in  the  de¬ 
fence,  not  of  Great  Britain  alone,  but  of  all 
the  different  provinces  of  the  empire;  the 
immense  debt  contracted  in  the  late  war  in 
particular,  and  a  great  part  of  that  contract¬ 
ed  in  the  war  before,  were  both  properly  con¬ 
tracted  in  defence  of  America. 

By  a  union  with  Great  Britain,  Ireland 
would  gain,  besides  the  freedom  of  trade, 
other  advantages  much  more  important,  and 
which  would  much  more  than  compensate 
any  increase  of  taxes  that  might  accompany 
that  union.  By  the  union  with  England  the 
middling  and  inferior  ranks  of  people  in  Scot¬ 
land  gained  a  complete  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  an  aristocracy  which  had  always 
before  oppressed  them.  By  a  union  with  Great 


Britain  the  greater  part  of  the  people  of  all 
ranks  in  Ireland  would  gain  an  equally  com¬ 
plete  deliverance  from  a  much  more  oppres¬ 
sive  aristocracy;  an  aristocracy  not  founded, 
like  that  of  Scotland,  in  the  natural  and  re¬ 
spectable  distinctions  of  birth  and  fortune, 
but  in  the  most  odious  of  all  distinctions, 
those  of  religious  and  political  prejudices;  dis¬ 
tinctions  which,  more  than  any  other,  ani¬ 
mate  both  the  insolence  of  the  oppressors  and 
the  hatred  and  indignation  of  the  oppressed, 
and  which  commonly  render  the  inhabitants 
of  the  same  country  more  hostile  to  one  an¬ 
other  than  those  of  different  countries  ever 
are.  Without  a  union  with  Great  Britain  the 
inhabitants  of  Ireland  are  not  likely  for  many 
ages  to  consider  themselves  as  one  people. 

No  oppressive  aristocracy  has  ever  pre¬ 
vailed  in  the  colonies.  Even  they,  however, 
would,  in  point  of  happiness  and  tranquility, 
gain  considerably  by  a  union  with  Great  Brit¬ 
ain.  It  would,  at  least,  deliver  them  from 
those  rancorous  and  virulent  factions  which 
are  inseparable  from  small  democracies,  and 
which  have  so  frequently  divided  the  affec¬ 
tions  of  their  people,  and  disturbed  the  tran¬ 
quillity  of  their  governments,  in  their  form 
so  nearly  democratical.  In  the  case  of  a  total 
separation  from  Great  Britain,  which,  unless 
prevented  by  a  union  of  this  kind,  seems  very 
likely  to  take  place,  those  factions  would  be 
ten  times  more  virulent  than  ever.  Before  the 
commencement  of  the  present  disturbances, 
the  coercive  power  of  the  mother  country  had 
always  been  able  to  restrain  those  factions 
from  breaking  out  into  anything  worse  than 
gross  brutality  and  insult.  If  that  coercive 
power  were  entirely  taken  away,  they  would 
probably  soon  break  out  into  open  violence 
and  bloodshed.  In  all  great  countries  which 
are  united  under  one  uniform  government, 
the  spirit  of  party  commonly  prevails  less  in 
the  remote  provinces  than  in  the  centre  of 
the  empire.  The  distance  of  those  provinces 
from  the  capital,  from  the  principal  seat  of 
the  great  scramble  of  faction  and  ambition, 
makes  them  enter  less  into  the  views  of  any 
of  the  contending  parties,  and  renders  them 
more  indifferent  and  impartial  spectators  of 
the  conduct  of  all.  The  spirit  of  party  pre¬ 
vails  less  in  Scotland  than  in  England.  In  the 
case  of  a  union  it  would  probably  prevail  less 
in  Ireland  than  in  Scotland,  and  the  colonies 
would  probably  soon  enjoy  a  degree  of  con¬ 
cord  and  unanimity  at  present  unknown  in 
any  part  of  the  British  empire.  Both  Ireland 
and  the  colonies,  indeed,  would  be  subjected 
to  heavier  taxes  than  any  which  they  at  pres¬ 
ent  pay.  In  consequence,  however,  of  a  dili¬ 
gent  and  faithful  application  of  the  public 
revenue  towards  the  discharge  of  the  national 
debt,  the  greater  part  of  those  taxes  might 


Public  Debts 


not  be  of  long  continuance,  and  the  public 
revenue  of  Great  Britain  might  soon  be  re¬ 
duced  to  what  was  necessary  for  maintaining 
a  moderate  peace  establishment. 

The  territorial  acquisitions  of  the  East  India 
Company,  the  undoubted  right  of  the  crown, 
that  is,  of  the  state  and  people  of  Great 
Britain,  might  be  rendered  another  source  of 
revenue  more  abundant,  perhaps,  than  all 
those  already  mentioned.  Those  countries  are 
represented  as  more  fertile,  more  extensive, 
and,  in  proportion  to  their  extent,  much  rich¬ 
er  and  more  populous  than  Great  Britain.  In 
order  to  draw  a  great  revenue  from  them,  it 
would  not  probably  be  necessary  to  introduce 
any  new  system  of  taxation  into  countries 
which  are  already  sufficiently  and  more  than 
sufficiently  taxed.  It  might,  perhaps,  be  more 
proper  to  lighten  than  to  aggravate  the  bur¬ 
den  of  those  unfortunate  countries,  and  to 
endeavour  to  draw  a  revenue  from  them,  not 
by  imposing  new  taxes,  but  by  preventing 
the  embezzlement  and  misapplication  of  the 
greater  part  of  those  which  they  already  pay. 

If  it  should  be  found  impracticable  for 
Great  Britain  to  draw  any  considerable  aug¬ 
mentation  of  revenue  from  any  of  the  re¬ 
sources  above  mentioned,  the  only  resource 
which  can  remain  to  her  is  a  diminution  of 
her  expense.  In  the  mode  of  collecting  and  in 
that  of  expending  the  public  revenue,  though 
in  both  there  may  be  still  room  for  improve¬ 
ment,  Great  Britain  seems  to  be  at  least  as 
economical  as  any  of  her  neighbours.  The 
military  establishment  which  she  maintains 
for  her  own  defence  in  time  of  peace  is  more 
moderate  than  that  of  any  European  state 
which  can  pretend  to  rival  her  either  in 
wealth  or  in  power.  None  of  those  articles, 
therefore,  seem  to  admit  of  any  considerable 
reduction  of  expense.  The  expense  of  the 
peace  establishment  of  the  colonies  was,  before 
the  commencement  of  the  present  disturb¬ 
ances,  very  considerable,  and  is  an  expense 
which  may,  and  if  no  revenue  can  be  drawn 
from  them  ought  certainly  to  be  saved  al¬ 
together.  This  constant  expense  in  time  of 
peace,  though  very  great,  is  insignificant  in 
comparison  with  what  the  defence  of  the 
colonies  has  cost  us  in  time  of  war.  The  last 
war,  which  was  undertaken  altogether  on 
account  of  the  colonies,  cost  Great  Britain,  it 
has  already  been  observed,  upwards  of  ninety 
millions.  The  Spanish  war  of  1739  was  prin¬ 
cipally  undertaken  on  their  account,  in  which, 
and  in  the  French  war  that  was  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  it,  Great  Britain  spent  upwards  of 
forty  millions,  a  great  part  of  which  ought 
justly  to  be  charged  to  the  colonies.  In  those 
two  wars  the  colonies  cost  Great  Britain 


421 

much  more  than  double  the  sum  which  the 
national  debt  amounted  to  before  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  first  of  them.  Had  it  not 
been  for  those  wars  that  debt  might,  and 
probably  would  by  this  time,  have  been  com¬ 
pletely  paid;  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  col¬ 
onies,  the  former  of  those  wars  might  not, 
and  the  latter  certainly  would  not  have  been 
undertaken.  It  was  because  the  colonies  were 
supposed  to  be  provinces  of  the  British  em¬ 
pire  that  this  expense  was  laid  out  upon  them. 
But  countries  which  contribute  neither  rev¬ 
enue  nor  military  force  towards  the  support 
of  the  empire  cannot  be  considered  as  prov¬ 
inces.  They  may  perhaps  be  considered  as 
appendages,  as  a  sort  of  splendid  and  showy 
equipage  of  the  empire.  But  if  the  empire 
can  no  longer  support  the  expense  of  keeping 
up  this  equipage,  it  ought  certainly  to  lay  it 
down;  and  if  it  cannot  raise  its  revenue  in 
proportion  to  its  expense,  it  ought,  at  least, 
to  accommodate  its  expense  to  its  revenue. 
If  the  colonies,  notwithstanding  their  refusal 
to  submit  to  British  taxes,  are  still  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  provinces  of  the  British  empire, 
their  defence  in  some  future  war  may  cost 
Great  Britain  as  great  an  expense  as  it  ever 
has  done  in  any  former  war.  The  rulers  of 
Great  Britain  have,  for  more  than  a  century 
past,  amused  the  people  with  the  imagina¬ 
tion  that  they  possessed  a  great  empire  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Atlantic.  This  empire,  how¬ 
ever,  has  hitherto  existed  in  imagination  only. 
It  has  hitherto  been,  not  an  empire,  but  the 
project  of  an  empire;  not  a  gold  mine,  but  the 
project  of  a  gold  mine;  a  project  which  has 
cost,  which  continues  to  cost,  and  which,  if 
pursued  in  the  same  way  as  it  has  been  hith¬ 
erto,  is  likely  to  cost,  immense  expense,  with¬ 
out  being  likely  to  bring  any  profit;  for  the 
effects  of  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,  it 
has  been  shown,  are,  to  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  mere  loss  instead  of  profit.  It  is  surely 
now  time  that  our  rulers  should  either  realize 
this  golden  dream,  in  which  they  have  been 
indulging  themselves,  perhaps,  as  well  as  the 
people,  or  that  they  should  awake  from  it 
themselves,  and  endeavour  to  awaken  the 
people.  If  the  project  cannot  be  completed, 
it  ought  to  be  given  up.  If  any  of  the  prov¬ 
inces  of  the  British  empire  cannot  be  made 
to  contribute  towards  the  support  of  the 
whole  empire,  it  is  surely  time  that  Great 
Britain  should  free  herself  from  the  expense 
of  defending  those  provinces  in  time  of  war, 
and  of  supporting  any  part  of  their  civil  or 
military  establishments  in  time  of  peace,  and 
endeavour  to  accommodate  her  future  views 
and  designs  to  the  real  mediocrity  of  her 
circumstances. 


Finis 


Appendix 


The  two  following  accounts  are  subjoined  in  order  to  illustrate  and  con¬ 
firm  what  is  said  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  fourth  book,  concerning  the 
tonnage  bounty  to  the  white-herring  fishery.  The  reader,  I  believe,  may 
depend  upon  the  accuracy  of  both  accounts. 

An  account  of  Busses  fitted  out  in  Scotland  for  Eleven  Years ,  with 
the  Number  of  Empty  Barrels  carried  out ,  and  the  Number  of  Barrels 
of  Herrings  caught;  also  the  Bounty  at  a  Medium  on  each  Barrel  of 
Seasteeks ,  and  on  each  Barrel  when  fully  packed. 


Years 

Number  of 
Busses 

Empty 
Barrels 
carried  out 

Barrels 
of  Herrings 
caught 

Bounty  paid 
the  Busses 

on 

1771 

29 

5948 

2832 

£ 

2085 

s. 

0 

d . 

0 

1772 

168 

41316 

22237 

11055 

7 

6 

1773 

190 

42333 

42055 

12510 

8 

6 

1774 

248 

59303 

56365 

16952 

2 

6 

1775 

275 

69144 

52879 

19315 

15 

0 

1776 

294 

76329 

51863 

21290 

7 

6 

1777 

240 

62679 

43313 

17592 

2 

6 

1778 

220 

56390 

40958 

16316 

2 

6 

1779 

206 

55194 

29367 

15287 

0 

0 

1780 

181 

48315 

19885 

13445 

12 

6 

1781 

135 

33992 

16593 

9613 

12 

6 

Total 

2186 

550943 

378347 

155463 

11 

0 

Seasteeks  378,347  Bounty  at  a  medium  for  each 

barrel  of  seasteeks  £0  8  2% 

But  a  barrel  of  seasteeks  being 
only  reckoned  two-thirds  of  a  bar¬ 
rel  fully  packed,  one-third  is  de¬ 
ducted,  which  brings  the  bounty 
to  £0  12  3  % 

%  deducted  126,115% 

Barrels  fully  packed  252,231% 

And  if  the  herrings  are  exported,  there  is,  besides, 

a  premium  of 

So  that  the  bounty  paid  by  Government  in  money  for 
each  barrel  is 

But  if  to  this  the  duty  of  the  salt  usually  taken  credit 
for  as  expended  in  curing  each  barrel,  which  at  a  medium 
is  of  foreign,  one  bushel  and  one-fourth  of  a  bushel,  at 
10s.  a  bushel,  be  added,  viz. 

The  bounty  on  each  barrel  would  amount  to 


0  2  8 


£0  14  11% 

0  12  6 
£1  7  5% 


423 


424 


The  Wealth  of  Nations 

If  the  herrings  are  cured  with  British  salt ,  it  will  stand  thus,  viz. 

Bounty  as  before  £0  14  11% 

But  if  to  this  bounty  the  duty  on  two  bushels  of  Scots 
salt  at  Is.  6d.  per  bushel,  supposed  to  be  the  quantity  at 
a  medium  used  in  curing  each  barrel  is  added,  to  wit  0  3  0 

The  bounty  on  each  barrel  will  amount  to  £0  17  11% 

And, 

When  buss  herrings  are  entered  for  home  consumption  in  Scotland,  and 
pay  the  shilling  a  barrel  of  duty,  the  bounty  stands  thus,  to  wit  as  before 

£0  12  3% 

From  which  the  Is.  a  barrel  is  to  be  deducted  0  10 

0  11  3% 

But  to  that  there  is  to  be  added  again  the  duty  of  the 
foreign  salt  used  in  curing  a  barrel  of  herrings,  viz.  0  12  6 

So  that  the  premium  allowed  for  each  barrel  of  her¬ 
rings  entered  for  home  consumption  is  £1  3  9% 

If  the  herrings  are  cured  with  British  salt ,  it  will  stand  as  follows,  viz . 

Bounty  on  each  barrel  brought  in  by  the  busses  as 
above  £0  12  3% 

From  which  deduct  the  Is.  a  barrel  paid  at  the  time 
they  are  entered  for  home  consumption  0  10 

£0  11  3 

But  if  to  the  bounty  the  duty  on  two  bushels  of  Scots 
salt  at  Is.  6d.  per  bushel,  supposed  to  be  the  quantity  at 
a  medium  used  in  curing  each  barrel,  is  added,  to  wit  0  3  0 

The  premium  for  each  barrel  entered  for  home  con¬ 
sumption  will  be  £0  14  3% 

Though  the  loss  of  duties  upon  herrings  exported  cannot,  perhaps,  prop¬ 
erly  be  considered  as  bounty;  that  upon  herrings  entered  for  home  con¬ 
sumption  certainly  may. 

An  Account  of  the  Quantity  of  Foreign  Salt  imported  into  Scotland , 
and  of  Scots  Salt  delivered  Duty  free  from  the  Works  there  for  the 
Fishery,  from  the  5th  of  April  1771  to  the  5th  of  April  1782,  with  a 
Medium  of  both  for  one  Year. 


Period 

Foreign  Salt 
Imported 

Scots  Salt 
delivered  from 
the  Works 

Bushels 

Bushels 

From  the  5th  of  April  1771  to  the  5th  of 

April  1782 

936,974 

168,226 

Medium  for  one  Year 

85,179Mi 

15,293  Ki 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Bushel  of  Foreign  Salt  weighs  84  lb.,  that 
of  British  Salt  56  lb.  only. 


Index 


( This  index  is  the  original  index ,  which  appeared  first  in  edition  3,  with  [in  square 
brackets]  additions  by  Edwin  Cannan.  It  covers  only  the  text  and  the  author  s  notes.) 


[Abassides,  opulence  of  Saracen  empire  under,  173.] 
[Abbeville,  woollen  monopoly,  196.] 

[Abraham,  weighed  shekels,  11.] 

Absentee  tax,  the  propriety  of,  considered,  with 
reference  to  Ireland,  395. 

[Abyssinia,  salt  money,  10.] 

[Academy,  the,  assigned  to  Plato,  339.] 

[Academy  of  Sciences,  Description  des  Arts  et 
Metiers  faites  ou  approuvees  par  Messieurs  de 
Vacademie  royale  des  sciences ,  1761,  54.] 
[Acapulco  ships,  sailing  between  America  and  East 
Indies,  89-91.] 

Accounts  of  money,  in  modern  Europe,  all  kept, 
and  the  value  of  goods  computed,  in  silver,  17. 
[Accumulation,  early  state  preceding,  20,  27;  title 
of  Bk.  ii.,  117;  previous  and  necessary  to  division 
of  labour,  117.] 

[Achilles,  Agamemnon’s  offer  to,  312.] 

Actors,  public,  paid  for  the  contempt  attending 
their  profession,  45. 

[Adriatic,  favourable  to  commerce,  10.] 
[Adulteration  of  coin,  worse  than  augmentation, 
414.] 

[Adulterine  guilds,  53.] 

[^Egean  sea,  islands  of,  239.] 

[^Eolian  colonies,  239.] 

[yEsop’s  Fables,  apologues,  335.] 

Africa,  [powerful  king  much  worse  off  than  Euro¬ 
pean  peasant,  6,]  cause  assigned  for  the  barbarous 
state  of  the  interior  parts  of  that  continent,  10. 

[Trade  to  America  consists  of  slave  trade,  246; 
receives  rum  in  exchange  for  slaves,  249;  manu¬ 
factures  from  European  towns,  272;  no  thriving 
colonies,  276;  natives  being  shepherds  could  not 
be  displaced,  276;  gum  senega  export,  286;  neces¬ 
sity  of  forts  for  commerce,  319;  music  and 
dancing,  338.] 

African  company  [one  of  five  regulated  companies, 
320;]  establishment  and  constitution  of,  322-3; 
receive  an  annual  allowance  from  parliament  for 
forts  and  garrisons,  322-3;  the  company  not  un¬ 
der  sufficient  control,  323;  history  of  the  Royal 
African  company,  324;  decline  of,  324;  rise  of 
the  present  company,  324. 

[Agamemnon’s  recommendation  of  his  cities,  312.] 
Age,  the  foundation  of  rank  and  precedency  in 
rude  as  well  as  civilized  societies,  309-10. 

[Agen,  land  tax  in,  375.] 

Aggregate  fund,  in  the  British  finances,  explained, 
405. 

Agio  of  the  bank  of  Amsterdam  [how  accounted 
for  by  some  people,  142;]  explained,  204;  of  the 


bank  of  Hamburg,  205;  the  agio  at  Amsterdam, 
how  kept  at  a  medium  rate,  208. 

[Agrarian  law,  the  foundation  of  Rome,  239.] 
[Agricultural  Systems,  288-300.] 

Agriculture,  the  labour  of,  does  not  admit  of  such 
subdivisions  as  manufactures,  4;  this  impossi¬ 
bility  of  separation,  prevents  agriculture  from 
improving  equally  with  manufactures,  4;  natural 
state  of,  in  a  new  colony,  39;  requires  more 
knowledge  and  experience  than  most  mechanical 
professions,  and  yet  is  carried  on  without  any 
restrictions,  54;  the  terms  of  rent,  how  adjusted 
between  landlord  and  tenant,  62;  is  extended  by 
good  roads  and  navigable  canals,  63;  under  what 
circumstances  pasture  land  is  more  valuable 
than  arable,  64;  gardening  not  a  very  gainful 
employment,  66;  vines  the  most  profitable  article 
of  culture,  66;  estimates  of  profit  from  projects, 
very  fallacious,  66;  [not  to  be  promoted  by  dis¬ 
couraging  manufactures,  67;]  cattle  and  tillage 
mutually  improve  each  other,  96;  remarks  on 
that  of  Scotland,  96-7;  remarks  on  that  of  North 
America,  97;  poultry  a  profitable  article  in  hus¬ 
bandry,  98;  hogs,  98-9;  dairy,  99;  evidences  of 
land  being  completely  improved,  100;  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  cultivation  as  it  raises  the  price  of 
animal  food,  reduces  that  of  vegetables,  106-7; 
by  whom  and  how  practiced  under  feudal  gov¬ 
ernment,  144-5;  its  operations  not  so  much  in¬ 
tended  to  increase,  as  to  direct,  the  fertility  of 
nature,  157;  has  been  the  cause  of  the  prosperity 
of  the  British  colonies  in  America,  158;  the 
profits  of,  exaggerated  by  projectors,  162;  [ca¬ 
pable  of  absorbing  more  capital  than  has  been 
applied  to  it,  162;]  on  equal  terms,  is  naturally 
preferred  to  trade,  163-4;  artificers  necessary  to 
the  carrying  it  on,  164;  was  not  attended  to 
by  the  Northern  destroyers  of  the  Roman 
empire,  165;  the  ancient  policy  of  Europe  un¬ 
favourable  to,  170;  was  promoted  by  the  com¬ 
merce,  and  manufactures  of  towns,  179;  [fa¬ 
voured  by  law  of  England,  179-80;]  the  wealth 
arising  from,  more  solid  and  durable,  than  that 
which  proceeds  from  commerce,  181. 

Is  not  encouraged  by  the  bounty  on  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  corn,  218;  why  the  proper  business 
of  new  companies  [?  colonies],  264;  the  present 
agricultural  system  of  political  economy  adopted 
in  France,  described,  288;  is  discouraged  by  re¬ 
strictions  and  prohibitions  in  trade,  293;  is 
favoured  beyond  manufactures  in  China,  296; 
and  in  Indostan,  297;  does  not  require  so  ex- 


425 


426 


Index 


tensive  a  market  as  manufactures,  298;  to  check 
manufactures,  in  order  to  promote  agriculture, 
false  policy,  299-300;  [suppose  a  settlement,  302; 
landlords  ought  to  be  encouraged  to  cultivate 
part  of  their  own  land,  364-5.] 

[Agrigen  turn,  rivalled  mother  city,  244.] 

[Agrippina,  her  white  nightingale,  95.] 

[Aides,  the  French,  farmed,  400.] 

[Aix-la-Chapelle,  treaty  of  325,  327,  409;  university 
of,  355.] 

Alcavala,  the  tax  in  Spain  so  called,  explained  and 
considered,  398;  the  ruin  of  the  Spanish  manu¬ 
factures  attributed  to  this  tax. 

[Ale,  licences  to  sell,  375;  incidence  of  taxes  on, 
386-7.] 

Alehouses,  the  number  of,  not  the  efficient  cause 
of  drunkenness,  156,  210-11. 

[Alexander  the  Great,  private  pupil  of  Aristotle,  58; 
conquests,  241.] 

[Alexander  III,  Pope,  bull  for  emancipation,  168.] 
[Alien  merchants  taxed,  387.] 

[Alienation,  fines  on,  378.] 

Allodial  rights,  mistaken  for  feudal  rights,  176-7; 
the  introduction  of  the  feudal  law  tended  to 
moderate  the  authority  of  the  allodial  lords,  177. 
[Almagro  went  in  search  of  gold,  242.] 

[Alsace  treated  as  foreign,  398.] 

Ambassadors,  the  first  motive  of  their  appoint¬ 
ment,  319. 

America,  [colonization  has  followed  coast  and 
rivers,  9;  mines  diminished  value  of  gold  and 
silver,  15,  83-4,  86,  103,  106,  190-1;  planters  are 
farmers  as  well  as  proprietors,  22-3;]  why  labour 
is  dearer  in  North  America  than  in  England, 
29,  30;  [not  so  rich  as  England,  30;]  great  in¬ 
crease  of  population  there,  30;  [people  marry 
early  yet  there  is  scarcity  of  hands,  30;  British 
colonies  illustrate  genius  of  British  constitution, 
31;  rapid  propagation,  34;  stamp  act,  36;]  com¬ 
mon  rate  of  interest  there,  39;  [acquisitions  of 
territory  raised  interest  in  Britain,  39;  rate  of 
profit  in  trade  with,  lower  than  Jamaican  trade, 
47;  corn  could  not  be  cultivated  by  factors  like 
sugar,  68;  skins  thrown  away  by  natives  of,  70; 
landlords  would  like  trees  removed,  71;]  is  a  new 
market  for  the  produce  of  its  own  silver  mines, 
88;  the  first  accounts  of  the  two  empires  of  Peru 
and  Mexico,  greatly  exaggerated,  88,  191;  im¬ 
proving  state  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  191;  [East 
Indies  takes  the  silver  of,  89;  the  tax  forms  the 
whole  rent  of  Spanish  gold  and  silver  mines,  93; 
slovenly  husbandry  in  British  colonies,  97;  cattle 
killed  for  hide  and  tallow,  100;  paper  currency 
for  small  sums,  139;  interior  commerce  com¬ 
pletely  carried  on  by  paper,  139-40;]  account 
of  the  paper  currency  of  the  British  colonies, 
141;  [state  of  savages,  like  that  of  England  in 
time  of  Julius  Caesar,  149;]  cause  of  the  rapid 
prosperity  of  the  British  colonies  there,  158; 
[carrying  trade  of  goods  to  Europe,  161-2;]  why 
manufactures  for  distant  sale  have  never  been 
established  there,  164;  [artificers  employ  savings 


in  purchase  and  cultivation  of  land;]  its  speedy 
improvement  owing  to  assistance  from  foreign 
capitals,  165;  [no  produce  returns  such  profits  as 
sugar,  167;  rapid  advance  founded  on  agricul¬ 
ture,  179;]  the  purchase  and  improvement  of 
uncultivated  lands,  the  most  profitable  employ¬ 
ment  of  capitals,  179;  [first  inquiry  of  Spaniards 
always  for  gold  and  silver,  182;  discovery  caused 
a  revolution  in  commerce,  185;  great  part  of 
expense  of  last  French  war  laid  out  there,  188;] 
commercial  alterations  produced  by  the  dis¬ 
covery  of,  190-91;  but  two  civilized  nations 
found  on  the  whole  continent,  191;  [European 
commerce  with,  more  advantageous  than  East 
India  trade,  191;  returns  to  trade  with,  infre¬ 
quent,  212-13;  not  more  than  three  million 
people  in  British  North  American  colonies; 
poorer  than  France;]  the  wealth  of  the  North 
American  colonies  increased,  though  the  balance 
of  trade  continued  against  them,  213. 

[Revolt,  214,  215;  long  coastline  and  slender 
British  authority,  215;]  Madeira  wine,  how  intro¬ 
duced  there;  [drawback  on  exports  to,  215-16; 
the  war,  223;  settled  by  different  motives  from 
Greek  and  Roman  colonies,  239;  no  necessity  for, 
240;]  historical  review  of  the  European  settle¬ 
ments  in,  241-43;  of  Spain,  244;  of  Holland,  245- 
46;  of  France,  246;  of  Britain,  246;  ecclesiastical 
government  in  the  several  European  colonies, 
247-48;  fish  a  principal  article  of  trade  from 
North  America  to  Spain,  Portugal  and  the 
Mediterranean,  249;  naval  stores  to  Britain,  250; 
[slave  labour,  253;]  little  credit  due  to  the  policy 
of  Europe  from  the  success  of  the  colonies,  254; 
[folly  and  injustice  presided  over  original  settle¬ 
ment,  254;  Europe  magna  virum  mater,  255;] 
the  discovery  and  colonization  of,  how  far  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  Europe,  255-74;  and  to  America, 
271;  [augmented  European  industry,  255;  an 
advantage  to  countries  which  never  sent  exports 
there,  255-56;  surplus  produce  the  source  of 
advantage  to  Europe,  256;  contributes  no  mili¬ 
tary  force  to  mother  countries;  and  little  rev¬ 
enue;  exclusive  trade  supposed  the  peculiar  ad¬ 
vantage,  256;  rapid  progress  unforeseen,  258; 
monopoly  attracted  capital,  260;  uncertain,  re¬ 
mote  and  irregular  returns  of  trade  to,  260; 
effects  of  stoppage  of  trade,  263;  European  mar¬ 
ket  for  bread  and  meat  extended,  264;  shop-keep¬ 
ing  policy  adopted  towards,  266;  taxation  by 
requisition,  269;  ambition  of  leading  men,  270; 
possible  removal  of  seat  of  government  to,  271; 
discovery  of,  one  of  the  two  greatest  events  in 
history,  271;  mother  countries  have  the  show 
but  not  all  the  advantages,  272-74;]  the  colonies 
in,  governed  by  a  spirit  of  monopoly,  274;  [more 
thriving  than  colonies  in  Africa,  276;  bounty  on 
naval  stores  from,  280;  Britain  sometimes  courts 
and  sometimes  quarrels  with,  280;  bounties,  281;] 
the  interest  of  the  consumer  in  Britain  sacri¬ 
ficed  to  that  of  the  producer,  by  the  system  of 
colonization,  288;  [natives  of,  were  hunters,  301; 


Index 


427 


and  contemptible  opponents,  302;  colonial  militia 
becoming  a  standing  army,  305;  natives  of,  re¬ 
garded  age  as  the  sole  foundation  of  rank,  309- 
10;  poll  taxes,  377;  productions  of,  articles  of 
common  use  in  Great  Britain,  389;]  plan  for 
extending  the  British  system  of  taxation  over 
all  the  provinces  of,  415;  the  question  how  the 
American  could  pay  taxes  without  specie  con¬ 
sidered,  418;  ought  in  justice  to  contribute  to 
discharge  the  public  debt  of  Great  Britain,  ex¬ 
pediency  of  their  union  with  Britain,  420;  the 
British  empire  there,  a  mere  project,  421. 
Amsterdam,  [83,  193,  204,  266,  283,  358;]  agio  of 
the  bank  of,  [how  accounted  for  by  some  people, 
142;]  explained,  204;  occasion  of  its  establish¬ 
ment,  204,  205;  advantages  attending  payments 
there,  205;  rate  demanded  for  keeping  money 
there,  205-6;  this  bank,  the  great  warehouse  of 
Europe  for  bullion,  207;  demands  upon,  how 
made  and  answered,  207;  the  agio  of,  how  kept 
at  a  medium  rate,  208;  the  amount  of  its 
treasure  only  to  be  conjectured,  208. 

[Anderson,  Adam,  quoted,  325.] 

[Anderson,  James,  quoted,  80,  93,  127.] 

[Angola,  240,  276.] 

Annuities  for  terms  of  years,  and  for  lives,  in  the 
British  finances,  historical  account  of,  406-7. 
[Antigua,  258,  419.] 

[Antoninus,  Marcus,  339.] 

[Antwerp,  181,  204.] 

[Aperea  of  Brazil,  241.] 

[’Attoixux,  240.] 

Apothecaries,  the  profit  on  their  drugs  unjustly 
stigmatized  as  exorbitant,  47. 

[Apothecary’s  shop  a  source  of  profit  to  Hamburg, 
357-8.] 

[Apples  imported  from  Flanders  in  seventeenth 
century,  33.] 

[Apprenticeship  statutes  raise  wages  more  perma¬ 
nently  than  they  lower  them,  26.] 

Apprenticeship,  the  nature  and  intention  of  this 
bond  servitude  explained,  143;  the  limitations 
imposed  on  various  trades,  as  to  the  number 
of  apprentices,  51;  the  statute  of  apprenticeship 
in  England,  51-2;  apprenticeships  in  France  and 
Scotland,  52;  general  remarks  on  the  tendency 
and  operation  of  long  apprenticeships,  52-3;  [ob¬ 
structs  free  circulation  of  labour  from  one  em¬ 
ployment  to  another,  58;  means  of  gaining  a 
settlement,  59-60;]  the  statute  of,  ought  to  be 
repealed,  201. 

[Relation  to  privileges  of  graduates,  333.] 
[Arabia,  hospitality  of  chiefs,  176;  histories  full  of 
genealogies,  178-9;] 

[Victorious  when  united,  302;  militia,  305; 
despotic  authority  of  sherifs,  310;  revenue  of 
chiefs  consists  of  profit,  357-8.] 

[Arabia,  Gulf  of,  favourable  to  commerce,  10.] 
[Arabs,  their  manner  of  supporting  war,  301.] 
[Arragon,  241.] 

[Arbuthnot,  Dr.  John,  quoted,  299.] 

[Archipelago,  263.] 


[Argyle,  the  Duke  of,  177.] 

[Aristotle,  munificently  rewarded  by  Philip  and 
Alexander,  58;  Lyceum  assigned  to,  338;  a 
teacher,  355;  quoted,  167,  338.] 

[Arithmetic,  political,  untrustworthy,  230;  of  the 
customs,  two  and  two  make  one,  388  .J 
[Armada,  the  defeat  of,  stopped  Spanish  obstruc¬ 
tion  of  colonization,  245;  less  alarming  than  the 
rupture  with  the  colonies,  262.] 

Army,  [a  disadvantageous  lottery,  46;]  three  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  by  which  a  nation  may  maintain  one 
in  a  distant  country,  187;  standing,  distinction 
between  and  a  militia,  304;  historical  review  of, 
305-6;  the  Macedonian  army,  306;  Carthaginian 
army,  306;  Roman  army,  306-7;  [courageous 
without  active  service,  307;]  is  alone  able  to 
perpetuate  the  civilization  of  a  country,  308; 
is  the  speediest  engine  for  civilizing  a  barbarous 
country,  308;  under  what  circumstances  danger¬ 
ous  to,  and  under  what,  favourable  to  liberty, 
308;  [small,  would  be  sufficient  if  martial  spirit 
prevailed,  342-3;  no  security  to  the  sovereign 
against  a  disaffected  clergy,  348.] 

Artificers,  prohibited  by  law  from  going  to  foreign 
countries,  287;  residing  abroad,  and  not  re¬ 
turning  on  notice,  exposed  to  outlawry,  287; 
[serving  in  an  army  must  be  maintained  by 
the  public,  302-3;]  see  Manufactures. 

[As,  originally  a  pound  of  copper,  12;  reduced  to 
1/24,  12;  always  a  copper  coin,  17;  reduced  at 
end  of  1st  Punic  war,  413-14.] 

[Ascetic  morality  taught  as  moral  philosophy,  336.] 
Asdrubal,  his  army  greatly  improved  by  discipline, 
306;  [the  younger],  how  defeated,  306. 

[Asinius  Celer  gave  large  price  for  a  surmullet,  95.] 
Assembly,  houses  of,  in  the  British  colonies,  the 
constitutional  freedom  of,  shown,  252-3. 

Assiento  contract,  325. 

[Assize  of  bread,  61.] 

[Assize  of  bread  and  ale,  remarks  on  that  statute, 
77-8,  79.] 

[Athens,  large  fees  of  teachers  at,  57-8;  artisans 
were  slaves,  298;  paid  soldiers  of,  303.] 

[Atlantic,  271.] 

[Augmentation  of  coin  defined,  414.] 

Augustus,  emperor,  emancipates  the  slaves  of 
Vedius  Pollio,  for  his  cruelty,  254. 

[Aulnagers,  11.] 

[Austere  morality  favoured  by  the  common  people, 
346.] 

[Austria,  little  assisted  by  the  Danube,  10;  militia 
defeated  by  the  Swiss,  307;  survey  for  land 
tax,  415.] 

[Ayr  Bank,  history  of,  135.] 

[Ayrshire,  rise  of  demand  for  labour  in,  32.] 

[Azores,  240.] 

[Babylon,  167.] 

[Bahamas,  241.] 

[Bakers,  incorporation  of,  in  Scotland,  62.] 

Balance  of  annual  produce  and  consumption  ex- 
[Balance  of  employments,  224.] 


428 


Index 


plained,  213;  may  be  in  favour  of  a  nation, 
when  the  balance  of  trade  is  against  it,  213. 
Balance  of  trade,  [absurd  speculations  concerning, 
163;]  no  certain  criterion  to  determine  on  which 
side  it  turns  between  two  countries,  202;  the 
current  doctrine  of,  on  which  most  regulations 
of  trade  are  founded,  absurd,  209;  if  even,  by 
the  exchange  of  their  native  commodities,  both 
sides  may  be  gainers,  209;  how  the  balance 
would  stand,  if  native  commodities  on  one  side, 
were  paid  with  foreign  commodities  on  the 
other,  209-10;  how  the  balance  stands  when 
commodities  are  purchased  wTith  gold  and  silver, 
210;  the  ruin  of  countries  often  predicted  from 
the  doctrine  of  an  unfavourable  balance  of 
trade,  213. 

[Balboa,  Nugnes  de,  242.] 

[Baltic,  10;  wood  from,  71;  flax  and  hemp,  157; 

tobacco  to,  261;  manufactures  for,  272.] 

Banks  [sometimes  pay  in  sixpences  to  gain  time, 
19,  138;  private,  in  London  allow  no  interest 
but  in  Edinburgh  give  4  per  cent  on  notes,  38; 
Scotch  banking,  126-37;]  great  increase  of  trade 
in  Scotland,  since  the  establishment  of  them  in 
the  principal  towns,  127;  their  usual  course  of 
business,  127;  consequences  of  their  issuing 
too  much  paper,  129;  necessary  caution  for  some 
time  observed  by  them  with  regard  to  giving 
credit  to  their  customers,  130-1;  limits  of  the 
advances  they  may  prudently  make  to  traders, 
131-2;  how  injured  by  the  practice  of  drawing 
and  redrawing  bills,  134;  history  of  the  Ayr 
bank,  135-6;  history  of  the  bank  of  England, 
137-8;  the  nature  and  public  advantage  of 
banks  considered,  138;  bankers  might  carry  on 
their  business  with  less  paper,  139,  140;  effects 
of  the  optional  clauses  in  the  Scots  notes,  140-1; 
origin  of  their  establishment,  205;  bank  money 
explained,  205. 

Of  England,  the  conduct  of,  in  regard  to  the 
coinage,  273;  [those  of  Edinburgh  have  no  ex¬ 
clusive  privilege,  330;]  joint  stock  companies 
why  well  adapted  to  the  trade  of  banking,  330, 
331;  a  doubtful  question  whether  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Great  Britain  is  equal  to  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  the  bank  to  profit,  358. 

Bankers,  the  credit  of  their  notes  how  established, 
124-5;  the  nature  of  the  banking  business  ex¬ 
plained,  125,  127;  the  multiplication  and  com¬ 
petition  of  bankers  under  proper  regulation,  of 
service  to  public  credit. 

[Bank  of  Amsterdam,  see  Amsterdam.] 

[Bank  of  England,  had  to  coin  much  gold,  129, 
130;  discounts,  135;  history,  137-8.] 

[Large  capital,  324;  enables  government  to 
contract  unfunded  debt,  404;  stopped  usual 
business  during  the  recoinage,  404;  advances 
the  proceeds  of  taxes,  405;  taxes  first  mortgaged 
in  perpetuity  for  its  advance,  405;  advances  at 
January  1775,  409.] 

IBank  of  Scotland,  127.] 

[Bank,  the  Royal,  127.] 


[Bank-money,  of  greater  value  than  currency,  204; 
explained,  205.] 

[Bank  notes,  not  below  £10  in  London,  139;  should 
not  be  for  less  than  £5,  139.] 

[Bankruptcy  most  frequent  in  hazardous  trades, 
47;  greatest  and  most  humilating  misfortune, 
148.] 

[Bar,  401.] 

[Barbadoes,  early  prosperity,  258;  all  cultivated, 
419.] 

[Barbary,  173;  322.] 

Baretti,  Mr.,  his  account  of  the  quantity  of 
Portugal  gold  sent  weekly  to  England,  235. 
Barons,  feudal,  their  power  contracted,  by  the 
grant  of  municipal  privileges,  172;  their  extensive 
authority,  176-7;  how  they  lost  their  authority 
over  their  vassals,  177-8;  and  the  power  to  dis¬ 
turb  their  country,  178-9;  [influence  of,  revenue 
spent  on  luxuries,  351.] 

Barter,  the  exchange  of  one  commodity  for  an¬ 
other,  the  propensity  to,  of  extensive  operation, 
and  peculiar  to  man,  6-7;  is  not  sufficient  to 
carry  on  the  mutual  intercourse  of  mankind,  10; 
[ceases  on  the  introduction  of  money,  14;]  see 
Commerce. 

[Basel,  chief  revenue  from  export  duty,  374.] 
Batavia,  causes  of  the  prosperity  of  the  Dutch 
settlement  there,  276. 

[Bath  Road  inn,  fallen  fortune  of,  150.] 

[Bavaria,  Danube  no  use  to,  10.] 

[Bayonne  treated  as  foreign  to  France,  398.] 
[Bazinghen,  Abot  de,  quoted,  237.] 

[Beaumont,  J.  L.  Moreau  de,  see  Memoires.] 
Beaver  skins,  review  of  the  policy  used  in  the 
trade  for,  286;  [subject  to  export  duty,  388.] 
[Becket  used  clean  hay,  176.] 

Beef,  cheaper  now  in  London,  than  in  the  reign 
of  James  I,  65;  compared  with  the  prices  of 
wheat  at  the  corresponding  times,  65,  66;  [com¬ 
pared  with  pork  in  France  and  England,  98-9.] 
[Beggar,  alone  depends  on  benevolence,  7;  once 
synonymous  with  scholar,  57.] 

Benefices,  ecclesiastical,  the  tenure  of,  why  rendered 
secure,  348-9;  the  power  of  collating  to,  how 
taken  from  the  Pope,  in  England  and  France, 
351;  general  equality  of,  among  the  Presbyterians, 
354;  good  effects  of  this  equality,  354. 

[Benefit  of  clergy,  350.] 

[Benevolence,  does  not  give  us  our  dinner,  7.1 
Bengal,  to  what  circumstance  its  early  improve¬ 
ment  in  agriculture  and  manufactures  was  owing, 
9-10;  present  miserable  state  of  the  country,  31; 
remarks  on  the  high  rates  of  interest  there,  39-40; 
[profits  eat  up  rent  and  leave  only  subsistence 
for  wages,  40,  41;  piece  goods  exports,  89;  ratio 
of  gold  to  silver,  91-2.] 

[Improper  regulations  turned  dearth  into 
famine,  226;]  oppressive  conduct  of  the  English 
there  to  suit  their  trade  in  opium,  277;  [revenue 
from  land  rent,  277;]  why  more  remarkable  for 
the  exportation  of  manufactures  than  of  grain, 
298;  [ancient  land  tax,  367-8;  good  roads,  367.] 


Index 


429 


[Bengal,  Gulf  of,  favourable  to  commerce,  10.] 
[Benguela,  240,  276.] 

Berne,  [farmers  equal  to  the  English,  170;]  brief 
history  of  the  republic  of,  172. 

Establishment  of  the  reformation  there,  352; 
application  of  the  revenue  of  the  Catholic  clergy, 
356;  derives  a  revenue  from  the  interest  of  its 
treasure,  359;  [tax  on  alienation,  378;  only  state 
which  has  a  treasure,  403.] 

[Bernier,  Francois,  quoted,  318.] 

[Bettering  one’s  condition,  universal  desire  of,  147- 
8,  150,  232,  291.] 

[Bible  commonly  read  in  Latin,  334-5.] 

Bills  of  exchange,  [discounting  of,  chief  means  of 
issuing  bank  notes,  127;]  punctuality  in  the 
payment  of,  how  secured,  133;  the  pernicious 
practice  of  drawing  and  redrawing  explained, 
133;  the  arts  made  use  of  to  glimpse  this  mu¬ 
tual  traffic  in  bills,  134. 

[Billets  d’etat ,  sometimes  at  60  or  70  per  cent 
discounts,  404.] 

[Birch,  Dr.  Thomas,  quoted,  65.] 

[Birmingham  produces  articles  of  fashion  and 
fancy,  49;  manufactures  not  within  statute  of 
apprenticeship,  51-2;  uses  £50,000  in  gold  and 
silver  annually,  90,  91;  reduction  in  price  of 
goods,  107;  manufactures  grew  up  naturally, 
175;  hardware  exchanged  for  wine,  396.] 

Birth,  superiority  of,  how  it  confers  respect  and 
authority,  310. 

Bishops,  the  ancient  mode  of  electing  them,  and 
how  altered,  349,  351. 

[Blackstone,  William,  quoted,  15,  167.] 

[Blanc,  Cape,  322  ] 

Body,  natural,  and  political,  analogy  between,  294. 
Bohemia,  [serfs  still  exist  in,  167;  survey  and  valu¬ 
ation,  366;]  account  of  the  tax  there  on  the 
industry  of  artificers,  381. 

[Bombay,  328.] 

[Bordeaux,  see  Bourdeaux.] 

[Borlase,  quoted,  73.] 

[Born,  Ralph  de,  his  feast,  77.] 

[Borough,  see  Burghs.] 

[Boston,  high-paid  labour  cheaper  than  slave,  34; 

less  populous  than  Mexico  or  Lima,  245.] 
[Bouchaud,  quoted,  378.] 

[Bounder,  proprietor  of  Cornish  tin  mine,  74.] 
Bounties,  why  given  in  commerce,  192. 

On  exportation,  the  policy  of  granting  them, 
considered,  216;  on  the  exportation  of  corn,  216- 
17;  this  bounty  imposes  two  taxes  on  the  people, 
217;  evil  tendency  of  this  bounty,  220;  the 
bounty  only  beneficial  to  the  exporter  and  im¬ 
porter,  220;  motives  of  the  country  gentleman 
in  granting  the  bounty,  220;  a  trade  which 
requires  a  bounty,  necessarily  a  losing  trade, 
221;  [bounties  on  production,  221;]  tonnage 
bounties  to  the  fisheries  considered,  221-2;  ac¬ 
count  of  the  white-herring  fishery,  223;  remarks 
on  other  bounties,  223;  a  review  of  the  principles 
on  which  they  are  generally  granted,  280;  those 
granted  on  American  produce  founded  on  mis¬ 


taken  policy,  281;  how  they  affect  the  consumer, 
288;  [public  teachers  receive  a  sort  of,  340; 
bounty  on  corn  worse  than  a  tax  on  necessaries, 
385;  on  articles  formerly  charged  with  export 
duties,  388;  give  rise  to  frauds,  388-9;  abolition 
of,  proposed,  390;  deducted  from  customs  rev¬ 
enue,  396.] 

Bounty  on  the  exportation  of  corn,  the  tendency 
of  this  measure  examined,  84;  [85-6;  and  see 
Bounties.] 

[Bourbon,  the  house  of,  united  by  British  ac¬ 
quisition  of  Gibraltar  and  Minorca,  323.] 
Bourdeaux,  why  a  town  of  great  trade,  145; 
[memoir  of  the  parliament  of,  as  to  French 
debt,  407.] 

[Brady,  Robert,  quoted,  171.] 

[Braganza,  family  of,  245.] 

Brazil  [aborigines  had  neither  arts  nor  agriculture, 
88;  gold  of,  160,  185,  210,  235,  243.] 

Grew  to  be  a  powerful  colony  under  neglect, 
245;  the  Dutch  invaders  expelled  by  the  Portu¬ 
guese  colonists,  245;  computed  number  of  in¬ 
habitants  there,  245;  [Portuguese  settled  in,  245;] 
the  trade  of  the  principal  provinces  oppressed 
by  the  Portuguese,  248;  [Portuguese  Jews 
banished  thither,  254.] 

Bread,  its  relative  value  with  butcher’s  meat  com¬ 
pared,  64,  65;  [tax  on,  in  Holland,  386;  levied 
by  licence,  387.] 

[Breslau,  tax  on  the  Bishop’s  land,  366.] 

Brewery,  reasons  for  transferring  the  taxes  on,  to 
the  malt,  392;  [for  private  use,  untaxed,  395.] 
Bridges,  how  to  be  erected  and  maintained,  315; 

[originally  maintained  by  six  days’  labour,  359.] 
[Bristol  and  the  African  Company,  322.] 

Britain,  Great,  evidences  that  labour  is  sufficiently 
paid  for  there,  31;  the  price  of  provisions  nearly 
the  same  in  most  places,  31;  great  variations  in 
the  price  of  labour,  31,  32;  vegetables  imported 
from  Flanders  in  the  last  century,  33;  historical 
account  of  the  alterations  interest  of  money  has 
undergone,  37,  38;  double  interest  deemed  a 
reasonable  mercantile  profit,  41;  in  what  respects 
the  carrying  trade  is  advantageous  to,  160;  ap¬ 
pears  to  enjoy  more  of  the  carrying  trade  of 
Europe,  than  it  really  has,  161;  is  the  only 
country  of  Europe  in  which  the  obligation  of 
purveyance  is  abolished,  169;  its  funds  for  the 
support  of  foreign  wars  inquired  into,  188;  why 
never  likely  to  be  much  affected  by  the  free 
importation  of  Irish  cattle,  195-6;  nor  salt  pro¬ 
visions,  196;  could  be  little  affected  by  the 
importation  of  foreign  corn,  196;  the  policy  of 
the  commercial  restraints  on  the  trade  with 
France  examined,  202;  the  trade  with  France 
might  be  more  advantageous  to  each  country 
than  that  with  any  other,  212. 

Why  one  of  the  richest  countries  in  Europe, 
while  Spain  and  Portugal  are  among  the  poorest, 
233;  review  of  her  American  colonies,  246-8;  the 
trade  of  her  colonies,  how  regulated,  249;  dis¬ 
tinction  between  enumerated  and  non-enumer- 


430 


Index 


ated  commodities,  explained,  249;  restrains 
manufactures  in  America,  250;  indulgences 
granted  to  the  colonies,  251;  constitutional  free¬ 
dom  of  her  colony  government,  252;  the  sugar 
colonies  of;  worse  governed  than  those  of  France, 
253;  disadvantages  resulting  from  retaining  the 
exclusive  trade  of  tobacco  with  Maryland  and 
Virginia,  257;  the  navigation  act  has  increased 
the  colony  trade,  at  the  expense  of  many  other 
branches  of  foreign  trade,  257-8;  the  advantage 
of  the  colony  trade  estimated,  260;  a  gradual 
relaxation  of  the  exclusive  trade,  recommended, 
262;  events  which  have  concurred  to  prevent 
the  ill  effects  of  the  loss  of  the  colony  trade, 
272-3;  the  natural  good  effects  of  the  colony 
trade,  more  than  counterbalance  the  bad  effects 
of  the  monopoly,  263;  to  maintain  a  monopoly, 
the  principal  end  of  the  dominion  assumed  over 
the  colonies,  206-7;  has  derived  nothing  but 
loss  from  this  dominion,  267;  is  perhaps  the 
only  state  which  has  only  increased  its  expenses 
by  extending  its  empire,  269;  the  constitution 
of,  would  have  been  completed  by  admitting  of 
American  representation,  271;  review  of  the 
administration  of  the  East  India  Company, 
277-9;  the  interest  of  the  consumer  sacrificed 
to  that  of  the  producer  in  raising  an  empire 
in  America,  288;  the  annual  revenue  of,  com¬ 
pared  with  its  annual  rents  and  interests  of 
capital  stock,  360;  the  land-tax  of,  considered, 
363;  tithes,  367;  window  tax,  371-2;  stamp 
duties,  379,  380;  poll  taxes  in  the  reign  of 
William  III,  382;  the  uniformity  of  taxation  in, 
favourable  to  internal  trade,  398;  the  system  of 
taxation  in,  compared  with  that  in  France,  400; 
account  of  the  unfunded  debt  of,  404;  funded 
debt,  404;  aggregate,  and  general  funds,  405; 
sinking  fund,  406;  annuities  for  terms  of  years 
and  for  lives,  406;  perpetual  annuities  the  best 
transferable  stock,  407;  the  reduction  of  the 
public  debts  during  peace,  bears  no  proportion 
to  their  accumulation  during  war,  409;  the 
trade  with  the  tobacco  colonies,  how  carried  on, 
without  the  intervention  of  specie,  418-19;  the 
trade  with  the  sugar  colonies  explained,  418-19; 
Ireland  and  America  ought  in  justice  to  con¬ 
tribute  toward  the  discharge  of  her  public  debts, 
420;  how  the  territorial  acquisitions  of  the  East 
India  company  might  be  rendered  a  source  of 
revenue,  421;  if  no  such  assistance  can  be  ob¬ 
tained,  her  only  resource  pointed  out,  421. 
[British  Empire,  States-general  of  the,  415;  colo¬ 
nies  provinces  of,  421 .] 

[British  Linen  Company,  331.] 

[Brittany,  taille  on  lands  held  by  ignoble  tenure, 
375.] 

[Bruges,  commerce  of,  181.] 

[Brutus,  lent  money  at  48  per  cent,  40.] 

[Buenos  Ayres,  price  of  oxen  at,  64,  81,  100.] 
[Buffon,  G.  L.  L.,  quoted,  98,  255.] 

Bullion,  the  money  of  the  great  mercantile  re¬ 
public,  188-9;  see  Gold  and  Silver. 


[Burcester  (now  Bicester),  price  of  hides  at,  101.] 
Burghs,  free,  the  origin  of,  171;  to  what  circum¬ 
stances  they  owed  their  corporate  jurisdictions, 
171-2;  why  admitted  to  send  representatives  to 
parliament,  172-3;  are  allowed  to  protect  refu¬ 
gees  from  the  country,  173. 

[Burgundy,  vineyards,  67;  militia  defeated  by  the 
Swiss,  307.] 

[Burman,  quoted,  378.] 

Burn,  Dr.,  his  observations  on  the  laws  relating 
to  the  settlements  of  the  poor,  [quoted,  32,] 
59,  60,  [61.] 

Butcher,  brutal  and  odious  business,  42. 

Butcher’s  meat  [progress  of  price  of,  64;  an  insig¬ 
nificant  part  of  the  labourers’  subsistence,  81;] 
nowhere  a  necessary  of  life,  386. 

[Buttons,  division  of  labour  in  making,  5.] 

[Byelaw,  to  limit  competition,  can  be  enacted  by 
a  corporation,  56;  of  boroughs,  171,  172.] 
[Byron,  Hon.  John,  quoted,  81.] 

[Cabbages,  half  the  price  they  were  forty  years 
ago,  33.] 

[Cadiz,  imports  of  bullion  to,  90-1;  exorbitant 
profits  and  profusion  at,  266,  272;  competition 
with  South  Sea  Company,  326.] 

[Caesar’s  army  destroyed  the  republic,  308.] 
[Calcraft’s  account,  410.] 

[Calcutta,  land  carriage  to,  9;  ratio  of  gold  and 
silver  at,  92;  council,  279,  328.] 

Calvinists,  origin  of  that  sect,  353;  their  principles 
of  church  government,  353. 

Cameron,  Mr.,  of  Lochiel,  exercised  within  thirty 
years  since,  a  criminal  jurisdiction  over  his  own 
tenants,  177. 

[Campus  Martius,  68,  338.] 

Canada,  the  French  colony  there,  long  under  the 
government  of  an  exclusive  company,  246;  but 
improved  speedily  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
company,  246. 

Canals,  navigable,  the  advantages  of,  63;  how  to 
be  made  and  maintained,  315;  that  of  Langue¬ 
doc,  the  support  of,  how  secured,  316;  may  be 
successfully  managed  by  joint  stock  companies, 
330-1. 

[Canary  islands,  240.] 

[Candles,  taxes  on,  33;  an  instrument  of  trade, 
385.] 

[Cannae,  battle  of,  304.] 

Cantillon,  Mr.  [Richard,]  remarks  on  his  account 
of  the  earnings  of  the  labouring  poor,  29. 
[Canton,  silver  will  buy  more  commodities  at, 
than  in  London,  16;  poverty  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of,  30.] 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  [discovery  of  passage  by, 
191,  240,  255,  271;]  causes  of  the  prosperity  of 
the  Dutch  settlement  there,  276;  [mentioned, 
322.] 

[Cape  Coast  Castle,  323.] 

[Capet,  Robert,  352.] 

Capital,  [manufacturer’s,  21,  22;  society’s.  39-40; 
in  a  trade,  46;  of  grocer,  47;  of  merchants,  68; 


Index 


employed  in  a  mine,  72;  |  in  trade,  explained, 
and  how  employed,  118;  distinguished  into  cir¬ 
culating  and  fixed  capitals,  118-19;  characteristic 
of  fixed  capitals,  119;  the  several  kinds  of  fixed 
capitals  specified,  120;  characteristic  of  circu¬ 
lating  capitals,  and  the  several  kinds  of,  120; 
fixed  capitals  supported  by  those  which  are 
circulating,  120;  circulating  capitals  how  sup¬ 
ported,  120;  intention  of  a  fixed  capital,  122; 
the  expense  of  maintaining  the  fixed  and  cir¬ 
culating  capitals  illustrated,  122;  money,  as  an 
article  of  circulating  capital,  considered,  122-3; 
money,  no  measure  of  capital,  124;  what  quan¬ 
tity  of  industry  any  capital  can  employ,  126; 
capitals,  how  far  they  may  be  extended  by  pa¬ 
per  credit,  131-2;  must  always  be  replaced  with 
profit  by  the  annual  produce  of  land  and  labour, 
143;  the  proportion  between  capital  and  reve¬ 
nue,  regulates  the  proportion  between  industry 
and  idleness,  146;  how  it  is  increased  or  dimin¬ 
ished,  146;  national  evidences  of  the  increase  of, 
148-9;  in  what  instances  private  expenses  con¬ 
tribute  to  enlarge  the  national  capital,  150;  the 
increase  of,  reduces  profits  by  competition,  153; 
the  different  ways  of  employing  a  capital,  155; 
how  replaced  to  the  different  classes  of  traders, 
156;  that  employed  in  agriculture  puts  into  mo¬ 
tion  a  greater  quantity  of  productive  labour, 
than  any  equal  capital  employed  in  manufac¬ 
tures,  157;  that  of  a  manufacture  should  reside 
within  the  country,  157-8;  the  operation  of  capi¬ 
tals  employed  in  agriculture,  manufactures,  and 
foreign  trade,  compared,  158;  the  prosperity  of 
a  country  depends  on  the  due  proportion  of  its 
capital  applied  to  these  three  grand  objects, 
159;  different  returns  of  capitals  employed  in 
foreign  trade,  159;  is  rather  employed  on  agri¬ 
culture  than  in  trade  and  manufactures,  on 
equal  terms,  163-4;  is  rather  employed  in  manu¬ 
factures  than  in  foreign  trade,  164-5;  the  nat¬ 
ural  progress  of  the  employment  of,  165;  acquired 
by  trade,  is  very  precarious  until  realized  by  the 
cultivation  and  improvement  of  land,  180-1;  the 
employment  of,  in  the  different  species  of  trade, 
how  determined,  193;  [industry  proportioned  to, 
194.] 

[Distributed  among  inferior  ranks  annually, 
391;  and  land,  the  two  original  sources  of  reve¬ 
nue,  411.] 

[Capital  values,  taxes  on,  377-80.] 

Capitation  taxes,  the  nature  of,  considered,  382; 
in  England,  382;  in  France,  382;  [and  see  Poll 
taxes.] 

[Carlisle,  exchange  between  London  and,  141.] 
[Carnatic,  327.] 

[Carneades,  58.] 

[Carolina,  planters  both  farmers  and  landlords,  69; 

plantation  of,  258.] 

[Carreri,  Gemelli,  see  under  Gemelli.] 

Carriage,  land  and  water,  compared,  8-9;  water 
carriage  contributes  to  improve  arts  and  indus¬ 
try,  in  all  countries  where  it  can  be  used,  19, 


431 

63,  90;  [absence  of  cheap,  causes  settlement  of 
finer  manufactures,  174.J 

Carriage,  Land,  how  facilitated  and  reduced  in 
price,  by  public  works,  315. 

[Carriage  tax,  317.] 

[Carron,  32.] 

[Carrots  reduced  in  price,  33.] 

Carrying  trade,  [defined,  125;]  the  nature  and 
operation  of,  examined,  160;  is  the  symptom, 
but  not  the  cause,  of  national  wealth,  and  hence 
points  out  the  two  richest  countries  in  Europe, 
161;  trades  may  appear  to  be  carrying  trades, 
which  are  not  so,  161;  the  disadvantages  of,  to 
individuals,  193;  the  Dutch,  how  excluded  from 
being  the  carriers  to  Groat  Britain,  197;  draw¬ 
backs  of  duties  originally  granted  for  the  en¬ 
couragement  of,  215. 

[Carthage,  mariners  sailed  beyond  Gibraltar,  9; 

the  fate  of  great  historical  revolution,  306.] 
[Carthagena,  307,  326.] 

Carthaginian  army,  its  superiority  over  the  Ro¬ 
man  army,  accounted  for,  307. 

[Cash  account  at  Scotch  banks  explained,  127-8.] 
[Castile,  241-2.] 

[Castracani,  Castruccio,  drove  out  manufactures 
from  Lucca,  174.] 

[Casuistry,  taught  as  moral  philosophy,  337.] 
[Catholics  established  Maryland,  254.] 

[Cato,  advised  good  feeding  of  cattle,  65;  on  com¬ 
munication  of  agricultural  knowledge,  197.] 
Cattle,  [at  one  time  used  as  money,  10;]  and  corn, 
their  value  compared,  in  the  different  stages  of 
agriculture,  64;  the  price  of,  reduced  by  artifi¬ 
cial  grasses,  65;  to  what  height  the  price  of 
cattle  may  rise  in  an  improving  country,  96; 
the  raising  a  stock  of,  necessary  for  the  supply 
of  manure  to  farms,  96;  cattle  must  bear  a 
good  price  to  be  well  fed,  96;  the  price  of,  rises 
in  Scotland  in  consequence  of  the  union  with 
England,  97;  great  multiplication  of  European 
cattle  in  America.  97;  are  killed  in  some  coun¬ 
tries,  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  hides  and 
tallow,  100;  the  market  for  these  articles  more 
extensive  than  for  the  carcase,  100;  this  market 
sometimes  brought  nearer  home  by  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  manufactures,  100;  how  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  cultivation  raises  the  price  of  animal 
food,  106;  [labouring,  are  a  fixed  capital,  118; 
importation  prohibited,  180;]  is  perhaps  the  only 
commodity  more  expensive  to  transport  by  sea 
than  by  land,  195-6;  Great  Britain  never  likely 
to  be  much  affected  by  the  free  importation  of 
Irish  cattle,  195-6. 

[Ceded  Islands,  249,  410,  419.] 

[Celebes,  276.] 

[Celtes  cultivated  music  and  dancing,  338.] 
Certificates,  parish,  the  laws  relating  to,  with  ob¬ 
servations  on  them,  60. 

[Chance  of  gain  overhauled,  45.] 

[Charles  V,  remark  on  the  abundance  of  France 
and  poverty  of  Spain,  88;  befriended  the  Pope, 
352.] 


Index 


432 

[Charles  VI  surveyed  Milan,  366] 

[Charles  VIII,  expedition  to  Naples,  180.] 

[Charles  XII  of  Sweden,  190.] 

[Charlevoix,  Francois,  quoted,  246.] 

[Chastity,  in  the  liberal  morality,  346.] 

[Chatham,  Lord,  his  account,  410.] 

Child,  Sir  Josiah,  [quoted,  320;]  his  observation  on 
trading  companies,  321-2. 

Children  [value  of,  in  North  America,  30,  243;] 
riches  unfavourable  to  the  production,  and  ex¬ 
treme  poverty  to  the  raising,  of  them,  33;  the 
mortality  still  greater  among  those  maintained 
by  charity,  33-4. 

[Chili,  takes  Spanish  iron,  73;  rent  of  gold  mines, 
74;  price  of  horses  in,  81;  growth  of  towns  of, 
89;  cattle  killed  for  sake  of  hide  and  tallow,  100; 
conquest  of,  242,  254.] 

China,  to  what  the  early  improvement  in  arts  and 
industry  there  was  owing,  9-10;  concurrent  testi¬ 
monies  of  the  misery  of  the  lower  ranks  of  the 
Chinese,  30;  [one  of  the  richest  countries  in  the 
world,  30;]  is  not  however  a  declining  country, 
34;  [stationary  population,  34;  long  stationary 
and  as  rich  as  possible,  40;]  high  rate  of  inter¬ 
est  of  money  there,  40;  [country  labourers 
higher  paid  than  artificers,  etc.,  55;  price  of 
silver  affected  by  price  in  Peru,  73;  much  richer 
than  any  part  of  Europe,  82,  104-5;]  the  price 
of  labour  there,  lower  than  in  the  greater  part 
of  Europe,  [82-3,]  89-90;  [trade  with,  89;]  great 
state  assumed  by  the  grandees,  89;  [not  much 
inferior  to  Europe  in  manufacturing,  90;]  silver 
the  most  profitable  article  to  send  thither,  90; 
the  proportional  value  of  gold  to  silver,  how 
rated  there,  92;  [quantity  of  precious  metals 
affected  by  the  abundance  of  American  mines, 
103-4;]  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  much  higher 
there  than  in  any  part  of  Europe,  104-5;  [won¬ 
derful  accounts  of  wealth  and  cultivation,  158; 
never  excelled  in  foreign  commerce,  158;  wealthy 
without  carrying  on  its  own  foreign  trade,  165; 
without  mines  richer  and  better  off  than  Mexico 
or  Peru,  191;  replacement  of  capital  employed, 
209;  acquired  wealth  by  agriculture  and  interior 
commerce,  212.] 

[Importance  of  the  Cape  and  Batavia  to  the 
trade  with  Europe,  276;]  agriculture  favoured 
there,  beyond  manufactures,  296;  foreign  trade 
not  favoured  there,  296-7;  extension  of  the 
home-market,  296;  great  attention  paid  to  the 
roads  there,  318;  [land  tax  the  principal  source 
of  revenue,  318;]  in  what  the  principal  revenue 
of  the  sovereign  consists,  367;  [consequent  good¬ 
ness  of  roads  and  canals,  367-8;]  the  revenue  of, 
partly  raised  in  kind,  368;  [silk,  390.] 
[Chocolate,  a  luxury  of  the  poorest  Spaniards,  384; 
duty  on,  391.] 

[Choiseul,  Duke  of,  managed  the  parliament  of 
Paris,  349.] 

[Christianity  established  by  law,  334.] 

[Christiern  II,  Reformation  in  Sweden  assisted 
by  his  tyranny,  352.] 


Church,  [of  England  not  successful  in  resisting 
enthusiasts,  344;  loyal,  353;  drains  the  univer¬ 
sities,  355;]  the  richer  the  church,  the  poorer 
the  state,  355;  amount  of  the  revenue  of  the 
church  of  Scotland,  356;  the  revenue  of  the 
church  heavier  taxed  in  Prussia,  than  lay  pro¬ 
prietors,  366;  the  nature  and  effect  of  tithes 
considered,  367. 

[Cibao,  241.] 

[Cicero,  quoted,  40,  65,  386.] 

[Cipango,  241.] 

Circulation,  the  dangerous  practice  of  raising 
money,  by,  explained,  133;  in  traffic,  the  two 
different  branches  of,  considered,  139. 

Cities,  circumstances  which  contributed  to  their 
opulence,  123;  those  of  Italy  the  first  that  rose 
to  consequence,  173;  the  commerce  and  manu¬ 
factures  of,  have  occasioned  the  improvement 
and  cultivation  of  the  country,  179. 

Clergy,  a  supply  of,  provided  for,  by  public  and 
private  foundations  for  their  education,  56;  cu¬ 
rates  worse  paid  than  many  mechanics,  56. 

[Of  North  American  colonies,  not  numerous, 
and  maintained  by  voluntary  contributions,  248; 
greatest  engrossers  of  land  in  colonies  of  Spain, 
Portugal  and  France,  248;]  of  an  established 
religion,  why  unsuccessful  against  the  teachers 
of  a  new  religion,  344;  why  they  persecute  their 
adversaries,  344;  the  zeal  of  the  inferior  clergy 
of  the  church  of  Rome,  how  kept  alive,  344; 
utility  of  ecclesiastical  establishments,  345;  how 
connected  with  the  civil  magistrate,  345;  unsafe 
for  the  civil  magistrate  to  differ  with  them,  348; 
must  be  managed  without  violence,  348-9;  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  one  great  army  cantoned 
over  Europe,  349;  their  power  similar  to  that 
of  the  temporal  barons,  during  the  feudal  monk¬ 
ish  ages,  349;  how  the  power  of  the  Romish 
clergy  declined,  351;  evils  attending  allowing 
parishes  to  elect  their  own  ministers,  353. 

Clothing,  more  plentiful  than  food,  in  uncultivated 
countries,  70;  the  materials  for,  the  first  articles 
rude  nations  have  to  offer,  70. 

[Coach,  a  man  not  rich  because  he  keeps  a,  32.] 

[Coach  and  six  not  effectually  demanded  by  a 
very  poor  man,  24.] 

[Coach-tax  better  levied  as  an  annuity  than  as 
a  lump  sum,  386.] 

Coal,  must  generally  be  cheaper  than  wood  to 
gain  the  preference  for  fuel,  72;  the  price  of, 
how  reduced,  72-3;  the  exportation  of,  sub¬ 
jected  to  a  duty  higher  than  the  prime  cost  of, 
at  the  pit,  287;  the  cheapest  of  all  fuel,  385; 
[manufactures  confined  to  coal  countries  in 
Great  Britain,  385;]  the  tax  on  [seaborne],  ab¬ 
surdly  regulated,  385. 

Coal  mines,  their  different  degrees  of  fertility,  71- 
2;  when  fertile,  are  sometimes  unprofitable  by 
situation,  72,  73;  the  proportion  of  rent  gen¬ 
erally  paid  for,  73;  the  machinery  necessary  to, 
expensive,  118. 

Coal  trade  from  Newcastle  to  London,  employs 


Index 


433 


more  shipping  than  all  the  other  carrying  trade 
of  England,  160-1. 

Cochin  China,  remarks  on  the  principal  articles 
of  cultivation  there,  68. 

[Cockfighting  has  ruined  many,  402.] 

[Cod  used  as  money,  10.] 

Coin,  stamped,  the  origin,  and  peculiar  advan¬ 
tages  of,  in  commerce,  11;  the  different  species 
of,  in  different  ages  and  countries,  11-12;  causes 
of  the  alterations  in  the  value  of,  12,  14,  15; 
how  the  standard  coin  of  different  nations  came 
to  be  of  different  metals,  16-17;  a  reform  in  the 
English  coinage  suggested,  19;  [gold  and  silver 
had  the  qualities  which  gave  them  value  before 
they  were  coined,  75;  silver,  consequences  at¬ 
tending  the  debasement  of,  84-5;  [amount  of 
Scotch,  93;  amount  of  British,  188;]  coinage  of 
France  and  Britain,  examined,  203-4. 

Why  coin  is  privately  melted  down,  236, 
237;  the  mint  chiefly  employed  to  keep  up  the 
quantity  thus  diminished,  236;  a  duty  to  pay 
the  coinage  would  preserve  money  from  being 
melted  or  counterfeited,  237;  standard  of  the 
gold  coin  in  France,  237;  how  a  seignorage  on 
coin  would  operate,  237;  a  tax  upon  coinage  is 
advanced  by  everybody,  and  finally  paid  by  no¬ 
body,  238;  a  revenue  lost,  by  government  defray¬ 
ing  the  expense  of  coinage,  238;  amount  of  the 
annual  coinage  before  the  late  reformation  of 
the  gold  coin,  238;  the  law  for  the  encourage¬ 
ment  of,  founded  on  prejudice,  239;  consequences 
of  raising  the  denomination  of,  as  an  expedient 
to  facilitate  payment  of  public  debts,  413,  adul¬ 
teration  of,  414. 

Colbert,  M.,  the  policy  of  his  commercial  regula¬ 
tions  disputed,  199,  289;  his  character,  288-9. 

Colleges,  cause  of  the  depreciation  of  their  money 
rents  inquired  into,  15;  the  endowments  of,  from 
whence  they  generally  arise,  331;  whether  they 
have  in  general  answered  the  purposes  of  their 
institution,  331;  these  endowments  have  dimin¬ 
ished  the  necessity  of  application  in  the  teach¬ 
ers,  332;  the  privileges  of  graduates  by  residence, 
and  charitable  foundation  of  scholarships,  in¬ 
jurious  to  collegiate  education,  333;  discipline 
of,  333-4. 

Colliers  and  coal-heavers,  their  high  earnings  ac¬ 
counted  for,  44. 

[Coloni  Partiarii  or  Metayers,  167-8.] 

[Colonia  signifies  a  plantation,  240.] 

Colonies,  new,  the  natural  progress  of,  39;  [restric¬ 
tions  on  hatters’  apprentices  in  the  English,  51; 
planters  in  British,  usually  farmers  as  well  as 
landlords,  69;  paper  currency  of  British,  141; 
slave  cultivation  in  British,  1 67-8;]  modern,  the 
commercial  advantages  derived  from  them,  192. 

Ancient,  on  what  principles  founded,  239; 
ancient  Grecian  colonies  not  retained  under  sub¬ 
jection  to  the  parent  states,  239;  [Roman  col¬ 
onies,  239-40;]  distinction  between  the  Roman 
and  Greek  colonies,  240;  circumstances  that  led 
to  the  establishment  of  European  colonies  in  the 


East  Indies  and  America,  240;  the  East  Indies 
discovered  by  Vasco  de  Gama,  240-1;  the  West 
Indies  discovered  by  Columbus,  241;  gold  the 
object  of  the  first  Spanish  enterprises  there,  242; 
and  of  those  of  all  other  European  nations,  243; 
causes  of  the  prosperity  of  new  colonies,  243 
[-255];  rapid  progress  of  the  ancient  Greek  col¬ 
onies,  244;  the  Roman  colonies  slow  in  improve¬ 
ment,  244;  the  remoteness  of  America  and  the 
West  Indies,  greatly  in  favour  of  the  European 
colonies  there,  244;  review  of  the  British  Ameri¬ 
can  colonies,  246;  expense  of  the  civil  establish¬ 
ments  in  British  America,  247;  ecclesiastical 
government,  247-8;  general  view  of  the  re¬ 
straints  laid  upon  the  trade  of  the  European 
colonies,  248;  the  trade  of  the  British  colonies, 
how  regulated,  249;  the  different  kinds  of  non- 
enumerated  commodities  specified,  249;  enu¬ 
merated  commodities,  250;  restraints  upon  their 
manufactures,  250;  indulgences  granted  them  by 
Britain,  2.52;  were  free  in  every  other  respect 
except  as  to  their  foreign  trade,  252;  little  credit 
due  to  the  policy  of  Europe  from  the  success 
of  the  colonies,  254;  throve  by  the  disorder  and 
injustice  of  the  European  governments,  254; 
have  contributed  to  augment  the  industry  of  all 
the  countries  of  Europe,  255;  exclusive  privileges 
of  trade,  a  dead  weight  upon  all  these  exertions 
both  in  Europe  and  America,  256;  have  in  gen¬ 
eral  been  a  source  of  expense  instead  of  revenue 
to  their  mother  countries,  256;  have  only  bene¬ 
fited  their  mother  countries  by  the  exclusive 
trade  carried  on  with  them,  256;  consequences  of 
the  navigation  act,  257;  the  advantage  of  the 
colony  trade  to  Britain  estimated,  260;  a  gradual 
relaxation  of  the  exclusive  commerce  recom¬ 
mended,  262;  events  which  have  prevented 
Britain  from  sensibly  feeling  the  loss  of  the 
colony  trade,  262-3;  the  effects  of  the  colony 
trade,  and  the  monopoly  of  that  trade,  distin¬ 
guished,  263-4;  to  maintain  a  monopoly,  the 
principal  end  of  the  dominion  Great  Britain  as¬ 
sumes  over  the  colonies,  266-7;  amount  of  the 
ordinary  peace  establishment  of,  267;  the  two 
late  wars  Britain  sustained,  colony  wars,  to 
support  a  monopoly,  281;  two  modes  by  which 
they  might  be  taxed,  268;  their  assemblies  not 
likely  to  tax  them,  268;  taxes  by  parliamentary 
requisition,  as  little  likely  to  be  raised,  268-9; 
representatives  of,  might  be  admitted  into  the 
British  parliament  with  good  effect,  269-70; 
answer  to  objections  against  American  repre¬ 
sentation,  271;  the  interest  of  the  consumer  in 
Britain,  sacrificed  to  that  of  the  producer,  in 
raising  an  empire  in  America,  288;  [should 
contribute  to  the  revenue  or  be  cut  off,  421.] 

Columbus,  the  motive  that  led  to  his  discovery 
of  America,  240;  why  he  gave  the  names 
of  Indies  to  the  islands  he  discovered,  240; 
his  triumphal  exhibition  of  their  productions, 
241-2. 

Columela,  his  instruction  for  fencing  a  kitchen- 


Index 


434 

garden,  66;  advises  the  planting  of  vineyards, 
66-7;  [quoted,  98,  167.] 

Combination  among  masters  eaiser  than  among 
workmen  and  not  prohibited  [by  law,  28.] 

Commerce,  the  different  common  standards  or 
mediums  made  use  of  to  facilitate  the  exchange 
of  commodities,  in  the  early  stages  of,  10;  ori¬ 
gin  of  money,  10;  definition  of  the  term  value ,  12. 

Treaties  of,  though  advantageous  to  the  mer¬ 
chants  and  manufacturers  of  the  favoured  coun¬ 
try,  necessarily  disadvantageous  to  those  of  the 
favouring  country,  233-4;  translation  of  the 
commercial  treaty  between  England  and  Portu¬ 
gal  concluded  in  1703  by  Mr.  Methuen,  234; 
restraints  laid  upon  the  European  colonies  in 
America,  247;  the  present  splendour  of  the  mer¬ 
cantile  system,  owing  to  the  discovery  and 
colonization  of  America,  271-2;  review  of  the 
plan  by  which  it  proposes  to  enrich  a  country, 
279  [-288];  the  interest  of  the  consumer  con¬ 
stantly  sacrificed  to  that  of  the  producer,  288; 
see  Agriculture,  Banks,  Capital,  Manufactures, 
Merchant,  Money,  Stock,  Trade,  etc. 

Commodities,  the  barter  of,  insufficient  for  the 
mutual  supply  of  the  wants  of  mankind,  10; 
metals  found  to  be  the  best  medium  to  facilitate 
the  exchange  of,  10;  labour  an  invariable  stand¬ 
ard  for  the  value  of,  14;  real  and  nominal  prices 
of,  distinguished,  14;  the  component  parts  of 
the  prices  of,  explained  and  illustrated,  21;  the 
natural,  and  market  prices  of,  distinguished,  and 
how  regulated,  23;  the  ordinary  proportion  be¬ 
tween  the  value  of  any  two  commodities,  not 
necessarily  the  same  as  between  the  quantities 
of  them  commonly  in  the  market,  92;  the  price 
of  rude  produce,  how  affected  by  the  advance 
of  wealth  and  improvement,  94;  foreign,  are 
primarily  purchased  with  the  produce  of  domes¬ 
tic  industry,  159;  when  advantageously  exported 
in  a  rude  state,  even  by  a  foreign  capital, 
164-5;  the  quantity  of,  in  every  country,  nat¬ 
urally  regulated  by  the  demand,  185;  wealth 
in  goods,  and  in  money,  compared,  186;  exporta¬ 
tion  of,  to  a  proper  market,  always  attended 
with  more  profit,  than  that  of  gold  and  silver, 
188;  the  natural  advantages  of  countries  in 
particular  productions,  sometimes  not  possible 
to  struggle  against,  195. 

[Commons,  the  House  of,  not  a  very  equal  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  people,  252;  untrustworthy  re¬ 
ports  of  debates  in,  322.] 

Company,  [government  of  an  exclusive,  the  worst 
of  all  governments,  246;  most  effectual  expedient 
for  stopping  growth  of  a  colony,  248;]  mercan¬ 
tile,  incapable  of  consulting  their  true  interests 
when  they  become  sovereigns,  277;  an  exclusive 
company,  a  public  nuisance,  279;  trading,  how 
first  formed,  319-20;  regulated,  and  joint  stock 
companies,  distinguished,  320;  regulated  com¬ 
panies  in  Great  Britain,  specified,  320;  are  use¬ 
less,  320;  the  constant  view  of  such  companies, 
321;  forts  and  garrisons,  why  never  maintained 


by  regulated  companies,  321;  the  nature  of  joint 
stock  companies  explained,  323,  329;  [seldom 
successful  without  an  exclusive  privilege,  324; 
account  of  several  companies,  324-9;]  a  monop¬ 
oly  necessary  to  enable  a  joint  stock  company 
to  carry  on  a  foreign  trade,  329;  [Morellet’s  list 
of  fifty-five  failures,  330;]  what  kind  of  joint 
stock  companies  need  no  exclusive  privileges, 
330;  joint  stock  companies,  why  well  adapted 
to  the  trade  of  banking,  330;  the  trade  of  in¬ 
surance  may  be  carried  on  successfully  by  a 
[joint]  stock  company,  330;  also  inland  naviga¬ 
tions,  and  the  supply  of  water  to  a  great  city, 
330;  ill  success  of  joint  stock  companies  in  other 
undertakings,  331. 

Competition,  the  effect  of,  in  the  purchase  of  com¬ 
modities,  24;  among  the  venders,  24,  37;  [re¬ 
straint  of,  causes  inequalities  of  wages  and  prof¬ 
its,  51,  56;  the  only  cause  of  good  management, 
63;  of  shopkeepers,  cannot  hurt  the  producer 
or  the  consumer,  156.] 

[Compiegne,  145.] 

[Conceit,  men’s  overweening,  often  noticed,  45.] 
Concordat,  in  France,  its  object,  351. 

[Condom,  375.] 

[Congo,  240,  276.] 

Congress,  American,  its  strength  owing  to  the  im¬ 
portant  characters  it  confers  on  the  members 
of  it,  270. 

[Connecticut,  expense  of,  247;  governor  elected  by 
the  assembly,  253.] 

[Considerations  on  the  Trade  and  Finances  of 
Great  Britain ,  quoted,  409.] 

[Constantine,  307.] 

[Constantinople,  348.] 

[Consumable  goods,  taxes  on,  finally  paid  by  the 
consumer  at  convenient  time,  362;  paid  indiffer¬ 
ently  from  the  three  kinds  of  revenue,  382;  in¬ 
cidence  of,  etc.,  383-401.] 

[Consumption  the  sole  end  of  production,  287.] 
[Controle,  the,  French  stamp  duties  on  registra¬ 
tion,  380.] 

Conversion  price,  in  the  payment  of  rents  in  Scot¬ 
land,  explained,  79. 

[Copartnery,  difference  between  it  and  a  joint- 
stock  company,  323.] 

[Copenhagen,  145.] 

Copper,  [Romans  used  unstamped  bars  of,  as 
money,  11;]  the  standard  measure  of  value 
among  the  ancient  Romans,  17;  is  no  legal 
tender  in  England,  17;  [rated  above  its  value  in 
the  English  coinage,  18;  not  legal  tender  for 
more  than  a  shilling,  19.] 

[Copyholders,  375.] 

[Copyright,  a  monopoly  granted  to  an  author. 
329.] 

Cori,  the  largest  quadruped  on  the  island  of  St. 
Domingo,  described,  241. 

Corn,  the  raising  of,  in  different  countries,  not  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  same  degree  of  rivalship  as  manu¬ 
factures,  4;  is  the  best  standard  for  reserved 
rents,  15;  the  price  of,  how  regulated  [varies 


Index 


more  from  year  to  year  than  silver,  15;]  the 
price  of,  the  best  standard  for  comparing  the 
different  values  of  particular  commodities  at 
different  times  and  places,  16;  the  three  com¬ 
ponent  parts  in  the  price  of,  21;  is  dearer  in 
Scotland  than  in  England,  31;  tcorn-field  pro¬ 
duces  more  food  than  pasture  of  equal  extent, 
64;]  its  value  compared  with  that  of  butchers 
meat,  in  the  different  periods  of  agriculture, 
64,  66;  compared  with  silver,  76-7;  circum¬ 
stances  in  a  historical  view  of  the  prices  of 
corn,  that  have  misled  writers  in  treating  of 
the  value  of  silver  at  different  periods,  79;  [at 
all  stages  of  improvement  costs  the  price  of 
nearly  equal  quantities  of  labour,  81;]  is  always 
a  more  accurate  measure  of  value,  than  any 
other  commodity,  81;  why  dearer  in  great  towns 
than  in  the  country,  83;  why  dearer  in  some  rich 
commercial  countries,  as  Holland  and  Genoa, 
83;  rose  in  its  nominal  price  on  the  discovery 
of  the  American  mines,  83;  and  in  consequence 
of  the  civil  war  under  King  Charles  I,  84;  and 
in  consequence  of  the  bounty  on  the  exporta¬ 
tion  of,  84;  tendency  of  the  bounty  examined, 
85-6;  [recent  high  price  due  to  bad  seasons,  86;] 
chronological  tables  of  the  prices  of,  111-16;  the 
least  profitable  article  of  growth  in  the  British 
West  Indian  colonies,  167;  the  restraints  for¬ 
merly  laid  upon  the  trade  of,  unfavourable  to  the 
cultivation  of  land,  170;  [bounty  on  exportation 
and  duties  on  importation,  180;]  the  free  im¬ 
portation  of,  could  little  affect  the  farmers  of 
Great  Britain,  196. 

The  policy  of  the  bounty  on  the  exportation 
of,  examined,  216;  the  reduction  in  the  price  of 
corn,  not  produced  by  the  bounty,  217;  tillage 
not  encouraged  by  the  bounty,  217-18;  the 
money  price  of,  regulates  that  of  all  other  house- 
made  commodities,  218;  illustration,  219;  ill  ef¬ 
fects  of  the  bounty,  220;  motives  of  the  country 
gentlemen  in  granting  the  bounty,  220;  the  nat¬ 
ural  value  of  corn  not  to  be  altered  by  alter¬ 
ing  the  money  price,  220-1;  the  four  several 
branches  of  the  corn  trade  specified,  224;  the 
inland  dealer,  for  his  own  interest  will  not  raise 
the  price  of  corn  higher  than  the  scarcity  of 
the  season  requires,  224;  corn  a  commodity  the 
least  liable  to  be  monopolized,  225;  the  inland 
dealers  in  corn  too  numerous  and  dispersed  to 
form  a  general  combination,  225;  dearths  never 
artificial,  but  when  government  interferes  im¬ 
properly  to  prevent  them,  225;  the  freedom  of 
the  corn  trade,  the  best  security  against  a 
famine,  225-6;  old  English  statute  to  prohibit  the 
corn  trade,  226;  consequences  of  farmers  being 
forced  to  become  corn  dealers,  227;  the  use  of 
corn  dealers  to  the  farmers,  228;  the  prohibitory 
statue  against  the  corn  trade  softened,  228-9; 
but  still  under  the  influence  of  popular  prej¬ 
udices,  228-9;  the  average  quantity  of  corn  im¬ 
ported  and  exported,  compared  with  the  con¬ 
sumption  and  annual  produce,  229;  tendency  of 


435 

a  free  importation  of  corn,  229-30;  the  home 
market  the  most  important  one  for  corn,  230; 
duties  payable  on  the  importation  of  grain,  be¬ 
fore  13th  of  George  III,  230,  note,  the  impro¬ 
priety  of  the  statute  22nd  of  Charles  II,  for  reg¬ 
ulating  the  importation  of  wheat,  confessed  by 
the  suspension  of  its  execution  by  temporary 
statutes,  230-1;  the  home-market  indirectly  sup¬ 
plied  by  the  exportation  of  corn,  230-1;  how  a 
liberal  system  of  free  exportation  and  importa¬ 
tion,  among  all  nations,  would  operate,  231;  the 
laws  concerning  corn,  similar  to  those  relating  to 
religion,  232;  the  home-market  supplied  by  the 
carrying  trade,  232;  the  system  of  laws  connected 
with  the  establishment  of  the  bounty,  undeserv¬ 
ing  of  praise,  232;  remarks  on  the  statute  13th  of 
George  III,  233;  [restrictions  on  French  corn 
trade  removed,  296;  bounty  on  corn  worse  than 
a  tax  on  necessaries,  385.] 

[Corn,  Essay  on  the  Legislation  and  Commerce  of, 
quoted,  400.] 

[Cornwall,  73-4.] 

Corporations,  tendency  of  the  exclusive  privileges 
of,  on  trade,  26,  51;  by  what  authority  erected, 
53;  the  advantages  corporations  derive  from  the 
surrounding  country,  53;  check  the  operations 
of  competition,  55;  their  internal  regulations, 
combinations  against  the  public,  55;  are  injuri¬ 
ous,  even  to  the  members  of  them,  56;  the  laws 
of,  obstruct  the  free  circulation  of  labour,  from 
one  employment  to  another,  58-9;  the  origin  of, 
171;  are  exempted  by  their  privileges  from  the 
power  of  the  feudal  barons,  172;  the  European 
East  India  Companies  disadvantageous  to  the 
eastern  commerce,  191;  the  exclusive  privileges 
of  corporations  ought  to  be  destroyed,  201. 
[Cortez,  242.] 

[Corvee,  a  principal  instrument  of  tyranny,  319.] 
[Cossacks,  treasures  of  their  chief,  190.] 

[Cost,  real,  defined,  23.] 

Cottagers,  in  Scotland,  their  situation  described, 
50;  are  cheap  manufacturers  of  stockings,  50; 
the  diminution  of,  in  England,  considered,  99. 
[Cotton,  most  valuable  vegetable  production  of  the 
West  Indies,  241;  bales  of,  exhibited  by  Colum¬ 
bus,  241.] 

[Cotton  manufacture  not  practised  in  Europe  in 
1492,  241.] 

[Country,  the  charms  of,  attract  capital,  164.] 
[Country  gentlemen,  imposed  on  by  the  argu¬ 
ments  of  merchants,  184;  imitated  manufac¬ 
turers,  197.] 

[Courts,  see  Justice.] 

Coward,  character  of,  343. 

Credit,  [of  a  person  does  not  depend  on  his  trade, 
44;  might  supply  the  place  of  money,  185;]  see 
Paper-money. 

[Creoles,  245.] 

[Cromwell,  258,  308.] 

[Crown  lands  should  be  sold,  361  .J 
[Crusades  to  the  Holy  Land,  favourable  to  the 
revival  of  commerce-  173.] 


436 


Index 


[Cruttenden  East  Indiaman.  327.] 

[Cuba,  73,  254.] 

[Cura^oa,  246.] 

[Curate,  130.] 

Currency  of  states,  remarks  on,  204. 

[Custom-house  books  untrustworthy,  202.] 

Customs  the  motives  and  tendency  of  drawbacks 
from  the  duties  of,  213;  the  revenue  of  the 
customs  increased,  by  drawbacks,  215;  occasion 
of  first  imposing  the  duties  of,  319;  origin  of 
those  duties,  387;  three  ancient  branches  of, 
387;  drawbacks  of,  388;  are  regulated  according 
to  the  mercantile  system,  388;  frauds  practised 
to  obtain  drawbacks  and  bounties,  388;  the 
duties  of,  in  many  instances,  uncertain,  389; 
improvement  of,  suggested,  389;  computation 
of  the  expense  of  collecting  them,  396. 

[Cyder,  tax  on,  393.] 

[Cyprus,  40.] 

[Daedalian  wings  of  paper  money,  138.] 

Dairy,  the  business  of,  generally  carried  on  as  a 
save-all,  99;  circumstances  which  impede  or  pro¬ 
mote  the  attention  to  it,  99;  English  and  Scotch 
dairies,  99. 

[Daniel,  Gabriel,  quoted,  172.] 

[Dantzig,  83,  203.] 

Danube,  the  navigation  of  that  river  why  of  little 
use  to  the  interior  parts  of  the  country  from 
whence  it  flows,  10. 

[Darien,  241.] 

[Dauphine,  375.] 

Davenant,  Dr.,  [quoted,  32;]  his  objections  to  the 
transferring  the  duties  on  beer  to  the  malt,  con¬ 
sidered,  393-4. 

[Dear  years  enable  masters  to  make  better  bar¬ 
gains  with  servants,  35.] 

Dearths,  never  caused  by  combinations  among 
the  dealers  in  corn,  but  by  some  general  calam¬ 
ity,  225;  the  free  exercise  of  the  corn  trade  the 
best  palliative  against  the  inconveniences  of  a 
dearth,  228;  corn  dealers  the  best  friends  to  the 
people  at  such  seasons,  229. 

[Debasement  of  coinage  practised  everywhere,  12.] 
Debts,  public,  [effect  of,  on  annual  produce,  to  be 
treated  in  fifth  book,  2;  paid  by  debasing  the 
coin,  12.] 

[Not  the  cause  of  British  prosperity,  232;  in¬ 
terest  on,  not  subject  to  the  land  tax,  360;]  the 
origin  of,  traced,  402;  are  accelerated  by  the 
expenses  attending  war,  403;  account  of  the 
unfunded  debt  of  Great  Britain,  404;  the  funded 
debt,  404;  aggregate  and  general  funds,  405; 
sinking  fund,  406,  408;  annuities  for  terms  of 
years,  and  for  lives,  406;  the  reduction  of,  dur¬ 
ing  peace,  bears  no  proportion  to  its  accumula¬ 
tion  during  war,  409;  the  plea  of  the  interest 
being  no  burden  to  the  nation,  considered,  411; 
are  seldom  fairly  paid  when  accumulated  to  a 
certain  degree,  413;  might  easily  be  discharged, 
by  extending  the  British  system  of  taxation 
over  all  the  provinces  of  the  empire,  415;  Ire¬ 


land  and  America  ought  to  contribute  to  dis¬ 
charge  the  public  debts  of  Britain,  420. 

Decker,  Sir  Matthew,  [quoted,  220,  258;]  his  ob¬ 
servation  on '  the  accumulation  of  taxes,  385; 
his  proposal  for  transferring  all  taxes  to  the 
consumer,  by  annual  payments,  considered,  386; 
[quoted,  416.] 

[Defence  much  more  important  than  opulence, 
198.] 

[De  Lange,  quoted,  296.] 

Demand,  [difference  between  absolute  and  effec¬ 
tive,  24;  regulates  multiplication  of  human  spe¬ 
cies,  34;]  though  the  increase  of,  may  at  first 
raise  the  price  of  goods,  it  never  fails  to  reduce 
it  afterward,  327. 

[Democritus,  quoted,  66.] 

[Denisart,  quoted,  38.] 

Denmark  [has  advanced  considerably  in  agricul¬ 
ture  and  manufactures,  88;  East  India  trade 
began  in  18th  century,  89;  James  I’s  bed  came 
from,  150;  East  India  trade  under  an  exclusive 
company,  191.] 

[No  gold,  silver  or  diamond  mines  in  colonies 
of,  243;  attempts  at  settlement  in  America  in 
17th  century,  245;]  account  of  the  settlements 
of,  in  the  West  Indies,  246;  [stunted  colonies 
with  rule  of  exclusive  company,  248;  without 
an  exclusive  company  would  never  have  sent 
to  ship  to  East  Indies,  274;  would  have  lost 
nothing  thereby,  275;  excluded  from  Eastland 
Company’s  monopoly,  320;  Reformation  on,  352; 
levies  transit  duty  on  the  Sound,  395.] 

[Depenses  annuelles,’  ‘foncieres’  and  ‘primitives' 
distinguished,  289.] 

[Dercyllidas,  quoted,  190.] 

[Desert  (Sahara),  240.] 

Diamonds,  the  mines  of,  not  always  worth  work¬ 
ing  for,  75;  [lower  in  price  in  India  than  in 
Europe,  89.] 

[Didactron  of  Isocrates,  58.] 

[Dignity  of  the  sovereign,  expense  of,  356.] 
[Diocletian,  307.] 

[Diogenes  sent  on  an  embassy,  58.] 

[Diomede,  his  armour  cost  nine  oxen,  10.] 

[Dion  Cassius,  quoted,  378.] 

[Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus,  quoted,  339.] 
[Directors  of  companies  inefficient  managers,  324.] 
Discipline,  the  great  importance  of,  in  war,  305; 
instances,  305,  etc. 

[Diseases,  peculiar,  of  different  trades,  35.] 
[Dissenters,  learned  but  not  so  popular  as  meth- 
odists,  344.] 

[Distribution,  subject  of  part  of  first  book,  1,  3; 
prices  and  produce  distributed  between  wages, 
profit  and  rent,  22,  109;  of  wealth  more  un¬ 
equal  in  France  than  America,  212.] 

Diversions,  public,  their  political  use,  347. 
[Division  of  labour,  3-10;  gives  occasion  to  ex¬ 
change  and  money,  10,  12;  in  the  original  state 
of  things  would  have  augmented  wages,  27;  is 
promoted  by  the  interest  of  owners  of  stocks, 
37;  in  metal  and  woollen  manufactures,  107; 


Index 


relation  to  exchange,  117;  advantageous  to  all 
the  persons  employed,  163;  promoted  by  foreign 
trade,  190,  191;  in  the  trade  of  war  must  be 
introduced  by  the  state,  303-4;  encouraged  by 
increase  of  demand,  327.] 

[Dobbs,  Mr.,  quoted,  325.] 

[Dog  never  exchanges,  7.] 

[Domaine,  source  of  French  revenue,  400.] 
Domingo,  [St.  mines  of,  73;]  mistaken  by  Colum¬ 
bus  for  a  part  of  the  East  Indies,  240-41;  its 
principal  productions,  241;  the  natives  soon 
stripped  of  all  their  gold,  242;  historical  view 
of  the  French  colony  there,  246. 

[Dominica  a  new  field  for  speculation,  419.] 
[Dominicans  revived  languishing  faith,  344.] 
Doomsday  book,  [mentions  annual  poll  taxes  paid 
by  towns,  171;]  the  intention  of  that  compila¬ 
tion,  366. 

Dorians,  ancient,  where  the  colonies  of,  settled, 
239. 

[Douglass,  Dr.,  quoted,  68,  141.] 

[Draco,  282.] 

Dramatic  exhibitions,  the  political  use  of,  347. 
Drawbacks,  in  commerce,  explained  192. 

The  motives  to,  and  tendency  of,  explained, 
213-14;  on  wines,  currants  and  wrought  silks, 
214;  on  tobacco  and  sugar,  214;  on  wines,  par¬ 
ticularly  considered,  214-15;  were  originally 
granted  to  encourage  the  carrying  trade,  215; 
the  revenue  of  the  customs  increased  by  them, 
215;  drawbacks  allowed  in  favour  of  the  col¬ 
onies,  252;  [given  on  certain  articles  formerly 
subject  to  export  duties,  388;  give  rise  to  fraud, 
388-9;  which  might  be  prevented,  390;  deduc¬ 
tions  from  customs  revenue,  396.] 

Drugs,  regulations  of  their  importation  and  ex¬ 
portation,  286. 

[Drummond,  Mr.,  his  notes  for  guineas,  17.] 
Drunkenness,  the  motive  to  this  vice  inquired  into, 
211;  condoned  by  liberal  morality,  346. 

[Du  Cange,  quoted,  414.] 

[Dumfries,  141.] 

[Dunfermline,  150.] 

[Dunkirk  treated  as  foreign  by  France,  399.] 
[Dupleix,  327.] 

Dutch,  their  settlements  in  America  slow  in  im¬ 
provement  because  under  the  government  of 
an  exclusive  company,  246;  their  East  India 
trade  checked  by  monopoly,  275;  measures 
taken  by,  to  secure  the  monopoly  of  the  spice 
trade,  276;  see  Holland. 

[Du  Tot,  quoted,  137.] 

[Du  Verney,  quoted,  137,  404.] 

East  India,  [native  governments  did  not  encourage 
foreign  commerce,  but  derived  opulence  from 
inland  navigation,  10;  shells  used  as  money,  10;] 
representation  of  the  miserable  state  of  the 
provinces  of,  under  the  English  government 
there,  31;  [great  fortunes  easily  acquired  there, 
40;  market  for  American  silver,  89;]  historical 
view  of  the  European  trade  with  those  coun- 


437 

tries,  89;  rice  countries  more  populous  and  rich 
than  corn  countries,  89;  the  real  price  of  labour 
lower  in  China  and  Indostan,  than  in  the 
greater  part  of  Europe,  89-90;  gold  and  silver 
the  most  profitable  commodities  to  carry  thith¬ 
er,  90;  the  proportional  value  of  gold  to 
silver,  how  rated  there,  92;  [trade  of,  to  Europe, 
a  roundabout  trade  of  consumption,  161;  ex¬ 
pense  of  last  French  war  laid  out  there,  188, 
267;  richer  and  better  cultivated  than  Mexico 
and  Peru,  191;  commerce  with,  less  advantage  to 
Europe  than  that  with  America.  191;]  great  ex¬ 
tension  of  foreign  commerce  by  the  discovery 
of  a  passage  to  round  the  cape  of  Good  Hope, 
191;  historical  review  of  the  intercourse  with, 
191;  effect  of  the  annual  exportation  of  silver 
co,  from  Europe,  191;  [re-exportation  of  goods 
from,  brings  back  gold  and  silver,  202;  goods 
mentioned,  210,  240,  241.] 

[Drawbacks  on  exportation  of  goods  from,  to 
America,  215,  252;  Columbus  tried  to  find  a 
western  passage  to,  240,  243;  origin  of  the 
name,  241;  northwest  passage  to,  243;  Dutch 
settlements  under  an  exclusive  company,  246; 
advantages  to  Europe  of  the  Cape  passage,  255, 

274- 9;  its  discovery  one  of  the  two  most  im¬ 
portant  events  in  history,  271;  countries  which 
trade  directly  with,  enjoy  the  show,  272;  mer¬ 
cantile  regulations  concerning  trade  with,  de¬ 
range  the  natural  distribution  of  stock  more 
than  others,  274;]  the  trade  with,  chiefly  car¬ 
ried  on  by  exclusive  companies,  274;  tendency 
of  their  monopolies,  274;  [poor  countries  should 
not  trade  with,  274-6;  no  colonies  there  thriv¬ 
ing  like  the  American,  276;  the  Cape  the  half¬ 
way  house,  276;  see  Indostan,  and  East  India 
Company.] 

East  India  Company,  [oppresses  and  domineers,  31; 
servants’  profits  eat  up  rent,  41;  import  tea 
worth  £1,500,000,  89;  tea  dearer  than  that  of 
Dutch  and  Gottenburg  companies,  185;  envy  of 
its  privileges  and  consequent  arguments  as  to 
the  trade  carried  on,  191.] 

[Restraints  on  the  rice  trade  imposed  by, 
caused  a  famine,  226;]  a  monopoly  against  the 
very  nation  in  which  it  is  erected,  274;  the 
operation  of  such  a  company  in  a  poor,  and  in 
a  rich  country,  compared,  274;  that  country 
whose  capital  is  not  large  enough  to  tend  to 
such  a  distant  trade  ought  not  to  engage  in  it, 

275- 76;  the  mercantile  habits  of  trading  com¬ 
panies  render  them  incapable  of  consulting  their 
true  interests  when  they  become  sovereigns,  277; 
[their  interest  as  sovereigns  that  European  im¬ 
ports  should  be  sold  cheap  and  Indian  exports 
dear,  and  the  reverse  as  merchants,  278;]  the 
genius  of  the  administration  of  the  English  com¬ 
pany,  278;  subordinate  practices  of  their  agents 
and  clerks,  278;  the  bad  conduct  of  agents  in 
India  owing  to  their  situations,  279;  such  an  ex¬ 
clusive  company  a  nuisance  in  every  respect, 
279;  [originally  established  to  maintain  forts. 


438 


Index 


319;  exclusive  privilege,  324;]  brief  review  of 
their  history,  326[-9];  their  privileges  invaded, 
326;  a  rival  company  formed,  326;  the  two  com¬ 
panies  united,  327;  are  infected  by  the  spirit  of 
war  and  conquest,  327;  agreements  between  the 
company  and  government,  327;  interference  of 
government  in  their  territorial  administration, 
328;  and  in  the  direction  at  home,  328;  why 
unfil  to  govern  a  great  empire,  328  9;  [may 
trade  after  expiration  of  exclusive  privilege,  330;] 
their  sovereign  and  commercial  characters,  in¬ 
compatible,  358;  [Bengal  land  tax  before  their 
domination,  367,  368;  a  modus  converted  into  a 
payment  in  kind,  368;  its  advance  to  govern¬ 
ment,  405,  409-10;]  how  the  territorial  acquisi¬ 
tions  of,  might  be  rendered  a  source  of  revenue, 
421. 

[East  India  Company,  the  Dutch,  its  tea  cheaper 
than  that  of  the  English  Company,  185;  mali¬ 
ciously  injures  the  English,  326.] 

[East  India  Company,  the  French,  established  to 
maintain  forts,  319.] 

[East  India  Company,  the  Gottenburg,  its  tea 
cheaper  than  that  of  the  English  Company,  185.] 
[Eastland  Company,  history  of,  320.] 

[Ecclesiastical  State,  taxes  on  bread,  386;  sinking 
fund  created  from  savings  in  interest,  408.] 
[Economical  Table,  293.] 

[Economists,  sect  of,  in  France,  their  political 
tenets,  288-96;  recommended  a  tax  on  rent  vary¬ 
ing  with  the  rent,  364.] 

[Economy  of  the  rich,  disorders  usually  estab¬ 
lished  in,  34.] 

Edinburgh  [land  and  water  traffic  from  to  London, 
8-9;  tenpence  a  day  the  price  of  labour,  31; 
bankers  pay  4  per  cent,  38;  wages  only  half 
what  they  are  in  London,  46;  lodgings  much 
dearer  than  in  London,  50;  new  town  contains 
no  Scotch  timber,  72;  two  public  banks  founded, 
127;  owing  to  cash  accounts,  merchants  have  an 
advantage  over  those  of  London,  127-8;  drawing 
and  redrawing  on  London,  133;]  its  present  share 
of  trade  owing  to  the  removal  of  the  court  and 
parliament,  145;  [trade  with  England,  159.] 
Education,  the  principal  cause  of  the  various 
talents  observable  in  different  men,  7;  [for  a 
particular  employment  much  be  replaced  from 
earnings,  142-3.] 

[Institutions  for,  315,  331-43;]  those  parts  of, 
for  which  there  are  no  public  institutions,  gener¬ 
ally  the  best  taught,  334;  in  universities,  a  view 
of,  337;  of  travelling  for,  337;  course  of,  in  the 
republics  of  ancient  Greece,  337-8;  in  ancient 
Rome,  338;  the  ancient  teachers  superior  to  those 
in  modern  times,  339;  public  institutions  in¬ 
jurious  to  good  education,  340;  inquiry  how  far 
the  public  ought  to  attend  to  the  education  of 
the  people,  340;  the  different  opportunities  of 
education  in  the  different  ranks  of  the  people, 
341;  the  advantages  of  a  proper  attention  in  the 
state  to  the  education  of  the  people,  343;  [bene¬ 
ficial  to  the  whole  society  and  therefore  not  un¬ 


justly  defrayed  by  general  contribution,  357.] 
[Edward  VI,  coin  adulterated  under,  414.] 

Egypt,  the  first  country  in  which  agriculture  and 
manufactures  appear  to  have  been  cultivated 
[owing  to  the  Nile],  9;  [religion  bound  every 
man  to  follow  the  occupation  of  his  father,  26; 
wealth  of  ancient,  158,  165,  173;  disliked  the  sea, 
158;  neglected  foreign  commerce,  212.] 

Agriculture  was  greatly  favoured  there,  297; 
[caste  system,  297;  great  works  on  the  Nile,  297;] 
was  long  the  granary  of  the  Roman  empire,  298; 
[ancient  revenue  chiefly  land-tax,  298;  two  lan¬ 
guages,  334;  land-tax  anciently  20  per  cent,  367 
good  roads,  298.] 

Ejectment,  action  of,  in  England,  when  invented 
and  its  operation,  168. 

[Elboeuf,  36.] 

[Eldorado,  242.] 

[Elections,  Countries  of,  in  France,  376.] 

[Elizabeth,  Queen,  first  to  wear  stockings  in  Eng¬ 
land,  108.] 

[Empires  all  mortal,  but  aim  at  immortality,  363.] 
Employments,  the  advantages  and  disadvantages 
of  the  different  kinds  of,  ii)  the  same  neighbour¬ 
hood,  continually  tend  to  equality,  42;  the  dif¬ 
ferences  or  inequalities  among,  specified,  42;  the 
constancy  or  precariousness  of,  influences  the 
rate  of  wages,  43. 

[Emulation,  good  effects  of,  even  in  mean  profes¬ 
sions,  332;  always  excited  by  competition,  339.] 
[Enclosure,  where  scarce,  may  be  specially  profit¬ 
able,  65.] 

[Endowments,  bad  effect  of,  on  education,  331-40.] 
England,  the  dates  of  its  several  species  of  coinage, 
silver,  gold,  and  copper,  17;  why  labour  is 
cheaper  there,  than  in  North  America,  29;  the 
rate  of  population  in  both  countries  compared, 
29-30;  the  produce  and  labour  of,  have  gradu¬ 
ally  increased  from  the  earliest  accounts  in  his¬ 
tory,  while  writers  are  representing  the  country 
as  rapidly  declining,  149;  enumeration  of  ob¬ 
structions  and  calamities  which  the  prosperity 
of  the  country  has  surmounted,  149;  circum¬ 
stances  that  favoured  commerce  and  manufac¬ 
tures,  179-80;  law  in  favour  of  agriculture,  180; 
why  formerly  unable  to  carry  on  foreign  wars 
of  long  duration,  189;  why  the  commerce  with 
France  has  been  subjected  to  so  many  dis¬ 
couragements,  212;  foundation  of  the  enmity  be¬ 
tween  these  countries,  213. 

Translation  of  the  commercial  treaty  con¬ 
cluded  in  1703,  with  Portugal,  234;  inquiry  into 
the  value  of  the  trade  with  Portugal,  234-5; 
might  procure  gold  without  the  Portugal  trade, 
235;  consequences  of  securing  the  colony  trade 
by  the  navigation  act,  257. 

[English  Copper  Company  of  London,  331.] 
Engrossing,  see  Forestalling. 

[Engrossing  of  land  in  ancient  times,  165;  in  col¬ 
onies,  247.] 

Entails,  the  law  of,  prevents  the  division  of  land 
by  alienation.  165;  intention  of,  166. 


Index 


[Enumerated  commodities,  215,  248-9.] 

[Ephesus,  244.] 

[Ephron,  11.] 

lEpices,  the  chief  part  of  French  judges’  emolu¬ 
ment,  313;  distributed  in  proportion  to  their 
diligence,  313.] 

[Epictetus,  a  teacher,  355.] 

[Epicurus  possessed  gardens,  339.] 

[Equality  of  taxation  defined,  361.] 

[Equipage,  71,  151;  American  colonies  a  showy,  of 
the  British  Empire,  421.] 

[Equity  demands  that  labourers  should  be  toler¬ 
ably  well  fed,  etc.,  33.] 

[Esau,  178.] 

[Eton  College  prices  of  corn,  80,  84,  86.] 

Europe,  general  review  of  the  several  nations  of, 
as  to  their  improvement  since  the  discovery  of 
America,  88;  the  two  richest  countries  in,  enjoy 
the  greatest  shares  of  the  carrying  trade,  161. 

Inquiry  into  the  advantages  derived  by,  from 
the  discovery  and  colonization  of  America,  255; 
the  particular  advantages  derived  by  each  col¬ 
onizing  country,  256;  and  by  others  which  have 
no  colonies,  272. 

[Eustatia  Island,  537.] 

[Euxine,  10.] 

Exchange,  the  operation  of,  in  the  commercial 
intercourse  of  different  countries,  183;  the  course 
of,  an  uncertain  criterion  of  the  balance  of  trade 
between  two  countries,  202;  [explanation  of  ‘at 
par.’  ‘in  favour  of’  and  ‘against,’  203;]  is  gen¬ 
erally  in  favour  of  those  countries  which  pay  in 
bank  money,  against  those  which  pay  in  com¬ 
mon  currency,  208-9. 

[Exchequer  bills  a  part  of  the  unfunded  debt,  404.] 
Excise,  the  principle  objects  of,  387;  the  duties  of, 
more  clear  and  distinct  than  the  customs,  389; 
affects  only  a  few  articles  of  the  most  general 
consumption,  389;  [embarrasses  the  smuggler 
more  than  customs,  390;]  the  excise  scheme  of 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  defended,  391;  the  excise 
upon  home  made  fermented  and  spirituous  liq¬ 
uors,  the  most  productive,  391;  expense  of  levy¬ 
ing  excise  duties  computed,  396;  the  laws  of, 
more  vexatious  than  those  of  the  customs.  397; 
[would  require  alteration  if  extended  to  the 
colonies,  416.] 

[Executioner  best  paid  of  all  common  trades,  42.] 
Exercise,  military,  alteration  in,  produced  by  the 
invention  of  fire  arms,  304. 

Expenses,  private,  how  they  influence  the  national 
capital,  150;  the  advantages  of  bestowing  them 
on  durable  commodities,  150-1. 

[Expilly,  Jean  Joseph,  quoted,  400.] 

Export  trade,  the  principles  of,  explained,  161; 
when  rude  produce  may  be  advantageously  ex¬ 
ported,  even  by  a  foreign  capital,  165;  why  en¬ 
couraged  by  European  nations,  191;  by  what 
means  promoted,  192. 

The  motives  to,  and  tendency  of,  drawbacks 
of  duties,  213-14;  the  grant  of  bounties  on,  con¬ 
sidered,  216;  exportation  of  the  materials  of 


439 

manufactures,  review  of  the  restraints  and  pro¬ 
hibitions  of,  281-2. 

Faith,  article  of,  how  regulated  by  the  civil 
magistrate,  348. 

Families,  seldom  remain  on  large  estates  for  many 
generations  in  commercial  countries,  179. 

Famine,  see  Dearth. 

Farmers  of  land,  the  several  articles  that  compose 
their  gain,  distinguished,  22;  require  more  knowl¬ 
edge  and  experience  than  the  generality  of  manu¬ 
facturers,  55;  in  what  their  capitals  consist,  118; 
the  great  quantity  of  productive  labour  put  in¬ 
to  motion  by  their  capitals,  157;  artificers  neces¬ 
sary  to  them,  164;  their  situation  better  in  Eng¬ 
land  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe,  168; 
labour  under  great  disadvantages  every  where, 
169;  origin  of  long  leases  of  farms,  178;  are  a 
class  of  men  least  subject  to  the  wretched  spirit 
of  monopoly,  196. 

Were  forced  by  old  statutes,  to  become  the 
only  dealers  in  corn,  227;  could  not  sell  corn 
cheaper  than  any  other  corn  merchant,  227; 
could  seldom  sell  it  so  cheap,  227-8;  the  culture 
of  land  obstructed  by  this  division  of  their 
capitals,  228;  the  use  of  corn  dealers  to  the 
farmers,  228;  how  they  contribute  to  the  annual 
production  of  the  land,  according  to  the  French 
agricultural  system  of  political  economy,  289. 

Farmers  of  the  public  revenue,  their  character, 
399,  407-8. 

[Farm-rent  paid  by  boroughs,  171,  173.] 

[Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  241.] 

[Fernambuco,  248.] 

[Fertile  lands  cultivated  first,  39.] 

Fertility,  rent  of  land  varies  with,  63.] 

Feudal  government,  miserable  state  of  the  occu¬ 
piers  of  land  under,  144;  trade  and  interest  of 
money  under,  144;  feudal  chiefs,  their  power, 
165;  slaves,  their  situation,  167;  tenures  of  land, 
167-8;  taxation,  169;  original  poverty  and  ser¬ 
vile  state  of  the  tradesmen  in  towns,  170;  im¬ 
munities  seldom  granted  but  for  valuable  con¬ 
siderations,  170-1;  origin  of  free  burghs,  171;  the 
power  of  the  barons  reduced  by  municipal 
privileges,  172;  the  cause  and  effect  of  ancient 
hospitality,  176;  extensive  power  of  the  ancient 
barons,  176-7;  was  not  established  in  England 
until  the  Norman  conquest,  177;  was  silently 
subverted  by  manufacturers  and  commerce,  177. 

Feudal  wars,  how  supported,  302;  military 
exercises  not  well  attended  to,  under,  304;  stand¬ 
ing  armies  gradually  introduced  to  supply  the 
place  of  the  feudal  militia,  307;  account  of  the 
casualties  or  taxes  under,  378;  [merchants  de¬ 
spised  and  envied,  387;]  revenues  under,  how  en¬ 
joyed  by  the  great  land-holders,  402. 

Fiars,  public,  in  Scotland,  [supply  evidence  of  the 
fall  in  the  price  of  grain,  32,  106;]  the  nature  of 
the  institution  explained,  79. 

[Fidei  commissa,  166.] 

[Fifteenths  and  tenths  resembled  the  taille,  169.] 


Index 


440 

Fines  for  the  renewal  of  leases,  the  motive  for 
exacting  them,  and  their  tendency,  364. 

[Finisterre,  Cape,  215,  250,  266,  415.] 

Fire  arms,  alteration  in  the  art  of  war,  effected  by 
the  invention  of,  304;  the  invention  of,  favour¬ 
able  to  the  extension  of  civilization,  309. 

[Fire  (i.e.,  steam)  engine,  5.] 

[Fire  insurance,  46.] 

Fish,  the  component  parts  of  the  price  of,  ex¬ 
plained,  22;  [case  in  which  rent  forms,  a  part  of 
their  price,  62;]  the  multiplication  of,  at  market, 
by  human  industry,  both  limited  and  uncertain, 
103;  how  an  increase  of  demand  raises  the  price 
of  fish,  103. 

Fisheries,  observations  on  the  tonnage  bounties 
granted  to,  221;  to  the  herring  fishery,  222;  the 
boat  fishery  ruined  by  this  bounty,  223. 

Flanders,  [onions  imported  from,  33;  wool  exported 
to,  70;  fine  manufacture  of  wool,  109;  English 
wool  exchanged  for  fine  cloths  of,  173;  ancient 
manufacture  of  fine  cloth,  174;  carried  on  chiefly 
with  English  and  Spanish  wool,  174;]  the  an¬ 
cient  commercial  prosperity  of,  perpetuated  by 
the  solid  improvements  of  agriculture,  181;  [im¬ 
portation  of  bone  lace  from,  prohibited,  199.] 
[Industry  augmented  by  colonization  of  Ameri¬ 
ca,  255;  supplies  linen  to  America,  272.] 

Flax,  the  component  parts  of  the  price  of,  ex¬ 
plained,  22. 

Fleetwood,  bishop,  remarks  on  his  Chronicon 
Preciosum,  79,  80;  [quoted,  80,  101.] 

[Florence,  a  Roman  colony,  244;  paid  Lorenzo’s 
trading  debts,  358.] 

[Florida,  French  settlers  in,  murdered  by  Span¬ 
iards,  245.] 

[Flota,  the  Spanish,  263.] 

Flour,  the  component  parts  of  the  price  of,  ex¬ 
plained,  21-2;  [duties  on,  common,  386.] 

[Fontainebleau,  145.] 

Food,  will  always  purchase  as  much  labour  as  it 
can  maintain  on  the  spot,  63;  bread  and  butchers’ 
meat  compared,  64,  65;  is  the  original  source  of 
every  other  production,  71;  the  abundance  of, 
constitutes  the  principal  part  of  the  riches  of  the 
world,  and  gives  the  principal  value  to  many 
other  kinds  of  riches,  76. 

Forestalling  and  engrossing,  the  popular  fear  of, 
like  the  suspicions  of  witchcraft,  229. 

Forts,  when  necessary  for  the  protection  of  com¬ 
merce,  319. 

[Foundling  hospitals,  high  mortality  in,  33-4.] 

France  [quality  and  price  of  corn,  silks,  hardware 
and  woollens  compared  with  Poland  and  Eng¬ 
land,  4;  debasement  of  coin,  15;  ratio  of  gold  to 
silver,  18;  seignorage  of  8  per  cent,  19,  237;  high 
rented  vineyards,  26;  fall  in  price  of  grain  since 
seventeenth  century,  32,  86.  106,  217;]  fluctu¬ 
ations  in  the  legal  rate  of  interest  for  money 
there,  during  the  course  of  the  present  century, 
38;  remarks  oil  the  trade  and  riches  of,  38;  [mar¬ 
ket  rate  of  interest  higher  than  in  England, 
wages  lower,  richer  than  Scotland  but  not  pro¬ 


gressing  so  fast,  38;  carrying  trade  taken  by  the 
Dutch.  38-9;]  the  nature  of  apprenticeships 
there,  52;  the  propriety  of  restraining  the  plant¬ 
ing  of  vineyards,  examined,  66-7;  [corn  carefully 
cultivated  in  the  wine  provinces,  67;  vineyards 
need  not  be  envied  by  Britain,  69;]  variations 
in  the  price  of  grain  there,  78;  [labouring  poor 
seldom  eat  butcher’s  meat,  81;  fall  in  price  of 
corn,  though  exportation  of  grain  was  prohibited 
till  1764,  86,  217;]  the  money  price  of  labour  has 
sunk  gradually  with  the  money  price  of  corn, 
87;  [improved  since  the  colonization  of  America, 
88;  silver  preponderates  in  the  coinage  of,  93; 
exports  poultry  to  England,  98;  price  of  pork 
nearly  equal  to  that  of  beef,  98;]  foundation  of 
the  Mississippi  scheme,  137;  [corn  as  cheap  as  in 
England  though  there  is  little  paper  money,  140;] 
little  trade  or  industry  to  be  found  in  the  parlia¬ 
ment  towns  of,  145;  [futile  attempt  to  reduce 
the  rate  of  interest,  155;  lawyers  have  dressed 
entails  in  the  garb  of  substitutions  and  fidei 
commisses,  166;]  description  of  the  class  of 
farmers  called  metayers,  167;  laws  relating  to 
the  tenure  of  land,  [shortness  of  leases,  169;] 
services  formerly  exacted  besides  rent,  169;  the 
taille,  what,  and  its  operation  in  checking  the 
cultivation  of  land,  169;  origin  of  the  magistrates 
and  councils  of  cities,  172;  [wine  exchanged  for 
English  wool,  173;  wine  and  brandy  for  Polish 
corn,  173;  breeding  of  silk  worms  introduced  in 
reign  of  Charles  IX,  174;  allodial  ownership 
preceded  the  feudal  system,  176-7;  cultivation 
and  improvement  inferior  to  that  of  England, 
180;]  no  direct  legal  encouragement  given  to 
agriculture,  180;  [prohibition  of  exporting  coin. 
184;  exchange  of  wine  for  English  hardware  not 
supposed  disadvantageous  to  England,  187;  last 
war  with,  cost  ninety  millions,  188;  Merovingian 
Kings  had  treasures,  190;  established  exclusive 
company  for  East  India  trade,  191;]  ill  policy  of 
M.  Colbert’s  commercial  regulations,  199;  French 
goods  heavily  taxed  in  Great  Britain,  202;  the 
commercial  intercourse  between  France  and 
England  now  chiefly  carried  on  by  smugglers, 
202;  the  policy  of  the  commercial  restraints  be¬ 
tween  France  and  Britain,  considered,  202;  [par 
of  exchange,  203,  204;]  state  of  the  coinage 
there,  204;  [invasion  of  Holland,  207,  208;  ad¬ 
vantages  of  trade  with,  209-10;  cheap  wine  does 
not  cause  drunkenness,  211;  wine  discouraged  by 
English  in  favour  of  Portugal,  211;]  why  the 
commerce  with  England  has  been  subjected  to 
discouragements,  212-13;  [much  more  populous 
and  rich  than  the  American  colonies  and  there¬ 
fore  a  better  market,  212;]  foundation  of  the 
enmity  between  these  countries  [France  and 
England],  213. 

[England  unwilling  to  carry  French  goods,  214; 
no  drawback  allowed  by  England  on  exporta¬ 
tion  of  French  wines  to  America,  215;  scarce 
ever  necessary  to  restrain  exportation  of  corn. 
232;  provisions  of  Methuen  treaty  as  to  wine 


Index 


441 


and  wool,  234;  required  Portugal  to  exclude 
British  ships,  235;]  remarks  concerning  the 
seignorage  on  coin,  237;  standard  of  the  gold 
coin  there,  237;  [no  gold  or  silver  mines  in  the 
American  colonies.  243;  settlements  in  America, 
245-6;  plenty  of  good  land  there,  236;  subject  to 
custom  of  Paris,  247;  no  revenue  from  colonies, 
248;  policy  of  establishing  exclusive  companies, 
248;]  the  trade  of  the  French  colonies,  how  reg¬ 
ulated,  249;  [refining  sugar  flourishes  in  colonies, 
251;]  the  government  of  the  colonies  conducted 
with  moderation,  253;  the  sugar  colonies  of,  bet¬ 
ter  governed,  than  those  of  Britain,  253;  [slaves 
better  managed  there,  253;  capital  accumulated 
there,  254;  industry  augmented  by  colonization 
of  America,  255;  tobacco  dearer  than  in  England, 
257,  navy,  258;  tobacco  imports,  261;  invasion  of 
England,  262;]  the  kingdom  of,  how  taxed,  269; 
the  members  of  the  league,  fought  more  in  de¬ 
fence  of  their  own  importance,  than  for  any 
other  cause,  270-1;  [supplies  linen  to  America, 
272;  East  Indian  trade  now  open,  274;  English 
import  duty  on  yarn,  280;  English  prohibition  of 
linen  imports,  280;  indigo,  280;  exclusive  trade 
in  gum  senega,  etc.,  taken  by  England,  286;]  the 
present  agricultural  system  of  political  economy 
adopted  by  philosophers  there,  described,  288 
[-96;  type  of  agricultural  country,  291;  agri¬ 
culture  and  corn  trade  relieved  from  restraints 
owing  to  the  economists,  296;  half  or  one-third 
of  the  population  agricultural,  298;  veterans 
defeated  by  English  standing  army,  305;  fees  in 
parliament,  313;  cost  of  Languedoc  canal,  316;] 
under  what  direction  the  funds  for  the  repair  of 
the  roads  are  placed,  317;  general  state  of  the 
roads,  317-18;  [great  roads  only  attended  to,  318; 
tyranny  of  the  corvee,  319;  South  Sea  Company 
ruined  by  the  slave  trade,  325;]  the  universities 
badly  governed,  333;  remarks  on  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  the  parliaments  of,  349;  measures  taken 
in,  to  reduce  the  power  of  the  clergy,  351;  [Ref¬ 
ormation,  352;  only  one  professor  whose  works 
are  worth  reading,  355;  treasure  of  Berne  in¬ 
vested  in  the  funds,  356,  359;  the  economists, 
364;  the  predial  taille,  366,  375;]  account  of  the 
mode  of  rectifying  the  inequalities  of  the  pre¬ 
dial  taille  in  the  generality  of  Montauban,  366; 
the  personal  taille  explained,  375;  the  inequal¬ 
ities  in,  how  remedied,  376;  how  the  personal 
taille  discourages  cultivation,  376-7;  the  Ving- 
tieme,  377;  stamp  duties  and  the  controle,  379- 
80;  [taille  charged  on  workmen  a  direct  tax  on 
wages,  381;]  the  capitation  tax,  how  rated,  382; 
[leather  shoes  not  necessaries,  383;  tobacco  taxed 
fifteen  times  its  value,  384;  silk  manufactures 
could  be  undersold  by  English,  390;  peages,  395;] 
restraints  upon  the  interior  trade  of  the  country 
by  the  local  variety  of  the  revenue  laws,  398; 
the  duties  on  tobacco  and  salt,  how  levied,  400; 
the  different  sources  of  revenue,  400;  how  the 
finances  of,  might  be  reformed,  855;  the  French 
system  of  taxation  compared  with  that  in  Brit¬ 


ain,  400;  [might  levy  three  times  the  British 
revenue,  400;  ‘billets  d’etat’  at  a  discount,  404;] 
the  nature  of  tontines  explained,  407;  estimate 
of  the  whole  national  debt  of,  407;  [reason  for 
more  of  the  debt  being  in  annuities  than  in  Eng¬ 
land,  407;  more  wealthy  bachelors,  408;  op¬ 
pressive  public  debt,  412;  augmentation  of  coin, 
414.] 

[Franciscans  revived  languishing  faith,  344.] 
[Frederick  of  Holstein,  352.] 

[Freedom  defined,  171.] 

[Freedom  of  trade  would  supply  gold  and  silver 
as  well  as  wine,  185;  would  supply  an  agricul¬ 
tural  country  with  artificers  and  merchants, 
292.] 

[Frezier,  quoted,  73,  74,  89.] 

Frugality,  generally  a  predominating  principle  in 
human  nature,  147. 

[Fruit  yields  greater  profit  and  rent  than  corn,  66.] 
Fuller’s  earth,  the  exportation  of,  why  prohibited, 
285. 

Funds,  British,  [Dutch  holding  in,  38-9;  Bernese 
treasure  partly  invested  in,  359;]  brief  historical 
view  of,  404;  operation  of,  politically  considered, 
410;  the  practice  of  funding,  has  gradually  en¬ 
feebled  every  state  that  has  adopted  it,  412. 
Fur  trade,  the  first  principles  of,  70. 

[Gabelle,  compounded  for,  398;  one  of  the  great 
sources  of  French  revenue,  400.] 

Gama,  Vasco  de,  the  first  European  who  discovered 
a  naval  track  to  the  East  Indies,  240. 

[Ganges,  9,  241,  297.] 

Gardening,  the  gains  from,  distinguished  into  the 
component  parts,  23;  not  a  profitable  employ¬ 
ment,  66. 

[Garonne,  145.] 

[Gassendi,  a  professor  who  entered  the  church, 
355.] 

Gemelli-Carreri,  quoted,  244. 

Gems,  see  Stones. 

General  fund,  in  the  British  finances,  explained, 
867. 

[Geneva,  respectable  clergy  of,  354;  eminent  men 
of  letters  are  professors,  355.] 

[Gengis  Khan,  182.] 

Genoa,  why  corn  is  dear  in  the  territory  of,  83; 
[shipping  encouraged  by  the  Crusades,  173;  small 
state  obliged  to  use  foreign  coin,  204;  bank  of, 
204;  Columbus  belonged  to,  240;  tax  on  bread, 
386;  enfeebled  by  debt,  412.] 

[Gentlemen,  English  university  education  not  prop¬ 
er  for  forming,  337;  would  be  better  educated  in 
the  absence  of  public  educational  institutions, 
340.] 

[Gentoo,  government  of  India,  297;  religion,  297.] 
[Geometry  should  be  taught  in  parish  schools,  342.] 
[Georgia,  cost  of  civil  establishment,  247;  not 
planted  at  time  of  Navigation  Act,  258.] 
[Germany,  improved  since  the  discovery  of  Ameri¬ 
ca,  88;  nation  of,  overran  Roman  Empire,  165; 
species  of  slavery  still  exists  in,  167;  purveyance 


442 


Index 


still  exists  in,  169;  free  towns  of,  172;  expense 
of  last  war  laid  out  in,  188,  267;  foreign  trade, 
202.] 

ILinen  exported  from  England  to  the  colonies  re¬ 
ceives  a  drawback,  252;  linen  exported  to  Ameri¬ 
ca,  255,  262,  272;  drained  by  the  Spanish 
Flota,  263;  trade  with  America,  272;  could  have 
been  conquered  by  Rome,  306;  justice  a  source 
of  revenue,  311;  just  beyond  the  shepherd  stage 
when  Rome  fell,  312;  Reformation  in,  352;  emi¬ 
nent  men  of  letters  often  professors,  355.] 

IGhent,  181.] 

[Gibraltar,  straits  of,  9;  acquisition  of,  served  to 
unite  the  house  of  Bourbon,  323.] 

[Gilbert,  Baron,  quoted,  168.] 

Glasgow,  [recent  rise  in  the  demand  for  labour, 
32;]  the  trade  of,  doubled  in  fifteen  years,  by 
erecting  banks  there,  127;  why  a  city  of  greater 
trade  than  Edinburgh,  145. 

[Glass  grinding  company,  331.] 

[Glaucus’  armour  cost  100  oxen,  10.] 

[Goa,  276.] 

[Golconda,  75.] 

Gold,  not  the  standard  of  value  in  England,  17; 
its  value  measured  by  silver,  17;  reformation  of 
the  gold  coin,  18;  mint  price  of  gold  in  England, 
18;  the  working  the  mines  of,  in  Peru,  very  un¬ 
profitable,  74;  qualities  for  which  this  metal  is 
valued,  75;  the  proportional  value  of,  to  silver, 
how  rated  before  and  after  the  discovery  of  the 
American  mines,  92;  is  cheaper  in  the  Spanish 
market  than  silver,  93. 

Great  quantities  of,  remitted  annually  from 
Portugal  to  England,  234-5;  why  little  of  it  re¬ 
mains  in  England,  235;  is  always  to  be  had  for 
its  value,  235. 

Gold  and  silver,  the  prices  of  how  affected  by  the 
increase  of  the  quantity  of  the  metals,  82;  are 
commodities  that  naturally  seek  the  best  mar¬ 
ket,  82;  are  metals  of  the  least  value  among  the 
poorest  nations,  83;  the  increase  in  the  quan¬ 
tity  of,  by  means  of  wealth  and  improvement, 
has  no  tendency  to  diminish  their  value,  83; 
the  annual  consumption  of  these  metals  very 
considerable,  90;  annual  importation  of,  into 
Spain  and  Portugal,  90-1;  are  not  likely  to  multi¬ 
ply  beyond  the  demand,  91-2;  the  durability  of, 
the  cause  of  the  steadiness  of  their  price,  91-2; 
on  what  circumstances  the  quantity  of,  in  every 
particular  country,  depends,  103-4;  the  low  value 
of  these  metals  in  a  country,  no  evidence  of  its 
wealth,  nor  their  high  value  of  its  poverty,  105; 
if  not  employed  at  home,  will  be  sent  abroad 
notwithstanding  all  prohibitions,  147;  the  reason 
why  European  nations  have  studied  to  accumu¬ 
late  these  metals,  182-3;  commercial  arguments 
in  favour  of  their  exportation,  183;  these,  and  all 
other  commodities,  are  mutually  the  prices  of 
each  other,  185;  the  quantity  of,  in  every  coun¬ 
try,  regulated  by  the  effectual  demand,  185;  why 
the  prices  of  these  metals  do  not  fluctuate  so 
much  as  those  of  other  commodities,  185;  to  pre¬ 


serve  a  due  quantity  of,  in  a  country,  no  proper 
object  of  attention  for  the  government,  185;  the 
accumulated  gold  and  silver  in  a  country  distin¬ 
guished  into  three  parts,  187;  a  great  quantity  of 
bullion  alternately  exported  and  imported  for  the 
purposes  of  foreign  trade,  188;  annual  amount  of 
these  metals  imported  into  Spain  and  Portugal, 
189;  the  importation  of,  not  the  principal  benefit 
derived  from  foreign  trade,  190;  the  value  of, 
how  affected  by  the  discovery  of  the  American 
mines,  190;  and  by  the  passage  round  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  to  the  East  Indies,  191;  effect  of 
the  annual  exportation  of  silver  to  the  East 
Indies,  191;  the  commercial  means  pursued  to 
increase  the  quantity  of  these  metals  in  a 
country,  192,  201-2;  bullion  how  received  and 
paid  at  the  bank  of  Amersterdam,  205;  at  what 
prices,  206;  a  trading  country  without  mines, 
not  likely  to  be  exhausted  by  an  annual  ex¬ 
portation  of  these  metals,  210. 

The  value  of,  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  depre¬ 
ciated  by  restraining  the  exportation  of  them, 
219;  are  not  imported  for  the  purposes  of  plate 
or  coin  but  for  foreign  trade,  236;  the  search 
after  mines  of,  the  most  ruinous  of  all  projects, 
242;  are  valuable,  because  scarce,  and  difficult  to 
be  procured,  242. 

Gorgias,  evidence  of  the  wealth  he  acquired  by 
teaching,  58. 

[Gottenburg,  tea  smuggled  from,  89;  company,  185.] 

Government,  civil,  indispensably  necessary  for  the 
security  of  private  property,  309;  subordination 
in  society,  by  what  means  introduced,  309;  in¬ 
equality  of  fortune  introduces  civil  government 
for  its  preservation,  311;  the  administration  of 
justice,  a  source  of  revenue  in  early  times,  311; 
why  government  ought  not  to  have  the  man¬ 
agement  of  turnpikes,  317;  nor  of  other  public 
works,  318;  [expense  of,  like  that  of  a  great 
estate,  361;  soon  learns  the  art  of  draining  its 
subjects’  pockets,  379;]  want  of  parsimony  dur¬ 
ing  peace,  imposes  a  necessity  of  contracting 
debts  to  carry  on  a  war,  403;  must  support  a 
regular  administration  of  justice  to  cause  manu¬ 
factures  and  commerce  to  flourish,  403;  origin 
of  a  national  debt,  404;  progression  of  public 
debts,  404;  war,  why  generally  agreeable  to  the 
people,  408. 

Governors,  political,  the  greatest  spendthrifts  in 
society,  150. 

[Gracchi,  338.] 

[Grapes  might  be  grown  in  Scotland  at  sufficient 
expense,  195.] 

Grasses,  artificial,  tend  to  reduce  the  price  of 
butcher’s  meat,  65. 

Graziers,  subject  to  monopolies  obtained  by  man¬ 
ufactures  to  their  prejudice,  285. 

Greece,  [ancient,  had  no  word  for  apprentice,  52; 
slavery  harsher  than  in  the  middle  ages,  167; 
cultivation  of  corn  degenerated,  167;  citizens 
consisted  of  landed  proprietors,  170;  opulent  and 
industrious,  173.] 


Index 


443 


Foreign  trade  promoted  [prohibited]  in  several 
of  the  ancient  states  of,  298;  [trade  and  manu¬ 
factures  carried  on  by  slaves,  298;  citizens  long 
served  in  war  without  pay,  302;]  military  exer¬ 
cises,  a  part  of  general  education,  303;  soldiers 
not  a  distinct  profession  in,  303;  [individual  mili¬ 
tary  exercises,  304;  militias  defeated  by  Mace¬ 
donian  and  Roman  standing  armies,  306;  but 
had  defeated  Persian  militia,  307;  just  beyond 
the  shepherd  stage  at  the  Trojan  war,  312;] 
course  of  education  in  the  republics  of,  337-8; 
the  morals  of  the  Greeks  inferior  of  those  of  the 
Romans,  338,  [339;  sanguinary  factions,  338; 
exercises  and  elementary  education,  338;]  schools 
of  the  philosophers  and  rhetoricians,  338;  law  no 
science  among  the  Greeks,  339;  courts  of  justice, 
339;  [abilities  of  people  equal  to  those  of  modern 
nations,  339;]  the  martial  spirit  of  the  people, 
how  supported,  343;  [great  men  of  letters  were 
teachers,  355;  public  revenue  largely  obtained 
from  state  lands,  359.] 

[Greek  clergy  turbulent,  348.] 

Greek  colonies,  [reasons  for  sending  them  out, 
239;]  how  distinguished  from  Roman  colonies, 
240;  rapid  progress  of  these  colonies,  244;  [plenty 
of  good  land,  244;  sometimes  contributed  mili¬ 
tary  force  but  seldom  revenue,  256;  England  and 
America  might  imitate  the  tie  between  mother 
country  and  colony,  256.] 

Greek  language,  how  introduced  as  a  part  of  uni¬ 
versity  education,  335;  philosophy,  the  three 
great  branches  of,  335. 

[Green  glass,  tax  on,  387.] 

[Greenland  seal  fishery,  279;  South  Sea  Company’s 
whale  fishery,  325.] 

[Granada  sugar  refinery,  251;  new  field  for  specu¬ 
lation,  419.] 

[Grocer,  high  profits  of,  explained,  47-8.] 

Ground  rents,  great  variations  of,  according  to 
situation,  369;  are  a  more  proper  subject  of  tax¬ 
ation  than  houses,  370;  [tax  on  the  sale  of,  379.] 
[Guastalla,  386.] 

[Guernsey,  269.] 

[Guicciardini,  quoted,  180.] 

[Guienne,  67.] 

[Guilds,  adulterine,  53.] 

[Guinea  coast,  211,  240,  323.] 

[Guineas,  not  used  in  computations,  17;  Drum¬ 
mond’s  notes  for,  17.] 

Gum  senega,  review  of  the  regulations  imposed  on 
the  trade  for,  286,  [388]. 

[Gumilla,  242.] 

Gunpowder,  great  revolution  effected  in  the  art  of 
war  by  the  invention  of,  304-5,  308;  this  inven¬ 
tion  favourable  to  the  extension  of  civilization, 
309. 

Gustavus  Vasa,  how  enabled  to  establish  the  ref¬ 
ormation  of  Sweden,  352. 

[Gymnasium,  303,  338,  342.] 

[Hackney  coaches  and  chairs,  taxes  on,  375.] 

[Hale,  Lord  Chief  Justice,  quoted,  32.] 


[Halifax,  175.] 

Hamburg,  [houses  of,  supported  by  Bank  of  Eng¬ 
land,  138;  goods  imported  from,  paid  for  by  bills 
on  Holland,  203;  exchange  with,  formerly  un¬ 
favourable,  204;  a  small  state  which  must  use 
foreign  coin,  204;]  agio  of  the  bank  of,  ex¬ 
plained,  205. 

[British  colonial  monopoly  hampers  the  mer¬ 
chants,  272;  type  of  mercantile  state,  291;] 
sources  of  the  revenue  of  that  city,  358;  the 
inhabitants,  of,  how  taxed  to  the  state,  374. 
Hamburg  Company,  some  account  of,  320. 
[Hamilcar,  306.] 

[Hannibal,  306.] 

[Hanseatic  league,  causes  that  rendered  it  formi¬ 
dable,  172;  why  no  vestige  remains  of  the  wealth 
of  the  Hans  towns,  181.] 

[Harbours,  cost  of,  should  be  defrayed  by  a  port 
duty  on  tonnage  of  ships,  315.] 

[Hardware,  187,  210;  Birmingham  manufacturers 
buy  wine  with,  396-7.] 

[Hasdrubal,  see  Asdrubal.] 

[Hawkers,  tax  on,  374-5.] 

[Hawkins,  Serjeant,  quoted,  282.] 

[Hazard,  capitalist  paid  for  incurring,  20.] 

Hearth  money,  why  abolished  in  England,  371. 
[Hebrew  language  not  a  part  of  common  univer¬ 
sity  education,  334-5.] 

[Hebrides,  wages  in,  32;  herring  fishery,  222.] 
[Henault,  President,  quoted,  270.] 

Henry  VIII  of  England,  prepares  the  way  for  the 
reformation  by  shutting  out  the  authority  of  the 
Pope,  352;  [adulterated  the  coin,  414.] 

[Henry  IV  of  France,  had  a  treasure,  403.] 

[Henry,  Prince,  65.] 

[Heptarchy,  149.] 

Herring  buss  bounty,  remarks  on,  221;  fraudulent 
claims  of  the  bounty,  222;  the  boat  fishery  the 
most  natural  and  profitable,  222;  account  of  the 
British  white-herring  fishery,  223;  account  of  the 
busses  fitted  out  in  Scotland,  the  amount  of 
their  cargoes,  and  the  bounties  on  them,  423[-4]. 
[Hesiod,  quoted,  335.] 

Hides,  the  produce  of  rude  countries,  commonly 
carried  to  a  distant  market,  100;  price  of,  in 
England  three  centuries  ago,  101-2;  salted  hides 
inferior  to  fresh  ones.  102;  the  price  of,  how 
affected  by  circumstances,  in  cultivated  and  in 
uncultivated  countries,  102. 

Higgling  of  the  market,  31. 

Highlands  of  Scotland,  [could  not  support  a  nailer, 
8;  wages  in,  32;]  interesting  remarks  on  the  pop¬ 
ulation  of,  33;  [high  mortality  of  children,  33; 
cattle  of,  admitted  to  England  by  the  Union, 
64,  96-7;  old  families  common  in,  178;]  military 
character  of  the  Highlanders,  305. 

[Highways  originally  maintained  by  six  days’  la¬ 
bour,  359.] 

[Hippias,  lived  in  splendour,  58;  peripatetic,  338.] 
[Hispaniola,  100.] 

Hobbes,  Mr.,  remarks  on  his  definition  of  wealth, 
13. 


Index 


444 

Hogs,  circumstances  which  render  their  flesh  cheap 
or  dear,  98. 

Holland,  [water  carriage  afforded  by  the  Maese,  9; 
ratio  of  silver  to  gold,  14  to  1,  18;]  observations 
on  the  riches  and  trade  of  the  republic  of,  38-9; 
[richer  than  England,  wages  high,  profits  low, 
gained  carrying  trade  of  France,  holds  large 
amount  in  French  and  English  funds  not  de¬ 
caying,  38-9;]  not  to  follow  some  business,  un¬ 
fashionable  there,  41;  [corn  chiefly  imported, 
64-5;  spices  burnt  to  keep  up  the  price,  68,  225, 
276;]  cause  of  the  dearness  of  corn  there,  83; 
[improved  since  the  discovery  of  America,  88; 
expelled  the  Portugese  from  India,  89,  191;  tea 
smuggled  from,  89;  houses  supported  by  Bank  of 
England,  138;  operation  of  carrying  trade,  160;] 
enjoys  the  greatest  share  in  the  carrying  trade 
of  Europe,  161;  [farmers  not  inferior  to  those  of 
England,  170;  legislature  attentive  to  com¬ 
merce  and  manufactures,  180;  exchange  with, 
183;  East  India  Company’s  tea  smuggled  into 
England,  185;  imports  lean  cattle,  196;  Dutch 
undertaker  of  woolen  manufacture  at  Abbe¬ 
ville,  196;]  how  the  Dutch  were  excluded  from 
being  the  carriers  to  Great  Britain,  197;  [supplied 
other  nations  with  fish,  197;  bad  terms  with 
England,  197;]  is  a  country  that  prospers  under 
the  heaviest  taxation,  199;  [French  wine 
smuggled,  202;  computation  of  state  of  credit 
and  debit,  203;]  account  of  the  bank  of  Amster¬ 
dam,  205;  [market  price  of  bullion  above  the 
mint  price,  206;]  this  republic  derives  even  its 
subsistence  from  foreign  trade,  213. 

[Buys  English  corn  cheaper  and  can  sell  manu¬ 
factures  cheaper  in  consequence  of  the  British 
corn  bounty,  220;  must  carry  on  herring  fishery 
in  decked  vessels,  222;  position  in  regard  to  the 
Methuen  treaty,  234;  no  gold,  silver  or  dia¬ 
monds  in  the  American  colonies,  243;  attack  on 
Brazil,  245;  settlements  in  17th  century,  245; 
Curagoa  and  Eustatia  free  ports,  246;  exclu¬ 
sive  company  for  colonial  commerce,  248;  naval 
power  in  1660,  258;  possessed  New  York  and 
New  Jersey,  258;  tobacco  imports,  261;  linen 
exported  to  America,  261-2;  maintains  mo¬ 
nopoly  of  trade  to  the  spice  island,  274;  would 
send  more  ships  to  the  East  Indies  if  the  trade 
were  free,  274-5;  settlements  at  the  Cape  and 
Batavia  the  most  considerable  in  Africa  and  the 
East  Indies,  276;  destructive  policy  in  East 
Indies,  277;  English  duty  on  yarn,  280;  gum 
senega  clandestinely  exported  from  England,  286; 
type  of  mercantile  state,  291;  subsistence  drawn 
from  other  countries,  295;  great  cities  the  capi¬ 
tals  of  little  republics,  353-4;  respectable  clergy, 
354;  eminent  men  of  letters  often  professors, 
355;  monopoly  of  madder  owing  to  existence  of 
tithe  elsewhere,  367;]  tax  paid  on  houses  there, 
371;  [rate  of  interest,  371;  2  per  cent  tax  on 
capital  paid  voluntarily,  374;  a  tax  intended  to 
fall  on  capital,  374;  servants’  tax,  377;  account 
of  the  tax  upon  successions,  378;  stamp  duties, 


379;  [tea  and  sugar  luxuries  of  the  poorest,  384; 
taxes  on  bread  and  necessaries  ruined  manufac¬ 
tures,  386;]  high  amounts  of  taxes  in,  386,  401; 
[tea  taxed  by  licence  to  drink,  387;  expense  of 
preserving  from  the  sea,  401;]  its  prosperity  de¬ 
pends  on  the  republican  form  of  government, 

401. 

[Holstein,  cattle  of,  exported  to  Holland,  295.] 

[Holy  land,  173.] 

[Homer,  quoted,  10,  312.] 

Honoraries  from  pupils  to  teachers  in  colleges, 
tendency  of,  to  quicken  their  diligence,  332. 

[Hop-garden,  high  profit  of,  66.] 

Hose,  in  the  time  of  Edward  IV,  how  made,  108. 

Hospitality,  ancient,  the  cause  and  effect  of,  176, 

402. 

[Hottentots,  276.] 

House,  different  acceptations  of  term  in  England, 
and  some  other  countries,  50,  [71];  houses  con¬ 
sidered  as  part  of  the  national  stock,  119;  houses 
produce  no  revenue,  119. 

The  rent  of,  distinguished  into  two  parts, 
368;  operation  of  a  tax  upon  house  rent,  pay¬ 
able  by  the  tenant,  369;  house  rent  the  best 
test  of  the  tenant’s  circumstances,  370;  proper 
regulation  of  a  tax  on,  370;  how  taxed  in  Hol¬ 
land,  371;  hearth  money,  371;  window  tax,  371; 
[tax  on  sale  of,  379.] 

Hudson’s  Bay  Company,  the  nature  of  their  estab¬ 
lishment  and  trade,  324;  their  profits  not  so 
high  as  has  been  reported,  325. 

[Hume,  quoted,  229,  140,  153,  176,  189,  344-5.] 

[Hungary,  Danube  little  use  to,  10;  serfs  still  exist 
in,  167;  industry  encouraged  by  colonization  of 
America,  255;  mines  worked  by  free  men,  299.] 

Hunters,  war  how  supported  by  a  nation  of,  301; 
cannot  be  very  numerous,  301;  no  established 
administration  of  justice  needful  among  them, 
309;  age  the  sole  foundation  of  rank  and  prec¬ 
edency  among,  310;  no  considerable  inequality 
of  fortune,  or  subordination  to  be  found  among 
them,  310;  no  hereditary  honours  in  such  a 
society,  310;  [minds  kept  alive  by  absence  of  di¬ 
vision  of  labour,  341.] 

Husbandmen,  war  how  supported  by  a  nation  of, 
302. 

Husbandry,  see  Agriculture. 

[Hutchinson,  quoted,  418.] 

[Hyder  Ali,  329.] 

Idleness,  unfashionable  in  Holland,  41;  [why  greater 
among  our  ancestors,  145;  prevails  where  revenue 
predominates,  146.] 

[Iguana  or  Ivana,  principal  animal  of  St.  Domingo, 
241.] 

Importation,  why  restraints  have  been  imposed 
on,  with  the  two  kinds  of,  192;  how  restrained 
to  secure  a  monopoly  of  the  home  market  to 
domestic  industry,  192;  the  true  policy  of  these 
restraints  doubtful,  192-3;  the  free  importation 
of  foreign  manufactures  more  dangerous  than 
that  of  raw  materials,  195;  how  far  it  may  be 


Index 


proper  to  continue  the  free  importation  of 
certain  foreign  goods,  199;  how  far  it  may  be 
proper  to  restore  the  free  importation  of  goods, 
after  it  has  been  interrupted,  200;  of  the  ma¬ 
terials  of  manufacture,  review  of  the  legal  en¬ 
couragements  given  to,  279;  statistics  of,  untrust¬ 
worthy,  389. 

Independents,  the  principles  of  that  sect  explained, 
346. 

[India,  Gulf  of,  10.] 

[Indian  corn,  241.] 

[Indian  seas,  274.] 

Indies,  see  East  and  West. 

Indostan  [violent  police  compels  every  man  to 
follow  the  occupation  of  his  father,  26;  country 
labourers  better  paid  than  most  artificers,  55; 
labourers’  real  wages  less  than  in  Europe,  89-90; 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  affected  by  American 
mines,  104;  treasure  commonly  buried  in,  121; 
wonderful  accounts  of  its  ancient  wealth  and 
cultivation,  158;  its  wealth  obtained  through 
exportation  was  in  foreign  hands,  165;  more 
advanced  than  Mexico  and  Peru,  191;  operation 
of  foreign  commerce,  209.] 

[Vasco  de  Gama  arrived  by  the  Cape  in 
1497,  240;]  the  several  classes  of  people  there 
kept  distinct,  297;  the  natives  of,  how  prevented 
from  undertaking  long  sea  voyages,  297;  [revenue 
chiefly  from  land  tax,  298;  silk  exports  to 
Rome,  299;  roads  and  canals,  318;  land  tax 
revenue  stimulates  the  sovereign’s  interest  in 
such  works,  318;  supposed  necessity  for  forts 
to  protect  commerce,  319;  silk  should  be  ad¬ 
mitted  free  to  Britain,  390;  see  East  Indies 
and  East  India  Company.] 

Industry,  the  different  kinds  of,  seldom  dealt  im¬ 
partially  with  by  any  nation,  2;  the  species  of 
frequently  local,  8;  naturally  suited  to  the  de¬ 
mand,  24;  is  increased  by  the  liberal  reward 
of  labour,  34;  how  affected  by  seasons  of  plenty 
and  scarcity,  35;  is  more  advantageously  exerted 
in  towns  than  in  the  country,  54;  the  average 
produce  of,  always  suited  to  the  average  con¬ 
sumption,  81;  is  promoted  by  the  circulation 
of  paper  money,  125;  three  requisites  to  putting 
industry  in  motion,  126;  how  the  general 
character  of  nations  is  estimated  by,  145;  and 
idleness,  the  proportians  between,  how  regulated, 
146;  is  employed  for  subsistence,  before  it  ex¬ 
tends  to  conveniences  and  luxury,  163;  whether 
the  general  industry  of  a  society,  is  promoted 
by  commercial  restraints  on  importation,  192-3; 
private  interest  naturally  points  to  that  employ¬ 
ment  most  advantageous  to  the  society,  193; 
but  without  intending  or  knowing  it,  194;  legal 
regulations  of  private  industry,  dangerous  as¬ 
sumptions  of  power,  194;  domestic  industry 
ought  not  to  be  employed  on  what  can  be  pur¬ 
chased  cheaper  from  abroad,  194;  of  the  society, 
can  augment  only  in  proportion  as  its  capital 
augments,  195;  when  it  may  be  necessary  to 
impose  some  burden  upon  foreign  industry,  to 


445 

favour  that  at  home,  197;  the  free  exercise  of 
industry  ought  to  be  allowed  to  all,  201. 

The  natural  effort  of  every  individual  to 
better  his  conditions,  will,  if  unrestrained,  result 
in  the  prosperity  of  the  society,  232. 

[Infanticide,  in  China,  30.] 

Insurance,  from  fire,  and  sea  risks,  the  nature  and 
profits  of,  examined,  46;  the  trade  of  insurance 
may  be  successfully  carried  on  by  a  joint  stock 
company,  330. 

Interest,  landed,  monied,  and  trading  distinguished 
152;  [public  promoted  by  private,  194,  273.] 

Interest  for  the  use  of  money,  the  foundation  of 
that  allowance  explained,  22;  [varies  with  the 
rate  of  profit,  37;]  historical  view  of  the  altera¬ 
tions  of,  in  England,  and  other  countries,  37 
[-41];  remarks  on  the  high  rates  of,  in  Bengal, 
40;  and  in  China,  40;  may  be  raised  by  defective 
laws,  independent  on  the  influence  of  wealth 
or  poverty,  40;  the  lowest  ordinary  rate  of, 
must  somewhat  more  than  compensate  occa¬ 
sional  losses,  40;  the  common  relative  proportion 
between  interest  and  mercantile  profits  inquired 
into,  41;  [stock  lent  at,  151-2;]  was  not  lowered 
in  consequences  of  the  discovery  of  the  Ameri¬ 
can  mines,  153;  how  the  legal  rate  of,  ought 
to  be  fixed,  154;  consequences  of  its  being  fixed 
too  high  or  too  low,  154-5;  the  market  rate  of, 
regulates  the  price  of  land,  155. 

[As  a  source  of  public  revenue,  358;  nominally 
subject  to  British  land  tax,  360;]  whether  a 
proper  object  of  taxation,  373;  [fall  in  the  rate 
of,  406,  373.] 

[Invisible  hand,  194.] 

[Ionian  colonized  Asia  Minor  and  the  Aegean,  239.] 

Ireland  [land  not  cultivated  by  factors,  68;  supplies 
strong  porters  and  beautiful  prostitutes,  fed  on 
potatoes,  to  London,  70;  exports  salt  meat,  100; 
may  not  export  wool  except  to  England,  101; 
may  export  raw  hides  to  England  duty  free, 
102,  279;  may  export  hides  to  other  countries, 
102;  only  lately  allowed  to  export  cattle  to 
England,  180;]  why  never  likely  to  furnish  cattle 
to  the  prejudice  of  Great  Britain,  195-6;  [dis¬ 
charged  soldiers  and  seamen  may  exercise  any 
trade  in,  201.] 

[Bounty  on  hemp  imported  into  Britain,  281;] 
the  proposed  absentee  tax  there  considered, 
395-6;  [able  to  pay  land  tax,  415;  extension  of 
British  custom  duties  to,  proposed,  415;]  ought 
in  justice  to  contribute  toward  the  discharge 
of  the  public  debt  of  Great  Britain,  420;  ex¬ 
pediency  of  a  union  with  Great  Britain,  420; 
[would  get  rid  of  an  oppressive  aristocracy  and 
a  spirit  of  party,  420.] 

[Isabella  of  Castile,  240.] 

Isocrates,  the  handsome  income  he  made  by  teach 
ing,  57;  man  of  letters  also  a  teacher,  355. 

[Isthmian  games,  342.] 

Italy  [corn  chiefly  imported  during  Roman  pros¬ 
perity,  65;  question  whether  a  new  vineyard 
would  be  profitable,  66;  olive  plantations  not 


446 


Index 


to  be  envied  by  Britain,  69;  not  gone  backward 
since  discovery  of  America,  88;  introduction  of 
wind  and  water  mills,  108;  artistic  genius  de¬ 
cayed  but  monuments  remain,  150-1;  cultivation 
degenerated  when  abandoned  to  slaves,  167; 
prohibition  of  exportation  and  encouragement  to 
importation  of  corn  obstructed  cultivation,  170; 
ancient  inhabitants  were  proprietors,  170:  cities 
became  independent,  172;  cities  the  first  which 
commerce  raised  to  opulence,  173;  silk  and  vel¬ 
vets  exchanged  for  corn  of  Poland,  173;  breeding 
of  silkworms  introduced,  174;]  the  only  great 
country  in  Europe,  which  has  been  cultivated 
and  improved  in  every  part  by  means  of  its 
foreign  commerce,  180;  [sober,  though  wine  is 
cheap,  211.] 

[In  little  states  restraints  on  export  of  corn 
may  sometimes  be  necessary,  232;]  was  originally 
colonized  by  the  Dorians,  239;  [Roman  colonies, 
240,  244;  Greek  colonies,  244;  school  of  philoso¬ 
phers  in  a  Greek  colony,  244;  result  of  admission 
of  inhabitants  to  Roman  citizenship,  271  ancient 
republics  derived  larger  part  of  revenue  from 
state  lands,  359;  silk  manufacturers  might  be 
undersold  by  English,  390;  small  states  levy 
transit  duties  on  the  Po,  395;  republics  all  in 
debt,  403;  republics  began  the  practice  of  fund¬ 
ing,  412.] 

[Jack  of  all  trades,  228.] 

Jamaica,  [trade  with,  more  uncertain  than  that 
with  North  America,  47;  circuitous  trade  ex¬ 
ample,  159.] 

[Increasing  improvement,  249;  desert  in  1660, 
258;]  the  returns  of  trade  from  that  island,  why 
irregular,  419. 

[James  I,  his  marriage  bed,  brought  from  Den¬ 
mark,  150.] 

[Japan,  copper  exported  to  Europe,  73;  ration  of 
silver  to  gold  8  to  1,  92;  no  gold  and  silver 
mines,  but  richer  than  Mexico  or  Peru,  191.] 

[Batavia  on  the  road  to,  276;  only  country 
with  which  China  carries  on  her  own  trade,  297; 
affords  an  example  to  China,  297.] 

[Jersey,  269.] 

Jewels,  see  Stones. 

[John,  King  of  England,  munificent  benefactor  to 
towns,  172.] 

[John,  King  of  France,  adulterated  the  coin  to 
pay  his  debts,  414.] 

[Joint-stock,  see  Company.] 

Jurisdictions,  territorial,  did  not  originate  in  the 
feudal  law,  176-7. 

[Jus  majoratus,  247.] 

Justice,  administration  of,  abandoned  to  feudal 
barons,  176-7;  the  administration  of,  a  duty  of 
the  sovereign,  309;  in  early  times  a  source  of 
revenue  to  him,  311-12;  the  making  justice 
subservient  to  the  revenue,  a  source  of  great 
abuses,  312;  is  never  administered  gratis,  313; 
the  whole  administration  of,  but  an  inconsider¬ 
able  part  of  the  expense  of  government,  313; 


how  the  whole  expense  of  justice  might  be  de¬ 
frayed  from  the  fees  of  court,  313;  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  the  jurisdictions  of  the  several  English 
courts  of  law,  accounted  for,  313;  law  language, 
how  corrupted,  314;  the  judicial  and  executive 
power,  why  divided,  313;  by  whom  the  expense 
of  the  administration  of,  ought  to  be  borne, 
357;  [good  administration  of,  necessary  for 
flourishing  commerce  and  manufactures,  403. 

[Jutland  cattle  exported  to  Holland,  295.] 

Kalm,  the  Swedish  traveller,  his  account  of  the 
husbandry  of  the  British  colonies  in  North 
America,  97. 

Kelp,  a  rent  demanded  for  the  rocks  on  which  it 
grows,  62. 

[Kent,  special  restrictions  on  removal  of  wool,  62.] 

[Kidders  of  corn  restrained,  226-7.] 

King,  Mr.,  [quoted,  32;]  his  account  of  the  average 
price  of  wheat,  85. 

King,  under  feudal  institutions,  no  more  than  the 
greatest  baron  in  the  nation,  176;  was  unable  to 
restrain  the  violence  of  his  barons,  176. 

Treasure-trove  an  important  branch  of  rev¬ 
enue  to,  402;  his  situation  how  favourable  for 
the  accumulating  treasure,  402;  in  a  commercial 
country,  naturally  spends  his  revenue  in  luxuries, 
402;  is  hence  driven  to  call  upon  his  subjects 
for  extraordinary  aids,  402. 

Kings  and  their  ministers,  the  greatest  spend¬ 
thrifts  in  a  country,  150. 

[Konigsberg,  193.] 

Labour,  the  fund  which  originally  supplies  every 
nation  with  its  annual  consumption,  1;  how  the 
proportion  between  labour  and  consumption  is 
regulated,  1;  the  different  kinds  of  industry  sel¬ 
dom  dealt  impartially  with  by  any  nation,  2; 
the  division  of  labour  considered,  3;  this  divi¬ 
sion  increases  the  quantity  of  work,  4;  instances 
an  illustration,  6;  from  what  principles  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  originates,  6;  the  divisibility  of, 
governed  by  the  market,  8;  labour  the  real 
measure  of  the  exchangeable  value  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  13;  different  kinds  of,  not  easily  estimated 
by  immediate  comparison,  13;  is  compared  by 
the  intermediate  standard  of  money,  14;  is  an 
invariable  standard  for  the  value  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  14;  has  a  real,  and  a  nominal  price,  14;  the 
quantity  of  labour  employed  on  different  ob¬ 
jects,  the  only  rule  for  exchanging  them  in  the 
rude  stages  of  society,  20;  difference  between  the 
wages  of  labour  and  profits  on  stock,  in  manu¬ 
facturers,  21;  the  whole  labour  of  a  country 
never  exerted,  23;  is  in  every  instance  suited 
to  the  demand,  24;  the  effect  of  extraordinary 
calls  for,  25;  the  deductions  made  from  the 
produce  of  labour  employed  upon  land,  27;  why 
dearer  in  North  America  than  in  England,  29; 
is  cheap  in  countries  that  are  stationary,  30; 
the  demand  for,  would  continually  decrease  in 
a  declining  country,  30-1;  the  province  of  Ben- 


Index 


gal  cited  as  an  instance,  31;  is  not  badly  paid 
for  in  Great  Britain,  31;  an  increasing  demand 
for,  favourable  to  population,  34;  that  of  free¬ 
men  cheaper  to  the  employers  than  that  of 
slaves,  34;  the  money  price  of,  how  regulated, 
36;  is  liberally  rewarded  in  new  colonies,  39; 
common  labour  and  skilful  labour  distinguished, 
43;  the  free  circulation  of,  from  one  employment 
to  another,  obstructed  by  corporation  laws,  58; 
the  unequal  prices  of,  in  different  places,  prob¬ 
ably  owing  to  the  law  of  settlements,  60-1;  can 
always  procure  subsistence  on  the  spot  where 
it  is  purchased,  63;  the  money  price  of,  in  dif¬ 
ferent  countries,  how  governed,  82;  is  set  into 
motion  by  stock  employed  for  profit,  110;  the 
division  of,  depends  on  the  accumulation  of 
stock,  117;  machines  to  facilitate  labour,  advan¬ 
tageous  to  society,  122;  productive  and  unpro¬ 
ductive,  distinguished,  142;  various  orders  of 
men  specified,  whose  labour  is  unproductive,  143; 
unproductive  labours  all  maintained  by  revenue, 
144;  the  price  of,  how  raised  by  the  increase  of 
the  national  capital,  153;  its  price,  though  nomi¬ 
nally  raised,  may  continue  the  same,  154. 

Is  liberally  rewarded  in  new  colonies,  243;  of 
artificers  and  manufacturers,  never  adds  any 
value  to  the  whole  amount  of  the  rude  produce 
of  the  land,  according  to  the  French  agricultural 
system  of  political  economy,  290;  this  doctrine 
shown  to  be  erroneous,  294-5;  the  productive 
powers  of  labour,  how  to  be  improved,  295; 
[forced,  319,  359;  division  of,  see  Division  of 
labour.] 

Labourers,  useful  and  productive,  everywhere 
proportioned  to  the  capital  stock  on  which  they 
are  employed,  1;  share  the  produce  of  their 
labour,  in  most  cases,  with  the  owners  of  the 
stock  on  which  they  are  employed,  21;  their 
wages  a  continued  subject  of  contest  between 
them  and  their  masters,  28;  are  seldom  successful 
in  their  outrageous  combinations,  28;  the  suffi¬ 
ciency  of  their  earnings,  a  point  not  easily  de¬ 
termined,  28-9;  their  wages  sometimes  raised  by 
increase  of  work,  29;  their  demands  limited  by 
the  funds  destined  for  payment,  29;  are  continu¬ 
ally  wanted  in  North  America,  30;  miserable 
conditions  of  those  in  China,  30;  are  not  ill 
paid  in  Great  Britain,  31;  if  able  to  maintain 
their  families  in  dear  years,  they  must  be  at  their 
ease  in  plentiful  seasons,  31;  a  proof  furnished 
in  the  complaints  of  their  luxury,  33;  why  worse 
paid  than  artificers,  43;  their  interests  strictly 
connected  with  the  interests  of  the  society,  110; 
labour  the  only  source  of  their  revenue,  118; 
effects  of  a  life  of  labour  on  the  understandings 
of  the  poor,  340. 

[Labourers,  statute  of,  77.] 

[Lace,  £30  worth  made  of  a  penny-worth  of  flax, 
290.] 

[Lacedaemon,  185.] 

[Lancashire,  oatmeal  diet,  69.] 

Land,  [appropriated,  20;]  the  demand  of  rent  for, 


447 

how  founded,  21;  the  rent  paid,  enters  into  the 
price  of  the  greater  part  of  all  commodities,  21; 
generally  produces  more  food  than  will  maintain 
the  labour  necessary  to  bring  it  to  market,  63; 
good  roads,  and  navigable  canals,  equalize  differ¬ 
ence  of  situation,  63;  that  employed  in  raising 
food  for  men  or  cattle,  regulates  the  rent  of  all 
other  cultivated  land,  66,  68;  can  clothe  and 
lodge  more  than  it  can  feed,  while  uncultivated, 
and  the  contrary  when  improved,  70;  the  culture 
of  land  producing  food,  creates  a  demand  for 
the  produce  of  other  lands,  75;  produces  by 
agriculture  a  much  greater  quantity  of  vegetable, 
than  of  animal  food,  81;  the  full  improvement 
of,  requires  a  stock  of  cattle  to  supply  manure, 
96;  cause  and  effect  of  the  diminution  of  cot¬ 
tagers,  98-9;  signs  of  the  land  being  completely 
improved,  99;  the  whole  annual  produce,  or 
the  price  of  it,  naturally  divides  itself  into  rent, 
wages,  and  profits  of  stock,  109;  the  usual  price 
of,  depends  on  the  common  rate  of  interest  for 
money,  155;  the  profits  of  cultivation  exagger¬ 
ated  by  projectors,  162;  the  cultivation  of,  nat¬ 
urally  preferred  to  trade  and  manufacturers,  on 
equal  terms,  163-4;  artificers  necessary  to  the 
cultivation  of,  164;  was  all  appropriated,  though 
not  cultivated,  by  the  northern  destroyers  of 
the  Roman  empire,  165;  origin  of  the  law  of 
primogeniture  under  the  feudal  government,  165; 
entails,  165-6;  obstacles  to  the  improvement  of 
land  under  feudal  proprietors,  166-7;  feudal 
tenures,  167-8;  feudal  taxation,  169;  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  land  checked  in  France  by  the  taille, 
169;  occupiers  of,  labour  under  great  disad¬ 
vantages,  169;  origin  of  long  leases  of,  178;  small 
proprietors,  the  best  improvers  of,  179;  small 
purchasers  of,  cannot  hope  to  raise  fortunes  by 
cultivation,  179. 

Tenures  of,  in  the  British  American  colonies, 
246;  is  the  most  permanent  source  of  revenue, 
359;  the  rent  of  a  whole  country,  not  equal  to 
the  ordinary  levy  upon  the  people,  360;  the 
revenue  from,  proportioned,  not  to  the  rent, 
but  to  the  produce,  360;  reasons  for  selling  the 
crown  lands,  360-1;  the  land-tax  of  Great  Britain 
considered,  363;  an  improved  land-tax  suggested, 
364;  a  land  tax,  however  equally  rated  by  a 
general  survey,  will  soon  become  unequal,  366; 
tithes  a  very  unequal  tax,  367;  tithes  dis¬ 
courage  improvement,  367;  [tax  on  the  sale  of, 
379;  one  of  the  two  great  sources  of  revenue, 
411.] 

Landholders,  [love  to  reap  where  they  never 
sowed,  21;  liberality  and  ignorance  of,  62;]  why 
frequently  inattentive  to  their  own  particular 
interests,  110;  how  they  contribute  to  the  annual 
production  of  the  land,  according  to  the  French 
agricultural  system  of  political  economy,  289; 
should  be  encouraged  to  cultivate  a  part  of 
their  own  land,  364-5. 

Land-tax,  additional  2s.,  188. 

[Amount  of  the  British,  360;  proportioned  to 


448 


Index 


rent,  362-7;  proportioned  to  produce,  367-8;  the 
British,  on  houses,  371;  cannot  raise  rents,  372; 
the  British,  intended  to  tax  stock  as  well  as 
land,  373;  the  British,  not  intended  to  fall  on 
capital,  374;  that  of  the  king  of  Sardinia  a  tax 
on  land  held  by  ignoble  tenure,  375;  the  British, 
resembles  the  vingtieme,  377,  400;  the  British, 
higher  on  officers,  382;  additional  Is.  for  three 
years,  409;  may  make  landlord  unable  to  main¬ 
tain  improvements,  411;  a  more  equal,  in  Great 
Britain  might  greatly  augment  the  revenue,  414; 
more  could  be  paid  in  Great  Britain  if  there 
were  no  tithe,  415.] 

[Languedoc,  67,  375.] 

[Languedoc  canal,  316.] 

[La  Riviere,  Mercier  de,  quoted,  296.] 

[Lastage,  170.] 

Latin  language,  how  it  became  an  essential  part 
of  university  education,  334;  [a  useless  smatter¬ 
ing  sometimes  taught  in  Scotch  parish  and 
English  charity  schools,  342. 

[Latium,  corn  culture  discouraged  in,  65.] 

[Laverdy  reduced  the  rate  of  interest,  38.] 

Law,  Mr.,  account  of  his  banking  scheme  for  the 
improvement  of  Scotland,  137;  quoted,  153. 
Law,  the  language  of,  how  corrupted,  314;  did  not 
improve  into  a  science  in  ancient  Greece,  339; 
remarks  on  the  courts  of  justice  in  Greece  and 
Rome,  339. 

Lawyers,  why  amply  rewarded  for  their  labour, 
44-5;  great  amount  of  their  fees,  45;  [few  men 
of  fortune  eminent  as,  332.] 

[Lead  smelting  company,  331.] 

Leases,  [for  life,  168;]  the  various  usual  conditions 
of,  364;  [registration  of,  364.] 

Leather,  restrictions  on  the  exportation  of,  un¬ 
manufactured,  285;  [real  necessary  of  life,  385; 
duty  on,  387.] 

Lectures  in  universities,  frequently  improper  for 
instruction,  333. 

[Leeds,  175.] 

| Legal  tender  originally  only  in  the  standard  of 
value,  17.] 

[Leghorn,  204.] 

[Legislator  contrasted  with  statesman  or  politician, 
199.] 

[Leith,  9,  50.] 

| Lerwick,  50.] 

[Letters,  men  of,  unprosperous  race,  57;  drawn 
from  the  universities  by  the  large  benefices  of¬ 
fered  by  the  church,  355.] 

Levant,  174. 

Levity,  the  vices  of,  ruinous  to  the  common 
people,  and  therefore  severely  censured  by 
them,  346. 

Lewis,  the  Fat,  172. 

Liberty,  [perfect,  necessary  for  correspondence  of 
market  and  natural  price,  23,  26;  and  for  equal¬ 
ity  of  advantages  of  different  employments,  42, 
51;  flagrantly  violated  by  the  laws  of  settlement, 
61;]  three  duties  only  necessary  for  a  sovereign 
to  attend  to,  for  supporting  a  system  of,  300. 


[Licences  to  consume,  Decker’s  plan  of  taxation 
by,  386.] 

[“Light  come  light  go,”  applicable  to  high  profits, 
266.] 

[Ligue,  270.] 

Lima,  computed  number  of  inhabitants  of  that 
city,  89,  244. 

Linen  manufacture,  [open  to  everybody,  58;]  nar¬ 
row  policy  of  the  master  manufacturers  in,  280; 
[high  price  in  ancient  Rome,  299;  use  of,  makes 
soap  necessary,  385;  duty  on  Scotch,  405.] 

[Lionnois,  73.] 

[Liquors  dearer  owing  to  taxes,  33;  brewed  and 
distilled  for  private  use,  392.] 

[Lisbon,  gold  and  silver  imported  to,  90;  both 
residence  of  a  court  and  a  trading  city,  145; 
gold  could  easily  be  brought  from  185;  carrying 
trade  example,  193;  bills  paid  in  common  cur¬ 
rency,  204.] 

[Weekly  amount  of  gold  brought  from,  to 
London,  235;  exorbitant  profits  at,  266;  mer¬ 
chants  magnificent  lord,  266.] 

Literature,  the  rewards  of,  reduced  by  competition, 
57;  was  more  profitable  in  ancient  Greece,  57-8; 
the  cheapness  of  literary  education  an  advantage 
to  the  public,  58. 

[Liverpool,  represented  on  the  African  Company’s 
committee,  322.] 

[Loango,  240.] 

Loans  of  money,  the  nature  of,  analysed,  152;  the 
extensive  operation  of,  152. 

[Local  revenue,  the  proper  source  of  maintenance 
for  public  works  and  services,  318,  357;  some¬ 
times  maintains  schools  and  colleges,  331;  peages 
and  duties  of  passage  formed  part  of,  395.] 

[Lochabar,  177.] 

[Lochiel,  Cameron  of,  177.] 

Locke,  Mr.,  remarks  on  his  opinion  of  the  differ¬ 
ences  between  the  market  and  mint  prices  of 
silver  bullion,  18;  his  account  of  the  cause  of 
lowering  the  rates  of  interest  for  money,  ex¬ 
amined,  153;  his  distinction  between  money  and 
moveable  goods,  182. 

[Locri,  244.] 

Lodgings,  cheaper  in  London,  than  in  any  other 
capital  city  in  Europe,  50. 

Logic,  the  origin  and  employment  of,  181. 

[Lombardy,  181.] 

[London,  road  and  sea  traffic  to  Edinburgh  and 
Calcutta,  9;  price  of  silver,  16;  wages  lower 
than  in  New  York,  29;  wages,  31;  early  decay 
of  carpenters,  34;  bankers  pay  no  interest,  38; 
great  companies  borrowed  at  5  per  cent  after 
the  late  war,  39;  wages  of  labourers  and  brick¬ 
layers  and  masons,  43;  chairmen  employed  as 
bricklayers,  43;  employment  from  day  to  day, 
44;  tailors  often  out  of  employment,  44;  coal- 
heavers,  44;  wages  of  common  labour,  44;  w'ages 
of  seamen  and  other  labourers  compared  with 
those  paid  at  Edinburgh,  46;  lodging  cheap,  50; 
silkweavers’  byelaw,  51;  counties  near,  petitioned 
against  turnpikes,  63;  meat  fallen  in  price  com- 


Index 


pared  with  bread,  65;  societies  of  merchants  buy 
land  in  sugar  colonies,  68;  chairmen,  porters, 
coal-heavers,  and  prostitutes,  Irish,  70;  stone 
quarry  near,  affords  considerable  rent,  70;  paving 
stones  from  Scotland,  71;  civil  war  raised  the 
price  of  corn,  84;  price  of  meat,  96,  98;  mer¬ 
chants  have  not  the  advantage  of  Scotch  cash 
accounts,  128;  transactions  of  Scotch  banks,  129; 
drawing  and  redrawing,  133;  no  bank  notes 
under  £10,  139;  exchange  with  Carlisle  and 
Dumfries,  141;  residence  of  a  court,  but  a  trading 
city,  145;  fire  and  plague,  149;  trade  with  Scot¬ 
land,  159;  coal  trade  with  Newcastle,  160; 
French  cambrics  may  be  imported,  202;  ex¬ 
change  with  Paris,  203;  and  other  foreign 
towns,  204.] 

[Herring  fishery  company,  223;  fifth  of  gold 
and  silver  found  in  colonies  reserved  to  the 
king  in  the  patent  of  the  London  company, 
243;  merchants  not  so  magnificent  as  those  of 
Cadiz  and  Lisbon,  nor  so  parsimonious  as  those 
of  Amsterdam,  266;  entrepot  for  German  and 
American  trade,  272;  streets  better  cared  for  by 
local  administration,  318;  expensive  port,  321; 
represented  on  the  committee  of  the  African 
Company,  322;  land  tax,  360,  373;  windows  and 
rent,  372;  porter  brewery,  392.] 

[London  Assurance  Company,  330,  331.] 

[Lorenzo  de’  Medici,  his  trading  debts  paid  by 
Florence,  358.] 

[Lorraine,  401.] 

Lotteries,  the  true  nature  of,  and  the  causes  of 
their  success,  explained,  45;  [silver  and  gold  min¬ 
ing  the  most  disadvantageous  in  the  world,  242.] 
[Lowndes  quoted,  84,  85,  203.] 

[Lucayan  Islands,  241.] 

[Lucca,  174.] 

[Lucerne,  tax  on  the  sale  of  land,  378.] 

[Lucian,  quoted,  339.] 

Luck,  instances  of  the  universal  reliance  mankind 
have  on  it,  46. 

[Luctuosa  hereditas,  378.] 

Lutherans,  origin  and  principles  of  that  sect,  353. 
Luxuries,  distinguished  from  necessaries,  383;  op¬ 
eration  of  taxes  on,  384;  [excise  duties  chiefly 
on,  387;  English  taxes  on,  fall  chiefly  on  middle 
and  upper  ranks,  391;  of  inferior  ranks  to  be 
taxed,  391;]  the  good  and  bad  properties  of 
taxes  on,  395. 

[Lyceum,  339.] 

[Lycurgus,  185.] 

[Lyons,  distant  from  source  of  materials  and  des¬ 
tination  of  manufactures,  157;  silk  manufacture, 
174.] 

[Lysias,  a  teacher,  355.] 

Macedon,  Philip  of,  liberality  to  Aristotle,  58;  the 
superiority  that  discipline  gave  his  army  over 
those  of  his  enemies,  305-6. 

[Machiavel  quoted,  174,  344,  358.] 

Machines  for  facilitating  mechanical  operations, 
how  invented  and  improved,  5;  [men  who  have 


449 

received  expensive  education  like,  42-3;]  are  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  every  society,  122. 

[Machpelah,  11.] 

Madder,  the  cultivation  of,  long  confined  to  Hol¬ 
land  by  English  tithes,  367. 

[Madeira,  240.] 

Madeira  wine,  how  introduced  into  North  America 
and  Britain,  215. 

[Madox  quoted,  53,  171,  172.] 

[Madras,  279,  327,  328.] 

[Madrid,  145.] 

[Maese  River,  9.] 

Magens,  see  Meggens. 

[Mahometan  nations,  high  rate  of  interest  among, 
40.] 

[Maidservants,  tax  on,  in  Holland,  377.] 
[Majorazzo,  247.1 
[Malacca,  276.] 

Malt,  reasons  for  transferring  the  duty  on  brewing 
to,  392;  distillery,  how  to  prevent  smuggling 
in,  393. 

[Malta,  the  order  of,  land-tax  paid  by,  in  Silesia, 
366.] 

[Mamelukes,  240.] 

[Manchester,  52.] 

[Mandarins’  contempt  of  commerce,  296;  em¬ 
bezzle  from  payments  in  kind,  368.] 

[Manilla,  90,  91.] 

Manufactures,  the  great  advantage  resulting  from 
a  division  of  labour  in,  3;  instances  in  illus¬ 
tration,  6;  why  profits  increase  in  the  higher 
stages  of,  22;  of  what  parts  the  gains  of  manu¬ 
facturers  consist,  23;  the  private  advantage 
of  secrets  in  manufactures,  25-6;  peculiar  ad¬ 
vantages  of  soil  and  situation  monopolies,  26; 
corporation  privileges,  26;  the  deductions  made 
from  labour  employed  on  manufactures,  28;  in¬ 
quiry  how  far  they  are  affected  by  seasons  of 
plenty  and  scarcity,  35;  are  not  so  materially 
affected  by  circumstances  in  the  country  where 
they  are  carried  on,  as  in  the  places  where  they 
are  consumed,  36;  [price  of,  more  raised  by  high 
profits  than  by  high  wages,  41;]  new  manufac¬ 
tures  generally  give  higher  wages  than  old  ones, 
49;  are  more  profitably  carried  on  in  towns  than 
in  the  open  country,  54;  by  what  means  the 
prices  of,  are  reduced,  while  the  society  continues 
improving,  107;  instances  in  hardware,  107;  in¬ 
stances  in  the  woollen  manufacture,  107-8;  what 
fixed  capitals  are  required  to  carry  on  particular 
manufactures,  118;  for  distant  sale,  why  not 
established  in  North  America,  164;  why  manu¬ 
factures  are  preferred  to  foreign  trade,  for  the 
employment  of  a  capital,  164;  motives  to  the 
establishment  of  manufactures  for  distant  sale, 
174;  how  shifted  from  one  country  to  another, 
174;  natural  circumstances  which  contribute  to 
the  establishment  of  them,  174;  their  effect  on 
the  government  and  manners  of  a  country,  175- 
6;  the  independence  of  artisans  explained,  178; 
[best  commodities  wherewith  to  pay  armies  in 
foreign  parts,  189;]  may  flourish  amidst  the  ruin 


Index 


450 

of  a  country,  and  begin  to  decay  on  the  return 
of  its  prosperity,  189;  [particular,  may  be  ac¬ 
quired  earlier  by  means  of  regulations,  195;]  in¬ 
quiry  how  far  manufactures  might  be  affected 
by  a  freedom  of  trade,  200;  those  thrown  out  of 
one  business  can  transfer  their  industry  to  col¬ 
lateral  employments,  200;  a  spirit  of  combina¬ 
tion  among  them  to  support  monopolies,  201. 

Manufacturers  prohibited  by  old  statutes 
from  keeping  a  shop,  or  selling  their  own  goods 
by  retail,  227;  the  use  of  wholesale  dealers  to 
manufacturers,  228;  British  restraints  on  manu¬ 
facturers  in  North  America,  250,  251;  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  instruments  in,  prohibited,  287; 
manufacturers  an  unproductive  class  of  the 
people,  according  to  the  French  agricultural 
system  of  political  economy,  290;  the  error  of 
this  doctrine  shown,  294;  how  manufacturers 
augment  the  revenue  of  a  country,  295-6;  why 
the  principle  support  of  foreign  trade,  297;  re¬ 
quire  a  more  extensive  market  than  rude  pro¬ 
duce  of  the  land,  297;  were  exercised  by  slaves 
in  ancient  Greece,  298;  high  prices  of,  in  Greece 
and  at  Rome,  299-300;  false  policy  to  check 
manufactures  in  order  to  promote  agriculture, 
299;  in  Great  Britain  why  principally  fixed  in 
the  coal  countries,  385;  [can  lend  money  to  gov¬ 
ernments,  403.] 

Manure,  the  supply  of,  in  most  places  depends  on 
the  stock  of  cattle  raised,  96. 

[Marannon,  248.] 

[Marco  Polo,  quoted,  241.] 

[Maria  Theresa,  366.] 

Maritime  countries,  why  the  first  that  are  civilized 
and  improved,  9. 

[Marriage,  discouraged  but  not  always  prevented 
by  poverty,  33;  encouraged  by  high  wages,  243.] 
[Marseilles  treated  as  foreign  by  France,  399.] 
Martial  spirit,  how  supported  in  the  ancient  re¬ 
publics  of  Greece  and  Rome,  342;  the  want  of  it 
now  supplied  by  standing  armies,  342;  the  es¬ 
tablishment  of  a  militia  little  able  to  support  it, 
739. 

[Maryland,  retail  stores  often  belong  to  residents 
in  England,  158;  tobacco  exports,  214,  257,  261; 
expense  of  civil  establishments,  247;  established 
by  Catholics,  254;  revenue,  417.] 

[Massachusetts,  expense  of  civil  establishment,  247; 
tax  on  importation  of  molasses,  416;  paper 
money,  418.] 

[Mazeppa,  190.] 

[Meat,  see  Butchers’  meat.] 

[Mechanics  should  be  taught  in  the  parish  schools, 
342.1 

[Medici,  Lorenzo  de’,  358.] 

Mediterranean  sea,  peculiarly  favourable  for  the 
first  attempts  in  navigation,  9;  [carries  commerce 
of  Europe  and  Asia,  10;  British  carrying  trade 
between  ports  of,  161;  expense  of  last  war  partly 
laid  out  in,  188.] 

[Venetian  fleets  scarcely  went  beyond,  245; 
American  fish  sent  to,  249;  British  trade  to, 


partly  superseded  by  the  American  trade,  258-9, 
263;  tobacco  from  America  exported  to,  261; 
Gibraltar  and  Minorca  intended  to  protect 
British  trade  with,  323.] 

Meggens,  Mr.,  his  account  of  the  annual  importa¬ 
tion  of  gold  and  silver  into  Spain  and  Portugal, 
90-1;  his  relative  proportion  of  each,  92. 

[Memoir es  concernant  les  droits  et  impositions  en 
Europe  quoted,  358,  359,  364,  366,  371,  374, 
376,  378,  379,  381,  455;  more  accurate  as  re¬ 
gards  French  taxes  than  as  regards  those  of 
other  countries,  358.] 

[Mendicant  orders  zealous  because  supported  by 
voluntary  oblations,  344.] 

[Menservants,  tax  on,  in  Holland,  377.] 

Mercantile  system  [principles  and  practice  of,  182- 
288;  law  for  the  encouragement  of  coinage  due 
to  the  vulgar  prejudices  of,  239;  mean  and  malig¬ 
nant  expedients  of,  265;  raised  to  splendour  by 
the  discovery  of  America  and  the  Cape  passage, 
271-2;  monopoly  the  sole  engine  of,  274;  en¬ 
couragement  of  exports  and  discouragement  of 
imports  the  two  great  engines  of,  279;  sacri¬ 
fices  consumer  to  producer,  287;  contrived  by 
producers,  288;  agreeable  to  a  plodding  man  of 
business,  288;  really  encourages  manufactures 
and  foreign  trade,  299-300;]  explained,  388;  [not 
favourable  to  the  annual  produce,  388.] 

Mercenary  troops,  origin  and  reason  of,  303;  the 
numbers  of,  how  limited,  303. 

Merchants,  [every  man  in  some  measure  a  mer¬ 
chant,  10;  endeavour  to  suit  their  importation 
of  bullion  to  the  demand,  19;  silent  with  regard 
to  the  pernicious  effects  of  their  own  gains,  41; 
clamour  and  sophistry  of,  55;]  their  judgments 
more  to  be  depended  on  respecting  the  interests 
of  their  particular  branches  of  trade,  than  with 
regard  to  the  public  interest,  110;  their  capitals 
altogether  circulating,  118;  their  dealings  ex¬ 
tended  by  the  aid  of  bankers  notes,  128,  130; 
customs  of,  first  established  to  supply  the  want 
of  laws,  and  afterward  admitted  as  laws,  133; 
the  manner  of  negotiating  bills  of  exchange  ex¬ 
plained,  133;  the  pernicious  tendency  of  draw¬ 
ing  and  redrawing,  133;  in  what  method  their 
capitals  are  employed,  155;  their  capitals  dis¬ 
persed  and  unfixed,  157;  the  principles  of  foreign 
trade  examined,  161;  are  the  best  of  improvers, 
when  they  turn  country  gentlemen,  175;  [not 
citizens  of  any  particular  country,  180;  listened 
to  because  supposed  to  understand  trade,  184;] 
their  preference  among  the  different  species  of 
trade,  how  determined,  193;  [derive  greatest 
advantage  from  a  monopoly  of  the  home  mar¬ 
ket,  195;]  are  actuated  by  a  narrow  spirit  of 
monopoly,  [197],  211. 

The  several  branches  of  the  corn  trade  speci¬ 
fied  and  considered,  224[-233];  the  government 
of  a  company  of,  the  worst  a  country  can  be 
under,  246;  of  London  not  good  economists, 
266;  an  unproductive  class  of  men,  according  to 
the  present  agricultural  system  of  political  econ- 


Index 


451 


omy  in  France,  291;  the  quick  return  of  mer¬ 
cantile  capitals  enables  merchants  to  advance 
money  to  government,  403;  their  capitals  in¬ 
creased  by  lending  money  to  the  state,  403. 

Mercier  de  la  Riviere,  M.,  character  of  his  natural 
and  essential  order  of  political  societies,  296. 

[Merovingian  kings  had  treasures,  190.] 

[Messance,  quoted,  36,  86,  106.] 

Metals,  why  the  best  medium  of  commerce,  10-11; 
origin  of  stamped  coins,  11;  why  different  metals 
became  the  standard  of  value  among  different 
nations,  16-17;  the  durability  of,  the  cause  of 
the  steadiness  of  their  price,  91;  on  what  the 
quantity  of  precious  metals  in  every  particular 
country  depends,  103-4;  restraints  upon  the  ex¬ 
portation  of,  285;  see  Gold  and  Silver. 

Metaphysics,  the  science  of,  explained,  336. 

Metayers,  description  of  the  class  of  farmers  so 
called  in  France,  167. 

Methodists,  the  teachers  among,  why  popular 
preachers,  344. 

Methuen,  Mr.,  translation  of  the  commercial  treaty 
concluded  by  him  between  England  and  Portu¬ 
gal,  234;  [his  treaty  obliges  the  consumer  to  buy 
a  worse  commodity  from  a  more  distant  coun¬ 
try,  288.] 

[Metz  treated  as  foreign  by  France,  398.] 

Mexico  was  a  less  civilised  country  than  Peru, 
when  first  visited  by  the  Spaniards,  88;  [inferior 
to  China,  Japan,  and  Indostan,  191;  Cortez  at¬ 
tracted  to,  by  quest  of  gold,  242;  something  like 
an  Eldorado,  243;]  present  populousness  of  the 
capital  city,  244-5;  low  state  of  arts  at  the  first 
discovery  of  that  empire,  245;  [conquest  pro¬ 
jected  by  governor  of  Cuba,  254;  natives  beyond 
hunting  stage,  276.] 

[Milan  surveyed,  366,  415;  old  church  lands  rated 
one  third,  366;  taxes  on  bread,  386;  six  different 
provinces  with  different  excises,  399.] 

[Miletus,  244.] 

[Military  age,  proportion  of  population  within, 
302.] 

Militia,  why  allowed  to  be  formed  in  cities,  and  its 
formidable  nature,  172;  the  origin  and  nature  of, 
explained,  304;  how  distinguished  from  the  reg¬ 
ular  standing  army,  304;  must  always  be  in¬ 
ferior  to  a  standing  army,  305;  a  few  campaigns 
of  service  may  make  a  militia  equal  to  a  stand¬ 
ing  army,  305;  instances,  306. 

Milk,  a  most  perishable  commodity,  how  manu¬ 
factured  for  store,  99. 

Mills,  wind  and  water,  their  late  introduction  into 
England,  108. 

[Mine  Adventurers’  Company  bankrupt,  331.] 

Mines,  distinguished  by  their  fertility  or  barren¬ 
ness,  71-2;  comparison  between  those  of  coal 
and  those  of  metals,  73;  the  competition  be¬ 
tween,  extends  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  73;  the 
working  of,  a  lottery,  74;  diamond  mines  not 
always  worth  working,  75;  tax  paid  to  the  king 
of  Spain  from  the  Peruvian  mines,  87;  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  mines  not  dependent  on  human  skill  or 


industry,  104;  in  Hungary,  why  worked  at  less 
expense  than  the  neighbouring  ones  in  Turkey, 
298-9. 

Mining,  projects  of,  uncertain  and  ruinous,  and 
unfit  for  legal  encouragement,  242. 

[Minorca,  the  acquisition  of,  united  the  house  of 
Bourbon,  323.] 

[Mint,  origin  of,  11;  present  hurry  of  the,  19;  oper¬ 
ations  of,  like  the  web  of  Penelope,  236.] 

[Mint  price,  18,  19.] 

Mirabeau,  Marquis  de,  his  character  of  the  eco¬ 
nomical  table,  296. 

Mississippi  scheme  in  France,  the  real  foundation 
of,  137;  [fall  of,  246,  249.] 

[Mithridates,  306.] 

[Modena,  taxes  on  necessaries,  386.] 

Modus  for  tithe,  a  relief  to  the  farmer,  368. 
[Molasses,  duties  on  beer  made  from,  416,  417.] 
[Moluccas,  89,  225,  277;  see  Spices.] 

[Monasteries,  destruction  of,  deprived  the  poor  of 
charity,  59.] 

Money,  the  origin  of,  traced,  10;  is  the  representa¬ 
tive  of  labour,  13;  the  value  of,  greatly  depre¬ 
ciated  by  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines, 
14;  how  different  metals  became  the  standard 
money  of  different  nations,  16-17;  [money  makes 
money,  39;  the  great  wheel  of  circulation,  123, 
124,  126;]  the  only  part  of  the  circulating  capital 
of  a  society,  of  which  the  maintenance  can 
diminish  their  net  revenue,  123;  makes  no  part 
of  the  revenue  of  a  society,  123;  the  term  money, 
in  common  acceptation,  of  ambiguous  meaning, 
123;  the  circulating  money  in  society,  no  meas¬ 
ure  of  its  revenue,  124;  paper  money,  124;  the 
effect  of  paper,  on  the  circulation  of  cash,  124-5; 
inquiry  into  the  proportion  of  the  circulating 
money  of  any  country  bears  to  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  circulated  by  it,  126;  paper,  can  never  ex¬ 
ceed  the  value  of  the  cash,  of  which  it  supplies 
the  place,  in  any  country,  128;  the  pernicious 
practice  of  raising  money  by  circulation  ex¬ 
plained,  133;  the  true  cause  of  its  exportation, 
147;  loans  of,  the  principles  of,  analysed,  151; 
monied  interest,  distinguished  from  the  landed 
and  trading  interest,  152;  inquiry  into  the  real 
causes  of  the  reduction  of  interest,  153;  money 
and  wealth  synonymous  terms  in  popular  lan¬ 
guage,  182;  and  moveable  goods  compared,  182; 
the  accumulation  of,  studied  by  the  European 
nations,  183;  the  mercantile  arguments  for  lib¬ 
erty  to  export  gold  and  silver,  183;  the  validity 
of  these  arguments  examined,  184;  money  and 
goods  mutually  the  price  of  each  other,  185; 
overtrading  causes  complaints  of  the  scarcity 
of  money,  186;  why  more  easy  to  buy  goods 
with  money,  than  to  buy  money  with  goods, 
186;  [ridiculous  to  go  about  to  prove  that  wealth 
does  not  consist  in,  186;]  inquiry  into  the  cir¬ 
culating  quantity  of,  in  Great  Britain,  188;  effect 
of  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines  on  the 
value  of,  190;  money  and  wealth  different  things, 
191-2;  bank  money  explained,  205;  [value  in 


452 


Index 


proportion  to  the  necessaries  it  will  purchase, 
390;]  see  Coins,  Gold,  and  Silver. 

Monopolies  in  trade  or  manufactures,  the  tend¬ 
ency  of,  26;  are  enemies  to  good  management,  63. 

Tendency  of  making  a  monopoly  of  colony 
trade,  263-4;  countries  which  have  colonies, 
obliged  to  share  their  advantages  with  many 
other  countries,  273;  the  chief  engine  in  the 
mercantile  system,  274;  how  monopolies  de¬ 
range  the  natural  distribution  of  the  stock  of 
the  society,  274;  are  supported  by  unjust  and 
cruel  laws,  282;  of  a  temporary  nature,  how  far 
justifiable,  329;  perpetual  monopolies  injurious 
to  the  people  at  large,  329-30;  [in  particular  prod¬ 
uce  of  land,  394.] 

Montauban,  the  inequalities  in  the  predial  tallie 
[taille]  in  that  generality,  how  rectified,  366. 

Montesquieu,  reasons  given  by  him  for  the  high 
rates  of  interest  among  all  Mahometan  nations, 
40;  examination  of  his  idea  of  the  cause  of  low¬ 
ering  the  rate  of  interest  of  money,  153;  quoted, 
298,  338. 

[Montezuma,  245.] 

[Moors  in  Spain,  173;  in  Africa,  240.] 

Morality,  two  different  systems  of,  in  every  civil¬ 
ised  society,  346;  the  principal  points  of  dis¬ 
tinction  between  them,  346;  the  ties  of  obliga¬ 
tion  in  each  system,  347;  why  the  morals  of  the 
common  people  are  more  regular  in  sectaries 
than  under  the  established  church,  347;  the 
excesses  of,  how  to  be  corrected,  347. 

[Moral  philosophy  debased  in  middle  ages,  336.] 

[Moravia,  167.] 

Morellet,  M.,  his  account  of  joint  stock  companies, 
defective,  330. 

[Mosaical  law  of  inheritance  in  New  England,  247.] 

[Mourning,  a  public,  raises  the  price  of  black 
cloth,  25,  49.] 

[Mum,  tax  on,  392.] 

Mun,  Mr.,  his  illustration  of  the  operation  of 
money  exported  for  commercial  purposes,  183. 

[Muscovia,  trade  with  China  by  caravan,  89; 
yarn,  280.] 

Music,  why  a  part  of  the  ancient  Grecian  educa¬ 
tion,  338;  and  dancing,  great  amusements  among 
barbarous  nations,  338;  [not  of  much  conse¬ 
quence  in  forming  the  Greeks,  339.] 

[Nails,  effects  of  division  of  labour  in  making,  4-5; 
currency  in  a  Scotch  village,  10.] 

[Naples,  180.] 

[National  debt,  see  Debts,  public  and  Funds.] 

Nations,  sometimes  driven  to  inhuman  customs, 
by  poverty,  1;  the  number  of  useful  and  produc¬ 
tive  labourers  in,  always  proportioned  to  the 
capital  stock  on  which  they  are  employed,  1; 
the  several  sorts  of  industry,  seldom  dealt  with 
impartially  by.  2;  maritime  nations,  why  the  first 
improved,  8;  how  ruined  by  a  neglect  of  public 
economy,  148;  evidences  of  the  increase  of  a 
national  capital,  148;  how  the  expenses  of  indi¬ 
viduals  may  increase  the  national  capital,  150. 


[Natural  liberty,  violations  of,  unjust,  61,  140, 
228;  obvious  and  simple  system  of,  300.] 
Navigation,  inland,  a  great  means  of  improving  a 
country  in  arts  and  industry,  9-10;  the  advan¬ 
tages  of,  63;  may  be  successfully  managed  by 
joint  stock  companies,  330. 

Navigation  act  of  England,  the  principal  disposi¬ 
tions  of,  197;  motives  that  dictated  this  law, 
197;  its  political  and  commercial  tendency, 
197-8. 

Its  consequences,  so  far  as  it  affected  the  col¬ 
ony  trade  with  England,  257-8;  diminished  the 
foreign  trade  with  Europe,  258;  has  kept  up 
high  profits  in  the  British  trade,  259;  sub¬ 
jects  Britain  to  a  disadvantage  in  every  branch 
of  trade  of  which  she  has  not  the  monopoly, 
259;  [truly  shopkeeper  proposal  enacted  in, 
266.] 

[Navy  bills,  404.] 

Necessaries,  [effect  of  taxes  on,  198-9,  383-4,  412;] 
distinguished  from  luxuries,  383;  operation  of 
taxes  on,  383-4;  principal  necessaries  taxed,  385; 
[value  of,  390;  ought  not  to  be  taxed,  391;  taxes 
on,  may  diminish  landlord’s  revenue,  412.] 
[Necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life,  1,  13,  14, 
69,  412.] 

Negro  slaves,  why  not  much  employed  in  raising 
corn  in  the  English  colonies,  167;  why  more 
numerous  on  sugar,  than  on  tobacco  planta¬ 
tions,  167;  [export  of,  to  the  West  Indies  un¬ 
profitable,  324,  325;  taxes  on,  377;  not  worse 
fed  than  the  lower  ranks  in  England,  417.] 
[Negroes  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  drunken,  211;  ad¬ 
dicted  to  music  and  dancing,  338.] 

[Nemean  games,  342.] 

[Newcastle,  colliers’  wages,  44;  price  of  coal  at,  73; 
coal  trade  to  London  employs  more  shipping 
than  all  the  carrying  trade,  160.] 

[New  England,  in  three  provinces  the  eldest  son 
has  a  double  share,  247;  councils  chosen  by  the 
representatives,  253;  more  republican  than  Eng¬ 
land,  253;  established  by  the  Puritans,  254; 
progress  not  foreseen  in  1660,  258;  exports  to 
Great  Britain  not  equal  to  imports,  419.] 
[Newfoundland,  dried  cod  currency,  10.] 

[New  Granada,  88.] 

[New  Hampshire,  cost  of  civil  establishment,  247.] 
[New  Jersey,  established  by  Swedes,  245;  progress 
obstructed  by  Dutch  exclusive  company,  246; 
cost  of  civil  establishment,  247;  possessed  by  the 
Dutch  in  1660,  258;  exports  to  Great  Britain 
less  than  imports,  419.] 

[New  York  province,  high  wages,  29;  free  labour 
found  cheaper  than  slave,  34;  swallowed  up  New 
Jersey  and  was  acquired  by  England,  245; 
progress  obstructed  by  Dutch  exclusive  com¬ 
pany,  246;  expense  of  civil  establishment,  247; 
possessed  by  the  Dutch  in  1660,  258;  exports  to 
Great  Britain  less  than  imports,  419.] 

[New  York  City,  second  great  town  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  colonies,  245.] 

[Nicuessa,  242.] 


Index 


[Nightingale,  a  white,  extravagant  price  paid  for, 
95.] 

Nile,  river,  the  cause  of  the  early  improvement  of 
agriculture  and  manufactures  in  Egypt,  9;  [fa¬ 
mous  irrigation  works  on,  297.] 

[Nimeguen,  peace  of,  199.] 

[Norfolk,  master  weavers  restricted  to  two  ap¬ 
prentices,  51.] 

[Norman  lords,  their  jurisdiction  no  greater  than 
that  of  the  Saxons,  177.] 

[Normandy,  398.] 

[North  Carolina,  expense  of  civil  establishment, 
247;  revenue,  417.] 

[Northumberland,  Earl  of,  his  household  book,  78; 

mountains  destined  to  be  breeding  country,  196.] 
[Northwest  passage,  243.] 

[Norway  exempted  from  Eastland  Company’s 
monopoly,  320.] 

[Norwich,  master  weavers  restricted  to  two  ap¬ 
prentices,  51.] 

[Nova  Belgia  divided  into  New  York  and  New 
Jersey,  246.] 

[Novae  Tabulae,  demand  of  Roman  poor  for,  413- 
14.] 

[Nova  Scotia,  expense  of  civil  establishment,  247.] 
[Nugnes  de  Balboa,  Vasco,  242.] 

[Nuremberg,  bank  of,  204-5.] 

[Oatmeal,  principal  and  best  food  of  Scotch  com¬ 
mon  people,  32.] 

Oats,  bread  made  of,  not  so  suitable  to  the  human 
constitution,  as  that  made  of  wheat,  69-70. 
[Oceana  as  likely  as  free  trade  in  Great  Britain, 
201.] 

[Offices,  salaries  of  public,  taxable,  382.] 

[Oieda,  242.] 

[Olympic  games,  342.] 

Ontology,  the  science  of,  explained,  336. 

[Optional  clause,  140.] 

[Orleans,  Duke  of,  137.] 

[Ortolans,  fattened  in  France,  98.] 

[Overtrading  occurs  when  profits  are  unusually 
high,  186.] 

Oxford,  the  professorships  there,  sinecures ,  332. 
[Oxfordshire,  coal  and  wood  mixed,  72.] 

[Palladius  quoted,  66.] 

[Palos,  240.] 

Paper  money,  the  credit  of,  how  established,  124; 
the  operation  of  paper  money  explained,  124-5; 
its  effect  on  the  circulation  of  cash,  124-5;  pro¬ 
motes  industry,  125;  operation  of  the  several 
banking  companies  established  in  Scotland, 
126-7;  can  never  exceed  the  value  of  the  gold 
and  silver,  of  which  it  supplies  the  place,  in 
any  country,  128;  consequences  of  too  much 
paper  being  issued,  129;  the  practice  of  drawing 
and  redrawing  explained,  with  its  pernicious 
effects,  133;  the  advantages  and  disadvantages 
of  paper  credit  stated.  138;  ill  effects  of  notes 
issued  for  small  sums.  139;  suppressing  small 
notes,  renders  money  more  plentiful.  139;  the 


453 

currency  of,  does  not  affect  the  prices  of  goods. 
140;  account  of  the  paper  currency  in  North 
America,  141;  expedient  of  the  government  of 
Pennsylvania  to  raise  money,  141,  359;  why  con¬ 
venient  for  the  domestic  purposes  of  the  North 
Americans,  418. 

[Paraguay,  88.] 

Paris,  [lodging  dearer  than  in  London,  50;  work¬ 
man  serves  five  years  as  apprentice  and  five 
more  as  journeyman,  52;  Rouen  the  entrepot  of 
goods  for,  145;]  enjoys  little  more  trade  than  is 
necessary  for  the  consumption  of  its  inhabitants. 
145;  [exchange  with  London,  203.] 

[Custom  of,  with  regard  to  inheritance,  fol¬ 
lowed  in  the  colonies,  247;  defended  itself 
against  Henry  IV,  270;  parliament  of,  349.] 
Parish  ministers,  evils  attending  vesting  the  elec¬ 
tion  of,  in  the  people,  353-4. 

[Parliament,  intimidated  by  private  interests,  201; 
managed  by  the  sovereign,  268,  349;  might  be 
extended  to  the  colonies,  415.] 

[Parliaments,  the  French,  little  trade  in  the  towns 
where  they  are,  145;  court  fees  and  salaries,  313; 
that  of  Paris  managed  by  Choiseul,  349;  mem¬ 
oir  of  that  of  Bordeaux  quoted,  407.] 

[Parma,  taxes  on  bread,  386;  several  provinces 
with  separate  excises,  399.] 

Parsimony  is  the  immediate  cause  of  the  increase 
of  capitals,  146;  Dromotes  industry,  146;  frugal 
men  public  benefactors,  147;  [destroyed  by  high 
profits,  265;]  is  the  only  means  by  which  artifi¬ 
cers  and  manufacturers  can  add  to  the  revenue 
and  wealth  of  society,  according  to  the  French 
agricultural  system  of  political  economy,  291 . 
[Parthians,  306-7.] 

[Passage  duties,  170-1,  395.] 

Pasture  land,  [not  so  productive  as  corn-fields,  64;] 
under  what  circumstances  more  profitable  than 
arable  land,  64;  why  it  ought  to  be  enclosed,  65. 
[Patents,  justification  of,  329.] 

Patronage,  the  right  of,  why  established  in  Scot¬ 
land,  354. 

[Pawnshop,  public,  at  Hamburg,  359.] 

Pay,  military,  origin  and  reason  of,  302. 

[Peages,  357,  395.] 

[Pedlars,  tax  on,  374-5.] 

[Pekin,  caravans  from  Muscovy  to,  89.] 

[Pelham,  Mr.,  quoted,  87;  redeemed  six  millions 
of  debt,  409.] 

[Peloponnesians  served  in  war  without  pay,  302.] 
[Peltry,  70.] 

[Penelope,  236.] 

Pennsylvania,  account  of  the  paper  currency  there. 
141,  359,  418;  [Quakers  liberated  their  slaves. 
167.] 

[No  right  of  primogeniture.  247;  expense  of 
civil  establishment,  247;  established  by  Quakers. 
254;  not  planted  in  1660,  258;]  good  conse¬ 
quences  of  the  government  there  having  no  re¬ 
ligious  establishment.  346;  derive  a  revenue 
from  their  paper  currency.  [359 1.  418;  imports 
from  Great  Britain  exceed  exports.  419.] 


Index 


454 

[Pensions,  a  derivative  revenue,  22;  value  of,  equal 
to  their  power  of  purchasing,  124.] 

People,  how  divided  into  productive  and  unpro¬ 
ductive  classes,  according  to  the  present  French 
system  of  agricultural  political  economy,  289; 
the  unproductive  class,  greatly  useful  to  the 
others,  291;  the  great  body  of,  how  rendered 
unwarlike,  304;  the  different  opportunities  of 
education  in  the  different  ranks  of,  341-2;  the 
inferior  ranks  of,  the  greatest  consumers,  391; 
the  luxurious  expences  of  these  ranks  ought  only 
to  be  taxed,  391. 

[Perpetuities  abhorred  by  English  common  law, 
166;  different  kinds  of,  prevent  division  of  great 
estates  in  Europe,  179.] 

Persecution  for  religious  opinions,  the  true  cause 
of,  344. 

[Persia,  Gulf  of,  10;  many  servants  but  few  sol¬ 
diers  at  the  court  of,  190;  militia  defeated  by 
the  Greek  militia,  307.] 

Peru,  the  discovery  of  the  silver  mines  in,  oc¬ 
casioned  those  in  Europe  to  be  in  a  great  meas¬ 
ure  abandoned,  73;  these  mines  yield  but  small 
profit  to  the  proprietors,  73;  tax  paid  to  the 
king  of  Spain  from  these  mines,  [74],  87;  the 
early  accounts  of  the  splendour  and  state  of  arts 
in  this  country,  greatly  exaggerated,  88;  present 
state  of,  under  the  Spanish  government,  88;  the 
working  of  the  mines  there  become  gradually 
more  expensive,  93;  [food,  clothing  and  lodging 
the  price  paid  for  gold  and  silver,  147;  silver  of, 
160,  185,  210;  less  rich  than  China,  Japan  or 
Indostan,  191.] 

[Reason  for  conquest  of,  242;  like  an  Eldorado, 
243;]  low  state  of  arts  there  when  first  dis¬ 
covered,  245;  is  probably  more  populous  now, 
than  at  any  former  period,  245;  [sums  spent  in 
receiving  a  new  viceroy,  248;  little  contributed 
by  Spain,  254;  natives  beyond  the  hunting 
stage,  276.] 

[Peter  the  Great,  his  great  reform  the  creation  of  a 
standing  army,  308.] 

[Pfeffel  quoted,  171,  note  3,  171,  note  2.] 

[Philadelphia,  high  wages,  34;  third  greatest  city  of 
the  English  colonies,  245.] 

[Philip  of  Macedon,  58,  306.] 

[Philip  I  of  France,  172.] 

[ Philosophical  and  Political  History,  quoted,  91; 
see  Raynal.] 

Philosophy  [subdivided,  5-6;  philosopher  not  very 
different  by  nature  from  a  porter,  7.] 

Natural,  the  origin  and  objects  of,  335;  moral, 
the  nature  of,  explained,  335;  logic,  the  origin 
and  employment  of,  335;  [study  of,  should  be 
universal  among  middle  and  upper  ranks,  347; 
nothing  so  absurd  as  not  to  have  been  asserted 
by  some,  386.] 

[Phocyllides,  335.] 

[Phoenicians  long  feared  to  sail  beyond  Gibraltar, 
9.1 

Physicians,  why  amply  rewarded  for  their  labour, 

44. 


Physics,  the  ancient  system  of,  explained,  336. 
[Picardy,  398.] 

[Piecework  leads  to  overwork,  34-5.] 

[Piedmont,  366.] 

Pinmaking,  the  extraordinary  advantage  of  a  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  in  this  art,  3. 

[Pisa,  shipping  encouraged  by  the  crusades,  173.] 
[Pizarro,  242.] 

[Placentia  bread-taxes,  386.] 

[Plano  Carpini,  quoted,  182.] 

[Plate  River,  64.] 

Plate  [sterling  mark  on,  gives  greater  security 
than  apprenticeship,  52;  annual  consumption  of, 
90;]  of  private  families,  the  melting  it  down  to 
supply  state  exigencies,  an  insignificant  resource, 
188;  profusion  of,  in  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
houses,  219;  new  plate  is  chiefly  made  from  old, 
236;  [tax  on,  most  conveniently  paid  as  an  an¬ 
nuity,  386.] 

[Plato,  quoted,  58,  167,  338;  the  Academy  assigned 
to,  339;  a  teacher,  355.] 

[Play  for  nothing,  better  than  to  work  for  nothing, 
145.] 

[Pliny,  quoted,  11,  17,  95,  167,  299.] 

Ploughmen,  their  knowledge  more  extensive  than 
the  generality  of  mechanics,  55. 

[Plutarch,  quoted,  58;  a  teacher,  355.] 

[Plymouth  Company,  243,  249.] 

Pneumatics,  the  science  of,  explained,  336-7. 
[Pneumatology,  336-7.] 

[Po  River,  transit  duties,  395.] 

[Poacher  everywhere  in  Great  Britain  a  very  poor 
man,  42.] 

[Pocock,  Dr.,  quoted,  176.] 

Poivre,  M.,  his  account  of  the  agriculture  of  Cochin 
China,  68. 

Poland,  [corn  as  cheap  as  that  of  France,  4;  dis¬ 
orders  have  raised  the  price  of  corn,  86;]  a  coun¬ 
try  still  kept  in  poverty  by  the  feudal  system 
of  its  government,  105;  [annual  produce  declin¬ 
ing,  106;  trade,  160;  serfs  still  exist  in,  167;  corn 
exchanged  for  wines  and  brandies  of  France, 
173.] 

[Industry  encouraged  by  colonization  of  Amer¬ 
ica,  255;  partition  and  pacification  of,  263; 
Russian  invasion,  307.] 

[Police,  regulations  of,  keep  market  price  above 
natural,  25,  26;  violent,  of  Indostan  and  ancient 
Egypt,  26;  rules  of  consequent  on  statute  of 
apprenticeship,  51-2;  laws  of  settlement  the 
greatest  disorder  of,  in  England,  59;  wrong  reg¬ 
ulation  of,  not  likely  to  be  advised  by  landlords, 
110.] 

[Vigilant  and  severe,  will  not  retain  gold  and 
silver  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  219;  of  Spain  and 
Portugal  lowers  value  of  precious  metals  there, 
232-3;  maintenance  of  roads  and  canals  a  branch 
of,  318;  particular  town  or  district  should  pay 
for  its  own,  357.] 

[Police  of  grain,  quoted,  78,  86;  see  Herbert.l 
[Policy  of  Europe,  favourable  to  the  industry  of 
towns,  2,  296;  nowhere  leaves  things  at  perfect 


Index 


455 


liberty,  42,  51;  considers  country  labour  as 
common  labour,  43.] 

1  Political  arithmetic,  Gregory  King’s  skill  in,  32; 

author  has  no  great  faith  in,  230.] 

Political  economy,  [private  interests  and  preju¬ 
dices  of  particular  orders  of  men  have  given 
occasion  to  different  theories  of,  2;  system  of, 
which  represents  national  wealth  as  consisting 
in  abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  104;  the  great 
object  of,  is  to  increase  the  riches  and  power  of 
the  country,  161;]  the  two  distinct  objects,  and 
two  different  systems  of,  182;  [Mun’s  title  a 
maxim  in  the,  of  England  and  other  countries, 
184;  under  the  mercantile  system,  object  of,  to 
diminish  imports  and  increase  exports,  192.] 
The  present  agricultural  system  of,  adopted 
by  French  philosophers,  described,  288;  classes 
of  the  people  who  contribute  to  the  annual  pro¬ 
duce  of  the  land,  289;  how  proprietors  con¬ 
tribute,  289;  how  cultivators  contribute,  289; 
artificers  and  manufacturers,  unproductive,  290; 
the  unproductive  classes  maintained  by  the 
others,  291;  bad  tendency  of  restrictions  and 
prohibitions  in  trade,  293;  how  this  system  is 
delineated  by  M.  Quesnai,  293;  the  bad  effects 
of  an  injudicious  political  economy,  how  cor¬ 
rected,  294;  the  capital  error  in  this  system 
pointed  out,  294;  [this  system  the  best  yet 
published  on  the  subject  of,  296;  very  important 
science,  296;  deals  with  the  nature  and  causes 
of  the  wealth  of  nations,  296;  of  Europe  favours 
manufactures  and  foreign  trade,  296;  to  promote 
cheapness  and  encourage  production,  the  great 
business  of,  327;  Morellet’s  great  knowledge  of, 
330.] 

[Politician,  insidious  and  crafty  animal,  199.] 

Poll  taxes,  origin  of,  under  the  feudal  government, 
170-1;  [on  negro  slaves,  a  tax  on  particular 
profits,  377;]  why  esteemed  badges  of  slavery, 
377;  the  nature  of,  considered,  382;  [French,  400.] 
[Polybius,  quoted,  338,  339.] 

[Pondicherry,  327.] 

[Pondo,  12.] 

[Pontage,  170.] 

Poor,  history  of  the  laws  made  for  the  provision 
of,  in  England,  59;  see  Settlement. 

Pope  of  Rome,  the  great  power  formerly  assumed 
by,  49-50;  his  power  how  reduced,  351;  rapid 
progress  of  the  reformation,  352. 

Population,  riches  and  extreme  poverty  equally 
unfavourable  to,  33;  is  limited  by  the  means  of 
subsistence,  34,  71;  [encouraged  by  high  wages 
in  colonies,  244;  taxation  of  luxuries  of  the  poor, 
no  discouragement  to  the  increase  of  useful,  384.] 
[Porree,  Father,  355.] 

Porter,  [tax  on,  has  not  raised  wages,  384;  price 
of  a  pot  of,  387;]  the  proportion  of  malt  used  in 
the  brewing  of,  392. 

Porters,  compared  with  philosophers,  7-8;  can  only 
find  employment  in  a  town,  8;  Irish,  in  London, 
70. 

Portico  assigned  to  Zeno,  339. 


[Porto  Bello,  326.] 

Portugal,  [small  part  of  Europe,  88;  in  16th 
Century  the  only  nation  regularly  trading  with 
East  Indies,  89;  lost  that  trade  to  the  Dutch, 
89,  191;  annual  produce  of  land  and  labour 
declining,  106;  trade  with  Britain,  159;  and  with 
Poland,  160;]  the  cultivation  of  the  country  not 
advanced  by  its  commerce,  180;  [expense  of  last 
war  laid  out  in,  188;  British  duties  on  wines, 
202,  211;  foreign  trade,  202.] 

The  value  of  gold  and  silver  there,  depreciated 
by  prohibiting  their  exportation,  219;  translation 
of  the  commercial  treaty  concluded  in  1703  with 
England,  234;  a  large  share  of  the  Portugal  gold 
sent  annually  to  England,  234-5;  [examination 
of  the  advantages  of  the  trade  with,  to  Great 
Britain,  235-6;]  motives  that  led  to  the  discovery 
of  a  passage  to  the  East  round  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  240;  [settlement  of  Brazil,  245; 
exclusive  companies  recently  established  for 
Fernambuco  and  Marannon,  248;  prohibition  of 
import  of  tobacco  except  from  the  colonies,  251; 
banished  Jews  to  Brazil,  254;]  lost  its  manu¬ 
factures  by  acquiring  rich  and  fertile  colonies, 
264;  [trade  with  East  Indies  open,  274;  and  none 
the  less  prosperous,  275,  276;  African  colonies 
resemble  the  American,  though  there  is  no 
exclusive  company,  276;  summary  of  effect  of 
Methuen  treaty,  288;  slave  trade  unprofitable, 
325;  see  Spain  and  Portugal.] 

[Postlethwaite,  quoted,  137,  note  1;  409.] 

Post-office,  [affords  a  revenue  to  the  state,  315;] 
a  mercantile  project  well  calculated  for  being 
managed  by  a  government,  358. 

Potatoes,  remarks  on,  as  an  article  of  food,  69; 
culture,  and  great  produce  of,  69;  the  difficulty 
of  preserving  them  the  great  obstacle  to  cul¬ 
tivating  them  for  general  diet,  70. 

[Potosi,  mines  of,  64,  83,  87.] 

[Pots  and  pans,  187.] 

Poultry,  the  cause  of  their  cheapness,  98;  is  a  more 
important  article  of  rural  economy  in  France 
than  in  England,  98. 

[Pounds,  various,  12;  accounts  kept  in,  17.] 

Poverty  sometimes  urges  nations  to  inhuman  cus¬ 
toms,  1;  is  no  check  to  the  production  of  chil¬ 
dren,  33;  but  very  unfavorable  to  raising  them, 
33. 

Pragmatic  sanction  in  France,  the  object  of,  351-2; 
is  followed  by  the  concordat,  351. 

Preferments,  ecclesiastical,  the  means  by  which 
a  national  clergy  ought  to  be  managed  by  the 
civil  magistrate,  348;  alterations  in  the  mode 
of  electing  to  them,  349. 

Presbyterian  church  government,  the  nature  of, 
described,  354;  character  of  the  clergy  of,  354, 
356;  [countries  exempt  from  tithe,  367.] 

Present  State  of  the  Nation ,  quoted,  188. 

[Press-gang,  49.] 

Prices,  [natural,  real,  market,  and  nominal,  12, 
13-20,  23-27;]  real  and  nominal,  of  commodities 
distinguished,  14;  [of  labour,  15,  63,  87;]  money 


456 


Index 


price  of  goods  explained,  20;  [component  parts 
of,  20-3;]  rent  for  land  enters  into  the  price  of 
the  greater  part  of  all  commodities,  21;  the 
component  parts  of  the  prices  of  goods  explained, 
21;  natural  and  market  prices  distinguished,  and 
how  governed,  23-4,  [26-7],  37. 

Though  raised  at  first  by  an  increase  of 
demand,  are  always  reduced  by  it  in  the  result, 
36-7;  [of  necessaries  and  labour,  380-1,  390.] 
Primogeniture,  origin  and  motive  of  the  law  of 
succession  by,  under  the  feudal  government, 
165-6;  is  contrary  to  the  real  interests  of 
families,  166;  [obstructs  improvement  in  Europe, 
179;  none  in  Pennsylvania,  and  restricted  in 
New  England,  247.] 

Princes,  why  not  well  calculated  to  manage  mer¬ 
cantile  projects  for  the  sake  of  revenue,  358. 
Prodigality,  the  natural  tendency  of,  both  to  the 
individual  and  to  the  public,  146;  prodigal  men 
enemies  to  their  country,  1 47. 

Produce  of  land  and  labour,  the  source  of  all 
revenue,  143;  the  value  of,  how  to  be  increased, 
148. 

[Production,  consumption  the  sole  object  of,  287.] 
[Productive,  and  useful  labourers  proportioned  to 
stock,  1;  and  unproductive,  142-51.] 

Professors  in  universities,  circumstances  which 
determine  their  merit,  354-5. 

Profit,  [must  be  obtained  by  the  undertaker  who 
hazards  his  stock,  20;  not  merely  a  different 
name  for  wages  of  direction,  21;  one  of  three 
original  sources  of  revenue,  22;]  the  various 
articles  of  gain  that  pass  under  the  common 
idea  of,  22-3;  [sometimes  included  in  wages,  23;] 
an  average  rate  of,  in  all  countries,  23;  [how 
affected  by  fluctuations  of  prices,  25;  name 
usually  given  to  gains  resulting  from  possession 
of  secrets  in  trade,  25-6;  raised  by  monopolies 
and  corporation  laws,  26;  depends  on  price  of 
provisions,  35;  general  theory  of,  37-41;]  averages 
of,  extremely  difficult  to  ascertain,  37;  interest 
of  money  the  best  standard  of,  37;  the  diminu¬ 
tion  of,  a  natural  consequence  of  prosperity,  38; 
clear  and  gross  profit,  distinguished,  40;  the 
nature  of  the  highest  ordinary  rate  of,  defined, 
41;  double  interest,  deemed  in  Great  Britain  a 
reasonable  mercantile  profit,  41;  in  thriving 
countries,  low  profit  may  compensate  the  high 
wages  of  labour,  41;  the  operation  of  high  profits 
and  high  wages,  compared,  41;  [inequalities  of, 
between  different  occupations,  42-62;]  compen¬ 
sates  inconveniences  and  disgrace,  42;  of  stock, 
how  affected,  [by  the  five  circumstances  which 
cause  differences  of  wages],  42;  large  profits  must 
be  made  from  small  capitals,  47-8;  why  goods 
are  cheaper  in  the  metropolis  than  in  country 
villages,  48;  great  fortunes  more  frequently 
made  by  trade  in  large  towns  than  in  small  ones, 
48;  [high,  a  cause  of  high  prices,  63;  a  charge 
which  comes  before  rent,  63;  lower  in  remote 
country  than  in  great  towns,  63;]  is  naturally 
low  in  rich,  and  high  in  poor  countries,  110; 


how  that  of  the  different  classes  of  traders  is 
raised,  156;  private,  the  sole  motive  of  employ¬ 
ing  capitals  in  any  branch  of  business,  162. 

[Kept  up  in  British  trade  by  the  colonial  mo¬ 
nopoly,  259;  high,  subjects  a  country  to  a  disad¬ 
vantage  in  trade,  259;  and  discourages  improve¬ 
ment  of  land,  265;]  when  raised  by  monopolies, 
encourages  luxury,  [high  rate  everywhere  de¬ 
stroys  parisomony,  265-6;]  small  republics  derive 
considerable  revenue  from,  358;  one  of  three 
sources  of  private  revenue,  361;  surplus  over 
interest  not  taxable,  372;  taxes  on,  372-4;  taxes 
on  particular,  374-77;  custom  duties  originally 
intended  as  a  tax  on,  387. 

[Progressive  state  best  for  the  body  of  the  people, 
34.] 

Projects,  unsuccessful,  in  arts,  injurious  to  a  coun¬ 
try,  147. 

Property,  [of  a  man  in  his  own  labour,  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  all  other,  52;  sacred  rights  of,  74;]  pas¬ 
sions  which  prompt  mankind  to  the  invasion  of, 
309;  civil  government  necessary  for  the  protec¬ 
tion  of,  309;  wealth  a  source  of  authority,  310, 
311. 

[Proprietor,  a  great,  seldom  a  great  improver,  166.] 
[Prosperity,  does  not  usually  last  more  than  200 
years,  180.] 

[Prostitutes,  Irish,  in  London,  70.] 

[Protagoras,  lived  in  splendour,  58;  went  from 
place  to  place,  338.] 

[Provence,  taille  in,  375.] 

[Proverbs  of  Solomon,  335.] 

Provisions,  how  far  the  variations  in  the  price  of, 
affect  labour  and  industry,  31,  35,  36;  whether 
cheaper  in  the  metropolis,  or  in  country  villages, 
48;  the  prices  of,  better  regulated  by  competi¬ 
tion  than  by  law,  61;  [parliamentary  inquiry 
into  causes  of  the  high  price  of,  65;]  a  rise 
in  the  prices  of,  must  be  uniform,  to  show  that 
it  proceeds  from  a  depreciation  of  the  value  of 
silver,  105;  [price  of,  and  wages,  380-1,  390.] 
Provisors,  object  of  the  statute  of,  in  England, 
351. 

Prussia,  [king  of,  accumulates  treasure,  188,  402-3; 
acknowledged  superiority  of  troops,  305;  troops 
veteran,  307;]  mode  of  assessing  the  land-tax 
there,  366;  [survey  and  valuation,  366,  415.] 
[Public  good,  not  much  good  done  by  those  who 
affect  to  trade  for  the,  194.] 

[Public  schools,  the  English,  less  corrupted  than 
the  universities,  334.] 

Public  works  and  institutions,  how  to  be  main¬ 
tained,  315;  equity  of  tolls  for  passage  over 
roads,  bridges,  and  canals.  315-16;  why  govern¬ 
ment  ought  not  to  have  the  management  of 
turnpikes.  317;  nor  of  other  public  works,  318-19: 
[deficiencies  in  the  receipts  from,  must  be  made 
good  from  taxes.  357;  six  days'  labour  originally 
sufficient  for  all,  359.] 

[Puritans  founded  New  England,  254.1 
Purveyance,  a  service  still  exacted  in  most  parts 
of  Europe,  169. 


Index 


457 


[Pythagoras,  school  of,  established  in  a  colony, 
244.] 

Quakers  of  Pennsylvania,  inference  from  their 
resolution  to  emancipate  all  their  negro  slaves, 
167;  [established  the  colony,  254;  in  a  majority 
there,  346.] 

Quesnai,  M.,  view  of  his  agricultural  system  of 
political  economy,  293;  his  doctrine  generally 
subscribed  to,  296. 

[Quintilian,  a  teacher,  355.] 

Quito,  populousness  of  that  city,  244. 

[Racked  rent  takes  part  of  the  farmer’s  share, 
289.] 

[Raleigh,  his  dream  of  an  Eldorado,  242.] 
[Ramazzini,  his  book  on  the  diseases  of  workmen, 
35.] 

[Rates,  the  Book  of,  231,  286,  388,  389.] 

[Raynal,  quoted,  91.] 

[Recoinage,  of  gold,  18;  of  silver,  under  William 
III,  85,  404.] 

[Recovery,  common,  168.] 

[Reformateur,  Le,  quoted,  386.] 

Reformation,  rapid  progress  of  the  doctrines  of, 
in  Germany,  352;  in  Sweden  and  Switzerland, 
352;  in  England  and  Scotland,  352-3;  origin  of 
the  Lutheran  and  Calvinistic  sects,  353. 
[Reformers  found  Greek  and  Hebrew  versions 
more  favourable  than  the  Latin,  335.] 

[Regiam  majestatem,  quoted,  80.] 

[Registration,  duties  on,  337-8,  379,  380.] 
Regulated  companies,  see  Companies. 

[Relief,  a  feudal  casualty  once  a  source  of  public 
revenue,  378.] 

Religion,  [corn  laws  resemble  laws  respecting,  232; 
instruction  in,  343-356;]  the  object  of  instruction 
in,  343;  advantage  the  teachers  of  a  new  religion 
enjoy  over  those  of  one  that  is  established,  343; 
origin  of  persecution  for  heretical  opinions,  344; 
how  the  zeal  of  the  inferior  clergy  of  the  church 
of  Rome  is  kept  alive,  344;  utility  of  ecclesias¬ 
tical  establishments,  345;  how  united  with  the 
civil  power,  345;  [instruction  in,  may  be  paid 
from  taxes  without  injustice,  357.] 

Rent,  reserved,  ought  not  to  consist  of  money,  14; 
but  of  corn,  15;  of  land,  constitutes  a  third  part 
of  the  price  of  most  kinds  of  goods,  21;  [some¬ 
times  confounded  with  profit,  22;]  an  average 
rate  of,  in  all  countries,  and  how  regulated,  23; 
[less  affected  by  fluctuations  of  prices  than 
wages  and  profit,  25;  of  particular  vineyards,  26; 
causes  which  regulate,  27;]  makes  the  first  de¬ 
duction  from  the  produce  of  labour  employed 
upon  land,  27;  [depends  on  price  of  provisions, 
35;  highest  rate  of  profit  eats  up,  41;]  the  terms 
of,  how  adjusted  between  landlord  and  tenant, 
62;  is  sometimes  demanded  for  what  is  alto¬ 
gether  incapable  of  human  improvement,  62; 
is  paid  for,  and  produced  by,  land  in  almost  all 
situations.  63;  [varies  with  fertility,  63;  of  rice 
lands,  69;]  the  general  proportion  paid  for  coal 


mines,  73;  and  metal  mines,  73;  mines  of  pre¬ 
cious  stones  frequently  yield  no  rent,  75;  [rent 
of  mines  in  proportion  to  relative,  but  land  rent 
in  proportion  to  absolute  fertility,  75;]  how  paid 
in  ancient  times,  79;  is  raised,  either  directly  or 
indirectly,  by  every  improvement  in  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  society,  109;  gross  and  net  rent  dis¬ 
tinguished,  121;  how  raised  and  paid  under 
feudal  government,  144;  present  average  propor¬ 
tion  of,  compared  with  the  produce  of  the  land, 
144. 

[In  Great  Britain,  estimate  of  the  amount  of, 
360;  one  third  of  the  produce,  360;  revenue  of 
the  people  not  proportioned  to,  360;]  of  houses 
distinguished  into  two  parts,  368;  difference  be¬ 
tween  rent  of  houses,  and  rent  of  land,  370;  rent 
of  a  house  the  best  estimate  of  a  tenant’s  cir¬ 
cumstances,  370;  [house-rent  taxable  under  the 
land-tax,  371.] 

[Rents  (French  rentes),  377.] 

[Representation  unknown  in  ancient  times,  271.] 

[Republican  government  supports  the  grandeur  of 
Holland,  401.] 

Retainers,  under  the  feudal  system  of  government 
described,  176  [-178];  how  the  connexion  be¬ 
tween  them  and  their  lords  was  broken,  177. 

[Retaliation,  when  expedient,  199.] 

Revenue,  the  original  sources  of,  pointed  out,  22; 
[381,  411;]  of  a  country,  of  what  it  consists,  121; 
the  net  revenue  of  a  society  diminished  by  sup¬ 
porting  a  circulating  stock  of  money,  123;  money 
no  part  of  revenue,  123;  is  not  to  be  computed 
in  money,  but  in  what  money  will  purchase,  123; 
how  produced,  and  how  appropriated,  in  the 
first  instance,  143;  produce  of  land,  143;  produce 
of  manufactures,  143;  must  always  replace  capi¬ 
tal,  143;  the  proportion  between  revenue  and 
capital,  regulates  the  proportion  between  idle¬ 
ness  and  industry,  146;  both  the  savings  and  the 
spendings  of,  annually  consumed,  146;  of  every 
society,  equal  to  the  exchangeable  value  of  the 
whole  produce  of  its  industry,  194. 

Of  the  customs,  increased  by  drawbacks,  215; 
[severity  of  the  laws  for  the  security  of  the,  282;] 
why  government  ought  not  to  take  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  turnpikes,  to  derive  a  revenue  from 
them,  317;  public  works  of  a  local  nature,  always 
better  maintained  by  provincial  revenues,  than 
by  the  general  revenue  of  the  state,  318;  the 
abuses  in  provincial  revenues  trifling,  when  com¬ 
pared  with  those  in  the  revenue  of  a  great  em¬ 
pire,  319;  the  greater  the  revenue  of  the  church, 
the  smaller  must  be  that  of  the  state,  355; 
the  revenue  of  the  state  ought  to  be  raised  pro- 
portionably  from  the  whole  society,  356-7;  local 
expenses  ought  to  be  defrayed  by  a  local  rev¬ 
enue,  357;  inquiry  into  the  sources  of  public 
revenue,  357;  of  the  republic  of  Hamburg,  358; 
whether  the  government  of  Britain  could  under¬ 
take  the  management  of  the  Bank,  to  derive  a 
revenue  from  it,  358;  the  post  office  a  mercantile 
project  well  calculated  for  being  managed  by 


458 


Index 


government,  358;  princes  not  well  qualified  to 
improve  their  fortunes  by  trade,  358;  the  English 
East  India  Company  good  traders  before  they 
became  sovereigns,  but  each  character  now 
spoils  the  other,  358;  expedient  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Pennsylvania  to  raise  money,  359;  rent 
of  land,  the  most  permanent  fund,  359;  feudal 
revenues,  359;  Great  Britain,  360;  revenue  from 
land  proportioned,  not  to  the  rent,  but  to  the 
produce,  360;  reasons  for  selling  the  crown  lands, 
361;  an  improved  land-tax  suggested,  364;  the 
nature  of  and  effect  of  tithes  explained,  367; 
why  a  revenue  cannot  be  raised  in  kind,  368; 
when  raised  in  money,  how  affected  by  different 
modes  of  valuation,  368;  a  proportionable  tax  on 
houses,  the  best  source  of  revenue,  370;  reme¬ 
dies  for  the  diminution  of,  according  to  their 
causes,  389-90;  bad  effects  of  farming  out  public 
revenues,  399;  the  different  sources  of  revenue 
in  France,  400;  how  expended,  in  the  rude 
state  of  society,  401-2. 

[Revolution,  the,  of  1688,  404.] 

[Rhine,  9.] 

[Rhode  Island  expense  of  civil  establishment,  247; 

representatives  elected  the  governor,  253.] 

Rice,  a  very  productive  article  of  cultivation,  69; 
requires  a  soil  unfit  for  raising  any  other  kind 
of  food,  69;  rice  countries  more  populous  than 
corn  countries,  89. 

Riches,  [measured  by  the  necessaries,  conveniences 
and  amusements  which  can  be  enjoyed,  13;] 
the  chief  employment  of,  consists  in  the  parade 
of,  75. 

[Rich  man  consumes  no  more  food  than  the  poor, 

71J 

[Riding  school  inefficient  because  generally  a  pub¬ 
lic  institution,  334.] 

[Riga,  159,  203.] 

[Riquet,  Languedoc  Canal  entrusted  to,  316.] 

Risk,  instances  of  the  inattention  mankind  pay  to 
it,  46. 

[Rivers,  earliest  improvements  of  industry  on  the 
banks  of,  8;  benefit  remote  parts  of  the  country, 
63.] 

Roads,  good,  the  public  advantages  of,  63;  [an¬ 
ciently  maintained  by  compulsory  labour,  169.] 
How  to  be  made  and  maintained,  315;  [-318;] 
the  maintenance  of,  why  improper  to  be  trusted 
to  private  interest,  316;  general  state  of,  in 
France,  317-18;  in  China,  318;  [may  not  unjustly 
be  paid  for  from  taxes,  357;  anciently  main¬ 
tained  by  six  days’  labour,  359;  good  in  ancient 
Bengal  and  Egypt,  367.] 

[Robert  Capet,  352.] 

[Roman  Catholic,  see  Rome,  modern.] 

[Roman  law  developed  with  respect  to  precedent, 
339;  position  of  emancipated  children,  378.] 
Romans,  [had  no  coined  money  till  the  time  of 
Servius  Tullius,  11,  12;]  why  copper  became 
the  standard  of  value  among  them,  17;  [incor¬ 
porated  trades,  51;  no  apprentices,  52-3;  Athe¬ 
nian  philosophers,  ambassadors  to,  58;  corn  chief¬ 


ly  imported,  65;  cultivation  discouraged  by  low 
price  of  corn,  65;  silver  mines  work  by,  79;] 
the  extravagant  prices  paid  by  them  for  certain 
luxuries  for  the  table,  accounted  for,  95;  the 
value  of  silver  higher  among  them  than  at 
the  present  time,  95;  [fall  of  Western  empire, 
165;  no  right  of  primogeniture,  165;  entails  un¬ 
known  among,  166;  slavery  harsher  than  in 
medieval  Europe,  167.] 

[Colonization  by,  239-40;]  the  republic  of, 
founded  on  a  division  of  land  among  the  citi¬ 
zens,  239-40;  the  agrarian  law  only  executed  up¬ 
on  one  or  two  occasions,  239-40;  [cultivation  by 
slaves,  239-40;]  how  the  citizens  who  had  no  land 
subsisted,  239-40;  distinction  between  the 
Roman  and  Greek  colonies,  240;  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  former  slower  than  that  of  the 
latter,  244;  [dependency  of  the  former  on  the 
mother  state,  244;  slaves  more  protected  under 
the  emperors,  254;  colonies  furnished  both  men 
and  money,  256;]  origin  of  the  social  war,  270; 
the  republic  ruined  by  extending  the  privilege 
of  Roman  citizens  to  the  greater  part  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Italy,  [270],  271;  [wisdom  of  the 
senate,  279;  discouraged  manufactures  and  for¬ 
eign  trade,  298;  used  slave  labour  in  manufac¬ 
tures,  298;  the  pound,  299;]  when  contributions 
were  first  raised  to  maintain  those  who  went  to 
the  wars,  302;  [Campus  Martius,  303;]  soldiers 
not  a  distinct  profession  there,  303;  [elevation 
of,  the  second  great  historical  revolution,  306; 
Carthaginian  wars,  306;]  improvement  of  the 
Roman  armies  by  discipline,  306;  how  that  dis¬ 
cipline  was  lost,  307;  the  fall  of  the  Western 
empire,  how  effected,  307;  [abandonment  of  per¬ 
sonal  administration  of  justice  by  the  consul, 
314;]  remarks  on  the  education  of  the  ancient 
Romans,  338;  their  morals  superior  to  those  of 
the  Greeks,  338;  [teachers  of  military  exercises 
not  paid  by  the  state,  338,  342;]  state  of  law  and 
forms  of  justice,  339;  [equal  to  any  modern 
people  in  ability,  339;]  the  martial  spirit  of  the 
people,  how  supported,  342;  [eminent  men  of 
letters  were  teachers,  355;  comfortable  without 
linen,  383;]  great  reductions  of  the  coin  practised 
by,  at  particular  exigencies,  413-14;  [poor  peo¬ 
ple  in  debt  to  the  rich  and  demanded  new 
tables,  414.] 

Rome,  modern  [i.e.,  church  of,  pay  of  priest  in 
England,  56;  claims  merit  as  to  the  emancipa¬ 
tion  of  serfs,  168.] 

[Clergy  obliged  to  study  Greek  and  Hebrew, 
335;  demanded  persecution  of  Protestants,  344;] 
how  the  zeal  of  the  inferior  clergy  of,  is  kept 
alive,  344;  [turbulent,  348;]  the  clergy  of,  one 
great  spiritual  army  dispersed  in  different  quar¬ 
ters  over  Europe,  349;  their  power  during  the 
feudal  monkish  ages  similar  to  that  of  the  tem¬ 
poral  barons,  350;  [most  formidable  combina¬ 
tion  against  civil  government,  350-1;]  their 
power  how  reduced,  351;  [richest  church  in 
Christendom,  355.] 


Index 


[Rome,  modern  city  of,  residence  of  a  court  and 
consequently  idle,  145.] 

Rouen,  [statistics  of  silk  and  linen  manufacture  in 
the  generality  of,  36;]  why  a  town  of  great  trade 
[though  the  seat  of  a  parliament],  145. 

Rouge,  Cape,  322,  323.] 

[Royal  Caroline,  325.] 

[Royal  Exchange  Assurance  Company.  330.] 
Ruddiman,  Mr.,  remarks  on  his  account  of  the 
ancient  price  of  wheat  in  Scotland,  80;  quoted, 
93,  127. 

[Ruffhead,  his  edition  of  the  statutes,  79.] 

[Rum,  and  molasses  expected  to  defray  the  cost  of 
sugar  cultivation,  68;  foreign  article  of  common 
use,  389;  excise  duties,  390;  proper  subject  of 
taxation,  416,  417.] 

Russia,  [improvement  since  the  discovery  of  Amer¬ 
ica,  88;  serfs  still  exist  in,  167;  peace  with  Turkey, 
263;  fleet  in  the  Archipelago,  263;  soldiers  not 
inferior  to  the  Prussian,  307;]  wras  civilised  under 
Peter  I  by  a  standing  army,  308;  [early  em¬ 
bassies  to,  319.] 

[Russian  Company,  320.] 

Sailors,  why  no  sensible  inconvenience  felt  by  the 
great  numbers  disbanded  at  the  close  of  a  war, 
200. 

[Saint  Christopher  island,  half  in  possession  of 
the  French  in  1600,  258;  completely  cultivated, 
419.] 

[Saint  Domingo,  mines  abandoned,  73;  Columbus 
in,  241;  stocks  accumulated  in,  254.] 

[Saint  James’s  Palace,  land-tax  on,  360.] 
[Saint-Maur,  Dupre  de,  quoted,  78,  81,  86,  106.] 
[Saint  Thomas  island,  Danish  settlement,  245.] 
[Saint  Vincent,  new  field  for  speculation,  419.] 
[Sallee,  322.] 

[Salmon  fishery  pays  a  rent,  22.] 

Salt  [currency  in  Abyssinia,  10;  dearer  on  account 
of  the  tax,  33;]  account  of  foreign  salt  imported 
into  Scotland,  and  of  Scots  salt  delivered  duty 
free,  for  the  fishery,  [222;]  Append .,  424;  is  an 
object  of  heavy  taxation  everywhere,  385;  the 
collection  of  the  duty  on,  expensive,  396;  [the 
French  tax  on,  398,  400.] 

[San  Domingo,  see  Saint  Domingo.] 

[Santa  Cruz  island,  Danish  settlement.  245.] 
[Saracens,  173.] 

Sardinia,  the  land-tax  how  assessed  there,  366, 
[375,  415.] 

[Savoy  surveyed,  366.] 

Saxon  lords,  their  authority  and  jurisdiction  as 
great  before  conquest,  as  those  of  the  Normans 
were  afterwTard,  177. 

[Scandinavians,  the  ancient,  practised  music  and 
dancing,  338.] 

[Scarcity,  effect  of  years  of,  on  industry  and  w'ages, 
35,  36-7.] 

[Scholarships,  effect  of,  on  earnings  of  labour,  56, 
57.] 

Schools.  [English  public,  334;]  parochial,  observa¬ 
tions  on,  [charity,  342.] 


459 

Science,  is  the  great  antidote  to  the  poison  of 
enthusiasm  and  superstition,  347. 

Scipio,  his  Spanish  militia,  rendered  superior  to 
the  Carthaginian  militia  by  discipline  and  serv¬ 
ice,  306. 

Scotland,  [in  the  Highlands  every  farmer  a  butcher, 
etc.,  8;  village  in,  where  nails  are  currency,  10; 
reduction  of  value  of  the  coin,  12,  15;  wages  in 
low  country  vary  less  than  in  England,  31;] 
compared  with  England,  as  to  the  prices  of 
labour  and  provisions,  32;  [grain  dearer  in  17th 
century,  32;  wages  in  17th  century  5d.  to  6d., 
32;  wrages  in  different  parts,  32;]  remarks  on  the 
population  of  the  Highlands,  33;  [workmen  less 
diligent  than  in  England,  34;  linen  manufacture, 
36;]  the  market  rate  of  interest,  higher  than  the 
legal  rate,  38;  [wages  lowrer  than  in  England,  38; 
much  poorer  and  advancing  less  rapidly  than 
England,  38,  82;  wages  of  colliers  and  common 
labourers  compared,  44;]  the  situation  of  cot¬ 
tagers  there,  described,  50;  [knitted  stockings  in 
many  places  cheaper  than  woven,  50;  wages 
of  spinners,  50;]  apprenticeships  and  corpora¬ 
tions,  52;  [church,  respectable  though  poorly 
paid,  57;  easy  migration  of  labour,  61;  assize 
of  bread  could  not  be  fixed  there,  61,  incorpora¬ 
tion  of  bakers  in,  61;  rent  for  kelp  shores,  62; 
desert  moors  yield  rent,  63;  union  with,  opened 
English  market  to  cattle  of,  64,  96-7;  high  rent 
of  enclosed  land,  65;  land  could  not  be  culti¬ 
vated  by  factors,  68;  oatmeal  said  to  be  better 
food  than  wheat  flour,  69;]  the  common  people 
of,  why  neither  so  strong  nor  so  handsome  as 
the  same  class  in  England,  69;  [stone  quarry 
affords  no  rent  in  some  parts,  70;  bark  the  only 
part  of  w'ool  sent  to  market  in  parts  of  the 
Highlands,  71;  rent  for  quarries  of  London 
paving  stones,  71;  many  coal  mines  yield  no 
rent,  72;  sixth  part  a  common  rent  of  fertile 
lead  mines,  73;  conversion  prices,  79;  wages 
higher  than  in  France,  81;  price  of  corn  in  Eng¬ 
land  and  Scotland  compared,  82;]  cause  of  the 
frequent  emigrations  from,  83;  [proportion  of  gold 
and  silver  in  the  coinage,  93;  price  of  cattle  affect¬ 
ed  by  the  union,  96-7;]  progress  of  agriculture 
there  before  the  union  with  England,  97;  present 
obstructions  to  better  husbandry,  97;  [dairy  farm¬ 
ing,  99;  calves  formerly  killed  young,  102;]  the 
price  of  wool  reduced  by  the  union,  103,  283; 
operation  of  the  several  banking  companies 
established  there.  126  [-137;]  amount  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  money  there  before  the  union;  amount 
of  the  present  circulating  cash,  127;  course  of 
dealing  in  the  Scots  bank.  126  [-137;]  [cash  ac¬ 
counts  do  not  exclude  bill  discounting,  128; 
twenty-shilling  notes  lowest  paper  money  cur¬ 
rent,  128;]  difficulties  occasioned  by  these  banks 
issuing  too  much  paper.  129-30;  necessary  cau¬ 
tion  for  some  time  observed  by  the  banks  in 
giving  credit  to  their  customers,  with  the  good 
effects  of  it,  131;  [limit  of  paper  money  reached 
twenty-five  years  ago,  132;]  the  scheme  of  draw- 


T60 


Index 


ing  and  redrawing  adopted  by  traders,  133;  its 
pernicious  tendency  explained,  133;  history  of 
the  Ayr  bank,  135;  Mr.  Law’s  scheme  to  im¬ 
prove  the  country,  137;  [issue  of  small  notes  ex¬ 
tends  the  paper  circulation  to  retail  trade,  139; 
and  banishes  gold  and  silver,  139];  the  prices  of 
goods  in,  not  altered  by  paper  currency,  140; 
effect  of  the  optional  clauses  in  their  notes, 
140-1;  [union  caused  nobility  to  cease  residing 
in  Edinburgh,  145;  wool  manufactured  in  York¬ 
shire,  158;  trade  with  London,  159;  one  fifth  or 
one  third  of  the  land  entailed,  166;  steel  bow 
tenants,  168;  long  leases,  169;  no  leasehold  car¬ 
ries  a  preliminary  vote,  169;  hospitality  in  the 
Highlands,  176;  small  rent  for  Highland  farms, 
176;  territorial  jurisdictions  in  the  Highlands, 
176-7;  prohibition  of  export  of  gold  and  silver, 
183;  manufacturing  wine  in,  195;  mountains 
destined  for  breeding  grounds,  196.] 

[Herring  fishery,  222-3,  and  Appendix;  salt 
duty,  222;  herrings  an  important  part  of  food  of 
common  people,  223;  English  bounty  on  hemp 
imported  from,  280;  judges’  salary  from  interest 
of  money,  314;  parish  schools,  342;]  cause  of  the 
speedy  establishment  of  the  reformation  there, 
353;  the  disorders  attending  popular  elections 
of  the  clergy  there,  occasion  the  right  of  patron¬ 
age  to  be  established,  354;  [respectable  clergy, 
354;  eminent  men  of  letters  professors,  355;] 
amount  of  the  whole  revenue  of  the  clergy,  356; 
[excellent  character  of  church,  356;  forisfamil¬ 
iated  children,  378;  shoes  not  a  necessary  of  life 
to  women  in,  383;  linen  subject  to  duty  on  im¬ 
portation  into  England,  405;  little  malt  liquor 
consumed,  417;  more  smuggling  than  in  Eng¬ 
land,  417;  redundant  paper  money  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  enterprising  spirit,  418;  has  banished 
gold  and  silver  in,  418;  less  spirit  of  party  than 
in  England,  420.] 

[Scythia,  barbarous  became  inland,  10;  overran 
Western  Empire,  165;  if  united  could  conquer 
Europe  and  Asia,  302;  militia  of  Mithridates, 
306;  military  organization  preserved  after  fall  of 
Western  Empire,  307;  administration  of  justice 
a  source  of  revenue,  311;  not  much  beyond 
shepherd  stage  at  fall  of  Western  Empire,  312.] 

[Sea-coast,  earlier  civilisation  of,  8.] 

Sea  service  and  military  service  by  land,  com¬ 
pared,  46. 

[Secrets  in  trade,  25-6.] 

Sects  in  religion,  the  more  numerous,  the  better 
for  society,  346;  why  they  generally  profess  the 
austere  system  of  morality,  346. 

[Seignorage,  none  in  England,  18,  129,  204;  but 
some  delay  equivalent  to  one,  19;  would  in¬ 
crease  the  superiority  of  coin  above  bullion,  19; 
8  per  cent  in  France,  19,  204,  237;  diminishes  or 
removes  the  profit  on  melting  new  coin,  237-9.] 

[Seius,  95.] 

Self-love  the  governing  principle  in  the  intercourse 
of  human  society,  7. 

[Senegal,  286,  322,  388.] 


Servants,  menial,  distinguished  from  hired  work¬ 
men,  142-3;  the  various  orders  of  men,  who  rank 
in  the  former  class,  in  reference  to  their  labours, 
143;  their  labour  unproductive,  294;  [see  Men- 
servants  and  Maidservants.] 

[Servius  Tullius,  11,  12.] 

[Sestertius,  silver  coin  estimated  in  copper,  17.] 
Settlements  of  the  poor,  brief  review  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  laws  relating  to,  59  [-61;]  the  removals  of 
the  poor,  a  violation  of  natural  liberty,  61;  the 
law  of,  ought  to  be  repealed,  201. 

[Seymour,  150.] 

Sheep,  frequently  killed  in  Spain,  for  the  sake  of 
the  fleece  and  the  tallow,  100;  severe  laws 
against  the  exportation  of  them  and  their  wool, 
281-2. 

[Sheffield  produces  necessary  articles,  49;  master 
cutlers  only  allowed  one  apprentice,  51;  reduc¬ 
tion  in  price  of  goods,  107;  manufactures  grown 
up  naturally,  175.] 

[Shells,  currency  on  coast  of  India,  10.] 

Shepherds,  war  how  supported  by  a  nation  of,  301; 
[much  leisure  among,  304;]  inequality  of  fortune 
among,  the  source  of  great  authority,  310;  birth 
and  family  highly  honoured  in  nations  of  shep¬ 
herds,  310-11;  inequality  of  fortune  first  began 
to  take  place  in  the  age  of  shepherds,  311;  and 
introduced  civil  government,  311;  [every  man 
exerts  his  capacity  among,  341.] 

Shetland,  [wages  and  price  of  stockings,  50;]  how 
rents  are  estimated  and  paid  there,  62;  [herring 
fishery,  222.] 

[Shilling,  12.] 

[Shopkeepers,  prejudice  against,  unfounded,  156; 
nation  of,  266;  navigation  act  inspired  by,  266; 
proposed  tax  on,  375.] 

[Shropshire,  73.] 

[Siam,  Gulf  of,  10.] 

[Siberia  barbarous  because  inland,  10;  caravans 
through,  89.] 

[Sicily,  price  of  wheat  in  ancient,  95;  silk  manu¬ 
factures  imported,  157;  Venice  originally  im¬ 
ported  silk  from,  174;  colonized  by  Dorians,  239; 
greatness  of  Greek  colonies  in,  244.] 

[Silesia,  lawns  of,  202;  land-tax,  366.] 

Silk,  [weavers  in  London  allowed  only  two  ap¬ 
prentices,  51;]  manufacture,  how  transferred 
from  Lucca  to  Venice,  174;  [expensive  in  Greece 
and  Rome,  299;  English  manufacturers  could 
undersell  French  and  Italians  if  duty  free,  390.] 
Silver,  [varies  greatly  from  century  to  century 
but  not  from  year  to  year,  15;  used  for  pur¬ 
chases  of  moderate  value,  16.]  the  first  stand¬ 
ard  coinage  of  the  northern  subverters  of  the 
Roman  empire,  17;  its  proportional  value  to 
gold  regulated  by  law,  17;  is  the  measure  of 
the  value  of  gold,  17;  mint  price  of  silver  in  Eng¬ 
land,  18;  inquiry  into  the  difference  between 
the  mint  and  market  prices  of  bullion,  18;  how 
to  preserve  the  silver  coin  from  being  melted 
down  for  profit,  19;  the  mines  of,  in  Europe, 
why  generally  abandoned,  73;  evidences  of  the 


Index 


461 


small  profit  they  yield  to  proprietors  in  Peru, 
73;  [seldom  found  virgin  like  gold,  and  conse¬ 
quences  thereof,  74;]  qualities  for  which  this 
metal  is  valued,  74;  the  most  abundant  mines 
of,  would  add  little  to  the  wealth  of  the  world, 
75;  but  the  increase  in  the  quantity  of,  would 
depreciate  its  own  value,  76;  circumstances  that 
might  counteract  this  effect,  76-7;  historical 
view  of  the  variations  in  the  value  of,  during 
the  four  last  centuries,  77;  remarks  on  its  rise 
in  value  compared  with  corn,  78;  circumstances 
that  have  misled  writers  in  reviewing  the  value 
of  silver,  79;  corn  the  best  standard  for  judging 
of  the  real  value  of  silver,  82;  the  price  of,  how 
affected  by  the  increase  of  quantity,  82;  the 
value  of,  sunk  by  the  discovery  of  the  American 
mines,  83;  when  the  reduction  of  its  value  from 
this  cause  appears  to  have  been  completed,  84; 
tax  paid  from  the  Peruvian  mines  to  the  king  of 
Spain,  87;  the  value  of  silver  kept  up  by  an 
extension  of  the  market,  88;  is  the  most  profit¬ 
able  commodity  that  can  be  sent  to  China,  90; 
the  value  of,  how  proportioned  to  that  of  gold, 
before  and  after  the  discovery  of  the  American 
mines,  92;  the  quantity  commonly  in  the  market 
in  proportion  to  that  of  gold,  probably  greater 
than  their  relative  values  indicate,  92;  [a  proper 
subject  of  taxation,  93;]  the  value  of,  probably 
rising,  and  why,  93;  the  opinion  of  a  depreci¬ 
ation  of  its  value,  not  well  founded,  106. 

The  real  value  of,  degraded  by  the  bounty  on 
the  exportation  of  corn,  218;  [tax  on,  in  America, 
242;]  has  not  varied  since  the  imposition  of  the 
English  land-tax,  363;  not  necessary  to  the 
Americans,  418;  see  Gold  and  Silver.] 

Sinking  fund  in  the  British  finances,  explained, 
406;  is  inadequate  to  the  discharge  of  former 
debts,  and  almost  wholly  applied  to  other  pur¬ 
poses,  408;  motives  to  the  misapplication  of 
it,  408-9. 

Slaves,  the  labour  of,  dearer  to  the  masters  than 
that  of  free  men,  34;  under  feudal  lords,  circum¬ 
stances  of  their  situation,  167;  countries  where 
this  order  of  men  still  remains,  167;  why  the 
service  of  slaves  is  preferred  to  that  of  free  men, 
167;  their  labour  why  unprofitable,  168;  causes 
of  the  abolishing  of  slavery  throughout  the 
greater  part  of  Europe,  168. 

[Cultivation  under  the  Homans  by,  239;]  receive 
more  protection  from  the  magistrate  in  an  arbi¬ 
trary  government,  than  in  one  that  is  free,  253; 
why  employed  in  manufactures  by  the  ancient 
Grecians,  298;  why  no  improvements  are  to  be 
expected  from  them,  298;  domestic  pedagogues 
usually  slaves  in  Greece  and  Home,  338. 

[Smith,  Charles,  Tracts  on  the  Corn  Trade , 
quoted,  87.] 

[Smith,  John,  Memoirs  of  Wool ,  quoted,  101,  283.] 

Smuggling,  a  tempting,  but  generally  a  ruinous 
employment,  47;  of  tea,  89;  moderate  tax  does 
not  encourage,  238;  encouraged  by  high  duties, 
[362],  388;  remedies  against,  389-90;  [excise  laws 


obstruct  more  than  tnose  of  the  customs,  391;] 
the  crime  of,  morally  considered,  397;  |more  op¬ 
portunities  for,  in  thinly  peopled  countries,  417.] 
[Soap,  dearer  in  consequence  of  taxes,  33;  rendered 
necessary  by  the  use  of  linen,  385.] 

[Society,  human,  the  first  principles  of,  7.] 
Soldiers,  remarks  on  their  motives  for  engaging  in 
the  military  line,  46;  comparison  between  the 
land  and  sea  service,  46;  why  no  sensible  incon¬ 
venience  felt  by  the  disbanding  of  great  num¬ 
bers  after  a  war  is  over,  200;  reason  of  their 
first  serving  for  pay,  302;  [possible  proportion  of, 
in  civilised  society,  303;]  how  they  became  a 
distinct  class  of  the  people,  304;  how  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  militia,  304;  alteration  in  their 
exercise  produced  by  the  invention  of  fire¬ 
arms,  304-5. 

[Solomon,  Proverbs  of,  335.] 

[Solon,  laws  of,  233,  338.] 

[Solorzano,  quoted,  87.] 

[Sou,  12.] 

[Sound,  the,  transit  duty,  395.] 

[South  Carolina,  expense  of  civil  establishment, 
247;  duty  on  molasses,  416.] 

South  Sea  company,  amazing  capital  once  enjoyed 
by,  323-4,  [325;]  mercantile  and  stock- jobbing 
projects  of,  325;  assiento  contract,  325;  whale 
fishery,  325;  the  capital  of,  turned  into  annuity 
stock,  325-6,  405,  [406.] 

Sovereign  and  trader,  inconsistent  characters,  358. 
Sovereign,  three  duties  only,  necessary  for  him  to 
attend  to,  for  supporting  a  system  of  natural 
liberty,  300;  how  he  is  to  protect  the  society 
from  external  violence,  301, 308;  and  the  members 
of  it,  from  the  injustice  and  oppression  of  each 
other,  309;  and  to  maintain  public  works  and 
institutions,  315. 

Spain  [mark  on  ingots  of  gold,  11;  tax  of  one  fifth 
on  Peruvian  mines,  73,  87;  avidity  for  gold  in 
St.  Domingo,  76;  declension  not  so  great  as  is 
commonly  imagined,  88;  saying  of  Charles  V 
that  everything  was  wanting,  88;  colonies,  88; 
sheep  killed  for  fleece  and  tallow,  100;]  one  of 
the  poorest  countries  in  Europe,  notwithstanding 
its  rich  mines,  105;  [wool,  107,  157,  174,  175, 
283;  ambassador  gave  Queen  Elizabeth  stock¬ 
ings,  108;]  its  commerce  has  produced  no  con¬ 
siderable  manufactures  for  distant  sale,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  country  remains  unculti¬ 
vated,  180;  Spanish  mode  of  estimating  their 
American  discoveries,  182;  [wealth  according  to 
the  Spaniards  consisted  in  gold  and  silver,  182; 
prohibition  of  English  woollens  in  Flanders,  199; 
sober,  though  wine  is  cheap,  211.] 

The  value  of  gold  and  silver  there,  depre¬ 
ciated  by  laying  a  tax  on  the  exportation  of 
them,  219;  agriculture  and  manufactures  there, 
discouraged  by  the  redundancy  of  gold  and 
silver,  219;  natural  consequences  that  would 
result  from  taking  away  this  tax,  219;  [attempt 
to  deprive  Britain  of  Portugal  trade,  235-6; 
representations  of  Columbus  to  the  court.  241;] 


462 


Index 


the  real  and  pretended  motives  of  the  court  of 
Castile  for  taking  possession  of  the  countries 
discovered  by  Columbus,  242;  the  tax  on  gold 
and  silver,  how  reduced,  242;  gold  the  object  of 
all  the  enterprises  to  the  new  world,  242  [-243; 
Crown  derived  some  revenue  from  colonies,  244;] 
the  colonies  of,  less  populous  than  those  of  any 
other  European  nation,  244;  asserted  an  ex¬ 
clusive  claim  to  all  America,  until  the  miscar¬ 
riage  of  their  invincible  armada,  245;  policy  of 
the  trade  with  the  colonies,  248;  the  American 
establishments  of,  effected  by  private  adven¬ 
turers,  who  received  little  beyond  permission 
from  the  government,  254;  [Flota  drained  Ger¬ 
many  of  many  commodities,  263;]  lost  its 
manufactures  by  acquiring  rich  and  fertile  col¬ 
onies,  264;  [veterans  equalled  by  the  American 
militia,  305;  united  with  France  by  the  British 
acquisition  of  Gibraltar  and  Minorca,  323;  trans¬ 
action  with  South  Sea  Company,  325-6;  Greek 
not  taught  in  universities,  335;]  the  Alcavala  tax 
there  explained,  398;  the  ruin  of  the  Spanish 
manufactures  attributed  to  it,  398;  [large  na¬ 
tional  debt,  412;  see  Spain  and  Portugal.] 

[Spain  and  Portugal,  supposed  to  have  gone  back¬ 
wards,  88;  beggarly  and  misgoverned  countries 
though  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  is  low,  105; 
ineffectual  attempts  to  restrict  exportation  of 
gold  and  silver,  183,  185,  233;  quantity  of  gold 
and  silver  annually  imported,  189.] 

[Gold  and  silver  naturally  a  little  cheaper  there 
than  elsewhere,  219;  exports  of  gold  and  silver 
nearly  equal  to  the  imports  thereof,  219;  agri¬ 
culture  discouraged  by  the  cheapness  of  gold 
and  silver,  219;  would  gain  by  abandoning  the 
restrictions,  219-20;  history  of  the  American 
colonies,  244-5;  colonies  have  more  good  land 
than  the  British,  246;  right  of  majorazzo  in 
the  colonies  hinders  improvement,  247;  some 
revenue  drawn  from  the  colonies,  247-8,  256; 
colonial  commerce  confined  to  one  port  and  to 
licenced  ships,  248;  American  fish  trade,  249; 
absolute  government  in  colonies,  253;  benefited 
by  colonization  of  America,  255;  colonial  mo¬ 
nopoly  has  not  maintained  manufactures,  264; 
and  its  bad  effects  have  nearly  overbalanced 
the  good  effects  of  the  trade,  264;  capital  not 
augmented  by  the  exorbitant  profits  of  Cadiz 
and  Lisbon,  266;  the  colonies  give  greater  en¬ 
couragement  to  the  industry  of  other  countries, 
272;  only  the  profits  of  the  linen  trade  with 
America  spent  in,  272.] 

[Sparta,  iron  money  at,  11.] 

Speculation,  a  distinct  employment  in  improved 
society,  10;  speculative  merchants  described,  48. 

[Spices,  Dutch  are  said  to  burn,  in  plentiful  years, 
68,  225,  276;  imported  into  Great  Britain,  389.] 

[Spirits,  licence  to  retail,  375;  wages  not  affected 
by  taxes  on,  384;  taxes  on,  paid  by  consumers, 
386;  policy  of  Great  Britain  to  discourage  con¬ 
sumption  of.  393.] 

Spitalfields.  silk  manufacture,  174.] 


Stage,  public  performers  on,  paid  for  the  contempt 
attending  their  profession,  45;  the  political  use 
of  dramatic  representations,  347. 

[Stallage,  170.] 

[Stamp  Act,  the  American,  36,  262.] 

Stamp  duties,  [on  proceedings  in  law  courts  might 
maintain  the  judges,  314;  loans  taxed  by,  378;  1 
in  England  and  Holland,  remarks  on,  379;  [on 
wills  in  Holland,  379;  in  France,  379,  380;  have 
become  almost  universal  in  Europe  in  the  course 
of  a  century,  379;  often  taxes  on  consumption, 
380;  one  of  three  principal  branches  of  British 
taxes,  415;  extension  to  the  colonies,  415.] 

[Stamps  on  linen  and  woollen  cloth,  11,  52.] 

[Standard  money,  17.] 

[Statesman  or  politician,  who  attempts  to  direct 
the  employment  of  private  capital,  194;  insidious 
and  crafty  animal,  199;  in  barbarous  society 
every  man  a,  341.] 

Steel-bow  tenants  in  Scotland,  what,  168. 

[Stewart,  House  of,  349.] 

Stock,  [early  state  preceding  accumulation  of,  20;] 
the  profits  raised  on,  in  manufactures,  explained, 
21;  in  trade,  an  increase  of,  raises  wages,  and 
diminishes  profit,  37;  [profits  of,  37-62;]  must  be 
larger  in  a  great  town  than  in  a  country  village, 
38;  natural  consequences  of  a  deficiency  of 
stock  in  new  colonies,  39;  the  profits  on,  little 
affected  by  the  easiness  or  difficulty  of  learning 
a  trade,  43;  but  by  the  risk,  or  disagreeableness 
of  the  business,  47;  [circulation  of,  obstructed, 
58;]  stock  employed  for  profit,  sets  into  motion 
the  greater  part  of  useful  labour,  110;  no  ac¬ 
cumulation  of,  necessary  in  the  rude  state  of 
society,  117;  the  accumulation  of,  necessary  to 
the  division  of  labour,  117;  stock  distinguished 
into  two  parts,  117;  the  general  stock  of  a  coun¬ 
try  or  society,  explained,  119;  houses,  119;  im¬ 
proved  land,  119;  personal  abilities,  119;  money 
and  provisions,  120;  raw  materials  and  manu¬ 
factured  goods,  120;  stock  of  individuals,  how 
employed,  121;  is  frequently  buried  or  concealed, 
in  arbitrary  countries,  121;  the  profits  on,  de¬ 
crease  in  proportion  as  the  quantity  increases, 
145;  on  what  principles  stock  is  lent  and  bor¬ 
rowed  at  interest,  151-2. 

That  of  every  society  divided  among  different 
employments,  in  the  proportion  most  agreeable 
to  the  public  interest,  by  the  private  views  of 
individuals,  273-4;  the  natural  distribution  of, 
deranged  by  monopolizing  systems,  274;  every 
derangement  of,  injurious  to  the  society,  275: 
mercantile,  is  barren  and  unproductive,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  French  agricultural  system  of  political 
economy,  290;  how  far  the  revenue  from,  is  an 
object  of  taxation.  372;  [easily  removed,  373;]  a 
tax  on,  intended  under  the  land  tax,  373. 

Stockings,  why  cheaply  manufactured  in  Scotland. 
50;  when  first  introduced  into  England,  108. 

[Stomach,  desire  of  food  bounded  by  narrow  ca¬ 
pacity  of  the,  71.] 


Index 


463 


Stone  quarries,  their  value  depends  on  situation, 
70-1,  76. 

Stones,  precious,  of  no  use  but  for  ornament,  and 
how  the  price  of,  is  regulated,  75;  the  most 
abundant  mines  of,  would  add  little  to  the 
wealth  of  the  world,  75. 

[Stowe,  150.] 

[Suabia,  house  of,  172.] 

Subordination,  how  introduced  into  society,  309; 
personal  qualifications,  309;  age  and  fortune, 
309-10;  birth,  310;  birth  and  fortune  two  great 
sources  of  personal  distinction,  311. 

Subsidy,  old,  in  the  English  customs,  the  draw¬ 
backs  upon,  214;  origin  and  import  of  the  term, 
388. 

[Succession,  laws  of,  165.] 

[Successions,  tax  on,  in  Holland,  378.] 

Sugar,  [currency  in  some  West  India  Colonies,  10;] 
a  very  profitable  article  of  cultivation,  67-8. 

Drawbacks  on  the  exportation  of,  from  Eng¬ 
land,  214;  might  be  cultivated  by  the  drill 
plough,  instead  of  all  hand  labour  by  slaves, 
253;  [tax  on,  does  not  affect  wages,  384;  yields 
considerable  customs  revenue,  389;  duty  on, 
falls  chiefly  on  middle  and  upper  ranks,  391; 
planters  say  the  duty  falls  on  the  producer, 
394;]  a  proper  subject  for  taxation,  as  an  ar¬ 
ticle  sold  at  a  monopoly  price,  394;  [nowhere  a 
necessary  of  life,  416.] 

Sumptuary  laws  superfluous  restraints  on  the  com¬ 
mon  people,  150;  [resemblance  of  taxes  on  lux¬ 
uries  to,  386.] 

Surinam,  present  state  of  the  Dutch  colony  there, 
246. 

[Surmullet,  high  price  paid  for,  95.] 

[Sussex,  restrictions  on  transport  of  wool,  282-3.] 
[Sweden,  improved  since  the  discovery  of  Ameri¬ 
ca,  88;  tea  smuggled  from,  89;  established  ex¬ 
clusive  company  for  East  Indian  trade,  191; 
settlements  in  New  World,  245;  pitch  and  tar 
company  of,  250;  without  an  exclusive  company 
would  never  have  sent  a  ship  to  East  Indies, 
274;  and  would  have  suffered  no  loss,  275;  ex¬ 
empted  from  Eastland  Company’s  exclusive 
privilege,  320;  Reformation  in,  352;  eminent  men 
of  letters  professors,  355.] 

[Swift,  quoted,  388.] 

Switzerland  [farmers  not  inferior  to  the  British, 
170;  cities  became  independent,  172;  sometimes 
may  be  necessary  to  restrain  export  of  corn, 
232;  militia  regimented,  304;  militia  defeated 
Austrian  and  Burgundian  militia,  307;  whole 
people  exercised  in  use  of  arms,  343;]  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  reformation  in  Berne  and  Zurich, 
352;  [many  cities  capitals  of  little  republics, 
353-4;  respectable  clergy,  354;  eminent  men  of 
letters  professors  in  Protestant  cantons,  355;] 
the  clergy  there  zealous  and  industrious,  356; 
[both  religions  established  in  some  cantons,  356;] 
taxes  how  paid  there,  374,  378. 

[Syracuse  a  great  colony,  244.] 

[Syria,  306.] 


Taille,  in  France,  the  nature  of  that  tax,  and  its 
operation,  explained,  169,  375;  [real  or  predial, 
169;  real  and  personal,  375;  on  the  industry  of 
workmen  and  day  labourers  a  tax  on  wages,  381; 
not  farmed,  400;  should  be  abolished  and  re¬ 
placed  by  an  increase  of  vingtiemes,  400.] 
[Tailors,  the  lowest  order  of  artificers,  wages  in 
London,  44;  wages  in  London  regulated  by  stat¬ 
ute,  61.] 

Talents,  natural,  not  so  various  in  different  men  as 
is  supposed,  7. 

[Tallage,  169.] 

[Tallies,  exchequer,  404.] 

[Tarentum  a  great  colony,  244.] 

[Tartar  Khan,  history  written  by  a,  178.] 

Tartars,  [barbarous  because  inland,  10;  ignorant,  88; 
caravans  passing  through,  89;  taxes  on  travellers, 
170;  ancient  families  common  among,  178;  shep¬ 
herds,  with  no  regulations  of  law  as  to  trans¬ 
mission  of  property,  179;  wealth  considered  to 
consist  in  cattle,  182;  chiefs  have  treasures,  190.] 
Their  manner  of  conducting  war,  301;  their 
invasions  dreadful,  302;  [militia  serves  under 
ordinary  chieftains,  305;  obedience  in  the  field 
superior  to  the  Highlanders,  305;  most  formi¬ 
dable  enemies  to  the  Romans,  306;  conquests  of 
civilised  Asiatic  countries,  308,  344;  chiefs  can 
only  use  surplus  revenue  in  maintaining  more 
men,  310;  Khans  despotic,  310;  justice  a  source 
of  revenue  after  fall  of  Western  empire,  311; 
hungry,  344;  chief’s  revenue  profit,  357.] 
Tavernier,  his  account  of  the  diamond  mines  of 
Golconda  and  Visiapour,  75. 

Taxes,  [derivative  revenue,  22;  on  gold  and  silver 
very  proper,  93;]  the  origin  of,  under  the  feudal 
government,  170-1. 

[Moderation  of,  a  cause  of  the  prosperity  of 
British  American  colonies,  247;  ruinous,  of  pri¬ 
vate  luxury  and  extravagance,  248;  American, 
generally  insufficient  to  defray  the  cost  of  the 
colonies,  256;  on  exportation  of  wool  would 
cause  little  inconvenience,  284;  imposed  by 
means  of  a  monopoly,  329;  general  discussion  of, 
361-98;]  the  sources  from  whence  they  must 
arise,  361;  unequal  taxes,  361-2;  ought  to  be 
clear  and  certain,  361-2;  ought  to  be  levied  at 
the  times  most  convenient  for  payment,  362; 
ought  to  take  as  little  as  possible  out  of  the 
pockets  of  the  people,  more  than  is  brought  into 
the  public  treasury,  362;  how  they  may  be  made 
more  burdensome  to  the  people  than  beneficial 
to  the  sovereign,  362;  the  land-tax  of  Great 
Britain,  363;  land-tax  at  Venice,  364;  improve¬ 
ments  suggested  for  a  land-tax,  364;  mode  of 
assessing  the  land-tax  in  Prussia,  366;  tithes  a 
very  unequal  tax,  and  a  discouragement  to 
improvement,  367;  operation  of  tax  on  house 
rent,  payable  by  the  tenant,  369;  a  proportion- 
able  tax  on  houses,  the  best  source  of  revenue, 
370;  how  far  the  revenue  from  stock  is  a  proper 
object  of  taxation,  372;  whether  interest  of 
money  is  proper  for  taxation,  372;  how  taxes 


464 


Index 


are  paid  at  Hamburg,  374;  in  Switzerland,  374; 
taxes  upon  particular  employments,  374;  poll 
taxes,  377;  taxes,  badges  of  liberty,  377;  taxes 
upon  the  transfer  of  property,  377-8;  stamp 
duties,  379;  on  whom  the  several  kinds  of  taxes 
principally  fall,  379;  taxes  upon  the  wages  of 
labour,  380;  capitations,  382;  taxes  upon  con¬ 
sumable  commodities,  383;  upon  necessaries,  384; 
upon  luxuries,  384;  principal  necessaries  taxed, 
384;  absurdities  in  taxation,  385;  different  parts 
of  Europe  very  highly  taxed,  386;  two  different 
methods  of  taxing  consumable  commodities,  386; 
Sir  Matthew  Decker’s  scheme  of  taxation  con¬ 
sidered,  386;  excise  and  customs,  387;  taxation 
sometimes  not  an  instrument  of  revenue,  but  of 
monopoly,  388;  improvements  of  the  customs 
suggested,  389;  taxes  paid  in  the  price  of  a 
commodity  little  adverted  to,  396;  on  luxuries, 
the  good  and  bad  properties  of,  396;  bad  effects 
of  farming  them  out,  399;  how  the  finances  of 
France  might  be  reformed,  400;  French  and 
English  systems  of  taxation  compared,  400-1; 
new  taxes  always  generate  discontent,  408;  how 
far  the  British  system  of  taxation  might  be 
applicable  to  all  the  different  provinces  of  the 
empire,  415;  such  a  plan  might  speedily  dis¬ 
charge  the  national  debt,  416-7. 

Tea,  great  importation  and  consumption  of  that 
drug  in  Britain,  89;  [quantities  smuggled,  185; 
tax  on,  does  not  affect  wages,  384;  Dutch  licences 
to  drink,  387;  affords  large  part  of  customs 
revenue,  389;  duty  falls  on  middle  and  upper 
ranks,  391.] 

Teachers  [earnings  of,  57-8;]  in  universities,  tend¬ 
ency  of  endowments  to  diminish  their  applica¬ 
tion,  332;  the  jurisdictions  to  which  they  are 
subject,  little  calculated  to  quicken  their  dili¬ 
gence,  332;  are  frequently  obliged  to  gain  pro¬ 
tection  by  servility,  333;  defects  in  their  estab¬ 
lishments,  333;  teachers  among  the  ancient 
Greeks  and  Romans,  superior  to  those  of  modern 
times,  339;  circumstances  which  draw  good  ones 
to,  or  drain  them  from,  the  universities,  354-5; 
their  employment  naturally  renders  them  emi¬ 
nent  in  letters,  355. 

[Tenths  and  fifteenths,  169.] 

Tenures,  feudal,  general  observations  on,  144;  de¬ 
scribed,  165-6. 

[Terra  Firma,  241.] 

[Terray,  Abbe,  raised  rate  of  interest  in  France,  38.] 
[Teutonic  order,  land-tax  of,  in  Silesia,  366.] 
[Thales,  school  established  in  a  colony,  244.] 
[Theocritus,  quoted,  42.] 

[Theognis,  335.1 

Theology,  monkish,  the  complexion  of,  336. 

[Thorn,  William,  quoted,  77.] 

JThrasymenus,  battle  of,  306.] 

[Thucydides,  quoted,  302.] 

[Timaeus,  quoted,  11.] 

[Timber,  rent  for  land  producing,  71.] 

Tin,  average  rent  of  the  mines  of,  in  Cornwall,  73; 
yield  a  greater  profit  to  the  proprietors  than  the 


silver  mines  of  Peru,  73;  regulations  under  which 
tin  mines  are  worked,  74. 

Tithes,  [great  hindrance  to  improvement,  168; 
none  in  British  American  colonies,  247;]  why 
an  unequal  tax,  367;  the  levying  of,  a  great 
discouragement  to  improvements,  367;  [confined 
the  cultivation  of  madder  to  Holland,  367;]  the 
fixing  a  modus  for,  a  relief  to  the  farmer,  368. 

Tobacco,  [currency  in  Virginia,  10;]  the  culture  of, 
why  restrained  in  Europe,  68;  not  so  profitable 
an  article  of  cultivation  in  the  West  Indies  as 
sugar,  68;  the  amount  and  course  of  the  British 
trade  with,  explained,  161;  [profits  of,  can  afford 
slave  cultivation,  167;  trade  in,  210.] 

The  whole  duty  upon,  drawn  back  on  expor¬ 
tation,  214;  consequences  of  the  exclusive  trade 
Britain  enjoys  with  Maryland  and  Virginia  in 
this  article,  257;  [tax  on,  does  not  raise  wages, 
384;  contributes  large  amount  to  customs  reve¬ 
nue,  389;  Walpole’s  scheme  for  levying  the  tax 
on,  391;  monopoly  in  France,  400;  nowhere  a 
necessary  of  life,  but  a  proper  subject  of  taxa¬ 
tion,  416.] 

[Tobago,  a  new  field  for  speculation,  419.] 

Tolls,  for  passage  over  roads,  bridges,  and  navi¬ 
gable  canals,  the  equity  of,  shown,  315-6;  upon 
carriages  of  luxury,  ought  to  be  higher  than 
upon  carriages  of  utility,  316;  the  management 
of  turnpikes  often  an  object  of  just  complaint, 
316;  why  government  ought  not  to  have  the 
management  of  turnpikes,  316-17,  395;  [on  car¬ 
riages  an  unequal  general  tax,  317;  lay  ex¬ 
pense  of  maintaining  roads  on  those  who  benefit, 
357.] 

Tonnage  and  poundage,  origin  of  those  duties,  387. 

[Tonquin  vessels  at  Batavia,  276.] 

Tontine  in  the  French  finances,  what,  with  the 
derivation  of  the  name,  407. 

[Toul  treated  as  foreign  by  France,  398.] 

Toulouse,  salary  paid  to  a  counsellor  or  judge  in 
the  parliament  of,  313. 

Towns,  the  places  where  industry  is  most  profit¬ 
ably  exerted,  54  [-55];  the  spirit  of  combination 
prevalent  among  manufacturers,  54,  55;  accord¬ 
ing  to  what  circumstances  the  general  character 
of  the  inhabitants,  as  to  industry,  is  formed, 
145;  the  reciprocal  nature  of  the  trade  between 
them  and  the  country,  explained,  163;  subsist 
on  the  surplus  produce  of  the  country,  163;  how 
first  formed,  164;  are  continual  fairs,  164;  [rise 
and  progress  of,  170-5;]  the  original  poverty  and 
servile  state  of  the  inhabitants  of,  170;  their 
early  exemptions  and  privileges,  how  obtained, 
171;  the  inhabitants  of,  obtained  liberty  much 
earlier  than  the  occupiers  of  land  in  the  country, 
171;  origin  of  free  burghs,  171;  origin  of  cor¬ 
porations,  171;  why  allowed  to  form  militia,  172; 
how  the  increase  and  riches  of  commercial 
towns  contributed  to  the  improvement  of  the 
countries  to  which  they  belonged,  175  [-181; 
favoured  by  Colbert  at  the  expense  of  the 
country,  289.] 


Index 


465 


Tracts  on  the  Corn  Trade  quoted,  87,  196,  216,  217. 

Trade,  double  interest  deemed  a  reasonable  mer¬ 
cantile  profit  in,  41;  four  general  classes  of, 
equally  necessary  to,  and  dependent  on,  each 
other,  155;  wholesale,  three  different  sorts  of, 
159;  the  different  returns  of  home  and  foreign 
trade,  159;  the  nature  and  operation  of  the 
carrying  trade  examined,  160;  the  principles  of 
foreign  trade  examined,  161;  the  trade  between 
town  and  country  explained,  163;  original  pov¬ 
erty  and  servile  state  of  the  inhabitants  of 
towns,  under  feudal  government,  170;  exemp¬ 
tions  and  privileges  granted  to  them,  171; 
extension  of  commerce  by  rude  nations  selling 
their  own  raw  produce  for  the  manufactures 
of  more  civilized  countries,  173;  its  salutary 
effects  on  the  government  and  manners  of  a 
country,  175-6;  subverted  the  feudal  authority, 
177;  the  independence  of  tradesmen  and  arti¬ 
sans,  explained,  178;  the  capitals  acquired  by, 
very  precarious,  until  some  part  has  been  real¬ 
ized  by  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of  land, 
180;  overtrading,  the  cause  of  complaints  of 
the  scarcity  of  money,  186;  the  importation  of 
gold  and  silver  not  the  principal  benefit  derived 
from  foreign  trade,  190;  effect  produced  in  trade 
and  manufactures  by  the  discovery  of  America, 
191;  and  by  the  discovery  of  a  passage  to  the 
East  Indies  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  191; 
error  of  commercial  writers  in  estimating  national 
wealth  by  gold  and  silver,  191;  inquiry  into  the 
cause  and  effect  of  restraints  upon  trade,  192; 
individuals,  by  pursuing  their  own  interests, 
unknowingly  promote  that  of  the  public,  194; 
legal  regulations  of  trade,  unsafe,  194;  retaliatory 
regulations  between  nations,  199;  measures  for 
laying  trade  open,  ought  to  be  carried  into 
execution  slowly,  201;  policy  of  the  restraints 
on  trade  between  France  and  Britain  considered, 
202;  no  certain  criterion  to  determine  on  which 
side  the  balance  of  trade  between  two  countries 
turns,  202;  most  of  the  regulations  of,  founded 
on  a  mistaken  doctrine  of  the  balance  of  trade, 
209;  is  generally  founded  on  narrow  principles 
of  policy,  211. 

Drawbacks  of  duties,  213-14;  the  dealer  who 
employs  his  whole  stock  in  one  single  branch 
of  business,  has  an  advantage  of  the  same  kind 
with  the  workman  who  employs  his  whole 
labour  on  a  single  operation,  227;  consequences 
of  drawing  it  from  a  number  of  small  channels 
into  one  great  channel,  262;  colony  trade,  and 
the  monopoly  of  that  trade,  distinguished,  263; 
the  interest  of  the  consumer  constantly  sacrificed 
to  that  of  the  producer,  287;  advantages  attend¬ 
ing  a  perfect  freedom  of,  to  landed  nations, 
according  to  the  present  agricultural  system  of 
political  economy  in  France,  292;  origin  of  for¬ 
eign  trade,  292;  consequences  of  high  duties 
and  prohibitions,  in  landed  nations,  293;  how 
trade  augments  the  revenue  of  a  country,  295; 
[foreign,  gives  opportunity  for  improvement  by 


example,  297;]  nature  of  the  trading  intercourse 
between  the  inhabitants  of  towns  and  those  of 
the  country,  299. 

[Trade,  Board  of,  321.] 

Trades,  cause  and  effect  of  the  separation  of,  4; 
origin  of,  7. 

[Traites  in  France,  divide  the  country  into  three 
parts,  398;  are  farmed,  400.] 

[Transfer  of  property,  taxes  on,  378.] 

Transit  duties  explained,  395. 

Travelling  for  education,  summary  view  of  the 
effects  of,  337. 

Treasures,  [of  princes  formerly  a  resource  in  war, 
188;  no  longer  accumulated  except  by  king  of 
Prussia,  188;]  why  formerly  accumulated  by 
princes,  190. 

Treasure- trove,  the  term  explained,  121;  why  an 
important  branch  of  revenue  under  the  ancient 
feudal  governments,  402. 

[Treaties  of  commerce,  233-4.] 

[Trebia,  battle  of,  306.] 

[Triclinaria,  high  price  of,  299.] 

[Troll,  Archbishop  of  Upsal,  352.] 

[Troyes  fair  and  weight,  12.] 

[Truck,  7.] 

[Trust  remunerated,  21.] 

[Tumbrel  and  Pillory,  statute  of,  79.] 

[Turdi  fed  by  the  Romans,  98.] 

[Turkey,  treasure  buried  and  concealed,  121;  con¬ 
quest  of  Egypt,  173  ,  240;  peace  with  Russia, 
263.] 

Turkey  company,  [commerce  of,  required  an 
ambassador  at  Constantinople,  319;]  short 
historical  view  of,  320. 

[Turnips  reduced  in  price,  33.] 

Turnpikes,  counties  near  London  petitioned 
against,  63;  see  Tolls. 

[Tuscany,  commerce  and  manufactures  diminished, 
181.] 

[Tutors,  private,  lowest  order  of  men  of  letters, 
340.] 

[Twelve  Tables,  339.] 

[Two  and  two  in  the  arithmetic  of  the  customs 
make  one,  388.] 

[Tyrrell,  quoted,  311.] 

[Ukraine,  88,  190.] 

[Ulloa,  quoted,  64,  73,  81,  244,  248.] 

[Undertakers  let  the  furniture  of  funerals,  119.] 
[Unfunded  debt,  404.] 

Universities,  [seven  years’  apprenticeship  at,  51; 
proper  name  for  any  incorporation,  51.] 

The  emoluments  of  the  teachers  in,  how  far 
calculated  to  promote  their  diligence,  332;  the 
professors  at  Oxford  have  mostly  given  up 
teaching,  332;  those  in  France  subject  to  in¬ 
competent  jurisdictions,  332-3;  the  privileges  of 
graduates  improperly  obtained,  333;  abuse  of 
lectureships,  333;  the  discipline  of,  seldom  cal¬ 
culated  for  the  benefit  of  the  students,  333;  are, 
in  England,  more  corrupted  than  the  public 
schools,  334;  original  foundation  of,  334;  how 


466 


Index 


Latin  became  an  essential  article  in  academical 
education,  334;  how  the  study  of  the  Greek 
language  was  introduced,  334-5;  the  three  great 
branches  of  the  Greek  philosophy,  335;  are  now 
divided  into  five  branches,  336;  the  monkish 
course  of  education  in,  336-7;  have  not  been 
very  ready  to  adopt  improvements,  337;  [im¬ 
provements  more  easily  introduced  into  the 
poorer,  337;]  are  not  well  calculated  to  prepare 
men  for  the  world,  337;  how  filled  with  good 
professors,  or  drained  of  them,  355;  where  the 
worst  and  best  professors  are  generally  to  be 
met  with,  355;  see  Colleges  and  Teachers. 
[Unproductive,  see  Productive.] 

[Unterwald,  taxes  publicly  assessed  by  the  con¬ 
tributor,  374;  moderate  tax,  374.] 

[Usury  prohibited,  402;  see  Interest.] 

[Utopia,  201,  415.] 

[Utrecht,  208.] 

[Utrecht,  Treaty  of,  325,  409.] 

[Vacations,  French  fees  of  court,  313.] 

Value,  the  term  defined,  12;  [rules  which  determine 
the  relative  or  exchangeable  value  of  goods, 
12-26.] 

[Varro  quoted,  66,  98.] 

Vedius  Pollio,  his  cruelty  to  his  slaves  checked  by 
the  Roman  emperor  Augustus,  which  could  not 
have  been  done  under  the  republican  form  of 
government,  254. 

[Veii,  siege  of,  302,  303.] 

[Velvet,  prohibition  of  importation  of,  would  be 
unnecessary  if  raw  silk  were  free  from  duty, 
390-1.] 

Venice,  [history  different  from  that  of  the  other 
Italian  republics,  172;  shipping  encouraged  by 
the  crusades,  173;]  origin  of  the  silk  manu¬ 
facture  in  that  city,  174;  [exchange  with  London, 
204;  bank  of,  204.] 

Traded  in  East  India  goods  before  the  sea 
track  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  dis¬ 
covered,  240;  [envied  by  the  Portuguese,  240; 
fleets  kept  within  the  Mediterranean,  245;  draws 
profit  from  a  bank,  358;]  nature  of  the  land-tax 
in  that  republic,  364;  [enfeebled  by  public  debt, 
412.] 

Venison,  the  price  of,  in  Britain,  does  not  compen¬ 
sate  the  expense  of  a  deer  park,  98. 

[Vera  Cruz,  South  Sea  Company’s  trade  at,  326.] 
[Verd,  Cape  de,  islands,  240.] 

[Verdun  treated  as  foreign  by  France,  398.] 
[Versailles,  idle  because  the  residence  of  a  court, 
145;  an  ornament  to  France,  150.] 

Vicesima  haereditatum  among  the  ancient  Romans, 
the  nature  of,  explained,  378. 

[Vienna,  small  capital  employed  in,  145.] 

Villages,  howr  first  formed,  164. 

Villenage,  probable  cause  of  the  wearing  out  of 
that  tenure  in  Europe,  168;  freedom  obtained 
by  a  villain  who  resided  a  year  in  a  town,  173; 
dependence  on  proprietors,  176. 

Vineyard,  high  rent  of  some  land  peculiarly 


suitable  for,  26;  the  most  profitable  part  of 
agriculture,  both  among  the  ancients  and 
moderns,  66;  great  advantages  derived  from 
peculiarities  of  soil  in,  67. 

[Vingtieme  resembles  English  land-tax,  377;  not 
farmed,  400;  should  be  increased  in  place  of  the 
taille  and  capitation,  400.] 

[Virginia,  tobacco  currency,  10;  evidence  of  a 
merchant  trading  with,  65;  tobacco  more  profit¬ 
able  than  corn,  68;  with  Maryland,  the  chief 
source  of  tobacco,  68;  stores  and  warehouses 
belong  to  residents  in  England,  158;  trade  with, 
159-60,  209;  tobacco  trade,  161,  214,  257,  261.] 
[Expense  of  civil  establishment,  247;  progress 
unforeseen  in  1660,  258;  no  necessity  for  gold 
and  silver  money,  419.] 

[Visiapour  diamond  mines,  75.] 

[Voltaire,  quoted,  355.] 

[Vulgate,  334.] 

Wages  of  labour  [allowance  made  for  hardship 
and  ingenuity,  13;  money,  accommodated  to 
the  average  price  of  corn,  15;  value  which  work¬ 
men  add  to  materials  pays  their  wages,  20;  of 
inspection  and  direction,  21;  one  of  three 
original  sources  of  revenue,  22,  361;  sometimes 
confounded  with  profit  and  rent,  23;  ordinary, 
average  or  natural  rate  of,  23;  how  affected  by 
state  of  society,  27;  general  discussion  of,  27- 
37;]  how  settled  between  masters  and  workmen, 
28;  the  workmen  generally  obliged  to  comply 
with  the  terms  of  their  employers,  28;  the 
opposition  of  workmen  outrageous,  and  seldom 
successful,  28;  circumstances  which  operate  to 
raise  wages,  29;  the  extent  of  wages  limited  by 
the  funds  from  which  they  arise,  29;  why  higher 
in  North  America,  than  in  England,  29;  are 
low  in  countries  that  are  stationary,  30;  not 
oppressively  low  in  Great  Britain,  31;  a  distinc¬ 
tion  made  here  between  the  wages  in  summer 
and  in  winter,  31;  if  sufficient  in  dear  years, 
they  must  be  ample  in  seasons  of  plenty,  31; 
different  rates  of,  in  different  places,  31;  liberal 
wages  encourage  industry  and  propagation,  34; 
an  advance  of,  necessarily  raises  the  price  of 
many  commodities,  37;  an  average  of,  not  easily 
ascertained,  37;  [continually  increasing  since  the 
time  of  Henry  VIII,  38;  higher  in  North 
American  and  West  Indian  colonies  than  in 
England,  39;  do  not  sink  with  profits  there,  39; 
very  low  in  a  country  which  could  advance  no 
further,  40;]  the  operation  of  high  wages  and 
high  profits  compared,  41;  causes  of  the  vari¬ 
ations  of,  in  different  employments,  42  [-62];  are 
generally  higher  in  new,  than  in  old  trades,  49, 
58;  legal  regulations  of,  destroy  industry  and 
ingenuity,  61;  [high,  a  cause  of  high  prices,  63;] 
[Merchants  complain  of  high,  but  say  nothing 
about  profits,  259;  reduced  by  the  colonial 
monopoly,  264-5;]  natural  effect  of  a  direct  tax 
upon,  380;  [382,  383-4;  connexion  of,  with  price 
of  provisions,  380.] 


Index 


467 


[Wales,  stone  quarries  afford  no  rent,  70;  old 
families  common,  178;  mountains  destined  to  be 
breeding  ground  of  Great  Britain,  196.] 

Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  his  excise  scheme  defended, 
391. 

Wants  of  mankind,  how  supplied  through  the 
operation  of  labour,  10;  how  extended,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  their  supply,  71;  the  far  greater  part 
of  them  supplied  from  the  produce  of  other 
men’s  labour,  117. 

Wars,  foreign,  the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of, 
in  the  present  century,  have  little  dependence 
on  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  in  a  nation, 
187-8;  [expences  abroad  defrayed  by  export  of 
commodities,  188-9.] 

How  supported  by  a  nation  of  hunters,  301; 
by  a  nation  of  shepherds,  301;  by  a  nation  of 
husbandmen,  302;  men  of  military  age,  what 
proportion  they  bear  to  the  whole  society,  302; 
feudal  wars,  how  supported,  302;  causes  which 
in  the  advanced  state  of  society,  rendered  it 
impossible  for  those  who  took  the  field,  to 
maintain  themselves,  302-3;  how  the  art  of  war 
became  a  distinct  profession,  303;  distinction 
between  the  militia  and  regular  forces,  304; 
alteration  in  the  art  of  war  produced  by  the 
invention  of  fire-arms,  304-5,  308;  importance 
of  discipline,  305;  Macedonian  army,  Cartha¬ 
ginian  army,  306;  Roman  army,  306;  feudal 
armies,  307;  a  well-regulated  standing  army,  the 
only  defence  of  a  civilized  country,  and  the 
only  means  for  speedily  civilizing  a  barbarous 
country,  308;  the  want  of  parsimony  during 
peace,  imposes  on  states  the  necessity  of  con¬ 
tracting  debts  to  carry  on  war,  403,  408;  why 
war  is  agreeable  to  those  who  live  secure  from 
the  immediate  calamities  of  it,  408;  advantages 
of  raising  the  supplies  for,  within  the  year,  411; 
[popularity  of,  and  how  it  might  be  removed, 
411.] 

[Warwick,  the  Earl  of,  his  hospitality,  176.] 

Watch  movements,  great  reduction  in  the  prices 
of,  owing  to  mechanical  improvements,  107. 

[Waterworks,  a  business  suitable  for  a  joint-stock 
company,  330,  331.] 

Wealth,  [real,  the  annual  produce,  2,  105,  106, 
146,  150,  192;  national,  represented  by  one 
system  of  political  economy  as  consisting  in 
the  abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  104;  land  the 
most  important  and  durable  part  of,  106;  real, 
109;  that  of  England  much  increased  since  1660, 
149;]  and  money,  synonymous  terms,  in  popular 
language,  182,  191;  Spanish  and  Tartarian 

estimate  of,  compared,  182;  [wealth  of  a 
neighbouring  nation  advantageous  in  trade,  212; 
accumulated  produce,  304;  makes  a  nation 
obnoxious  to  attack,  304;]  the  great  authority 
conferred  by  the  possession  of,  310. 

Weavers,  the  profits  of,  why  necessarily  greater 
than  those  of  spinners,  22. 

[Weigh  and  pay,  maxim  of  the  port  of  London, 
261.] 


[Western  Islands,  wages  in,  32.] 

West  Indies,  [sugar  currency,  10;  planters  farm 
their  own  estates,  22-3;  wages  higher  than  in 
England,  39;  British  acquisitions  in,  raised 
profits,  39;  sugar  colonies  resemble  esteemed 
vineyards,  67;  interest  fallen  since  the  discovery 
of,  153;  carrying  trade  between,  and  Europe, 
161;  would  have  progressed  less  rapidly  if  no 
capital  but  their  own  had  been  employed  in  the 
export  trade,  165;  slavery  harsher  than  in 
medieval  Europe,  167;  high  profits  of  sugar  and 
consequent  greater  number  of  slaves  in  sugar 
colonies,  167;  importation  of  gold  and  silver 
from  the  Spanish,  185;  expense  of  last  war 
largely  laid  out  in,  188.] 

British  monopoly  in  sugar  of,  273;  Madeira 
wine  imported  directly,  215;  interest  which 
caused  settlements  in,  239;  no  necessity  for 
settlements,  240;  discovered  by  Columbus,  241: 
how  they  obtained  this  name,  241;  the  original 
native  productions  of,  241;  the  thirst  of  gold 
the  object  of  all  the  Spanish  enterprises  there. 
242;  and  of  those  of  every  other  European 
nation,  243;  [plenty  of  good  land,  244,  246;]  the 
remoteness  of,  greatly  in  favour  of  the  European 
colonies  there,  244;  [Dutch  originally  under  an 
exclusive  company,  246;  St.  Domingo  the  most 
important  of  the  sugar  colonies,  246;  price  of 
European  goods  enormous  in  Spanish,  248; 
some  most  important  productions  non-enu- 
merated,  249;  freedom  of  trade  with  British 
American  colonies,  250;]  the  sugar  colonies  of 
France  better  governed  than  those  of  Britain, 
253;  [effects  of  colonial  monopoly.  260;  returns 
of  trade  with,  more  irregular  and  uncertain 
than  with  any  part  of  Europe,  261;  expense  of 
preventing  smuggling,  267;  proposal  for  ob¬ 
taining  war  contributions  from,  269;  natives 
not  benefited  by  the  European  discovery  of,  271; 
gum  senega  treated  like  an  enumerated  com¬ 
modity  from,  286;  colonial  system  sacrifices 
consumer  to  producer,  287;  slave  trade  a  loss 
to  the  African  Company,  324;  French  and 
Portuguese  companies  ruined  by  slave  trade, 
325;  South  Sea  Company’s  trade  to  the  Spanish, 
325;  some  productions  of,  yield  large  portion  of 
British  customs  revenue,  389;  more  able  to  pay 
land-tax  than  Great  Britain,  415.] 

[Westminster  land-tax,  360,  373-4.] 

[Westminster  Hall,  Rufus’  dining-room,  176.] 
[Westmoreland,  price  of  coal  in,  73.] 

[Wheat,  see  Corn.] 

[Whitehall,  palace  of,  land-tax,  360.1 
[William  Rufus  dined  in  Westminster  Hall,  176.] 
[William  III,  unable  to  refuse  anything  to  the 
country  gentlemen,  86.] 

[Wilton,  ornament  to  England,  150.] 

Window  tax  in  Britain,  how  rated,  372;  tends  to 
reduce  house-rent,  372. 

Windsor  market,  chronological  table  of  the  prices 
of  corn  at,  114-16. 

Wine,  the  cheapness  of,  would  be  a  cause  of 


Index 


468 

sobriety,  211;  the  carrying  trade  in,  encouraged 
by  English  statutes,  214;  [cellar,  a  public,  a 
source  of  revenue  to  Hamburg,  358;  licences  to 
sell,  375;  tax  on,  paid  by  consumers,  386; 
tonnage  on,  387;  foreign  article  commonly  used 
in  Great  Britain,  389;  Walpole’s  scheme  for 
levying  the  tax  on,  391;  duty  on,  falls  on 
middle  and  upper  ranks,  391.] 

[Witchcraft,  fear  of,  compared  to  that  of  engross¬ 
ing  and  forestalling,  229.] 

[Wolverhampton,  manufactures  of,  not  within 
the  statute  of  apprenticeship,  52;  manufactures 
grown  up  naturally,  175.] 

[Women’s  education  contains  nothing  fantastical, 
340.] 

Wood,  the  price  of,  rises  in  proportion  as  a 
country  is  cultivated,  72;  the  growth  of  young 
trees  prevented  by  cattle,  72;  when  the  plant¬ 
ing  of  trees  becomes  a  profitable  employment, 
72. 

[Woodcocks  could  not  be  much  increased,  95.] 

Wool,  the  produce  of  rude  countries,  commonly 
carried  to  a  distant  market,  100;  the  price 
of,  in  England,  has  fallen  considerably  since 
the  time  of  Edward  III,  101;  causes  of  this 
diminution  in  price,  101;  the  price  of,  consider¬ 
ably  reduced  in  Scotland,  by  the  union  with 
England,  103. 

Severity  of  the  laws  against  the  exportation 
of,  281-2;  restraints  upon  the  inland  commerce 


of,  282;  restraints  upon  the  coasting  trade  of, 
283;  pleas  on  which  these  restraints  are  founded, 
283;  the  price  of  wool  depressed  by  these 
regulations,  283;  the  exportation  of,  ought  to  be 
allowed,  subject  to  a  duty,  284. 

Woollen  cloth,  the  present  prices  of,  compared  with 
those  at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  107-8; 
three  mechanical  improvements  introduced  in 
the  manufacture  of,  108;  [in  ancient  Rome 
much  higher  in  price  than  now,  299.] 

[Yeomanry,  superior  position  of  the  English, 
168,  170.] 

[Yorkshire,  wollen  manufacture,  36;  cloth  fallen 
in  price,  107,  108;  small  paper  currencies,  139, 
141;  Scotch  wool  manufactured  there,  158.] 
[Young  men’s  generosity  to  their  teachers,  334, 
339.] 

[Yucatan,  88.] 

Zama,  battle  of,  306. 

[Zealand,  French  wine  smuggled  from,  202; 

expense  of  protecting  from  the  sea,  401.] 
[Zemindaries,  368.] 

[Zeno  of  Citta,  the  Portico  assigned  to,  339.] 

[Zeno  of  Elea,  travelled  from  place  to  place,  338.] 
[Zurich,  the  reformation  in,  352;  tax  on  revenue 
assessed  by  the  contributor,  374;  moderate 
tax,  374.] 

[Zwingli,  353.] 


ARCHBISHIP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL 

Library 

5000  Mitty  Avenue 
San  Jose,  CA  35129-1897 


Printed  in  the  U.  S.  A. 


t-ZmS JF'T'SF'' r'SF'  *“-iF^'^F— i'^*-'1  r^^’  ,~%m^  ,'^J  m~^V Wlr*  r~V^ m'^S  V^md 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


| 

*^Fr?^F^| 

'r'=^P^r?: 


'WF?^7? 

75^^?? 


^^1 


r~  I 


^^1 


5^^ 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


