g  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  = 


—  «,  «.  — -  «.  ■»«,  — .«.  -*.«.  -—  *■  »  -•  '  5  —-  5  —  _V  — --«s  ^ — J 


^7 


h^-. 


b^7 


W7 


h^~. 


2^ 

^^7 

^P"7 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 


24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


•WFWF- 


*7^7^- 


V^SP’V^’- 


^7^ 


'7^’V^P’' 


^7^ 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  g 


28.  GILBERT 

41.  GIBBON  II 

^7^ 

GALILEO 

HARVEY 

42.  KANT 

29.  CERVANTES 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

THE  FEDERALIST 

J.  S.  MILL 

31.  DESCARTES 

SPINOZA 

44.  BOSWELL 

32.  MILTON 

45.  LAVOISIER 

FOURIER 

33.  PASCAL 

FARADAY 

34.  NEWTON 

46.  HEGEL 

HUYGENS 

47.  GOETHE 

35.  LOCKE 

BERKELEY 

48.  MELVILLE 

HUME 

49.  DARWIN 

36.  SWIFT 

^7^" 

STERNE 

50.  MARX 

^7^" 

ENGELS 

^7^~ 

37.  FIELDING 

51.  TOLSTOY 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 

ROUSSEAU 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

^7^“ 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

40.  GIBBON  I 

54.  FREUD 

^7^- 

^7^- 

^7^" 

*7^S7- 

^7^7“ 

25405 


H 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G?86  WESTERN  WORLD 
v.l8  Augustine. 


OCT  1 4  1992 


REFERENCE  BOOK 
LIMITED  CIRCULATION 


RULES 

1.  All  pupils  in  the  school  are  entitled  to 
use  the  library  and  to  borrow  books. 

2.  Reserved  books  may  be  borrowed  for 
;one  period,  or  at  the  close  of  school,  and 
should  be  returned  before  the  first  class  the 
following  school  day. 

3.  All  other  books  may  be  retained  for  two 
weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for, 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


..  .A 


f 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


AUGUSTINE 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012 


http://archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest18ency 


24885 


The  Confessions 
The  City  of  God 
On  Christian  Doctrine 

BY  SAINT  AUGUSTINE 


ARCHBISHiP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL  i 
Library  | 

5000  Mitty  Avenue  % 

San  Jose,  CA  95129-1897  i 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  City  of  God  translated  by  Marcus  Dods,  and  On  Christian  Doctrine } 
translated  by  J.  F.  Shaw, 

are  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 

The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

*952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 
Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10327 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


25405 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Saint  Augustine,  354-430 


Augustine  was  born  November  13,  354,  at 
Tagaste.  a  small  town  in  the  Roman  province 
of  Xumidia.  near  what  is  now  the  eastern 
borders  of  Algeria.  His  father,  although  not 
wealthy,  was  an  official  in  the  Roman  adminis¬ 
tration  of  the  village  and  was  then  still  a  pagan. 
His  mother,  Monica,  was  already  known  as  a  fer¬ 
vent  Christian.  Both  were  probably  of  Roman 
stock,  although  they  may  have  had  some  Numi- 
dian  ancestry,  and  Augustine  himself  shows  an 
acquaintance  with  the  Punic  language. 

While  still  a  child,  Augustine  was  enrolled  by 
his  mother  as  a  catechumen  in  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  although  not  baptized,  he  learned 
something  about  Christianity  from  her.  At  the 
age  of  eleven  or  twelve,  he  was  sent  to  Madaura, 
some  twenty  miles  south  of  Tagaste,  to  study 
grammar  and  literature.  He  did  so  well  that  his 
father  aspired  to  make  a  lawyer  of  him.  Augus¬ 
tine  spent  a  year  of  idleness  while  his  father 
sought  the  necessary  funds,  and  it  was  finally 
through  the  generosity  of  a  citizen  of  Tagaste, 
who  continued  for  some  time  as  his  patron,  that 
in  370  he  was  able  to  go  to  Carthage  for  the 
course  in  rhetoric.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  he 
began  living  with  a  woman  with  whom  he  re¬ 
mained  for  the  next  ten  years  and  who  bore 
him  a  son  named  Adeodatus.  At  the  schools  he 
had  the  reputation  of  being  a  quiet  and  studious 
young  man.  His  reading  of  Cicero’s  Hortensius, 
he  tells  us,  made  him  in  love  with  philosophy. 
He  also  fell  under  the  influence  of  the  Maniche- 
ans  and  became  an  auditor,  or  beginner,  in  their 
sect,  which  claimed  to  reconcile  philosophy  and 
religion. 

On  completing  his  studies  in  373,  Augustine 
chose  to  follow  letters  rather  than  law  as  a 
career.  After  a  year  of  teaching  grammar  at 
Tagaste,  he  established  himself  as  a  rhetorician 
at  Carthage.  In  377  he  entered  the  poetry  con¬ 
test  and  won  the  prize  with  a  dramatic  poem. 
Not  long  afterwards,  he  wrote  his  first  book, 
On  the  Beautiful  and  the  Fit ,  which  he  later 
considered  not  worth  preserving.  In  383,  moti¬ 
vated  in  part  by  his  ambition  as  a  rhetorician, 
Augustine  went  to  Rome.  His  expectations  were 
not  realized,  and  a  year  later  he  accepted  the 
municipal  chair  of  rhetoric  at  Milan. 


While  at  Rome,  Augustine  had  abandoned 
Manicheism.  At  Milan  he  came  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  St.  Ambrose  and  also  began  reading 
the  Neo-Platonists.  His  ensuing  development, 
recorded  in  the  Confessions ,  culminated  in  the 
decision  in  386  to  become  a  Christian.  That 
autumn  he  retired  to  the  estate  of  a  friend  at 
Cassiciacum  to  prepare  for  entering  the  Catho¬ 
lic  Church.  Accompanying  him  were  his  mother, 
his  son,  and  several  friends  and  pupils — at  least 
eight  in  all.  Under  the  leadership  of  Augustine 
the  group  spent  some  time  in  philosophical  dis¬ 
cussion.  The  results  were  taken  down,  edited  by 
Augustine,  and  published  as  the  philosophical 
dialogues,  Against  the  Academics ,  On  the  Happy 
Life ,  and  On  Order.  The  following  spring  he  re¬ 
turned  to  Milan  and  on  Holy  Saturday  was  bap¬ 
tized  by  St.  Ambrose. 

Having  become  a  Christian,  Augustine  de¬ 
cided  to  return  to  Africa  and  to  lead  a  kind  of 
monastic  life  with  a  few  of  his  friends  and 
pupils.  While  waiting  for  his  departure,  he 
worked  at  several  books  he  had  planned,  includ¬ 
ing  a  series  on  the  liberal  arts,  of  which  only 
one,  On  Music,  has  survived.  The  death  of  his 
mother,  which  occurred  after  they  had  reached 
Rome  and  were  at  the  embarkation  port  of 
Ostia,  delayed  his  return.  For  more  than  a  year 
he  remained  in  Rome,  continued  to  work  on 
his  philosophical  dialogues,  and  furthered  his 
knowledge  of  Christian  doctrine  and  practice. 
His  first  controversial  work,  On  the  Morals  of 
the  Catholic  Church  and  of  the  Manicheans, 
was  written  at  this  time.  It  was  not  until  388 
that  Augustine  with  his  son  and  two  friends 
reached  Tagaste.  He  sold  his  property,  gave  the 
proceeds  to  the  poor,  and  with  his  few  followers 
set  up  a  kind  of  monastery  devoted  to  a  life  of 
prayer  and  study.  His  son,  Adeodatus,  who  was 
one  of  the  group  and  whose  education  had  been 
a  particular  care  of  Augustine’s,  died  in  389. 

In  391  Augustine’s  quiet  monastic  life  was 
brought  suddenly  to  an  end.  He  happened  to 
be  on  a  visit  to  Hippo  and  was  attending 
church  when  the  aged  bishop  was  urging  his 
congregation  to  find  a  candidate  for  the  priest¬ 
hood.  Augustine,  despite  his  protestations,  was 
immediately  chosen,  and  the  bishop  ordained 


V 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


him  as  a  priest.  Later  that  year  he  moved  his 
monastery  to  Hippo  and  began  his  sacerdotal 
duties.  Although  it  was  then  customary  for 
preaching  to  be  reserved  for  the  bishop,  Augus¬ 
tine  even  as  a  priest  was  assigned  that  task.  He 
began  his  sermons  on  the  Scriptures,  which, 
transcribed  as  they  were  delivered,  constitute 
his  many  books  of  commentary  on  the  Bible. 
He  also  began  the  public  disputes  with  the  Afri¬ 
can  heretics  which  were  to  engage  him  for  the 
rest  of  his  life. 

In  395  or  396  Augustine  was  called  upon  to 
assume  what  he  called  the  “burden  of  the 
episcopate.”  For  thirty-five  years  as  the  Bishop 
of  Hippo  nearly  all  of  his  energies  were  given 
to  the  defense  and  promotion  of  the  Catholic 
Church  in  northern  Africa.  He  took  an  influen¬ 
tial  part  in  the  many  councils  and  conferences 
called  to  deal  with  various  heresies  and  wrote 
many  works  against  them,  in  particular  against 
Manicheism,  Donatism,  and  Pelagianism.  His 
diocese  was  large  by  African  standards  and  in 
governing  it  he  also  had  to  preside  over  the 
episcopal  court  which,  as  was  customary  at  the 
time,  heard  civil  as  well  as  ecclesiastical  cases. 
The  administrative  and  financial  duties  of  his 
office  made  constant  demands.  Wherever  he 
was,  he  was  called  upon  to  preach,  at  times  for 
periods  of  five  consecutive  days.  His  fame  and 
position  brought  requests  for  advice  from  Chris¬ 
tians  and  non-Christians  alike,  which  involved 
him  in  voluminous  correspondence.  Augustine 
also  never  lost  concern  for  his  monastic  com¬ 
munity.  Besides  providing  a  rule  for  a  common 
life,  he  made  his  monastery  into  something  of  a 
theological  seminary,  and  many  of  its  mem¬ 
bers  later  became  bishops  and  saints,  spreading 
wherever  they  went  the  influence  of  Augustine’s 
teaching  and  zeal. 


However  onerous  and  varied  his  duties,  Au¬ 
gustine  always  found  time  to  write.  In  397  he 
wrote  the  first  three  books,  On  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine;  the  final  book  was  not  completed  until 
thirty  years  later.  At  the  same  time  he  also  be¬ 
gan  his  Confessions ,  and  the  completed  work 
seems  to  have  been  published  by  400.  He  had 
no  sooner  finished  that  than  he  began  one  of  his 
greatest  doctrinal  treatises,  On  the  Trinity.  Fol¬ 
lowing  the  sack  of  Rome  in  410,  he  was  drawn 
into  the  controversy  regarding  the  responsibility 
of  Christianity  for  the  fall  of  the  “eternal  city,” 
and  into  a  correspondence  with  two  Roman  of¬ 
ficials  on  the  relation  of  the  Church  and  the 
Empire.  Out  of  such  reflections  he  seems  to 
have  conceived  the  City  of  God ,  which  was  be¬ 
gun  in  413  and  appeared  serially  for  thirteen 
years. 

In  426  Augustine  arranged  for  his  successor 
as  Bishop  of  Hippo.  Considering  it  useful  “to 
compile  and  point  out  all  those  things  which  dis¬ 
please  me  in  my  works,”  he  read  through  all  his 
writings  and  in  his  Retractions  noted  down  what 
revisions  he  would  make  in  their  doctrine.  In 
the  work  as  he  left  it,  he  comments  on  two 
hundred  and  thirty-two  separate  titles,  not  in¬ 
cluding  his  letters  and  sermons,  which  were  to 
have  been  considered  in  a  separate  account. 

While  Augustine  was  engaged  in  this  task, 
North  Africa  was  becoming  involved  in  what 
amounted  to  civil  war.  Vandals  from  Spain  had 
been  invited  to  Africa,  to  help  in  the  fight 
against  the  imperial  forces,  but  it  was  soon  evi¬ 
dent  that  they  came  not  to  aid  but  in  their  own 
interest.  In  430  the  imperial  forces  were  de¬ 
feated  and  sought  refuge  in  Hippo,  where  they 
were  besieged  by  the  Vandal  army.  There,  when 
the  siege  was  in  its  third  month,  Augustine  died, 
August  28,  430. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note,  Page  v 

THE  CONFESSIONS,  Page  i 

Translated  by  Edward  Bouverie  Pusey 

THE  CITY  OF  GOD,  Page  129 

Translated  by  Marcus  Dods 

ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE,  Page  62 

Translated  by  J.  F.  Shaw 


__ 


CONTENTS:  THE  CONFESSIONS 


BOOK  I.  Confessions  of  the  greatness  and  un¬ 
searchableness  of  God,  of  God's  mercies  in  in¬ 
fancy  and  boyhood,  and  human  wilfulness;  of 
his  own  sins  of  idleness,  abuse  of  his  studies,  and 
of  God's  gifts  up  to  his  fifteenth  year.  i 

BOOK  II.  Object  of  these  confessions.  Further  ills 
of  idleness  developed  in  his  sixteenth  year.  Evils 
of  ill  society,  which  betrayed  him  into  theft.  9 

BOOK  III.  Augustine's  residence  at  Carthage  from 
his  seventeenth  to  his  nineteenth  year.  Source  of 
his  disorders.  Love  of  shows.  Advance  in  studies, 
and  love  of  wisdom.  Distaste  for  Scripture.  Led 
astray  by  the  Manichceans.  Refutation  of  some 
of  their  tenets.  Grief  of  his  mother  Monica  at  his 
heresy,  and  prayers  for  his  conversion.  Her  vision 
from  God,  and  answer  through  a  bishop.  13 

BOOK  IV.  Augustine's  life  from  nineteen  to  eight  - 
and-twenty ;  himself  a  Manichcean,  and  seducing 
others  to  the  same  heresy;  partial  obedience 
amidst  vanity  and  sin;  consulting  astrologers, 
only  partially  shaken  herein;  loss  of  an  early 
friend,  who  is  converted  by  being  baptized  when 
in  a  swoon;  reflections  on  grief,  on  real  and  un¬ 
real  friendship,  and  love  of  fame;  writes  on  uthe 
fair  and  fit,"  yet  cannot  rightly,  though  God  had 
given  him  great  talents,  since  he  entertained 
wrong  notions  of  God;  and  so  even  his  knowledge 
he  applied  ill.  19 

BOOK  V.  St.  Augustine's  twenty-ninth  year.  Fans - 
tus,  a  snare  of  Satan  to  many,  made  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  deliverance  to  St.  Augustine,  by  shewing 
the  ignorance  of  the  Manichees  on  those  things 
wherein  they  professed  to  have  divine  knowledge. 
Augustine  gives  up  all  thought  of  going  further 
among  the  Manichees :  is  guided  to  Rome  and 
Milan,  where  he  hears  St.  Ambrose,  leaves  the 
Manichees,  and  becomes  again  a  catechumen  in 
the  Church  Catholic .  27 

BOOK  VI.  Arrival  of  Monica  at  Milan;  her  obedi¬ 
ence  to  St.  Ambrose,  and  his  value  for  her;  St. 
Ambrose's  habits;  Augustine's  gradual  abandon¬ 
ment  of  error;  finds  that  he  has  blamed  the 
Church  Catholic  wrongly;  desire  of  absolute 
certainty,  but  struck  with  the  contrary  analogy 
of  God's  natural  providence;  how  shaken  in  his 
worldly  pursuits;  God's  guidance  of  his  friend 
Alypius;  Augustine  debates  with  himself  and  his 


friends  about  their  mode  of  life;  his  inveterate 
sins,  and  dread  of  judgment.  34 

BOOK  VII.  Augustine's  thirty-first  year;  gradually 
extricated  from  his  errors,  but  still  with  material 
conceptions  of  God;  much  aided  by  an  argu¬ 
ment  of  Nebridius;  sees  that  the  cause  of  sin  lies 
in  free-will,  rejects  the  Manichcean  heresy,  but 
cannot  altogether  embrace  the  doctrine  of  the 
Church;  recovered  from  the  belief  in  astrology, 
but  miserably  perplexed  about  the  origin  of  evil; 
is  led  to  find  in  the  Platonists  the  seeds  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  the  Word,  but  not  of 
his  humiliation ;  hence  he  obtains  clearer  notions 
of  God's  majesty,  but,  not  knowing  Christ  to  be 
the  Mediator,  remains  estranged  from  him;  all 
his  doubts  removed  by  the  study  of  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture,  especially  St.  Paid.  43 

BOOK  VIII.  Augustine's  thirty-second  year.  He 
consults  Simplicianus ;  from  him  hears  the  history 
of  the  conversion  of  Victorinus,  and  longs  to  de¬ 
vote  himself  entirely  to  God,  but  is  mastered  by 
his  old  habits;  is  still  further  roused  by  the  his¬ 
tory  of  St.  Anthony,  and  of  the  conversion  of  the 
two  courtiers;  during  a  severe  struggle  hears  a 
voice  from  heaven,  opens  Scripture,  and  is  con¬ 
verted,  with  his  friend  Alypius.  His  mother's 
visions  fulfilled.  52 

BOOK  IX.  Augustine  determines  to  devote  his  life 
to  God,  and  to  abandon  his  profession  of  rhet¬ 
oric,  quietly  however;  retires  to  the  country  to 
prepare  himself  to  receive  the  grace  of  baptism, 
and  is  baptized  with  Alypius,  and  his  son  Adeo- 
datus.  At  Ostia,  on  his  way  to  Africa,  his  mother 
Monica  dies,  in  her  fifty-sixth  year,  the  thirty- 
third  of  Augustine.  Her  life  and  character.  61 

BOOK  X.  Having  in  the  former  books  spoken  of 
himself  before  his  receiving  the  grace  of  baptism, 
in  this  Augustine  confesses  what  he  then  was. 
But  first,  he  enquires  by  what  faculty  we  can 
know  God  at  all;  whence  he  enlarges  on  the 
mysterious  character  of  the  memory,  wherein 
God,  being  made  known,  dwells,  but  which  could 
not  discover  him.  Then  he  examines  his  own 
trials  under  the  triple  division  of  temptation, 
Ulust  of  the  flesh,  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  pride" ; 
what  Christian  continency  prescribes  as  to  each. 
On  Christ  the  only  Mediator,  Who  heals  and  will 
heal  all  infirmities.  71 


IX 


X 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


BOOK  XI.  Augustine  breaks  off  the  history  of  the 
mode  whereby  God  led  him  to  holy  orders ,  in 
order  to  “confess”  God's  mercies  in  opening  to 
him  the  Scripture.  Moses  is  not  to  be  understood 
but  in  Christ,  not  even  the  first  words  “In  the 
beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth”  Answer  to  cavillers  who  asked,  “What 
did  God  before  He  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth,  and  whence  willed  He  at  length  to  make 
them,  whereas  He  did  not  make  them  before?” 
Inquiry  into  the  nature  of  time.  89 

BOOK  XII.  Augustine  proceeds  to  comment  on 
Genesis  I,  1  and  explains  the  “heaven”  to  mean 
that  spiritual  and  incorporeal  creation  which 


cleaves  to  God  unintermittingly,  always  behold - 
ing  his  countenance ;  “earth,”  the  formless  mat - 
ter  whereof  the  corporeal  creation  was  after¬ 
wards  formed.  He  does  not  reject,  however,  other 
interpretations,  which  he  adduces,  but  rather 
confesses  that  such  is  the  depth  of  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture,  that  manifold  senses  may  and  ought  to  be 
extracted  from  it,  and  that  whatever  truth  can 
be  obtained  from  its  words  does,  in  fact,  lie  con¬ 
cealed  in  them.  99 

BOOK  XIII.  Continuation  of  the  exposition  of 
Genesis  I ;  it  contains  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity, 
and  a  type  of  the  formation,  extension,  and  sup¬ 
port  of  the  Church.  no 


THE  CONFESSIONS 


BOOK  I 

Confessions  of  the  greatness  and  unsearchable - 
ness  of  God ,  0/  G0T5  mercies  in  infancy  and 
boyhood ,  arc*/  human  wilfulness;  of  his  own 
sins  of  idleness ,  a&rcse  a/  /rc*5  studies,  and  of 
God's  gifts  up  to  his  fifteenth  year. 

[I]  1.  Great  art  Thou.  0  Lord,  and  greatly  to 
be  praised ;  great  is  Thy  power,  and  Thy  wisdom 
infinite.1  And  Thee  would  man  praise;  man,  but 
a  particle  of  Thy  creation;  man,  that  bears 
about  him  his  mortality,  the  witness  of  his  sin, 
the  witness,  that  “Thou  resistest  the  proud”:2 
yet  would  man  praise  Thee;  he.  but  a  particle  of 
Thy  creation.  Thou  awakest  us  to  delight  in  Thy 
praise;  for  Thou  madest  us  for  Thyself,  and  our 
heart  is  restless  until  it  repose  in  Thee.  Grant 
me.  Lord,  to  know  and  understand  which  is  first, 
to  call  on  Thee  or  to  praise  Thee?  and,  again,  to 
know  Thee  or  to  call  on  Thee?  For  who  can  call 
on  Thee,  not  knowing  Thee?  For  he  that  know- 
eth  Thee  not  may  call  on  Thee  as  other  than 
Thou  art.  Or  is  it  rather  that  we  call  on  Thee 
that  we  may  know  Thee?  “  But  how  shall  they 
call  on  Him  in  Whom  they  have  not  believed? 
or  how  shall  they  believe  without  a  preacher?”3 
And  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  praise  Him.4 
For  they  that  seek  shall  find  Him,5  and  they  that 
find  shall  praise  Him.  I  will  seek  Thee,  Lord,  by 
calling  on  Thee;  and  will  call  on  Thee,  believing 
in  Thee;  for  to  us  hast  Thou  been  preached.  My 
faith.  Lord,  shall  call  on  Thee,  which  Thou  hast 
given  me,  wherewith  Thou  hast  inspired  me, 
through  the  Incarnation  of  Thy  Son,  through 
the  ministry  of  the  Preacher.6 

[II]  2.  And  how  shall  I  call  upon  my  God, 
my  God  and  Lord,  since,  when  I  call  for  Him,  I 
shall  be  calling  Him  to  myself?  and  what  room  is 
there  within  me,  whither  my  God  can  come  into 

[Biblical  citations  in  quotation  marks  are  exact;  those 
not  in  quotation  marks  are  St.  Augustine’s  paraphrases.] 

Ts.  145.  3;  147.  5.  2Jas.  4.  6;  I  Pet.  5.  5. 

3Rom.  10.  14.  4Ps.  22.  26.  6Matt.  7.  7. 

6St.  Ambrose. 


me?  Whither  can  God  come  into  me,  God  who 
made  heaven  and  earth?  Is  there,  indeed,  O 
Lord  my  God,  aught  in  me  that  can  contain 
Thee?  Do  then  heaven  and  earth,  which  Thou 
hast  made,  and  wherein  Thou  hast  made  me, 
contain  Thee?  or,  because  nothing  which  exists 
could  exist  without  Thee,  doth  therefore  what¬ 
ever  exists  contain  Thee?  Since,  then,  I  too 
exist,  why  do  I  seek  that  Thou  shouldest  enter 
into  me,  who  were  not,  wert  Thou  not  in  me? 
Why?  Because  I  am  not  gone  down  in  hell,  and 
yet  Thou  art  there  also.  For  “if  I  go  down  into 
hell,  Thou  art  there.”7 1  could  not  be  then,  0  my 
God,  could  not  be  at  all,  wert  Thou  not  in  me; 
or,  rather,  unless  I  were  in  Thee,  of  Whom  are 
all  things,  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  whom  are 
all  things?8  Even  so,  Lord,  even  so.  Whither  do 
I  call  Thee,  since  I  am  in  Thee?  or  whence  canst 
Thou  enter  into  me?  For  whither  can  I  go  be¬ 
yond  heaven  and  earth,  that  thence  my  God 
should  come  into  me,  Who  hath  said,  “I  fill  the 
heaven  and  the  earth?”9 

[Ill]  3.  Do10  the  heaven  and  earth  then  con¬ 
tain  Thee,  since  Thou  fillest  them?  or  dost  Thou 
fill  them  and  yet  overflow,  since  they  do  not 
contain  Thee?  And  whither,  when  the  heaven 
and  the  earth  are  filled,  pourest  Thou  forth  the 
remainder  of  Thyself?  Or  hast  Thou  no  need 
that  aught  contain  Thee,  Who  containest  all 
things,  since  what  Thou  fillest  Thou  fillest  by 
containing  it?  For  the  vessels  which  Thou  fillest 
uphold  Thee  not,  since,  though  they  were  brok¬ 
en,  Thou  wert  not  poured  out.  And  when  Thou 
are  poured  out11  on  us,  Thou  art  not  cast  down, 
but  Thou  upliftest  us;  Thou  art  not  dissipated, 
but  Thou  gatherest  us.  But  Thou  Who  fillest  all 
things,  fillest  Thou  them  with  Thy  whole  self? 
or,  since  all  things  cannot  contain  Thee  wholly, 
do  they  contain  part  of  Thee?  and  all  at  once 
the  same  part?  or  each  its  own  part,  the  great¬ 
er  more,  the  smaller  less?  And  is,  then,  one 
part  of  Thee  greater,  another  less?  or  art  Thou 

7Ps.  139.  8.  8Rom.  11.  36.  9Jer.  23.  24. 

10Against  the  Manichees.  11  Acts,  2.  18. 


1 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


wholly  everywhere,  while  nothing  contains 
Thee  wholly? 

[IV]  4.  What  art  Thou  then,  my  God?  What, 
but  the  Lord  God?  For  who  is  Lord  but  the 
Lord?  or  who  is  God  save  our  God?1  Most  high¬ 
est,  most  good,  most  potent,  most  omnipotent; 
most  merciful,  yet  most  just;  most  hidden,  yet 
most  present;  most  beautiful,  yet  most  strong; 
stable,  yet  incomprehensible;  unchangeable,  yet 
all-changing;  never  new,  never  old;  all-renew¬ 
ing,  and  bringing  age  upon  the  proud,  and  they 
know  it  not;  ever  working,  ever  at  rest;  still 
gathering,  yet  nothing  lacking;  supporting,  fill¬ 
ing,  and  over-spreading;  creating,  nourishing, 
and  maturing;  seeking,  yet  having  all  things. 
Thou  lovest,  without  passion;  art  jealous,  with¬ 
out  anxiety;  repentest,  yet  grievest  not;  art  an¬ 
gry,  yet  serene;  changest  Thy  works,  Thy  pur¬ 
pose  unchanged;  receivest  again  what  Thou 
findest,  yet  didst  never  lose;  never  in  need,  yet 
rejoicing  in  gains;  never  covetous,  yet  exacting 
usury.  Thou  receivest  over  and  above,  that 
Thou  mayest  owe;  and  who  hath  aught  that  is 
not  Thine?  Thou  payest  debts,  owing  nothing; 
remittest  debts,  losing  nothing.  And  what  have  I 
now  said,  my  God,  my  life,  my  holy  joy?  or 
what  saith  any  man  when  he  speaks  of  Thee? 
Yet  woe  to  him  that  speaketh  not,  since  mute 
are  even  the  most  eloquent. 

[V]  5.  Oh!  that  I  might  repose  on  Thee! 
Oh!  that  Thou  wouldest  enter  into  my  heart, 
and  inebriate  it,  that  I  may  forget  my  ills,  and 
embrace  Thee,  my  sole  good?  What  art  Thou  to 
me?  In  Thy  pity,  teach  me  to  utter  it.  Or  what 
am  I  to  Thee  that  Thou  demandest  my  love, 
and,  if  I  give  it  not,  are  wroth  with  me,  and 
threatenest  me  with  grievous  woes?  Is  it  then  a 
slight  woe  to  love  Thee  not?  Oh !  for  Thy  mer¬ 
cies’  sake,  tell  me,  0  Lord  my  God,  what  Thou 
art  unto  me.  “Say  unto  my  soul,  I  am  thy  salva¬ 
tion.”2  So  speak,  that  I  may  hear.  Behold,  Lord, 
my  heart  is  before  Thee;  open  Thou  the  ears 
thereof,  and  “say  unto  my  soul,  I  am  thy  salva¬ 
tion.”  After  this  voice  let  me  haste,  and  take 
hold  on  Thee.  Hide  not  Thy  face  from  me.  Let 
me  die3 — lest  I  die — only  let  me  see  Thy  face. 

6.  Narrow  is  the  mansion  of  my  soul;  en¬ 
large  Thou  it,  that  Thou  mayest  enter  in.  It  is 
ruinous!  repair  Thou  it.  It  has  that  within 
which  must  offend  Thine  eyes;  I  confess  and 
know  it.  But  who  shall  cleanse  it?  or  to  whom 
should  I  cry,  save  Thee?  Lord,  cleanse  me  from 

Ts.  18.  31.  2Ps.  25.  3. 

3i.e.  Let  me  see  the  face  of  God,  though  I  die  (Ex.  33. 
20.),  since  if  I  see  it  not,  but  it  be  turned  away,  I  must 
needs  die,  and  that  “the  second  death.” 


mv  secret  faults,  and  spare  Thy  servant  from 
the  power  of  the  enemy.4  I  believe,  and  there¬ 
fore  do  I  speak.5  Lord,  Thou  knowest.  Have  I 
not  confessed  against  myself  my  transgressions 
unto  Thee,  and  Thou,  my  God,  hast  forgiven  the 
iniquity  of  my  heart?6  I  contend  not  in  judg¬ 
ment  with  Thee,7  who  art  the  truth;  I  fear  to 
deceive  myself;  lest  mine  iniquity  lie  unto  it¬ 
self.8  Therefore  I  contend  not  in  judgment  with 
Thee;  “for  if  Thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark  in¬ 
iquities,  0  Lord,  who  shall  abide  it?”9 

[VI]  7.  Yet  suffer  me  to  speak  unto  Thy 
mercy,  me,  “dust  and  ashes.”10  Yet  suffer  me  to 
speak,  since  I  speak  to  Thy  mercy,  and  not  to 
scornful  man.  Thou  too,  perhaps,  despisest  me, 
yet  wilt  Thou  return  and  have  compassion11  up¬ 
on  me.  For  what  would  I  say,  0  Lord  my  God, 
but  that  I  know  not  whence  I  came  into  this  dy¬ 
ing  life  (shall  I  call  it?)  or  living  death.  Then 
immediately  did  the  comforts  of  Thy  compas¬ 
sion  take  me  up,  as  I  heard  (for  I  remember  it 
not)  from  the  parents  of  my  flesh,  out  of  whose 
substance  Thou  didst  sometime  fashion  me. 
Thus  there  received  me  the  comforts  of  wom¬ 
an’s  milk.  For  neither  my  mother  nor  my  nurses 
stored  their  own  breasts  for  me;  but  Thou  didst 
bestow  the  food  of  my  infancy  through  them, 
according  to  Thine  ordinance,  whereby  Thou 
distributest  Thy  riches  through  the  hidden 
springs  of  all  things.  Thou  also  gavest  me  to  de¬ 
sire  no  more  than  Thou  gavest;  and  to  my 
nurses  willingly  to  give  me  what  Thou  gavest 
them.  For  they,  with  an  heaven-taught  affection, 
willingly  gave  me  what  they  abounded  with 
from  Thee.  For  this,  my  good  from  them,  was 
good  for  them.  Nor,  indeed,  from  them  was  it, 
but  through  them;  for  from  Thee,  0  God,  are 
all  good  things,  and  from  my  God  is  all  my 
health.12  This  I  since  learned.  Thou,  through 
these  Thy  gifts,  within  me  and  without,  pro¬ 
claiming  Thyself  unto  me.  For  then  I  knew  but 
to  suck;  to  repose  in  what  pleased,  and  cry  at 
what  offended  my  flesh;  nothing  more. 

8.  Afterwards  I  began  to  smile;  first  in  sleep, 
then  waking:  for  so  it  was  told  me  of  myself, 
and  I  believed  it;  for  we  see  the  like  in  other 
infants,  though  of  myself  I  remember  it  not. 
Thus,  little  by  little,  I  became  conscious  where 
I  was ;  and  to  have  a  wish  to  express  my  wishes 
to  those  who  could  content  them,  and  I  could 
not;  for  the  wishes  were  within  me,  and  they 
without ;  nor  could  they  by  any  sense  of  theirs 
enter  within  my  spirit.  So  I  flung  about  at  ran- 

4Ps.  10.  12,  13.  6Ps.  116.  10.  6Ps.  32  5 

7Job,  g.  3.  8Ps.  26.  12.  9Ps.i30.  3. 

10Gen.  18.  27.  nJer.  12.  15.  12Prov.  21.  31. 


CONFESSIONS  I.  4-1 1  3 


dom  limbs  and  voice,  making  the  few  signs  I 
could,  and  such  as  I  could,  like,  though  in  truth 
very  little  like,  what  I  wished.  And  when  I  was 
not  presently  obeyed  (my  wishes  being  hurtful 
or  unintelligible),  then  I  was  indignant  with  my 
elders  for  not  submitting  to  me,  with  those  ow¬ 
ing  me  no  service  for  not  serving  me,  and 
avenged  myself  on  them  by  tears.  Such  have  I 
learnt  infants  to  be  from  observing  them;  and 
that  I  was  myself  such,  they,  all  unconscious, 
have  shewn  me  better  than  my  nurses  who  knew 
it. 

9.  And,  lo!  my  infancy  died  long  since,  and  I 
live.  But  Thou,  Lord.  Who  for  ever  livest,  and 
in  Whom  nothing  dies;  for  before  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  worlds,  and  before  all  that  can  be 
called  “before,”  Thou  art,  and  art  God  and 
Lord  of  all  which  Thou  hast  created;  in  Thee 
abide,  fixed  for  ever,  the  first  causes  of  all  things 
unabiding;  and  of  all  things  changeable,  the 
springs  abide  in  Thee  unchangeable:  and  in 
Thee  live  the  eternal  reasons  of  all  things  un¬ 
reasoning  and  temporal.  Say,  Lord,  to  me.  Thy 
suppliant;  say,  all-pitying,  to  me,  Thy  pitiable 
one;  say,  did  my  infancy  succeed  another  age  of 
mine  that  died  before  it?  Was  it  that  which  I 
spent  within  my  mother’s  womb?  for  of  that  I 
have  heard  somewhat,  and  have  myself  seen 
women  with  child?  and  what  before  that  life 
again,  0  God  my  joy,  was  I  anywhere  or  any¬ 
body?  For  this  have  I  none  to  tell  me,  neither 
father  nor  mother,  nor  experience  of  others,  nor 
mine  own  memory'.  Dost  Thou  mock  me  for  ask¬ 
ing  this,  and  bid  me  praise  Thee  and  acknowl¬ 
edge  Thee,  for  that  I  do  know? 

10.  I  acknowledge  Thee,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  praise  Thee  for  my  first  rudiments  of 
being,  and  my  infancy,  whereof  I  remember 
nothing;  for  Thou  hast  appointed  that  man 
should  from  others  guess  much  as  to  himself; 
and  believe  much  on  the  strength  of  weak  fe¬ 
males.  Even  then  I  had  being  and  life,  and  (at 
my  infancy’s  close)  I  could  seek  for  signs 
whereby  to  make  known  to  others  my  sensa¬ 
tions.  Whence  could  such  a  being  be,  save  from 
Thee,  ilord?  Shall  any  be  his  own  artificer?  Or 
can  there  elsewhere  be  derived  any  vein,  which 
may  stream  essence  and  life  into  us,  save  from 
Thee,  0  Lord,  in  whom  essence  and  life  are  one? 
for  Thou  Thyself  art  supremely  Essence  and 
Life.  For  “Thou  art  most  high,  and  art  not 
changed,”1  neither  in  Thee  doth  today  come  to 
a  close;  yet  in  Thee  doth  it  come  to  a  close;  be¬ 
cause  all  such  things  also  are  in  Thee.  For  they 
had  no  way  to  pass  away,  unless  Thou  upheldest 

1Mal.  3.  6. 


them.  And  since  “Thy  years  fail  not,”2  Thy 
years  are  one  today.  How  many  of  ours  and  our 
fathers’  years  have  flowed  away  through  Thy 
“today,”  and  from  it  received  the  measure  and 
the  mould  of  such  being  as  they  had;  and  still 
others  shall  flow  away,  and  so  receive  the  mould 
of  their  degree  of  being.  But  “Thou  art  still  the 
same,”3  and  all  things  of  tomorrow,  and  all  be¬ 
yond,  and  all  of  yesterday,  and  all  behind  it, 
Thou  hast  done  today.  What  is  it  to  me.  though 
any  comprehend  not  this?  Let  him  also  rejoice 
and  say,  “What  thing  is  this?”4  Let  him  rejoice 
even  thus;  and  be  content  rather  by  not  discov¬ 
ering  to  discover  Thee,  than  by  discovering  not 
to  discover  Thee. 

[VII]  11.  Hear,  0  God.  Alas,  for  man’s  sin! 
So  saith  man,  and  Thou  pitiest  him;  for  Thou 
madest  him,  but  sin  in  him  Thou  madest  not. 
Who  remindeth  me  of  the  sins  of  my  infancy? 
for  in  Thy  sight  none  is  pure  from  sin,  not  even 
the  infant  whose  life  is  but  a  day  upon  the  earth. 
Who  remindeth  me?  Doth  not  each  little  infant, 
in  whom  I  see  what  of  myself  I  remember  not? 
What  then  was  my  sin?  Was  it  that  I  hung  upon 
the  breast  and  cried?  For  should  I  now  so  do  for 
food  suitable  to  my  age,  justly  should  I  be 
laughed  at  and  reproved.  What  I  then  did  was 
worthy  reproof;  but  since  I  could  not  under¬ 
stand  reproof,  custom  and  reason  forbade  me  to 
be  reproved.  For  those  habits,  when  grown,  we 
root  out  and  cast  away.  Now  no  man,  though  he 
prunes,  wittingly  casts  away  what  is  good.  Or 
was  it  then  good,  even  for  a  while,  to  cry  for 
what,  if  given,  would  hurt?  bitterly  to  resent 
that  persons  free,  and  its  own  elders,  yea,  the 
very  authors  of  its  birth,  served  it  not?  that 
many  besides,  wiser  than  it,  obeyed  not  the  nod 
of  its  good  pleasure?  to  do  its  best  to  strike  and 
hurt,  because  commands  were  not  obeyed,  which 
had  been  obeyed  to  its  hurt?  The  weakness  then 
of  infant  limbs,  not  its  will,  is  its  innocence.  My¬ 
self  have  seen  and  known  even  a  baby  envious; 
it  could  not  speak,  yet  it  turned  pale  and  looked 
bitterly  on  its  foster-brother.  Who  knows  not 
this?Mothers  and  nurses  tell  you  that  they  allay 
these  things  by  I  know  not  what  remedies.  Is 
that  too  innocence,  when  the  fountain  of  milk  is 
flowing  in  rich  abundance,  not  to  endure  one  to 
share  it,  though  in  extremest  need,  and  whose 
very  life  as  yet  depends  thereon?  We  bear  gent¬ 
ly  with  all  this,  not  as  being  no  or  slight  evils, 
but  because  they  will  disappear  as  years  in¬ 
crease;  for,  though  tolerated  now,  the  very  same 
tempers  are  utterly  intolerable  when  found  in 
riper  years. 

2Ps.  102.  27.  3Ibid.  4Ex.  16.  15. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


12.  Thou,  then.  0  Lord  my  God.  Who  gavest 
life  to  this  my  infancy,  furnishing  thus  with 
senses  (as  we  see)  the  frame  Thou  gavest,  com¬ 
pacting  its  limbs,  ornamenting  its  proportions, 
and,  for  its  general  good  and  safety,  implanting 
in  it  all  vital  functions,  Thou  commandest  me 
to  praise  Thee  in  these  things,  “to  confess  unto 
Thee,  and  sing  unto  Thy  name.  Thou  most 
Highest.”1  For  Thou  art  God,  Almighty  and 
Good,  even  hadst  Thou  done  nought  but  only 
this,  which  none  could  do  but  Thou :  whose 
Unity  is  the  mould  of  all  things;  who  out  of 
Thy  own  fairness  makest  all  things  fair;  and  or- 
derest  all  things  by  Thy  law.  This  age  then, 
Lord,  whereof  I  have  no  remembrance,  which  I 
take  on  others’  word  and  guess  from  other  in¬ 
fants  that  I  have  passed,  true  though  the  guess 
be,  I  am  yet  loth  to  count  in  this  life  of  mine 
which  I  live  in  this  world.  For  no  less  than  that 
which  I  spent  in  my  mother’s  womb,  is  it  hid 
from  me  in  the  shadows  of  forgetfulness.  But  if 
“I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my 
mother  conceive  me,”  2  where,  I  beseech  Thee, 
0  my  God,  where,  Lord,  or  when,  was  I  Thy 
servant  guiltless?  But,  lo!  that  period  I  pass  by; 
and  what  have  I  now  to  do  with  that  of  which  I 
can  recall  no  vestige? 

[VIII]  13.  Passing  hence  from  infancy,  I 
came  to  boyhood,  or  rather  it  came  to  me,  dis¬ 
placing  infancy.  Nor  did  that  depart  (for  whith¬ 
er  went  it?),  and  yet  it  was  no  more.  For  I  was 
no  longer  a  speechless  infant,  but  a  speaking 
boy.  This  I  remember;  and  have  since  observed 
how  I  learned  to  speak.  It  was  not  that  my 
elders  taught  me  words  (as,  soon  after,  other 
learning)  in  any  set  method;  but  I,  longing  by 
cries  and  broken  accents  and  various  motions  of 
my  limbs  to  express  my  thoughts,  that  so  I 
might  have  my  will,  and  yet  unable  to  express  all 
I  willed  or  to  whom  I  willed,  did  myself,  by  the 
understanding  which  Thou,  my  God,  gavest  me, 
practise  the  sounds  in  my  memory.  When  they 
named  anything,  and  as  they  spoke  turned  to¬ 
wards  it,  I  saw  and  remembered  that  they  called 
what  they  would  point  out  by  the  name  they  ut¬ 
tered.  And  that  they  meant  this  thing,  and  no 
other,  was  plain  from  the  motion  of  their  body, 
the  natural  language,  as  it  were,  of  all  nations, 
expressed  by  the  countenance,  glances  of  the 
eye,  gestures  of  the  limbs,  and  tones  of  the 
voice,  indicating  the  affections  of  the  mind  as  it 
pursues,  possesses,  rejects,  or  shuns.  And  thus 
by  constantly  hearing  words,  as  they  occurred 
in  various  sentences,  I  collected  gradually  for 
what  they  stood;  and,  having  broken  in  my 
lPs.  92.  1.  2Ps.  51.  5. 


mouth  to  these  signs,  I  thereby  gave  utterance 
to  my  will.  Thus  I  exchanged  with  those  about 
me  these  current  signs  of  our  wills,  and  so 
launched  deeper  into  the  stormy  intercourse  of 
human  life,  yet  depending  on  parental  authority 
and  the  beck  of  elders. 

[IX]  14.  0  God  my  God,  what  miseries  and 
mockeries  did  I  now  experience,  when  obedience 
to  my  teachers  was  proposed  to  me,  as  proper  in 
a  boy,  in  order  that  in  this  world  I  might  pros¬ 
per,  and  excel  in  tongue-science,  which  should 
serve  to  the  “praise  of  men”  and  to  deceitful 
riches.  Next  I  was  put  to  school  to  get  learning, 
in  which  I  (poor  wretch)  knew  not  what  use 
there  was;  and  yet,  if  idle  in  learning,  I  was 
beaten.  For  this  was  judged  right  by  our  fore¬ 
fathers;  and  many,  passing  the  same  course  be¬ 
fore  us,  framed  for  us  weary  paths,  through 
which  we  were  fain  to  pass ;  multiplying  toil  and 
grief  upon  the  sons  of  Adam.  But,  Lord,  we 
found  that  men  called  upon  Thee,  and  we  learnt 
from  them  to  think  of  Thee  (according  to  our 
powers)  as  of  some  great  One  Who,  though  hid¬ 
den  from  our  senses,  couldst  hear  and  help  us. 
For  so  I  began,  as  a  boy,  to  pray  to  Thee,  my 
“aid”  and  “refuge”;  and  broke  the  fetters  of  my 
tongue  to  call  on  Thee,  praying  Thee,  though 
small,  yet  with  no  small  earnestness,  that  I 
might  not  be  beaten  at  school.  And  when  Thou 
heardest  me  not  (not  thereby  giving  me  over  to 
folly3),  my  elders,  yea,  my  very  parents,  who 
yet  wished  me  no  ill,  mocked  my  stripes,  my 
then  great  and  grievous  ill. 

15.  Is  there,  Lord,  any  of  soul  so  great,  and 
cleaving  to  Thee  with  so  intense  affection  (for  a 
sort  of  stupidity  will  in  a  way  do  it);  but  is 
there  anyone  who,  from  cleaving  devoutly  to 
Thee,  is  endued  with  so  great  a  spirit  that  he 
can  think  as  lightly  of  the  racks  and  hooks  and 
other  torments  (against  which,  throughout  all 
lands,  men  call  on  Thee  with  extreme  dread), 
mocking  at  those  by  whom  they  are  feared  most 
bitterly,  as  our  parents  mocked  the  torments 
which  we  suffered  in  boyhood  from  our  masters? 
For  we  feared  not  our  torments  less ;  nor  prayed 
we  less  to  Thee  to  escape  them.  And  yet  we 
sinned,  in  writing  or  reading  or  studying  less 
than  was  exacted  of  us.  For  we  wanted  not,  O 
Lord,  memory  or  capacity,  whereof  Thy  will 
gave  enough  for  our  age;  but  our  sole  delight 
was  play;  and  for  this  we  were  punished  by 
those  who  yet  themselves  were  doing  the  like. 
But  elder  folks’  idleness  is  called  “business”; 
that  of  boys,  being  really  the  same,  is  punished 
by  those  elders;  and  none  commiserates  either 
3Ps.  22.  2,  Vulg. 


CONFESSIONS  I.  12-19 


boys  or  men.  For  will  any  of  sound  discretion 
approve  of  my  being  beaten  as  a  boy  because, 
by  playing  at  ball.  I  made  less  progress  in  studies 
which  I  was  to  learn  only  that,  as  a  man,  I  might 
play  more  unbeseemingly?  And  what  else  did 
he.  who  beat  me?  who,  if  worsted  in  some  tri¬ 
fling  discussion  with  his  fellow-tutor.  wTas  more 
embittered  and  jealous  than  I,  when  beaten  at 
ball  by  a  play-fellow? 

[X]  16.  And  yet  I  sinned  herein,  0  Lord 
God.  the  Creator  and  Disposer  of  all  things  in 
nature,  of  sin  the  Disposer  only,  0  Lord  my 
God,  I  sinned  in  transgressing  the  commands  of 
my  parents  and  those  my  masters.  For  what 
they,  with  whatever  motive,  would  have  me 
learn,  I  might  afterward  have  put  to  good  use. 
For  I  disobeyed,  not  from  a  better  choice,  but 
from  love  of  play,  loving  the  pride  of  victory  in 
my  contests,  and  to  have  my  ears  tickled  with 
lying  fables,  that  they  might  itch  the  more;  the 
same  curiosity  flashing  from  my  eyes  more  and 
more,  for  the  shows  and  games  of  my  elders. 
Yet  those  who  give  these  shows  are  in  such  es¬ 
teem  that  almost  all  wish  the  same  for  their 
children,  and  yet  are  very  willing  that  they 
should  be  beaten  if  those  very  games  detain 
them  from  the  studies  whereby  they  would  have 
them  attain  to  be  the  givers  of  them.  Look  with 
pity.  Lord,  on  these  things,  and  deliver  us  who 
call  upon  Thee  now;  deliver  those  too  who  call 
not  on  Thee  yet.  that  they  may  call  on  Thee, 
and  Thou  mayest  deliver  them. 

[XI]  17.  As  a  boy,  then,  I  had  already  heard 
of  an  eternal  life,  promised  us  through  the  hu¬ 
mility  of  the  Lord  our  God  stooping  to  our 
pride;  and  even  from  the  womb  of  my  mother, 
who  greatly  hoped  in  Thee,  I  was  sealed  with 
the  mark  of  His  cross  and  salted  with  His  salt.1 
Thou  sawest,  Lord,  how  while  yet  a  boy,  being 
seized  on  a  time  with  sudden  oppression  of  the 
stomach,  and  like  near  to  death — Thou  sawest, 
my  God  (for  Thou  wert  my  keeper),  with  what 
eagerness  and  what  faith  I  sought,  from  the 
pious  care  of  my  mother  and  Thy  Church,  the 
mother  of  us  all,  the  baptism  of  Thy  Christ  my 
God  ahd  Lord.  Whereupon  the  mother  of  my 
flesh,  being  much  troubled  (since,  with  a  heart 
pure  in  Thy  faith,  she  even  more  lovingly  trav¬ 
ailed  in  birth2  of  my  salvation),  would  in  eager 
haste  have  provided  for  my  consecration  and 
cleansing  by  the  healthgiving  sacraments,  con¬ 
fessing  Thee,  Lord  Jesus,  for  the  remission  of 

!A  rite  in  the  Western  Churches,  on  admission  as  a 
catechumen,  previous  to  Baptism,  denoting  the  purity 
and  uncorruptedness  and  discretion  required  of  Christians. 

2Gal.  4.  19. 


sins,  unless  I  had  suddenly  recovered.  And  so, 
as  if  I  must  needs  be  again  polluted  should  I 
live,  my  cleansing  was  deferred,  because  the  de¬ 
filements  of  sin  would,  after  that  washing,  bring 
greater  and  more  perilous  guilt.  I  then  already 
believed;  and  my  mother,  and  the  whole  house¬ 
hold  except  my  father;  yet  did  not  he  prevail 
over  the  power  of  my  mother’s  piety  in  me,  that 
as  he  did  not  yet  believe,  so  neither  should  I.  For 
it  was  her  earnest  care  that  Thou  my  God, 
rather  than  he,  shouldest  be  my  father;  and  in 
this  Thou  didst  aid  her  to  prevail  over  her  hus¬ 
band,  whom  she,  the  better,  obeyed,  therein  also 
obeying  Thee,  who  hast  so  commanded. 

18.  I  beseech  Thee,  my  God,  I  would  fain 
know,  if  so  Thou  wiliest,  for  what  purpose  my 
baptism  was  then  deferred?  Was  it  for  my  good 
that  the  rein  was  laid  loose,  as  it  were,  upon  me, 
for  me  to  sin?  or  was  it  not  laid  loose?  If  not, 
why  does  it  still  echo  in  our  ears  on  all  sides, 
“Let  him  alone,  let  him  do  as  he  will,  for  he  is 
not  yet  baptized”?  But  as  to  bodily  health,  no 
one  says,  “Let  him  be  worse  wounded,  for  he  is 
not  yet  healed.”  How  much  better  then,  had  I 
been  at  once  healed;  and  then,  by  my  friends’ 
diligence  and  my  own,  my  soul’s  recovered 
health  had  been  kept  safe  in  Thy  keeping  who 
gavest  it.  Better  truly.  But  how  many  and  great 
waves  of  temptation  seemed  to  hang  over  me 
after  my  boyhood!  These  my  mother  foresaw; 
and  preferred  to  expose  to  them  the  clay  whence 
I  might  afterwards  be  moulded,  than  the  very 
cast  when  made. 

[XII]  19.  In  boyhood  itself,  however  (so 
much  less  dreaded  for  me  than  youth),  I  loved 
not  study,  and  hated  to  be  forced  to  it.  Yet  I 
was  forced;  and  this  was  well  done  towards  me, 
but  I  did  not  well;  for,  unless  forced,  I  had  not 
learnt.  But  no  one  doth  well  against  his  will, 
even  though  what  he  doth  be  well.  Yet  neither 
did  they  well  who  forced  me,  but  what  was  well 
came  to  me  from  Thee,  my  God.  For  they  were 
regardless  how  I  should  employ  what  they 
forced  me  to  learn,  except  to  satiate  the  insati¬ 
ate  desires  of  a  wealthy  beggary  and  a  shame¬ 
ful  glory.  But  Thou,  by  Whom  the  very  hairs  of 
our  head  are  numbered,3  didst  use  for  my  good 
the  error  of  all  who  urged  me  to  learn ;  and  my 
own,  who  would  not  learn,  Thou  didst  use  for 
my  punishment — a  fit  penalty  for  one,  so  small 
a  boy  and  so  great  a  sinner.  So  by  those  who 
did  not  well,  Thou  didst  well  for  me ;  and  by  my 
own  sin  Thou  didst  justly  punish  me.  For  Thou 
hast  commanded,  and  so  it  is,  that  every  inordi¬ 
nate  affection  should  be  its  own  punishment. 

3Matt.  10.  30. 


6 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


[XIII]  20.  But  why  did  I  so  much  hate  the 
Greek,  which  I  studied  as  a  boy?  I  do  not  yet 
fully  know.  For  the  Latin  I  loved;  not  what  my 
first  masters,  but  what  the  so-called  grammari¬ 
ans  taught  me.  For  those  first  lessons,  reading, 
writing,  and  arithmetic,  I  thought  as  great  a 
burden  and  penalty  as  any  Greek.  And  yet 
whence  was  this  too.  but  from  the  sin  and  van¬ 
ity  of  this  life,  because  “I  was  flesh,  and  a  breath 
that  passeth  away  and  cometh  not  again?”1  For 
those  first  lessons  were  better  certainly,  because 
more  certain;  by  them  I  obtained,  and  still  re¬ 
tain,  the  power  of  reading  what  I  find  written, 
and  myself  writing  what  I  will ;  whereas  in  the 
others,  I  was  forced  to  learn  the  wanderings  of 
one  Tineas,  forgetful  of  my  own,  and  to  weep 
for  dead  Dido  because  she  killed  herself  for 
love;  the  while,  with  dry  eyes,  I  endured  my 
miserable  self  dying  among  these  things,  far 
from  Thee,  0  God  my  life. 

21.  For  what  more  miserable  than  a  miserable 
being  who  commiserates  not  himself;  weeping 
the  death  of  Dido  for  love  to  Eneas,  but  weep¬ 
ing  not  his  own  death  for  want  of  love  to  Thee, 
0  God?  Thou  light  of  my  heart,  Thou  bread  of 
my  inmost  soul,  Thou  Power  Who  givest  vigour 
to  my  mind.  Who  quickenest  my  thoughts,  I 
loved  Thee  not.  I  committed  fornication  against 
Thee,  and  all  around  me  thus  fornicating  there 
echoed  “Well  done!  well  done!”  for  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  this  world  is  fornication  against  Thee;2 
and  “Well  done!  well  done!”  echoes  on  till  one 
is  ashamed  not  to  be  thus  a  man.  And  all  this  I 
wept  not,  I  who  wept  for  Dido  slain,  and  “seek¬ 
ing  by  the  sword  a  stroke  and  wound  extreme,”3 
myself  seeking  the  while  a  worse  extreme,  the 
extremest  and  lowest  of  Thy  creatures,  having 
forsaken  Thee,  earth  passing  into  the  earth.  And 
if  forbid  to  read  all  this,  I  was  grieved  that  I 
might  not  read  what  grieved  me.  Madness  like 
this  is  thought  a  higher  and  a  richer  learning 
than  that  by  which  I  learned  to  read  and  write. 

22.  But  now,  my  God,  cry  Thou  aloud  in  my 
soul,  and  let  Thy  truth  tell  me,  “Not  so,  not  so. 
Far  better  was  that  first  study.”  For,  lo.  I  would 
readily  forget  the  wanderings  of  .Eneas  and  all 
the  rest,  rather  than  how  to  read  and  write.  But 
over  the  entrance  of  the  Grammar  School  is  a 
vail4  drawn!  true;  yet  is  this  not  so  much  an 
emblem  of  aught  recondite  as  a  cloke  of  error. 
Let  not  those  whom  I  no  longer  fear  cry  out 

Ts.  78.  39;  Jas,  4.  14.  2Jas.  4.  4. 

3Aeneid,  vi.  457. 

4An  emblem  of  honour,  used  in  places  of  worship,  and 
subsequently  in  courts  of  law,  Emperors’  palaces  and 
even  private  houses. 


against  me,  while  I  confess  to  Thee,  my  God, 
whatever  my  soul  will,  and  acquiesce  in  the 
condemnation  of  my  evil  ways,  that  I  may  love 
Thy  good  ways.  Let  not  either  buyers  or  sellers 
of  grammar-learning  cry  out  against  me.  For  if 
I  question  them  whether  it  be  true  that  Eneas 
came  on  a  time  to  Carthage,  as  the  Poet  tells, 
the  less  learned  will  reply  that  they  know  not, 
the  more  learned  that  he  never  did.  But  should 
I  ask  with  what  letters  the  name  “Eneas”  is 
written,  everyone  who  has  learnt  this  will  an¬ 
swer  me  aright,  as  to  the  signs  which  men  have 
conventionally  settled.  If,  again,  I  should  ask 
which  might  be  forgotten  with  least  detriment 
to  the  concerns  of  life,  reading  and  writing  or 
these  poetic  fictions?  who  does  not  foresee  what 
all  must  answer  who  have  not  wholly  forgotten 
themselves?  I  sinned,  then,  when  as  a  boy  I  pre¬ 
ferred  those  empty  to  those  more  profitable 
studies,  or  rather  loved  the  one  and  hated  the 
other.  “One  and  one,  two”;  “two  and  two, 
four”;  this  was  to  me  a  hateful  sing-song:  “the 
wooden  horse  lined  with  armed  men,”  and  “the 
burning  of  Troy,”  and  “Creusa’s  shade  and  sad 
similitude,”5  were  the  choice  spectacle  of  my 
vanity. 

[XIV]  23.  Why  then  did  I  hate  the  Greek 
classics,  which  have  the  like  tales?  For  Homer 
also  curiously  wove  the  like  fictions,  and  is  most 
sweetly-vain,  yet  was  he  bitter  to  my  boyish 
taste.  And  so  I  suppose  would  Virgil  be  to  Gre¬ 
cian  children,  when  forced  to  learn  him  as  I 
was  Homer.  Difficulty,  in  truth,  the  difficulty  of 
a  foreign  tongue,  dashed,  as  it  were,  with  gall  all 
the  sweetness  of  Grecian  fable.  For  not  one 
word  of  it  did  I  understand,  and  to  make  me  un¬ 
derstand  I  was  urged  vehemently  with  cruel 
threats  and  punishments.  Time  was  also  (as  an 
infant)  I  knew  no  Latin ;  but  this  I  learned  with¬ 
out  fear  of  suffering,  by  mere  observation,  amid 
the  caresses  of  my  nursery  and  jests  of  friends, 
smiling  and  sportively  encouraging  me.  This  I 
learned  without  any  pressure  of  punishment  to 
urge  me  on,  for  my  heart  urged  me  to  give  birth 
to  its  conceptions,  which  I  could  only  do  by 
learning  words  not  of  those  who  taught,  but  of 
those  who  talked  with  me ;  in  whose  ears  also  I 
gave  birth  to  the  thoughts,  whatever  I  con¬ 
ceived.  No  doubt,  then,  that  a  free  curiosity  has 
more  force  in  our  learning  these  things  than  a 
frightful  enforcement.  Only  this  enforcement 
restrains  the  rovings  of  that  freedom  through 
Thy  laws,  0  my  God,  Thy  laws,  from  the  mas¬ 
ter’s  cane  to  the  martyr’s  trials,  being  able  to 
temper  for  us  a  wholesome  bitter,  recalling  us 
bAeneid,  n.  772. 


7 


CONFESSIONS  I.  20-28 


to  Thyself  from  that  deadly  pleasure  which 
lures  us  from  Thee. 

[XV]  24.  Hear,  Lord,  my  prayer ;  let  not  my 
soul  faint  under  Thy  discipline,  nor  let  me  faint 
in  confessing  unto  Thee  all  Thy  mercies  where¬ 
by  Thou  hast  drawn  me  out  of  all  my  most  evil 
ways,  that  Thou  mightest  become  a  delight  to 
me  above  all  the  allurements  which  I  once  pur¬ 
sued;  that  I  may  most  entirely  love  Thee,  and 
clasp  Thy  hand  with  all  my  affections,  and  Thou 
mayest  yet  rescue  me  from  every  temptation, 
even  unto  the  end.  For,  lo,  0  Lord,  my  King  and 
my  God,  for  Thy  service  be  whatever  useful 
thing  my  childhood  learned;  for  Thy  service, 
that  I  speak,  write,  read,  reckon.  For  Thou  didst 
grant  me  Thy  discipline,  while  I  was  learning 
vanities;  and  my  sin  of  delighting  in  those  van¬ 
ities  Thou  hast  forgiven.  In  them,  indeed,  I 
learnt  many  a  useful  word,  but  these  may  as 
well  be  learned  in  things  not  vain;  and  that  is 
the  safe  path  for  the  steps  of  youth. 

[XVI]  25.  But  woe  is  thee,  thou  torrent  of 
human  custom!  Who  shall  stand  against  thee? 
How  long  shalt  thou  not  be  dried  up?  How  long 
roll  the  sons  of  Eve  into  that  huge  and  hideous 
ocean  which  even  they  scarcely  overpass  who 
climb  the  cross?  Did  not  I  read  in  thee  of  Jove 
the  thunderer  and  the  adulterer?  Both,  doubt¬ 
less,  he  could  not  be;  but  so  the  feigned  thunder 
might  countenance  and  pander  to  real  adultery. 
And  now  which  of  our  gowned  masters  lends  a 
sober  ear  to  one  who  from  their  own  school  cries 
out,  “These  were  Homer’s  fictions,  transferring 
things  human  to  the  gods;  would  he  had  brought 
down  things  divine  to  us!”  Vet  more  truly  had 
he  said,  “These  are  indeed  his  fictions;  but  at¬ 
tributing  a  divine  nature  to  wicked  men,  that 
crimes  might  be  no  longer  crimes,  and  whoso 
commits  them  might  seem  to  imitate  not  aban¬ 
doned  men,  but  the  celestial  gods.” 

26.  And  yet,  thou  hellish  torrent,  into  thee 
are  cast  the  sons  of  men  with  rich  rewards,  for 
compassing  such  learning;  and  a  great  solemnity 
is  made  of  it  when  this  is  going  on  in  the  forum, 
within  sight  of  laws  appointing  a  salary  beside 
the  scholar’s  payments;  and  thou  lashest  thy 
rocks  and  roarest,  “Hence  words  are  learnt; 
hence  eloquence;  most  necessary  to  gain  your 
ends,  or  maintain  opinions.”  As  if  we  should 
have  never  known  such  words  as  “golden  show¬ 
er,”  “lap,”  “beguile,”  “temples  of  the  heavens,” 
or  others  in  that  passage,  unless  Terence  had 
brought  a  lewd  youth  upon  the  stage,  setting  up 
Jupiter  as  his  example  of  seduction. 

Viewing  a  picture ,  where  the  tale  was  drawn, 

Of  Jove's  descending  in  a  golden  shower 


To  Danae’s  lap,  a  woman  to  beguile. 

And  then  mark  how  he  excites  himself  to  lust  as 
by  celestial  authority; 

And  what  God?  Great  Jove , 

Who  shakes  heav’n’s  highest  temples  with  his 
thunder, 

And  I,  poor  mortal  man,  not  do  the  samel 
I  did  it,  and  with  all  my  heart  I  did  it. 

Not  one  whit  more  easily  are  the  words  learnt 
for  all  this  vileness;  but  by  their  means  the  vile¬ 
ness  is  committed  with  less  shame.  Not  that  I 
blame  the  words,  being,  as  it  were,  choice  and 
precious  vessels;  but  that  wine  of  error  which  is 
drunk  to  us  in  them  by  intoxicated  teachers; 
and  if  we,  too,  drink  not,  we  are  beaten,  and 
have  no  sober  judge  to  whom  we  may  appeal. 
Yet,  0  my  God  (in  Whose  presence  I  now  with¬ 
out  hurt  may  remember  this),  all  this  unhappily 
I  learnt  willingly  with  great  delight,  and  for  this 
was  pronounced  a  hopeful  boy. 

[XVII]  27.  Bear  with  me,  my  God,  while  I 
say  somewhat  of  my  wit,  Thy  gift,  and  on  what 
dotages  I  wasted  it.  For  a  task  was  set  me,  trou¬ 
blesome  enough  to  my  soul  upon  terms  of  praise 
or  shame  and  fear  of  stripes,  to  speak  the  words 
of  Juno,  as  she  raged  and  mourned  that  she 
could  not. 

This  Trojan  prince  from  Latium  turn.1 

Which  words  I  had  heard  that  Juno  never  ut¬ 
tered;  but  we  were  forced  to  go  astray  in  the 
footsteps  of  these  poetic  fictions,  and  to  say  in 
prose  much  what  he  expressed  in  verse.  And  his 
speaking  was  most  applauded  in  whom  the  pas¬ 
sions  of  rage  and  grief  were  most  pre-eminent, 
and  clothed  in  the  most  fitting  language,  main¬ 
taining  the  dignity  of  the  character.  What  is  it 
to  me,  0  my  true  life,  my  God,  that  my  decla¬ 
mation  was  applauded  above  so  many  of  my 
own  age  and  class?  Is  not  all  this  smoke  and 
wind?  And  was  there  nothing  else  whereon  to 
exercise  my  wit  and  tongue?  Thy  praises,  Lord, 
Thy  praises  might  have  stayed  the  yet  tender 
shoot  of  my  heart  by  the  prop  of  Thy  Scrip¬ 
tures;  so  had  it  not  trailed  away  amid  these 
empty  trifles,  a  defiled  prey  for  the  fowls  of  the 
air.  For  in  more  ways  than  one  do  men  sacrifice 
to  the  rebellious  angels. 

[XVIII]  28.  But  what  marvel  that  I  was 
thus  carried  away  to  vanities,  and  went  out  from 
Thy  presence,  0  my  God,  when  men  were  set  be¬ 
fore  me  as  models,  who,  if  in  relating  some  ac¬ 
tion  of  theirs,  in  itself  not  ill,  they  committed 
some  barbarism  or  solecism,  being  censured, 
were  abashed;  but  when  in  rich  and  adorned 
lAeneid,  i.  36-75, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


8 

and  well-ordered  discourse  they  related  their 
own  disordered  life,  being  bepraised,  they  glor¬ 
ied?  These  things  Thou  seest,  Lord,  and  holdest 
Thy  peace;  “long-suffering,  and  plenteous  in 
mercy  and  truth.”1  Wilt  Thou  hold  Thy  peace 
for  ever?  And  even  now  Thou  drawest  out  of 
this  horrible  gulf  the  soul  that  seeketh  Thee, 
that  thirsteth  for  Thy  pleasures,  “whose  heart 
saith  unto  Thee,”  I  have  sought  Thy  face;  “Thy 
face.  Lord,  will  I  seek.”2  For  darkened3  affec¬ 
tions  is  removal  from  Thee.  For  it  is  not  by  our 
feet,  or  change  of  place,  that  men  leave  Thee, 
or  return  unto  Thee.  Or  did  that  Thy  younger 
son  look  out  for  horses  or  chariots  or  ships,  fly 
with  visible  wings,  or  journey  by  the  motion  of 
his  limbs,  that  he  might  in  a  far  country  waste 
in  riotous  living  all  Thou  gavest  at  his  depar¬ 
ture?  A  loving  Father  when  Thou  gavest,  and 
more  loving  unto  him  when  he  returned  empty.4 
So  then  in  lustful — that  is,  in  darkened — affec¬ 
tions,  is  the  true  distance  from  Thy  face. 

29.  Behold,  0  Lord  God,  yea,  behold  patient¬ 
ly  as  Thou  art  wont,  how  carefully  the  sons  of 
men  observe  the  covenanted  rules  of  letters  and 
syllables  received  from  those  who  spake  before 
them,  neglecting  the  eternal  covenant  of  ever¬ 
lasting  salvation  received  from  Thee.  Insomuch 
that  a  teacher  or  learner  of  the  hereditary  laws 
of  pronunciation  will  more  offend  men  by  speak¬ 
ing.  without  the  aspirate,  of  a  “’uman  being,” 
in  despite  of  the  laws  of  grammar,  than  if  he,  a 
“human  being,”  hate  a  “human  being”  in  despite 
of  Thine.  As  if  any  enemy  could  be  more  hurt¬ 
ful  than  the  hatred  with  which  he  is  incensed 
against  him;  or  could  wound  more  deeply  him 
whom  he  persecutes  than  he  wounds  his  own 
soul  by  his  enmity.  Assuredly  no  science  of  let¬ 
ters  can  be  so  innate  as  the  record  of  conscience, 
“that  he  is  doing  to  another  what  from  another 
he  would  be  loth  to  suffer.”  How  deep  are  Thy 
ways,  0  God,  Thou  only  great,  “that  sittest”  si¬ 
lent  “on  high”5  and  by  an  unwearied  law  dis¬ 
pensing  penal  blindness  to  lawless  desires.  In 
quest  of  the  fame  of  eloquence,  a  man  standing 
before  a  human  judge,  surrounded  by  a  human 
throng,  declaiming  against  his  enemy  with  fierc¬ 
est  hatred,  will  take  heed  most  watchfully  lest, 
by  an  error  of  the  tongue,  he  murder  the  word 
“human  being”;  but  takes  no  heed  lest,  through 
the  fury  of  his  spirit,  he  murder  the  real  human 
being. 

30.  This  was  the  world  at  whose  gate  unhap¬ 
py  I  lay  in  my  boyhood;  this  the  stage,  where  I 
had  feared  more  to  commit  a  barbarism  than, 

Ts.  86.  15.  2Ps.  27.  8.  3Rom.  1.  21. 

4Luke,  15.  11-32.  6Isa.  33.  5. 


having  committed  one,  to  envy  those  who  had 
not.  These  things  I  speak  and  confess  to  Thee, 
my  God;  for  which  I  had  praise  from  them 
whom  I  then  thought  it  all  virtue  to  please.  For 
I  saw  not  the  abyss  of  vileness  wherein  I  was 
cast  away  from  Thine  eyes.6  Before  them  what 
more  foul  than  I  was  already,  displeasing  even 
such  as  myself?  with  innumerable  lies  deceiving 
my  tutor,  my  masters,  my  parents,  from  love  of 
play,  eagerness  to  see  vain  shows,  and  restless¬ 
ness  to  imitate  them !  Thefts  also  I  committed, 
from  my  parents’  cellar  and  table,  enslaved  by 
greediness,  or  that  I  might  have  to  give  to  boys, 
who  sold  me  their  play,  which  all  the  while  they 
liked  no  less  than  I.  In  this  play,  too,  I  of¬ 
ten  sought  unfair  conquests,  conquered  myself 
meanwhile  by  vain  desire  of  pre-eminence.  And 
what  could  I  so  ill  endure,  or,  when  I  detected 
it,  upbraided  I  so  fiercely,  as  that  I  was  doing  to 
others?  and  for  which  if,  detected,  I  was  up¬ 
braided,  I  chose  rather  to  quarrel  than  to  yield. 
And  is  this  the  innocence  of  boyhood?  Not  so, 
Lord,  not  so;  I  cry  Thy  mercy,  0  my  God.  For 
these  very  sins,  as  riper  years  succeed,  these 
very  sins  are  transferred  from  tutors  and  mas¬ 
ters,  from  nuts  and  balls  and  sparrows,  to  mag¬ 
istrates  and  kings,  to  gold  and  manors  and 
slaves,  just  as  severer  punishments  displace  the 
cane.  It  was  the  low  stature  then  of  childhood 
which  Thou  our  King  didst  commend  as  an  em¬ 
blem  of  lowliness,  when  Thou  saidst:  “Of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.”7 

31.  Yet,  Lord,  to  Thee,  the  Creator  and  Gov¬ 
ernor  of  the  universe,  most  excellent  and  most 
good,  thanks  were  due  to  Thee  our  God,  even 
hadst  Thou  destined  for  me  boyhood  only.  For 
even  then  I  was,  I  lived,  and  felt;  and  had  an 
implanted  providence  over  my  own  well-being — 
a  trace  of  that  mysterious  Unity  whence  I  was 
derived ;  I  guarded  by  the  inward  sense  the  en¬ 
tireness  of  my  senses,  and  in  these  minute  pur¬ 
suits,  and  in  my  thoughts  on  things  minute,  I 
learnt  to  delight  in  truth,  I  hated  to  be  deceived, 
had  a  vigorous  memory,  was  gifted  with  speech, 
was  soothed  by  friendship,  avoided  pain,  base¬ 
ness,  ignorance.  In  so  small  a  creature,  what 
was  not  wonderful,  not  admirable?  But  all  are 
gifts  of  my  God;  it  was  not  I  who  gave  them 
me;  and  good  these  are,  and  these  together  are 
myself.  Good,  then,  is  He  that  made  me,  and  He 
is  my  good;  and  before  Him  will  I  exult  for 
every  good  which  of  a  boy  I  had.  For  it  was  my 
sin  that  not  in  Him,  but  in  His  creatures — my¬ 
self  and  others — I  sought  for  pleasures,  sublim¬ 
ities,  truths,  and  so  fell  headlong  into  sorrows, 
6Ps.  31.  22.  7Matt.  19.  14. 


CONFESSIONS  I 

confusions,  errors.  Thanks  be  to  Thee,  my  joy 
and  my  glory  and  my  confidence,  my  God. 
thanks  be  to  Thee  for  Thy  gifts;  but  do  Thou 
preserve  them  to  me.  For  so  wilt  Thou  preserve 
me.  and  those  things  shall  be  enlarged  and  per¬ 
fected  which  Thou  hast  given  me.  and  I  myself 
shall  be  with  Thee,  since  even  to  be  Thou  hast 
given  me. 

BOOK  II.  Object  of  these  Confessions.  Farther 

ills  of  idleness  developed  in  his  sixteenth  year. 

Evils  of  ill  society ,  which  betrayed  him  into 

theft. 

[I]  1. 1  will  now  call  to  mind  my  past  foulness, 
and  the  carnal  corruptions  of  my  soul:  not  be¬ 
cause  I  love  them,  but  that  I  may  love  Thee,  0 
my  God.  For  love  of  Thy  love  I  do  it ;  reviewing 
my  most  wicked  ways  in  the  very  bitterness  of 
my  remembrance,  that  Thou  mayest  grow  sweet 
unto  me  (Thou  sweetness  never  failing,  Thou 
blissful  and  assured  sweetness) ;  and  gathering 
me  again  out  of  that  my  dissipation  wherein  I 
was  torn  piecemeal,  while,  turned  from  Thee, 
the  One  Good.  I  lost  myself  among  a  multiplic¬ 
ity  of  things.  For  I  even  burnt  in  my  youth  here¬ 
tofore,  to  be  satiated  in  things  below;  and  I 
dared  to  grow  wild  again,  with  these  various  and 
shadowy  loves:  my  beauty  consumed  away,1 
and  I  stank  in  Thine  eyes;  pleasing  myself,  and 
desirous  to  please  in  the  eyes  of  men. 

[II]  2.  And  what  was  it  that  I  delighted  in, 
but  to  love,  and  be  beloved?  but  I  kept  not  the 
measure  of  love,  of  mind  to  mind,  friendship’s 
bright  boundary;  but  out  of  the  muddy  concu¬ 
piscence  of  the  flesh,  and  the  bubblings  of  youth, 
mists  fumed  up  which  beclouded  and  overcast 
my  heart,  that  I  could  not  discern  the  clear 
brightness  of  love,  from  the  fog  of  lustfulness. 
Both  did  confusedly  boil  in  me,  and  hurried  my 
unstayed  youth  over  the  precipice  of  unholy  de¬ 
sires,  and  sunk  me  in  a  gulf  of  flagitiousnesses. 
Thy  wrath  had  gathered  over  me,  and  I  knew  it 
not.  I  was  grown  deaf  by  the  clanking  of  the 
chain  of  my  mortality,  the  punishment  of  the 
pride  of  my  soul,  and  I  strayed  further  from 
Thee,  and  Thou  lettest  me  alone,  and  I  was 
tossed  about,  and  wasted,  and  dissipated,  and  I 
boiled  over  in  my  fornications,  and  Thou  held- 
est  Thy  peace,  0  Thou  my  tardy  joy !  Thou  then 
heldest  Thy  peace,  and  I  wandered  further  and 
further  from  Thee,  into  more  and  more  fruit¬ 
less  seed-plots  of  sorrows,  with  a  proud  deject¬ 
edness  and  a  restless  weariness. 

3.  Oh!  that  someone  had  then  attempered  my 
disorder,  and  turned  to  account  the  fleeting 

lPs.  39.  II. 


•  29-31, 11. 1-5  9 

beauties  of  these,  the  extreme  points  of  Thy 
creation!  had  put  a  bound  to  their  pleasurable¬ 
ness,  that  so  the  tides  of  my  youth  might  have 
cast  themselves  upon  the  marriage  shore,  if  they 
could  not  be  calmed,  and  kept  within  the  object 
of  a  family,  as  Thy  law  prescribes,  0  Lord;  who 
this  way  formest  the  offspring  of  this  our  death, 
being  able  with  a  gentle  hand  to  blunt  the 
thorns,  which  were  excluded  from  Thy  paradise? 
For  Thy  omnipotency  is  not  far  from  us,  even 
when  we  be  far  from  Thee.  Else  ought  I  more 
watchfully  to  have  heeded  the  voice  from  the 
clouds;  “Nevertheless  such  shall  have  trouble 
in  the  flesh,  but  I  spare  you.”2  And,  “It  is  good 
for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman,”3  And,  “He 
that  is  unmarried  thinketh  of  the  things  of  the 
Lord,  how  he  may  please  the  Lord;  but  he  that 
is  married  careth  for  the  things  of  this  world, 
how  he  may  please  his  wife.”4  To  these  words  I 
should  have  listened  more  attentively  and,  being 
severed  “for  the  kingdom  of  heaven’s  sake,”5 
had  more  happily  awaited  Thy  embraces. 

4.  But  I,  poor  wretch,  foamed  like  a  troubled 
sea,  following  the  rushing  of  my  own  tide,  for¬ 
saking  Thee,  and  exceeded  all  Thy  limits;  yet  I 
escaped  not  Thy  scourges.  For  what  mortal  can? 
For  Thou  wert  ever  with  me  mercifully  rigor¬ 
ous,  and  besprinkling  with  most  bitter  alloy  all 
my  unlawful  pleasures,  that  I  might  seek  pleas¬ 
ures  without  alloy.  But  where  to  find  such,  I 
could  not  discover,  save  in  Thee,  0  Lord,  Who 
teachest  by  sorrow,6  and  wounded  us,  to  heal; 
and  killest  us,  lest  we  die  from  Thee.  Where  was 
I,  and  how  far  was  I  exiled  from  the  delights  of 
Thy  house,  in  that  sixteenth  year  of  the  age  of 
my  flesh,  when  the  madness  of  lust  (to  which 
human  shamelessness  giveth  free  license,  though 
unlicensed  by  Thy  laws)  took  the  rule  over  me, 
and  I  resigned  myself  wholly  to  it?  My  friends 
meanwhile  took  no  care  by  marriage  to  save  my 
fall;  their  only  care  was  that  I  should  learn  to 
speak  excellently  and  be  a  persuasive  orator. 

[III.]  5.  For  that  year  were  my  studies  in¬ 
termitted  ;  whilst  after  my  return  from  Madaura 
(a  neighbour  city,  whither  I  had  journeyed  to 
learn  grammar  and  rhetoric),  the  expenses  for  a 
further  journey  to  Carthage  were  being  provided 
for  me;  and  that,  rather  by  the  resolution  than 
the  means  of  my  father,  who  was  but  a  poor 
freeman  of  Thagaste.  To  whom  tell  I  this?  not 
to  Thee,  my  God;  but  before  Thee  to  mine  own 
kind,  even  to  that  small  portion  of  mankind  as 
may  light  upon  these  writings  of  mine.  And  to 
what  purpose?  that  whosoever  reads  this  may 

2I  Cor.  7.  28.  3I  Cor.  7.  1.  4I  Cor.  7.  32,  33. 

6Matt.  19.  12.  6Ps.  93.  20.  Vulg.;  Deut.  32.  39. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


think  out  of  what  depths  we  are  to  cry  unto 
Thee.1  For  what  is  nearer  to  Thine  ears  than  a 
confessing  heart  and  a  life  of  faith?  Who  did 
not  extol  my  father  for  that,  beyond  the  ability 
of  his  means,  he  would  furnish  his  son  with  all 
necessaries  for  a  far  journey  for  his  studies’ 
sake?  For  many  far  abler  citizens  did  no  such 
thing  for  their  children.  But  yet  this  same  father 
had  no  concern  how  I  grew  towards  Thee,  or 
how  chaste  I  were;  so  that  I  were  but  copious 
in  speech,  however  barren  I  were  to  Thy  cul¬ 
ture,  0  God,  who  art  the  only  true  and  good 
Lord  of  Thy  field,  my  heart. 

6.  But  while  in  that  my  sixteenth  year  I  lived 
with  my  parents,  leaving  all  school  for  a  while 
(a  season  of  idleness  being  interposed  through 
the  narrowness  of  my  parents’  fortunes),  the 
briers  of  unclean  desires  grew  rank  over  my 
head,  and  there  was  no  hand  to  root  them  out. 
When  that  my  father  saw  me  at  the  baths,  now 
growing  toward  manhood,  and  endued  with  a 
restless  youthfulness,  he,  as  already  hence  an¬ 
ticipating  his  descendants,  gladly  told  it  to  my 
mother;  rejoicing  in  that  tumult  of  the  senses 
wherein  the  world  forgetteth  Thee  its  Creator, 
and  becometh  enamoured  of  Thy  creature,  in¬ 
stead  of  Thyself,  through  the  fumes  of  that  in¬ 
visible  wine  of  its  self-will,  turning  aside  and 
bowing  down  to  the  very  basest  things.  But  in 
my  mother’s  breast  Thou  hadst  already  begun 
Thy  temple,  and  the  foundation  of  Thy  holy 
habitation,  whereas  my  father  was  as  yet  but  a 
catechumen,  and  that  but  recently.  She  then 
was  startled  with  an  holy  fear  and  trembling; 
and,  though  I  was  not  as  yet  baptized,  feared  for 
me  those  crooked  ways  in  which  they  walk  who 
turn  their  back  to  Thee,  and  not  their  face.2 

7.  Woe  is  me!  and  dare  I  say  that  Thou  held- 
est  Thy  peace,  0  my  God,  while  I  wandered  fur¬ 
ther  from  Thee?  Didst  Thou  then  indeed  hold 
Thy  peace  to  me?  And  whose  but  Thine  were 
these  words  which  by  my  mother,  Thy  faithful 
one.  Thou  sangest  in  my  ears?  Nothing  whereof 
sunk  into  my  heart,  so  as  to  do  it.  For  she 
wished,  and  I  remember  in  private  with  great 
anxiety  warned  me,  “not  to  commit  fornication; 
but  especially  never  to  defile  another’s  wife.” 
These  seemed  to  me  womanish  advices,  which  I 
should  blush  to  obey.  But  they  were  Thine,  and 
I  knew  it  not :  and  I  thought  Thou  wert  silent, 
and  that  it  was  she  who  spake ;  by  whom  Thou 
wert  not  silent  unto  me;  and  in  her  wast  de¬ 
spised  by  me,  her  son,  “the  son  of  Thy  hand¬ 
maid,  Thy  servant.”3  But  I  knew  it  not ;  and  ran 
headlong  with  such  blindness  that  amongst  my 

xPs.  130.  1.  2Jer.  2.  27.  3Ps.  116.  16. 


equals  I  was  ashamed  of  a  less  shamelessness, 
when  I  heard  them  boast  of  their  flagitiousness, 
yea,  and  the  more  boasting,  the  more  they  were 
degraded :  and  I  took  pleasure,  not  only  in  the 
pleasure  of  the  deed,  but  in  the  praise.  What  is 
worthy  of  dispraise  but  vice?  But  I  made  my¬ 
self  worse  than  I  was,  that  I  might  not  be  dis¬ 
praised;  and  when  in  anything  I  had  not  sinned 
as  the  abandoned  ones,  I  would  say  that  I  had 
done  what  I  had  not  done,  that  I  might  not  seem 
contemptible  in  proportion  as  I  was  innocent; 
or  of  less  account,  the  more  chaste. 

8.  Behold  with  what  companions  I  walked 
the  streets  of  Babylon,  and  wallowed  in  the  mire 
thereof,  as  if  in  a  bed  of  spices  and  precious 
ointments.  And  that  I  might  cleave  the  faster  to 
its  very  centre,  the  invisible  enemy  trod  me 
down,  and  seduced  me,  for  that  I  was  easy  to  be 
seduced.  Neither  did  the  mother  of  my  flesh 
(who  had  now  “fled  out  of  the  centre  of  Baby¬ 
lon,”4  yet  went  more  slowly  in  the  skirts  there¬ 
of),  as  she  advised  me  to  chastity,  so  heed  what 
she  had  heard  of  me  from  her  husband,  as  to  re¬ 
strain  within  the  bounds  of  conjugal  affection 
(if  it  could  not  be  pared  away  to  the  quick) 
what  she  felt  to  be  pestilent  at  present,  and  for 
the  future  dangerous.  She  heeded  not  this,  for 
she  feared,  lest  a  wife  should  prove  a  clog  and 
hindrance  to  my  hopes.  Not  those  hopes  of  the 
world  to  come,  which  my  mother  reposed  in 
Thee;  but  the  hope  of  learning,  which  both  my 
parents  were  too  desirous  I  should  attain;  my 
father,  because  he  had  next  to  no  thought  of 
Thee,  and  of  me  but  vain  conceits;  my  mother, 
because  she  accounted  that  those  usual  courses 
of  learning  would  not  only  be  no  hindrance,  but 
even  some  furtherance  towards  attaining  Thee. 
For  this  I  conjecture,  recalling,  as  well  as  I  may, 
the  disposition  of  my  parents.  The  reins,  mean¬ 
time,  were  slackened  to  me,  beyond  all  temper 
of  due  severity,  to  spend  my  time  in  sport,  yea, 
even  unto  dissoluteness  in  whatsoever  I  affected. 
And  in  all  was  a  mist,  intercepting  from  me,  0 
my  God,  the  brightness  of  Thy  truth;  and  mine 
iniquity  burst  out  as  from  very  “fatness.”5 

[IV.]  9.  Theft  is  punished  by  Thy  law,  0 
Lord,  and  the  law  written  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
which  iniquity  itself  effaces  not.  For  what  thief 
will  abide  a  thief?  not  even  a  rich  thief,  one 
stealing  through  want.  Yet  I  lusted  to  thieve, 
and  did  it,  compelled  by  no  hunger,  nor  poverty, 
but  through  a  cloyedness  of  well-doing,  and  a 
pamperedness  of  iniquity.  For  I  stole  that  of 
which  I  had  enough,  and  much  better.  Nor  cared 
I  to  enjoy  what  I  stole,  but  joyed  in  the  theft 

4Jer.  51.  6.  6Ps.  73.  7. 


II 


CONFESSIONS  II.  6-13 


and  sin  itself.  A  pear  tree  there  was  near  our 
vineyard,  laden  with  fruit,  tempting  neither  for 
colour  nor  taste.  To  shake  and  rob  this,  some 
lewd  young  fellows  of  us  went,  late  one  night 
(having  according  to  our  pestilent  custom  pro¬ 
longed  our  sports  in  the  streets  till  then),  and 
took  huge  loads,  not  for  our  eating,  but  to  fling 
to  the  very  hogs,  having  only  tasted  them.  And 
this,  but  to  do  what  we  liked  only  because  it  was 
misliked.  Behold  my  heart,  0  God,  behold  my 
heart,  which  Thou  hadst  pity  upon  in  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  bottomless  pit.  Now,  behold,  let  my 
heart  tell  Thee  what  it  sought  there,  that  I 
should  be  gratuitously  evil,  having  no  tempta¬ 
tion  to  ill  but  the  ill  itself.  It  was  foul,  and  I 
loved  it;  I  loved  to  perish,  I  loved  mine  own 
fault,  not  that  for  which  I  was  faulty,  but  my 
fault  itself.  Foul  soul,  falling  from  Thy  firma¬ 
ment  to  utter  destruction;  not  seeking  aught 
through  the  shame,  but  the  shame  itself! 

[V.]  10.  For  there  is  an  attractiveness  in 
beautiful  bodies,  in  gold  and  silver,  and  all 
things;  and  in  bodily  touch,  sympathy  hath 
much  influence,  and  each  other  sense  hath  his 
proper  object  answerably  tempered.  Worldly 
honour  hath  also  its  grace,  and  the  power  of 
overcoming,  and  of  mastery;  whence  springs 
also  the  thirst  of  revenge.  But  yet,  to  obtain  all 
these,  we  may  not  depart  from  Thee,  0  Lord, 
nor  decline  from  Thy  law.  The  life  also  which 
here  we  live  hath  its  own  enchantment,  through 
a  certain  proportion  of  its  own.  and  a  corre¬ 
spondence  with  all  things  beautiful  here  below. 
Human  friendship  also  is  endeared  with  a  sweet 
tie,  by  reason  of  the  unity  formed  of  many  souls. 
Upon  occasion  of  all  these,  and  the  like,  is  sin 
committed,  while  through  an  immoderate  incli¬ 
nation  towards  these  goods  of  the  lowest  order, 
the  better  and  higher  are  forsaken — Thou,  our 
Lord  God,  Thy  truth,  and  Thy  law.  For  these 
lower  things  have  their  delights,  but  not  like  my 
God.  Who  made  all  things:  for  in  Him  doth  the 
righteous  delight,  and  He  is  the  joy  of  the  up¬ 
right  in  heart.1 

11.  When,  then,  we  ask  why  a  crime  was  done, 
we  believe  it  not,  unless  it  appear  that  there 
might  have  been  some  desire  of  obtaining  some 
of  those  which  we  called  lower  goods,  or  a  fear 
of  losing  them.  For  they  are  beautiful  and  come¬ 
ly;  although,  compared  with  those  higher  and 
beatific  goods,  they  be  abject  and  low.  A  man 
hath  murdered  another;  why?  he  loved  his  wife 
or  his  estate;  or  would  rob  for  his  own  liveli¬ 
hood;  or  feared  to  lose  some  such  thing  by  him  ; 
or.  wronged,  was  on  fire  to  be  revenged.  Would 
LPs.  64.  10. 


any  commit  murder  upon  no  cause,  delighted 
simply  in  murdering?  Who  would  believe  it?  For 
as  for  that  furious  and  savage  man,  of  whom  it 
is  said  that  he  was  gratuitously  evil  and  cruel, 
yet  is  the  cause  assigned;  “lest,”  saith  he, 
“through  idleness  hand  or  heart  should  grow  in¬ 
active.”  And  to  what  end?  That,  through  that 
practice  of  guilt,  he  might,  having  taken  the 
city,  attain  to  honours,  empire,  riches,  and  be 
freed  from  fear  of  the  laws,  and  his  embarrass¬ 
ments  from  domestic  needs,  and  consciousness 
of  villainies.  So  then,  not  even  Catiline  himself 
loved  his  own  villainies,  but  something  else,  for 
whose  sake  he  did  them. 

[VI.]  12.  What  then  did  wretched  I  so  love 
in  thee,  thou  theft  of  mine,  thou  deed  of  dark¬ 
ness,  in  that  sixteenth  year  of  my  age?  Lovely 
thou  wert  not,  because  thou  wert  theft.  But  art 
thou  anything,  that  thus  I  speak  to  thee?  Fair 
were  the  pears  we  stole,  because  they  were  Thy 
creation.  Thou  fairest  of  all,  Creator  of  all. 
Thou  good  God;  God.  the  sovereign  good  and 
my  true  good.  Fair  were  those  pears,  but  not 
them  did  my  wretched  soul  desire;  for  I  had 
store  of  better,  and  those  I  gathered  only  that  I 
might  steal.  For,  when  gathered,  I  flung  them 
away,  my  only  feast  therein  being  my  own  sin, 
which  I  was  pleased  to  enjoy.  For  if  aught  of 
those  pears  came  within  my  mouth,  what  sweet¬ 
ened  it  was  the  sin.  And  now,  0  Lord  my  God, 
I  enquire  what  in  that  theft  delighted  me;  and 
behold  it  hath  no  loveliness;  I  mean  not  such 
loveliness  as  in  justice  and  wisdom;  nor  such  as 
is  in  the  mind  and  memory,  and  senses,  and  ani¬ 
mal  life  of  man;  nor  yet  as  the  stars  are  glorious 
and  beautiful  in  their  orbs;  or  the  earth,  or  sea, 
full  of  embryo-life,  replacing  by  its  birth  that 
which  decayeth;  nay,  nor  even  that  false  and 
shadowy  beauty  which  belongeth  to  deceiving 
vices. 

13.  For  so  doth  pride  imitate  exaltedness; 
whereas  Thou  Alone  art  God  exalted  over  all. 
Ambition,  what  seeks  it  but  honours  and  glory? 
whereas  Thou  Alone  art  to  be  honoured  above 
all,  and  glorious  for  evermore.  The  cruelty  of 
the  great  would  fain  be  feared,  but  who  is  to  be 
feared  but  God  alone,  out  of  whose  power  what 
can  be  wrested  or  withdrawn?  when,  or  where, 
or  whither,  or  by  whom?  The  tendernesses  of 
the  wanton  would  fain  be  counted  love :  yet  is 
nothing  more  tender  than  Thy  charity;  nor  is 
aught  loved  more  healthfully  than  Thy  truth, 
bright  and  beautiful  above  all.  Curiosity  makes 
semblance  of  a  desire  of  knowledge;  whereas 
Thou  supremely  knowest  all.  Yea,  ignorance 
and  foolishness  itself  is  cloked  under  the  name 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  simplicity  and  uninjuriousness;  because 
nothing  is  found  more  single  than  Thee:  and 
what  less  injurious,  since  they  are  his  own 
works,  which  injure  the  sinner?  Yea,  sloth 
would  fain  be  at  rest;  but  what  stable  rest  be¬ 
sides  the  Lord?  Luxury  affects  to  be  called  plen¬ 
ty  and  abundance;  but  Thou  art  the  fulness  and 
neverfailing  plenteousness  of  incorruptible 
pleasures.  Prodigality  presents  a  shadow  of  lib¬ 
erality  :  but  Thou  art  the  most  overflowing  Giv¬ 
er  of  all  good.  Covetousness  would  possess  many 
things :  and  Thou  possessest  all  things.  Envy  dis¬ 
putes  for  excellency :  what  more  excellent  than 
Thou?  Anger  seeks  revenge:  who  revenges  more 
justly  than  Thou?  Fear  startles  at  things  un¬ 
wonted  and  sudden,  which  endanger  things  be¬ 
loved,  and  takes  forethought  for  their  safety: 
but  to  Thee  what  unwonted  or  sudden,  or  who 
separateth  from  Thee  what  Thou  lovest?  Or 
where  but  with  Thee  is  unshaken  safety?  Grief 
pines  away  for  things  lost,  the  delight  of  its  de¬ 
sires;  because  it  would  have  nothing  taken  from 
it,  as  nothing  can  from  Thee. 

14.  Thus  doth  the  soul  commit  fornication 
when  she  turns  from  Thee,  seeking,  without 
Thee,  what  she  findeth  not  pure  and  untainted 
till  she  returns  to  Thee.  Thus  all  pervertedly 
imitate  Thee,  who  remove  far  from  Thee,  and 
lift  themselves  up  against  Thee.  But  even  by 
thus  imitating  Thee,  they  imply  Thee  to  be  the 
Creator  of  all  nature;  whence  there  is  no  place 
whither  altogether  to  retire  from  Thee.  What 
then  did  I  love  in  that  theft?  and  wherein  did 
I  even  corruptly  and  pervertedly  imitate  my 
Lord?  Did  I  wish  even  by  stealth  to  do  contrary 
to  Thy  law,  because  by  power  I  could  not.  so 
that  being  a  prisoner,  I  might  mimic  a  maimed 
liberty  by  doing  with  impunity  things  unpermit¬ 
ted  me,  a  darkened  likeness  of  Thy  Omnipoten¬ 
cy?  Behold  Thy  servant  fleeing  from  his  Lord, 
and  obtaining  a  shadow.  0  rottenness,  0  mon¬ 
strousness  of  life,  and  depth  of  death!  could  I 
like  what  I  might  not,  only  because  I  might  not? 

[VII]  15.  “What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord,”  1  that,  whilst  my  memory  recalls  these 
things,  my  soul  is  not  affrighted  at  them?  I  will 
love  Thee,  0  Lord,  and  thank  Thee,  and  confess 
unto  Thy  name;2  because  Thou  has  forgiven  me 
these  so  great  and  heinous  deeds  of  mine.  To 
Thy  grace  I  ascribe  it,  and  to  Thy  mercy,  that 
Thou  hast  melted  away  my  sins  as  it  were  ice. 
To  Thy  grace  I  ascribe  also  whatsoever  I  have 
not  done  of  evil;  for  what  might  I  not  have 
done,  who  even  loved  a  sin  for  its  own  sake? 
Yea,  all  I  confess  to  have  been  forgiven  me; 

^s.  16.  12.  *Rev.  3.  5. 


both  what  evils  I  committed  by  my  own  wilful¬ 
ness,  and  what  by  Thy  guidance  I  committed 
not.  What  man  is  he  who,  weighing  his  own  in¬ 
firmity,  dares  to  ascribe  his  purity  and  innocen- 
cy  to  his  own  strength;  that  so  he  should  love 
Thee  the  less,  as  if  he  had  less  needed  Thy  mer¬ 
cy,  whereby  Thou  remittest  sins  to  those  that 
turn  to  Thee?  For  whosoever,  called  by  Thee, 
followed  Thy  voice  and  avoided  those  things 
which  he  reads  me  recalling  and  confessing  of 
myself,  let  him  not  scorn  me,  who  being  sick, 
was  cured  by  that  Physician,  through  Whose 
aid  it  was  that  he  was  not,  or  rather  was  less, 
sick:  and  for  this  let  him  love  Thee  as  much, 
yea  and  more;  since  by  Whom  he  sees  me  to 
have  been  recovered  from  such  deep  consump¬ 
tion  of  sin,  by  Him  he  sees  himself  to  have  been 
from  the  like  consumption  of  sin  preserved. 

[VIII]  16.  “What  fruit  had  I  then”  (wretch¬ 
ed  man!)  in  those  things,  of  the  remembrance 
whereof  I  am  now  ashamed?3  Especially  in  that 
theft  which  I  loved  for  the  theft’s  sake;  and  it 
too  was  nothing.4  and  therefore  the  more  miser¬ 
able  I,  who  loved  it.  Yet  alone  I  had  not  done  it : 
such  was  I  then,  I  remember,  alone  I  had  never 
done  it.  I  loved  then  in  it  also  the  company  of 
the  accomplices,  with  whom  I  did  it?  I  did  not 
then  love  nothing  else  but  the  theft,  yea  rather 
I  did  love  nothing  else;  for  that  circumstance  of 
the  company  was  also  nothing.  What  is,  in 
truth?  who  can  teach  me,  save  He  that  enlight- 
eneth  my  heart  and  discovereth  its  dark  cor¬ 
ners?  What  is  it  which  hath  come  into  my  mind 
to  enquire,  and  discuss,  and  consider?  For  had  I 
then  loved  the  pears  I  stole,  and  wished  to  en¬ 
joy  them,  I  might  have  done  it  alone,  had  the 
bare  commission  of  the  theft  sufficed  to  attain 
my  pleasure;  nor  needed  I  have  inflamed  the 
itching  of  my  desires  by  the  excitement  of  ac¬ 
complices.  But  since  my  pleasure  was  not  in 
those  pears,  it  was  in  the  offence  itself,  which 
the  company  of  fellow-sinners  occasioned. 

[IX]  17.  What  then  was  this  feeling?  For  of 
a  truth  it  was  too  foul :  and  woe  was  me,  who 
had  it.  But  yet  what  was  it?  “Who  can  under¬ 
stand  his  errors?”5  It  was  the  sport,  which,  as 
it  were,  tickled  our  hearts,  that  we  beguiled, 
those  who  little  thought  what  we  were  doing, 
and  much  misliked  it.  Why  then  was  my  de¬ 
light  of  such  sort,  that  I  did  it  not  alone?  Be¬ 
cause  none  doth  ordinarily  laugh  alone?  ordi¬ 
narily  no  one;  yet  laughter  sometimes  masters 
men  alone  and  singly  when  no  one  whatever  is 
with  them,  if  anything  very  ludicrous  presents 

SRom.  6.  21.  4See  Bk.  hi.  12;  Bk.  vii.  18. 

6Ps.  19.  12. 


CONFESSIONS 

itself  to  their  senses  or  mind.  Yet  I  had  not  done 
this  alone;  alone  I  had  never  never  done  it.  Be¬ 
hold  my  God,  before  Thee,  the  vivid  remem¬ 
brance  of  my  soul;  alone,  I  had  never  commit¬ 
ted  that  theft,  wherein  what  I  stole  pleased  me 
not,  but  that  I  stole;  nor  had  it  alone  liked  me 
to  do  it,  nor  had  I  done  it.  0  friendship  too  un¬ 
friendly!  thou  incomprehensible  inveigler  of  the 
soul,  thou  greediness  to  do  mischief  out  of  mirth 
and  wantonness,  thou  thirst  of  others’  loss,  with¬ 
out  lust  of  my  own  gain  or  revenge:  but  when 
it  is  said.  ‘’Let’s  go,  let’s  do  it,”  we  are  ashamed 
not  to  be  shameless. 

[X]  iS.  Who  can  disentangle  that  twisted 
and  intricate  knottiness?  Foul  is  it :  I  hate  to 
think  on  it,  to  look  on  it.  But  Thee  I  long  for, 
0  Righteousness  and  Innocency,  beautiful  and 
comely  to  all  pure  eyes,  and  of  a  satisfaction  un¬ 
sating.  With  Thee  is  rest  entire,  and  life  im¬ 
perturbable  Whoso  enters  into  Thee  enters  into 
the  joy  of  his  Lord:1  and  shall  not  fear,  and 
shall  do  excellently  in  the  All-Excellent.  I  sank 
away  from  Thee,  and  I  wandered,  O  my  God, 
too  much  astray  from  Thee  my  stay,  in  these 
days  of  my  youth,  and  I  became  to  myself  a  bar¬ 
ren  land. 

BOOK  III.  Augustine's  residence  at  Carthage 
from  his  seventeenth  to  his  nineteenth  year. 
Source  of  his  disorders.  Love  of  shows.  Ad¬ 
vance  in  studies ,  and  love  of  wisdom.  Distaste 
for  Scripture.  Led  astray  to  the  Manichceans, 
Refutation  of  some  of  their  tenets.  Grief  of 
his  mother  Monica  at  his  heresy,  and  prayers 
for  his  conversion.  Her  vision  from  God ,  and 
answer  through  a  Bishop. 

[I]  i.  To  Carthage  I  came,  where  there  sang  all 
around  me  in  my  ears  a  cauldron  of  unholy 
loves.  I  loved  not  yet,  yet  I  loved  to  love,  and. 
out  of  a  deep-seated  want,  I  hated  myself  for 
wanting  not.  I  sought  what  I  might  love,  in  love 
with  loving,  and  safety  I  hated,  and  a  way  with¬ 
out  snares.  For  within  me  was  a  famine  of  that 
inward  food.  Thyself,  my  God;  yet,  through 
that  famine  I  was  not  hungered;  but  was  with¬ 
out  alldonging  for  incorruptible  sustenance,  not 
because  filled  therewith,  but  the  more  empty, 
the  more  I  loathed  it.  For  this  cause  my  soul 
was  sickly  and  full  of  sores,  it  miserably  cast 
itself  forth,  desiring  to  be  scraped  by  the  touch 
of  objects  of  sense.  Yet  if  these  had  not  a  soul, 
they  would  not  be  objects  of  love.  To  love  then, 
and  to  be  beloved,  was  sweet  to  me;  but  more, 
when  I  obtained  to  enjoy  the  person  I  loved.  I 
defiled,  therefore,  the  spring  of  friendship  with 
lMatt.  25.  21. 


11. 14-18,  hi  1-3  13 

the  filth  of  concupiscence,  and  I  beclouded  its 
brightness  with  the  hell  of  lustfulness;  and  thus 
foul  and  unseemly,  I  would  fain,  through  ex¬ 
ceeding  vanity,  be  fine  and  courtly.  I  fell  head¬ 
long  then  into  the  love  wherein  I  longed  to  be 
ensnared.  My  God.  my  Mercy,  with  how  much 
gall  didst  thou  out  of  thy  great  goodness  be¬ 
sprinkle  for  me  that  sweetness?  For  I  was  both 
beloved,  and  secretly  arrived  at  the  bond  of  en¬ 
joying;  and  was  with  joy  fettered  with  sorrow¬ 
bringing  bonds,  that  I  might  be  scourged  with 
the  iron-burning  rods  of  jealousy,  and  suspi¬ 
cions,  and  fears,  and  angers,  and  quarrels. 

r  II  ]  2.  Stage-plays  also  carried  me  away,  full 
of  images  of  my  miseries,  and  of  fuel  to  my  fire. 
Why  is  it  that  man  desires  to  be  made  sad,  be¬ 
holding  doleful  and  tragical  things,  which  yet 
himself  would  by  no  means  suffer?  yet  he  de¬ 
sires  as  a  spectator  to  feel  sorrow  at  them,  and 
this  very  sorrow  is  his  pleasure.  What  is  this  but 
a  miserable  madness?  for  a  man  is  the  more  af¬ 
fected  with  these  actions,  the  less  free  he  is  from 
such  affections.  Howsoever,  when  he  suffers  in 
his  own  person,  it  uses  to  be  styled  “misery”: 
when  he  compassionates  others,  then  it  is  “mer¬ 
cy.”  But  what  sort  of  compassion  is  this  for 
feigned  and  scenical  passions?  for  the  auditor  is 
not  called  on  to  relieve,  but  only  to  grieve:  and 
he  applauds  the  actor  of  these  fictions  the  more, 
the  more  he  grieves.  And  if  the  calamities  of 
those  persons  (whether  of  old  times,  or  mere 
fiction)  be  so  acted  that  the  spectator  is  not 
moved  to  tears,  he  goes  away  disgusted  and  crit¬ 
icising;  but  if  he  be  moved  to  passion,  he  stays 
intent,  and  weeps  for  joy. 

3.  Are  griefs  then  too  loved?  Verily  all  desire 
joy.  Or,  whereas  no  man  likes  to  be  miserable, 
is  he  yet  pleased  to  be  merciful?  which  because 
it  cannot  be  without  passion,  for  this  reason 
alone  are  passions  loved?  This  also  springs  from 
that  vein  of  friendship.  But  whither  goes  that 
vein?  whither  flows  it?  wherefore  runs  it  into 
that  torrent  of  pitch  bubbling  forth  those  mon¬ 
strous  tides  of  foul  lustfulness,  into  which  it  is 
wilfully  changed  and  transformed,  being  of  its 
own  will  precipitated  and  corrupted  from  its 
heavenly  clearness?  Shall  compassion  then  be 
put  away?  by  no  means.  Be  griefs  then  some¬ 
times  loved.  But  beware  of  uncleanness,  0  my 
soul,  under  the  guardianship  of  my  God,  the 
God  of  our  fathers,  who  is  to  be  praised  and  ex¬ 
alted  above  all  for  ever,2  beware  of  uncleanness. 
For  I  have  not  now  ceased  to  pity;  but  then  in 
the  theatres  I  rejoiced  with  lovers,  when  they 
wickedly  enjoyed  one  another,  although  this 
2Song  of  the  Three  Holy  Children ,  ver.  3. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


14 

was  imaginary  only  in  the  play.  And  when  they 
lost  one  another,  as  if  very  compassionate,  I  sor¬ 
rowed  with  them,  yet  had  my  delight  in  both. 
But  now  I  much  more  pity  him  that  rejoiceth  in 
his  wickedness,  than  him  who  is  thought  to  suf¬ 
fer  hardship  by  missing  some  pernicious  pleas¬ 
ure  and  the  loss  of  some  miserable  felicity.  This 
certainly  is  the  truer  mercy,  but  in  it  grief  de¬ 
lights  not.  For  though  he  that  grieves  for  the 
miserable  be  commended  for  his  office  of  char¬ 
ity;  yet  would  he.  who  is  genuinely  compassion¬ 
ate,  rather  there  were  nothing  for  him  to  grieve 
for.  For  if  good  will  be  ill  willed  (which  can 
never  be)  then  may  he  who  truly  and  sincerely 
commiserates  wish  there  might  be  some  miser¬ 
able  that  he  might  commiserate.  Some  sorrow 
may  then  be  allowed,  none  loved.  For  thus  dost 
Thou.  0  Lord  God,  who  lovest  souls  far  more 
purely  than  we,  and  hast  more  incorruptibly  pity 
on  them,  yet  are  wounded  with  no  sorrowful¬ 
ness.  “And  who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?”  1 

4.  But  I.  miserable,  then  loved  to  grieve,  and 
sought  out  what  to  grieve  at,  when,  in  another’s 
and  that  feigned  and  personated  misery,  that 
acting  best  pleased  me,  and  attracted  me^the 
most  vehemently,  which  drew  tears  from  me. 
What  marvel  that,  an  unhappy  sheep  straying 
from  Thy  flock  and  impatient  of  Thy  keeping, 
I  became  infected  with  a  foul  disease?  And 
hence  the  love  of  griefs;  not  such  as  should  sink 
deep  into  me;  for  I  loved  not  to  suffer  what  I 
loved  to  look  on ;  but  such  as  upon  hearing  their 
fictions  should  lightly  scratch  the  surface;  upon 
which,  as  on  envenomed  nails,  followed  inflamed 
swelling,  impostumes,  and  a  putrefied  sore.  My 
life  being  such,  was  it  life,  0  my  God? 

[Ill]  5.  And  Thy  faithful  mercy  hovered  over 
me  afar.  Upon  how  grievous  iniquities  con¬ 
sumed  I  myself,  pursuing  a  sacrilegious  curios¬ 
ity,  that,  having  forsaken  Thee,  it  might  bring 
me  to  the  treacherous  abyss,  and  the  beguiling 
service  of  devils,  to  whom  I  sacrificed  my  evil 
actions,  and  in  all  these  things  thou  didst 
scourge  me !  I  dared  even,  while  Thy  solemnities 
were  celebrated  within  the  walls  of  Thy  Church, 
to  desire,  and  to  compass  a  business,  deserving 
death  for  its  fruits,  for  which  Thou  scourgedst 
me  with  grievous  punishments,  though  nothing 
to  my  fault,  0  Thou  my  exceeding  mercy,  my 
God,  my  refuge  from  those  terrible  destroyers, 
among  whom  I  wandered  with  a  stiff  neck,  with¬ 
drawing  further  from  Thee,  loving  mine  own 
ways,  and  not  Thine;  loving  a  vagrant  liberty. 

6.  Those  studies  also,  which  were  accounted 
commendable,  had  a  view  to  excelling  in  the 

*11  Cor.  2.  16. 


courts  of  litigation;  the  more  bepraised,  the 
craftier.  Such  is  men’s  blindness,  glorying  even 
in  their  blindness.  And  now  I  was  chief  in  the 
rhetoric  school,  whereat  I  joyed  proudly,  and 
I  swelled  with  arrogancy,  though  (Lord,  Thou 
knowest)  far  quieter  and  altogether  removed 
from  the  subvertings  of  those  “Subverters”2(for 
this  ill-omened  and  devilish  name  was  the  very 
badge  of  gallantry)  among  whom  I  lived,  with 
a  shameless  shame  that  I  was  not  even  as  they. 
With  them  I  lived,  and  was  sometimes  delighted 
with  their  friendship,  vfliose  doings  I  ever  did 
abhor,  i.e.,  their  “subvertings,”  wherewith  they 
wantonly  persecuted  the  modesty  of  strangers, 
which  they  disturbed  by  a  gratuitous  jeering 
feeding  thereon  their  malicious  mirth.  Nothing 
can  be  liker  the  very  actions  of  devils  than 
these.  What  then  could  they  be  more  truly  called 
than  “subverters”? — themselves  subverted  and 
altogether  perverted  first,  the  deceiving  spirits 
secretly  deriding  and  seducing  them,  wherein 
themselves  delight  to  jeer  at,  and  deceive  others. 

[IV]  7.  Among  such  as  these,  in  that  unsettled 
age  of  mine,  learned  I  books  of  eloquence, 
wherein  I  desired  to  be  eminent,  out  of  a  dam¬ 
nable  and  vainglorious  end,  a  joy  in  human  van¬ 
ity.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  study,  I  fell  upon 
a  certain  book  of  Cicero,  whose  speech  almost 
all  admire,  not  so  his  heart.  This  book  of  his 
contains  an  exhortation  to  philosophy,  and  is 
called  Hortensius.  But  this  book  altered  my  af¬ 
fections,  and  turned  my  prayers  to  Thyself,  0 
Lord;  and  made  me  have  other  purposes  and 
desires.  Every  vain  hope  at  once  became  worth¬ 
less  to  me;  and  I  longed  with  an  incredibly 
burning  desire  for  an  immortality  of  wisdom, 
and  began  now  to  arise,  that  I  might  return  to 
Thee.  For  not  to  sharpen  my  tongue  (which 
thing  I  seemed  to  be  purchasing  with  my  moth¬ 
er’s  allowances,  in  that  my  nineteenth  year,  my 
father  being  dead  two  years  before),  not  to 
sharpen  my  tongue  did  I  employ  that  book;  nor 
did  it  infuse  into  me  its  style,  but  its  matter. 

8.  How  did  I  burn  then,  my  God,  how  did  I 
burn  to  re-mount  from  earthly  things  to  Thee, 
nor  knew  I  what  Thou  wouldest  do  with  me? 
For  with  Thee  is  wisdom.  But  the  love  of  wis¬ 
dom  is  in  Greek  called  “philosophy,”  with  which 
that  book  inflamed  me.  Some  there  be  that  se¬ 
duce  through  philosophy,  under  a  great,  and 
smooth,  and  honourable  name  colouring  and  dis¬ 
guising  their  own  errors ;  and  almost  all  who  in 
that  and  former  ages  were  such  are  in  that  book 

2  Ever  sores.  This  appears  to  have  been  a  name  which  a 
pestilent  and  savage  set  of  persons  gave  themselves,  licen¬ 
tious  alike  in  speech  and  action. 


CONFESSIONS  III.  4-1 1  15 


censured  and  set  forth:  there  also  is  made  plain 
that  wholesome  advice  of  Thy  Spirit,  by  Thy 
good  and  devout  servant ;  “Beware  lest  any  man 
spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit, 
after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the  rudiments 
of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ.  For  in  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.”1 
And  since  at  that  time  (Thou.  0  light  of  my 
heart,  knowest)  Apostolic  Scripture  was  not 
known  to  me,  I  was  delighted  with  that  exhorta¬ 
tion,  so  far  only  that  I  was  thereby  strongly 
roused,  and  kindled,  and  inflamed  to  love,  and 
seek,  and  obtain,  and  hold,  and  embrace  not  this 
or  that  sect,  but  wisdom  itself  whatever  it  were; 
and  this  alone  checked  me  thus  enkindled,  that 
the  name  of  Christ  was  not  in  it.  For  this  name, 
according  to  Thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  this  name  of 
my  Saviour  Thy  Son,  had  my  tender  heart,  even 
with  my  mother’s  milk,  devoutly  drunk  in,  and 
deeply  treasured;  and  whatsoever  was  without 
that  name,  though  never  so  learned,  polished,  or 
true,  took  not  entire  hold  of  me. 

[V]  9. 1  resolved  then  to  bend  my  mind  to  the 
holy  Scriptures,  that  I  might  see  what  they 
were.  But  behold,  I  see  a  thing  not  understood 
by  the  proud,  nor  laid  open  to  children,  lowly  in 
access,  in  its  recesses  lofty,  and  veiled  with  mys¬ 
teries;  and  I  was  not  such  as  could  enter  into  it, 
or  stoop  my  neck  to  follow  its  steps.  For  not  as 
I  now  speak  did  I  feel  when  I  turned  to  those 
Scriptures;  but  they  seemed  to  me  unworthy  to 
be  compared  to  the  stateliness  of  Tully:  for  my 
swelling  pride  shrunk  from  their  lowliness,  nor 
could  my  sharp  wit  pierce  the  interior  thereof. 
Yet  were  they  such  as  would  grow  up  in  a  little 
one.  But  I  disdained  to  be  a  little  one;  and, 
swoln  with  pride,  took  myself  to  be  a  great  one. 

[VI]  10.  Therefore  I  fell  among  men  proudly 
doting,  exceeding  carnal  and  prating,  in  whose 
mouths  were  the  snares  of  the  Devil,  lined  with 
the  mixture  of  the  syllables  of  Thy  name,  and  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Paraclete,  our  Comforter.  These  names  de¬ 
parted  not  out  of  their  mouth,  but  so  far  forth 
as  the  sound  only  and  the  noise  of  the  tongue, 
for  thfe  heart  was  void  of  truth.  Yet  they  cried 
out  “Truth,  Truth,”  and  spake  much  thereof  to 
me,  “yet  it  was  not  in  them”:2  but  they  spake 
falsehood,  not  of  Thee  only  (who  truly  art 
Truth),  but  even  of  those  elements  of  this 
world,  Thy  creatures.  And  I  indeed  ought  to 
have  passed  by  even  philosophers  who  spake 
truth  concerning  them,  for  love  of  Thee,  my 
Father,  supremely  good,  Beauty  of  all  things 
beautiful.  0  Truth,  Truth,  how  inwardly  did 

lCol.  2.  8.  o.  2I  John.  2.  4. 


even  then  the  marrow  of  my  soul  pant  after 
Thee,  when  they  often  and  diversely,  and  in 
many  and  huge  books,  echoed  of  Thee  to  me, 
though  it  was  but  an  echo?  And  these  were  the 
dishes  wherein  to  me,  hungering  after  Thee, 
they,  instead  of  Thee,  served  up  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  beautiful  works  of  Thine,  but  yet  Thy 
works,  not  Thyself,  no  nor  Thy  first  works.  For 
Thy  spiritual  works  are  before  these  corporeal 
works,  celestial  though  they  be,  and  shining. 
But  I  hungered  and  thirsted  not  even  after  those 
first  works  of  Thine,  but  after  Thee  Thyself, 
the  Truth,  “in  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning”  :3  yet  they  still  set  before  me 
in  those  dishes,  glittering  fantasies,  than  which 
better  were  it  to  love  this  very  sun  (which  is 
real  to  our  sight  at  least),  than  those  fantasies 
which  by  our  eyes  deceive  our  mind.  Yet  be¬ 
cause  I  thought  them  to  be  Thee,  I  fed  thereon; 
not  eagerly,  for  Thou  didst  not  in  them  taste  to 
me  as  Thou  art;  for  Thou  wast  not  these  empti¬ 
nesses,  nor  was  I  nourished  by  them,  but  ex¬ 
hausted  rather.  Food  in  sleep  shews  very  like 
our  food  awake;  yet  are  not  those  asleep  nour¬ 
ished  by  it,  for  they  are  asleep.  But  those  were 
not  even  any  way  like  to  Thee,  as  Thou  hast  now 
spoken  to  me;  for  those  were  corporeal  fanta¬ 
sies,  false  bodies,  than  which  these  true  bodies, 
celestial  or  terrestrial,  which  with  our  fleshly 
sight  we  behold,  are  far  more  certain:  these 
things  the  beasts  and  birds  discern  as  well  as  we, 
and  they  are  more  certain  than  when  we  fancy 

them.  And  again,  we  do  with  more  certainty  fan¬ 
cy  them,  than  by  them  conjecture  other  vaster 
and  infinite  bodies  which  have  no  being.  Such 
empty  husks  was  I  then  fed  on ;  and  was  not  fed. 
But  Thou,  my  soul’s  Love,  in  looking  for  whom 
I  fail,4  that  I  may  become  strong,  art  neither 
those  bodies  which  we  see,  though  in  heaven; 
nor  those  which  we  see  not  there;  for  Thou  hast 
created  them,  nor  dost  Thou  account  them 
among  the  chiefest  of  Thy  works.  How  far  then 
art  Thou  from  those  fantasies  of  mine,  fanta¬ 
sies  of  bodies  which  altogether  are  not,  than 
which  the  images  of  those  bodies  which  are,  are 
far  more  certain;  and  more  certain  still  the  bod¬ 
ies  themselves,  which  yet  Thou  art  not;  no,  nor 
yet  the  soul,  which  is  the  life  of  the  bodies.  So 

then,  better  and  more  certain  is  the  life  of  the 
bodies  than  the  bodies.  But  Thou  art  the  life  of 
souls,  the  life  of  lives,  having  life  in  Thyself; 
and  changest  not,  life  of  my  soul. 

11.  Where  then  wert  Thou  then  to  me,  and 
how  far  from  me?  Far  verily  was  I  straying 
from  Thee,  barred  from  the  very  husks  of  the 
3James,  1.  17.  4Ps.  69. 3. 


i6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


swine,  whom  with  husks  I  fed.  For  how  much 
better  are  the  fables  of  poets  and  grammarians, 
than  these  snares?  For  verses,  and  poems,  and 
“Medea  flying,”  are  more  profitable,  truly,  than 
these  men’s  five  elements,  variously  disguised, 
answering  to  five  dens  of  darkness,  which  have 
no  being,  yet  slay  the  believer.  For  verses  and 
poems  I  can  turn  to  true  food,  and  “Medea  fly¬ 
ing,”  though  I  did  sing,  I  maintained  not; 
though  I  heard  it  sung,  I  believed  not :  but  those 
things  I  did  believe.  Woe,  woe,  by  what  steps 
was  I  brought  down  “to  the  depths  of  hell!”  1 
toiling  and  turmoiling  through  want  of  Truth, 
since  I  sought  after  Thee,  my  God  (to  Thee  I 
confess  it,  who  hadst  mercy  on  me,  not  as  yet 
confessing),  not  according  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  mind,  wherein  Thou  willedst  that  I 
should  excel  the  beasts,  but  according  to  the 
sense  of  the  flesh.  But  Thou  wert  more  inward 
to  me  than  my  most  inward  part;  and  higher 
than  my  highest.  I  lighted  upon  that  bold  wom¬ 
an,  “simple  and  knoweth  nothing,” 2  shadowed 
out  in  Solomon,  “sitting  at  the  door,  and  saying, 
Eat  ye  bread  of  secrecies  willingly,  and  drink  ye 
stolen  waters  which  are  sweet”:3  she  sedubed 
me,  because  she  found  my  soul  dwelling  abroad 
in  the  eye  of  my  flesh,  and  ruminating  on  such 
food  as  through  it  I  had  devoured. 

[VII]  12.  For,  other  than  this,  that  which 
really  is  I  knew  not;  and  was,  as  it  were  through 
sharpness  of  wit,  persuaded  to  assent  to  foolish 
deceivers,  when  they  asked  me,  “Whence  is 
evil?”  “Is  God  bounded  by  a  bodily  shape,  and 
has  hairs  and  nails?”  “Are  they  to  be  esteemed 
righteous  who  had  many  wives  at  once,  and  did 
kill  men,  and  sacrificed  living  creatures?”4  At 
which  I,  in  my  ignorance,  was  much  troubled, 
and,  departing  from  the  truth,  seemed  to  my¬ 
self  to  be  making  towards  it;  because  as  yet  I 
knew  not  that  evil  was  nothing  but  a  privation 
of  good,  until  at  last  a  thing  ceases  altogether 
to  be;  which  how  should  I  see,  the  sight  of 
whose  eyes  reached  only  to  bodies,  and  of  my 
mind  to  a  phantasm?  And  I  knew  not  God  to  be 
a  Spirit,5  not  One  who  hath  parts  extended  in 
length  and  breadth,  or  whose  being  was  bulk; 
for  every  bulk  is  less  in  a  part  than  in  the  whole : 
and  if  it  be  infinite,  it  must  be  less  in  such  part 
as  is  defined  by  a  certain  space,  than  in  its  in¬ 
finitude;  and  so  is  not  wholly  everywhere,  as 
Spirit,  as  God.  And  what  that  should  be  in  us  by 
which  we  were  like  to  God,  and  might  in  Scrip¬ 
ture  be  rightly  said  to  be  “after  the  Image  of 
God,” 6 1  was  altogether  ignorant. 

^rov.  g.  18.  2Ibid.,  g.  13.  zIbid.,  9.  14,  17. 

4I  Kings,  18.  40.  6 John,  4.  24.  6Gen.  1.  27. 


13.  Nor  knew  I  that  true  inward  righteousness 
which  judgeth  not  according  to  custom,  but  out 
of  the  most  rightful  law  of  God  Almighty, 
whereby  the  ways  of  places  and  times  were  dis¬ 
posed  according  to  those  times  and  places;  it¬ 
self  meantime  being  the  same  always  and  every¬ 
where,  not  one  thing  in  one  place,  and  another 
in  another;  according  to  which  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  Moses,  and  David,  were 
righteous,  and  all  those  commended  by  the 
mouth  of  God ;  but  were  judged  unrighteous  by 
silly  men,  judging  out  of  man’s  judgment,7  and 
measuring  by  their  own  petty  habits,  the  moral 
habits  of  the  whole  human  race.  As  if  in  an  ar¬ 
mory,  one  ignorant  what  were  adapted  to  each 
part  should  cover  his  head  with  greaves,  or  seek 
to  be  shod  with  a  helmet,  and  complain  that 
they  fitted  not :  or  as  if,  on  a  day  when  business 
is  publicly  stopped  in  the  afternoon,  one  were 
angered  at  not  being  allowed  to  keep  open  shop, 
because  he  had  been  in  the  forenoon;  or  when 
in  one  house  he  observeth  some  servant  take  a 
thing  in  his  hand  which  the  butler  is  not  suffered 
to  meddle  with ;  or  something  permitted  out  of 
doors  which  is  forbidden  in  the  dining-room; 
and  should  be  angry  that  in  one  house,  and  one 
family,  the  same  thing  is  not  allotted  every¬ 
where,  and  to  all.  Even  such  are  they  who  are 
fretted  to  hear  something  to  have  been  lawful 
for  righteous  men  formerly,  which  now  is  not; 
or  that  God,  for  certain  temporal  respects,  com¬ 
manded  them  one  thing,  and  these  another, 
obeying  both  the  same  righteousness:  whereas 
they  see,  in  one  man,  and  one  day,  and  one 
house,  different  things  to  be  fit  for  different 
members,  and  a  thing  formerly  lawful,  after  a 
certain  time  not  so;  in  one  corner  permitted  or 
commanded,  but  in  another  rightly  forbidden 
and  punished.  Is  justice  therefore  various  or 
mutable?  No,  but  the  times  over  which  it  pre¬ 
sides  flow  not  evenly,  because  they  are  times. 
But  men,  whose  days  are  few  upon  the  earth,8 
for  that  by  their  senses  they  cannot  harmonize 
the  causes  of  things  in  former  ages  and  other  na¬ 
tions  which  they  had  no  experience  of,  with 
these  which  they  have  experience  of,  whereas  in 
one  and  the  same  body,  day,  or  family,  they 
easily  see  what  is  fitting  for  each  member,  and 
season,  part,  and  person;  to  the  one  they  take 
exceptions,  to  the  other  they  submit. 

14.  These  things  I  then  knew  not,  nor  ob¬ 
served;  they  struck  my  sight  on  all  sides,  and  I 
saw  them  not.  I  indited  verses,  in  which  I  might 
not  place  every  foot  everywhere,  but  differently 
in  different  metres;  nor  even  in  any  one  metre 

7I  Cor.  7.  3.  8Job,  14.  1. 


CONFESSIONS  III.  12-17  17 


the  self-same  foot  in  all  places.  Yet  the  art  itself, 
by  which  I  indited,  had  not  different  principles 
for  these  different  cases,  but  comprised  all  in 
one.  Still  I  saw  not  how  that  righteousness, 
which  good  and  holy  men  obeyed,  did  far  more 
excellently  and  sublimely  contain  in  one  all 
those  things  which  God  commanded,  and  in  no 
part  varied;  although  in  varying  times  it  pre¬ 
scribed  not  everything  at  once,  but  apportioned 
and  enjoined  what  was  fit  for  each.  And  I,  in 
my  blindness,  censured  the  holy  Fathers,  not 
only  wherein  they  made  use  of  things  present  as 
God  commanded  and  inspired  them,  but  also 
wherein  they  were  foretelling  things  to  come,  as 
God  was  revealing  in  them.1 

[VIII]  15.  Can  it  at  any  time  or  place  be  un¬ 
just  to  love  God  with  all  his  heart,  with  all  his 
soul,  and  with  all  his  mind;  and  his  neighbour 
as  himself?  2  Therefore  are  those  foul  offences 
which  be  against  nature  to  be  everywhere  and 
at  all  times  detested  and  punished;  such  as  were 
those  of  the  men  of  Sodom:  which  should  all 
nations  commit,  they  should  all  stand  guilty  of 
the  same  crime,  by  the  law  of  God,  which  hath 
not  so  made  men  that  they  should  so  abuse  one 
another.  For  even  that  intercourse  which  should 
be  between  God  and  us  is  violated  when  that 
same  nature,  of  which  He  is  Author,  is  polluted 
by  the  perversity  of  lust.  But  those  actions 
which  are  offences  against  the  customs  of  men 
are  to  be  avoided  according  to  the  customs  sev¬ 
erally  prevailing;  so  that  a  thing  agreed  upon, 
and  confirmed,  by  custom  or  law  of  any  city  or 
nation  may  not  be  violated  at  the  lawless  pleas¬ 
ure  of  any,  whether  native  or  foreigner.  For  any 
part  which  harmonizeth  not  with  its  whole  is 
offensive.  But  when  God  commands  a  thing  to 
be  done  against  the  customs  or  compact  of  any 
people,  though  it  were  never  by  them  done  here¬ 
tofore,  it  is  to  be  done;  and  if  intermitted,  it  is 
to  be  restored;  and  if  never  ordained,  is  now  to 
be  ordained.  For  lawful  if  it  be  for  a  king,  in  the 
state  which  he  reigns  over,  to  command  that 
which  no  one  before  him,  nor  he  himself  hereto¬ 
fore,  had  commanded,  and  to  obey  him  cannot 
be  agaihst  the  common  weal  of  the  state;  (nay, 
it  were  against  it  if  he  were  not  obeyed,  for  to 
obey  princes  is  a  general  compact  of  human  so¬ 
ciety);  how  much  more  unhesitatingly  ought 
we  to  obey  God,  in  all  which  He  commands,  the 
Ruler  of  all  His  creatures!  For,  as  among  the 
powers  in  man’s  society  the  greater  authority  is 
obeyed  in  preference  to  the  lesser,  so  must  God 
above  all. 

*As  in  typical  actions  of  the  Patriarchs. 

2Deut.  6.  5;  Matt.  22.  37-9. 


16.  So  in  acts  of  violence,  where  there  is  a 
wish  to  hurt,  whether  by  reproach  or  injury;  and 
these  either  for  revenge,  as  one  enemy  against 
another;  or  for  some  profit  belonging  to  another, 
as  the  robber  to  the  traveller;  or  to  avoid  some 
evil,  as  towards  one  who  is  feared;  or  through 
envy,  as  one  less  fortunate  to  one  more  so;  or 
one  well  thriven  in  anything,  to  him  whose  be¬ 
ing  on  a  par  with  himself  he  fears,  or  grieves  at; 
or  for  the  mere  pleasure  at  another’s  pain,  as 
spectators  of  gladiators,  or  deriders  and  mock¬ 
ers  of  others.  These  be  the  heads  of  iniquity 
which  spring  from  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  of  the 
eye,  or  of  rule,  either  singly,  or  two  combined, 
or  all  together;  and  so  do  men  live  ill  against 
the  three,  and  seven,  that  psaltery  “of  ten 
strings,”3  Thy  Ten  Commandments,  0  God, 
most  high,  and  most  sweet.  But  what  foul  of¬ 
fences  can  there  be  against  Thee,  Who  canst  not 
be  defiled?  or  what  acts  of  violence  against 
Thee,  Who  canst  not  be  harmed?  But  Thou 
avengest  what  men  commit  against  themselves, 
seeing  also  when  they  sin  against  Thee,  they  do 
wickedly  against  their  own  souls,  and  iniquity 
gives  itself  the  lie,4  by  corrupting  and  perverting 
their  nature,  which  Thou  hast  created  and  or¬ 
dained,  or  by  an  immoderate  use  of  things  al¬ 
lowed,  or  in  “burning”  in  things  unallowed,  to 
that  use  which  is  against  nature;5  or  are  found 
guilty,  raging  with  heart  and  tongue  against 
Thee,  kicking  against  the  pricks;6  or  when, 
bursting  the  pale  of  human  society,  they  boldly 
joy  in  self-willed  combinations  or  divisions,  ac¬ 
cording  as  they  have  any  object  to  gain  or  sub¬ 
ject  of  offence.  And  these  things  are  done  when 
Thou  art  forsaken,  0  Fountain  of  Life,  Who  art 
the  only  and  true  Creator  and  Governor  of  the 
Universe,  and  by  a  self-willed  pride,  any  one 
false  thing  is  selected  therefrom  and  loved.  So 
then  by  a  humble  devoutness  we  return  to  Thee; 
and  Thou  cleanest  us  from  our  evil  habits,  and 
art  merciful  to  their  sins  who  confess,  and 
“hearest  the  groaning  of  the  prisoner,”7  and 
loosest  us  from  the  chains  which  we  made  for 
ourselves,  if  we  lift  not  up  against  Thee  the 
horns  of  an  unreal  liberty,  suffering  the  loss  of 
all  through  covetousness  of  more,  by  loving 
more  our  own  private  good  than  Thee,  the  Good 
of  all. 

[IX]  17.  Amidst  these  offences  of  foulness 
and  violence,  and  so  many  iniquities,  are  sins  of 
men,  who  are  on  the  whole  making  proficiency; 
which  by  those  that  judge  rightly  are,  after  the 
rule  of  perfection,  discommended,  yet  the  per- 

3Ps.  144.  9.  4Ps.  27.  12,  Vulg.  6Rom.  1.  24-9. 

6Acts,  9.  15.  7Ps.  102.  20. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


18 

sons  commended,  upon  hope  of  future  fruit,  as 
in  the  green  blade  of  growing  corn.  And  there 
are  some,  resembling  offences  of  foulness  or  vio¬ 
lence,  which  yet  are  no  sins;  because  they  of¬ 
fend  neither  Thee,  our  Lord  God,  nor  human  so¬ 
ciety;  when,  namely,  things  fitting  for  a  given 
period  are  obtained  for  the  service  of  life,  and 
we  know  not  whether  out  of  a  lust  of  having;  or 
when  things  are,  for  the  sake  of  correction,  by 
constituted  authority  punished,  and  we  know 
not  whether  out  of  a  lust  of  hurting.  Many  an 
action  then  which  in  men’s  sight  is  disapproved 
is  by  Thy  testimony  approved;  and  many,  by 
men  praised,  are  (Thou  being  witness)  con¬ 
demned:  because  the  shew  of  the  action,  and  the 
mind  of  the  doer,  and  the  unknown  exigency  of 
the  period,  severally  vary.  But  when  Thou  on  a 
sudden  commandest  an  unwonted  and  un- 
thought-of  thing,  yea,  although  Thou  hast  some¬ 
time  forbidden  it,  and  still  for  the  time  hidest 
the  reason  of  Thy  command,  and  it  be  against 
the  ordinance  of  some  society  of  men,  who 
doubts  but  it  is  to  be  done,1  seeing  that  society 
of  men  is  just  which  serves  Thee?  But  blessed 
are  they  who  know  Thy  commands!  For-  all 
things  were  done  by  Thy  servants;2  either  to 
shew  forth  something  needful  for  the  present, 
or  to  foreshew  things  to  come. 

[X]  1 8.  These  things  I  being  ignorant  of, 
scoffed  at  those  Thy  holy  servants  and  prophets. 
And  what  gained  I  by  scoffing  at  them,  but  to  be 
scoffed  at  by  Thee,  being  insensibly  and  step  by 
step  drawn  on  to  those  follies,  as  to  believe  that 
a  fig-tree  wept  when  it  was  plucked,  and  the 
tree,  its  mother,  shed  milky  tears?  Which  fig 
notwithstanding  (plucked  by  some  other’s,  not 
his  own,  guilt)  had  some  (Manichaean)  “saint” 
eaten,  and  mingled  with  his  bowels,  he  should 
breathe  out  of  its  angels,  yea,  there  shall  burst 
forth  particles  of  divinity,  at  every  moan  or 
groan  in  his  prayer,  which  particles  of  the  most 
high  and  true  God  had  remained  bound  in  that 
fig,  unless  they  had  been  set  at  liberty  by  the 
teeth  or  belly  of  some  “Elect  saint”!  And  I, 
miserable,  believed  that  more  mercy  was  to  be 
shewn  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  than  men,  for 
whom  they  were  created.  For  if  anyone  being 
hungry  and  not  being  a  Manichaean,  should 
ask  for  any,  that  morsel  would  seem  as  it  were 
condemned  to  capital  punishment,  which 
should  be  given  him. 

[XI]  19.  And  Thou  sentest  Thine  hand  from 
above.3  and  drewest  my  soul  out  of  that  pro¬ 
found  darkness,  my  mother,  Thy  faithful  one, 

lCity  of  God,  Bk.  1.  26.  2The  Patriarchs. 

3Ps.  144.  7. 


weeping  to  Thee  for  me,  more  than  mothers 
weep  the  bodily  deaths  of  their  children.  For 
she,  by  that  faith  and  spirit  which  she  had  from 
Thee,  discerned  the  death  wherein  I  lay,  and 
Thou  heardest  her,  0  Lord;  Thou  heardest  her, 
and  despisedst  not  her  tears  when,  streaming 
down,  they  watered  the  ground  under  her  eyes  in 
every  place  where  she  prayed ;  yea  Thou  heard¬ 
est  her.  For  whence  was  that  dream  whereby 
Thou  comfortedst  her;  so  that  she  allowed  me 
to  live  with  her,  and  to  eat  at  the  same  table  in 
the  house,  which  she  had  begun  to  shrink  from, 
abhorring  and  detesting  the  blasphemies  of  my 
error?  For  she  saw  herself  standing  on  a  certain 
wooden  rule,  and  a  shining  youth  coming  to¬ 
wards  her,  cheerful  and  smiling  upon  her,  her¬ 
self  grieving,  and  overwhelmed  with  grief.  But 
he  having  (in  order  to  instruct,  as  is  their  wont, 
not  to  be  instructed)  enquired  of  her  the  causes 
of  her  grief  and  daily  tears,  and  she  answering 
that  she  was  bewailing  my  perdition,  he  bade  her 
rest  contented,  and  told  her  to  look  and  observe, 
“That  where  she  was,  there  was  I  also.”  And 
when  she  looked,  she  saw  me  standing  by  her  in 
the  same  rule.  Whence  was  this,  but  that  Thine 
ears  were  towards  her  heart?  0  Thou  Good  om¬ 
nipotent,  Who  so  carest  for  every  one  of  us  as  if 
Thou  caredst  for  him  only;  and  so  for  all,  as  if 
they  were  but  one ! 

20.  Whence  was  this  also,  that  when  she  had 
told  me  this  vision,  and  I  would  fain  bend  it  to 
mean,  “That  she  rather  should  not  despair  of 
being  one  day  what  I  was”;  she  presently,  with¬ 
out  any  hesitation,  replies,  “No;  for  it  was  not 
told  me  that,  ‘where  he,  there  thou  also’;  but 
‘where  thou,  there  he  also’  ”?  I  confess  to  Thee, 
0  Lord,  that,  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance 
(and  I  have  oft  spoken  of  this),  Thy  answer, 
through  my  waking  mother — that  she  was  not 
perplexed  by  the  plausibility  of  my  false  inter¬ 
pretation,  and  so  quickly  saw  what  was  to  be 
seen,  and  which  I  certainly  had  not  perceived, 
before  she  spake — even  then  moved  me  more 
than  the  dream  itself,  by  which  a  joy  to  the 
holy  woman,  to  be  fulfilled  so  long  after,  was, 
for  the  consolation  of  her  present  anguish,  so 
long  before  foresignified.  For  almost  nine  years 
passed,  in  which  I  wallowed  in  the  mire  of  that 
deep  pit,  and  the  darkness  of  falsehood,  often 
assaying  to  rise,  but  dashed  down  the  more 
grievously.  All  which  time  that  chaste,  godly, 
and  sober  widow  (such  as  Thou  lovest),  now 
more  cheered  with  hope,  yet  no  whit  relaxing  in 
her  weeping  and  mourning,  ceased  not  at  all 
hours  of  her  devotions  to  bewail  my  case  unto 
Thee.  And  her  prayers  entered  into  Thy  pres- 


CONFESSIONS  III,  18-21,  IV.  1-3  19 


ence;1  and  yet  Thou  sufferest  me  to  be  yet  in¬ 
volved  and  reinvolved  in  that  darkness. 

[XII]  21.  Thou  gavest  her  meantime  another 
answer,  which  I  call  to  mind;  for  much  I  pass 
by,  hasting  to  those  things  which  more  press  me 
to  confess  unto  Thee,  and  much  I  do  not  remem¬ 
ber.  Thou  gavest  her  then  another  answer,  by 
a  priest  of  Thine,  a  certain  Bishop  brought  up 
in  Thy  Church,  and  well  studied  in  Thy  books. 
Whom  when  this  woman  had  entreated  to 
vouchsafe  to  converse  with  me,  refute  my  er¬ 
rors,  unteach  me  ill  things,  and  teach  me  good 
things  (for  this  he  was  wont  to  do,  when  he 
found  persons  fitted  to  receive  it),  he  refused, 
wisely,  as  I  afterwards  perceived.  For  he  an¬ 
swered  that  I  was  yet  unteachable,  being  puffed 
up  with  the  novelty  of  that  heresy,  and  had  al¬ 
ready  perplexed  divers  unskilful  persons  with 
captious  questions,  as  she  had  told  him.  “But 
let  him  alone  a  while,”  saith  he;  “only  pray  God 
for  him,  he  will  of  himself  by  reading  find  what 
that  error  is,  and  how  great  its  impiety.”  At  the 
same  time  he  told  her  how  himself,  when  a  little 
one,  had  by  his  seduced  mother  been  consigned 
over  to  the  Manichees,  and  had  not  only  read, 
but  frequently  copied  out  almost  all,  their 
books,  and  had  (without  any  argument  or  proof 
from  anyone)  seen  how  much  that  sect  was  to  be 
avoided;  and  had  avoided  it.  Which  when  he 
had  said,  and  she  would  not  be  satisfied,  but 
urged  him  more,  with  entreaties  and  many  tears, 
that  he  would  see  me  and  discourse  with  me,  he, 
a  little  displeased  at  her  importunity,  saith,  “Go 
thy  ways,  and  God  bless  Thee,  for  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  that  the  son  of  these  tears  should  perish.” 
Which  answer  she  took  (as  she  often  mentioned 
in  her  conversations  with  me)  as  if  it  had  sound¬ 
ed  from  heaven. 

BOOK  IV.  Augustine’s  life  from  nineteen  to 
eight  and  twenty;  himself  a  Manichcean,  and 
seducing  others  to  the  same  heresy;  partial 
obedience  amidst  vanity  and  sin ,  consulting 
astrologers;  only  partially  shaken  herein;  loss 
of  an  early  friend ,  who  is  converted  by  being 
baptized  when  in  a  swoon;  reflections  on  grief, 
on  real  and  unreal  friendship,  and  love  of 
fame;  writes  on  lithe  fair  and  fit,”  yet  cannot 
rightly,  though  God  had  given  him  great  tal¬ 
ents,  since  he  entertained  wrong  notions  of 
God;  and  so  even  his  knowledge  he  applied  ill. 
[I]  1.  For  this  space  of  nine  years  then  (from 
my  nineteenth  year  to  my  eight-and- twentieth) 
we  lived  seduced  and  seducing,  deceived  and  de¬ 
ceiving,  in  divers  lusts;  openly,  by  sciences 
^s.  88. 1. 


which  they  call  “liberal”;  secretly,  with  a  false- 
named  religion;  here  proud,  there  superstitious, 
everywhere  vain!  Here,  hunting  after  the  emp¬ 
tiness  of  popular  praise,  down  even  to  theatrical 
applauses,  and  poetic  prizes,  and  strifes  for  gras¬ 
sy  garlands,  and  the  follies  of  shows,  and  the  in¬ 
temperance  of  desires.  There,  desiring  to  be 
cleansed  from  these  defilements,  by  carrying 
food  to  those  who  were  called  “elect”  and 
“holy,”  out  of  which,  in  the  workhouse  of  their 
stomachs,  they  should  forge  for  us  Angels  and 
Gods,  by  whom  we  might  be  cleansed.  These 
things  did  I  follow,  and  practise  with  my 
friends,  deceived  by  me  and  with  me.  Let  the  ar¬ 
rogant  mock  me,  and  such  as  have  not  been,  to 
their  soul’s  health,  stricken  and  cast  down  by 
Thee,  0  my  God;  but  I  would  still  confess  to 
Thee  mine  own  shame  in  Thy  praise.  Suffer  me, 
I  beseech  Thee,  and  give  me  grace  to  go  over  in 
my  present  remembrance  the  wanderings  of  my 
forepassed  time,  and  to  “offer  unto  Thee  the  sac¬ 
rifice  of  thanksgiving.”  2  For  what  am  I  to  my¬ 
self  without  Thee  but  a  guide  to  mine  own 
downfall?  or  what  am  I  even  at  the  best,  but 
an  infant  sucking  the  milk  Thou  givest,  and 
feeding  upon  Thee,  the  food  that  perisheth 
not?  3  But  what  sort  of  man  is  any  man,  seeing 
he  is  but  a  man?  Let  now  the  strong  and  the 
mighty  laugh  at  us,  but  let  us  “poor  and  needy”4 
confess  unto  Thee. 

[II]  2.  In  those  years  I  taught  rhetoric  and, 
overcome  by  cupidity,  made  sale  of  a  loquacity 
to  overcome  by.  Yet  I  preferred  (Lord,  Thou 
knowest)  honest  scholars  (as  they  are  account¬ 
ed),  and  these  I,  without  artifice,  taught  arti¬ 
fices,  not  to  be  practised  against  the  life  of  the 
guiltless,  though  sometimes  for  the  life  of  the 
guilty.  And  Thou,  0  God,  from  afar  perceivedst 
me  stumbling  in  that  slippery  course,  and  amid 
much  smoke  sending  out  some  sparks  of  faith¬ 
fulness,  which  I  shewed  in  that  my  guidance  of 
such  as  loved  vanity,  and  sought  after  leasing,5 
myself  their  companion.  In  those  years  I  had 
one — not  in  that  which  is  called  lawful  marriage, 
but  whom  I  had  found  out  in  a  wayward  passion, 
void  of  understanding;  yet  but  one,  remaining 
faithful  even  to  her;  in  whom  I  in  my  own  case 
experienced  what  difference  there  is  betwixt  the 
self-restraint  of  the  marriage-covenant,  for  the 
sake  of  issue,  and  the  bargain  of  a  lustful  love, 
where  children  are  born  against  their  parents’ 
will,  although,  once  born,  they  constrain  love. 

3. 1  remember  also,  that  when  I  had  settled  to 
enter  the  lists  for  a  theatrical  prize,  some  wiz- 

2Ps.  116.  17.  3John,  6.  27.  4Ps.  74.  21. 

6Ps.  4.  2. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ard  asked  me  what  I  would  give  him  to  win :  but 
I,  detesting  and  abhorring  such  foul  mysteries, 
answered,  “Though  the  garland  were  of  imper¬ 
ishable  gold,  I  would  not  suffer  a  fly  to  be  killed 
to  gain  me  it.”  For  he  was  to  kill  some  living 
creatures  in  his  sacrifices,  and  by  those  honours 
to  invite  the  devils  to  favour  me.  But  this  ill  also 
I  rejected,  not  out  of  a  pure  love1  for  Thee,  0 
God  of  my  heart;  for  I  knew  not  how  to  love 
Thee,  who  knew  not  how  to  conceive  aught  be¬ 
yond  a  material  brightness.  And  doth  not  a  soul, 
sighing  after  such  fictions,  commit  fornication 
against  Thee,  trust  in  things  unreal,  and  feed 
the  wind?  2  Still  I  would  not  forsooth  have  sacri¬ 
fices  offered  to  devils  for  me,  to  whom  I  was  sac¬ 
rificing  myself  by  that  superstition.  For  what 
else  is  it  to  feed  the  wind  but  to  feed  them,  that 
is,  by  going  astray  to  become  their  pleasure  and 
derision? 

[Ill]  4.  Those  impostors  then,  whom  they 
style  mathematicians,  I  consulted  without  scru¬ 
ple;  because  they  seemed  to  use  no  sacrifice, 
nor  to  pray  to  any  spirit  for  their  divinations: 
which  art,  however,  Christian  and  true  piety 
consistently  rejects  and  condemns.  For  it  is  a 
good  thing  to  confess  unto  Thee,  and  to  say, 
“Have  mercy  upon  me,  heal  my  soul,  for  I  have 
sinned  against  Thee”;3  and  not  to  abuse  Thy 
mercy  for  a  license  to  sin,  but  to  remember  the 
Lord’s  words,  “Behold,  thou  art  made  whole, 
sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto  thee.”4 
All  which  wholesome  advice  they  labour  to  de¬ 
stroy,  saying,  “The  cause  of  thy  sin  is  inevitably 
determined  in  heaven;”  and  “This  did  Venus, 
or  Saturn,  or  Mars”:  that  man,  forsooth,  flesh 
and  blood,  and  proud  corruption,  might  be 
blameless;  while  the  Creator  and  Ordainer  of 
heaven  and  the  stars  is  to  bear  the  blame.  And 
who  is  He  but  our  God?  the  very  sweetness  and 
well-spring  of  righteousness,  Who  renderest  “to 
every  man  according  to  his  works”:5  and  “a 
broken  and  contrite  heart”  wilt  Thou  not  de¬ 
spise.6 

5.  There  was  in  those  days  a  wise  man,7  very 
skilful  in  physic,  and  renowned  therein,  who 
had  with  his  own  proconsular  hand  put  the  Ago¬ 
nistic  garland  upon  my  distempered  head,  but 
not  as  a  physician:  for  this  disease  Thou  only 
curest,  who  resistest  the  proud,  and  givest  grace 
to  the  humble.8  But  didst  Thou  fail  me  even  by 
that  old  man,  or  forbear  to  heal  my  soul?  For 
having  become  more  acquainted  with  him,  and 
hanging  assiduously  and  fixedly  on  his  speech 

*Cf.  City  oj  God ,  Bk.  xrv.  9.  2Hosea,  12.  1. 

8Ps.  41.  4.  4John,  5. 14.  6Rom.  2. 6;  Matt.  16.  27. 

6Ps.  51.17.  7Vindicianus.  8I  Pet.  5.  5;  James,  4.  6. 


(for  though  in  simple  terms,  it  was  vivid,  lively, 
and  earnest),  when  he  had  gathered  by  my  dis¬ 
course  that  I  was  given  to  the  books  of  nativity- 
casters,  he  kindly  and  fatherly  advised  me  to 
cast  them  away,  and  not  fruitlessly  bestow  a 
care  and  diligence,  necessary  for  useful  things, 
upon  these  vanities;  saying  that  he  had  in  his 
earliest  years  studied  that  art,  so  as  to  make  it 
the  profession  whereby  he  should  live,  and  that, 
understanding  Hippocrates,  he  could  soon  have 
understood  such  a  study  as  this ;  and  yet  he  had 
given  it  over,  and  taken  to  physic,  for  no  other 
reason  but  that  he  found  it  utterly  false;  and 
he,  a  grave  man,  would  not  get  his  living  by  de¬ 
luding  people.  “But  thou,”  saith  he,  “hast  rhet¬ 
oric  to  maintain  thyself  by,  so  that  thou  fol- 
lowest  this  of  free  choice,  not  of  necessity:  the 
more  then  oughtest  Thou  to  give  me  credit  here¬ 
in,  who  laboured  to  acquire  it  so  perfectly  as  to 
get  my  living  by  it  alone.”  Of  whom  when  I  had 
demanded,  how  then  could  many  true  things  be 
foretold  by  it,  he  answered  me  (as  he  could), 
“that  the  force  of  chance,  diffused  throughout 
the  whole  order  of  things,  brought  this  about. 
For  if  when  a  man  by  hap-hazard  opens  the 
pages  of  some  poet,  who  sang  and  thought  of 
something  wholly  different,  a  verse  oftentimes 
fell  out,  wondrously  agreeable  to  the  present 
business:  it  were  not  to  be  wondered  at  if,  out 
of  the  soul  of  man,  unconscious  what  takes  place 
in  it,  by  some  higher  instinct  an  answer  should 
be  given,  by  hap,  not  by  art,  corresponding  to 
the  business  and  actions  of  the  demander.” 

6.  And  thus  much,  either  from  or  through 
him,  Thou  conveyedst  to  me,  and  tracedst  in  my 
memory,  what  I  might  hereafter  examine  for 
myself.  But  at  that  time  neither  he,  nor  my 
dearest  Nebridius,  a  youth  singularly  good  and 
of  a  holy  fear,  who  derided  the  whole  body  of 
divination,  could  persuade  me  to  cast  it  aside, 
the  authority  of  the  authors  swaying  me  yet 
more,  and  as  yet  I  had  found  no  certain  proof 
(such  as  I  sought)  whereby  it  might  without  all 
doubt  appear  that  what  had  been  truly  foretold 
by  those  consulted  was  the  result  of  hap-hazard, 
not  of  the  art  of  the  star-gazers. 

[IV]  7.  In  those  years  when  I  first  began  to 
teach  rhetoric  in  my  native  town,  I  had  made 
one  my  friend,  but  too  dear  to  me  from  a  com¬ 
munity  of  pursuits,  of  mine  own  age,  and,  as 
myself,  in  the  first  opening  flower  of  youth.  He 
had  grown  up  of  a  child  with  me,  and  we  had 
been  both  school-fellows  and  play-fellows.  But 
he  was  not  yet  my  friend  as  afterwards,  nor 
even  then  as  true  friendship  is;  for  true  it  can¬ 
not  be,  unless  in  such  as  Thou  cementest  to- 


21 


CONFESSIONS  IV.  4-1 1 


gether,  cleaving  unto  Thee,  by  that  love  which 
is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  is  given  unto  us.1  Yet  was  it  but  too  sweet, 
ripened  by  the  warmth  of  kindred  studies :  for, 
from  the  true  faith  (which  he  as  a  youth  had 
not  soundly  and  thoroughly  imbibed),  I  had 
warped  him  also  to  those  superstitious  and  per¬ 
nicious  fables  for  which  my  mother  bewailed 
me.  With  me  he  now  erred  in  mind,  nor  could 
my  soul  be  without  him.  But  behold  Thou  wert 
close  on  the  steps  of  Thy  fugitives,  at  once  God 
of  vengeance2  and  Fountain  of  mercies,  turning 
us  to  Thyself  by  wonderful  means;  Thou  took- 
est  that  man  out  of  this  life,  when  he  had  scarce 
filled  up  one  whole  year  of  my  friendship,  sweet 
to  me  above  all  sweetness  of  that  my  life. 

8.  “Who  can  recount  all  Thy  praises,” 3  which 
he  hath  felt  in  his  one  self?  What  diddest  Thou 
then,  my  God,  and  how  unsearchable  is  the 
abyss  of  Thy  judgments?4  For  long,  sore  sick  of 
a  fever,  he  lay  senseless  in  a  death-sweat;  and, 
his  recovery  being  despaired  of,  he  was  baptized, 
unknowing;  myself  meanwhile  little  regarding, 
and  presuming  that  his  soul  would  retain  rather 
what  it  had  received  of  me,  not  what  was 
wrought  on  his  unconscious  body.  But  it  proved 
far  otherwise:  for  he  was  refreshed,  and  re¬ 
stored.  Forthwith,  as  soon  as  I  could  speak  with 
him  (and  I  could,  so  soon  as  he  was  able,  for  I 
never  left  him,  and  we  hung  but  too  much  upon 
each  other),  I  essayed  to  jest  with  him,  as 
though  he  would  jest  with  me  at  that  baptism 
which  he  had  received  when  utterly  absent  in 
mind  and  feeling,  but  had  now  understood  that 
he  had  received.  But  he  so  shrunk  from  me,  as 
from  an  enemy;  and  with  a  wonderful  and  sud¬ 
den  freedom  bade  me,  as  I  would  continue  his 
friend,  forbear  such  language  to  him.  I,  all  as¬ 
tonished  and  amazed,  suppressed  all  my  emo¬ 
tions  till  he  should  grow  well,  and  his  health 
were  strong  enough  for  me  to  deal  with  him  as  I 
would.  But  he  was  taken  away  from  my  phrensy, 
that  with  Thee  he  might  be  preserved  for  my 
comfort ;  a  few  days  after,  in  my  absence,  he  was 
attacked  again  by  the  fever,  and  so  departed. 

9.  At  this  grief  my  heart  was  utterly  dark¬ 
ened;  and  whatever  I  beheld  was  death.  My  na¬ 
tive  country  was  a  torment  to  me,  and  my  fa¬ 
ther’s  house  a  strange  unhappiness;  and  what¬ 
ever  I  had  shared  with  him,  wanting  him,  be¬ 
came  a  distracting  torture.  Mine  eyes  sought 
him  everywhere,  but  he  was  not  granted  them ; 
and  I  hated  all  places,  for  that  they  had  not 
him;  nor  could  they  now  tell  me,  “he  is  com- 

1Rom.  5.5.  2Ps.  94.  1.  3Ps.  106.  2. 

4Ps.  36.  6;  Rom.  n.  33. 


ing,”  as  when  he  was  alive  and  absent.  I  became 
a  great  riddle  to  myself,  and  I  asked  my  soul, 
why  she  was  so  sad,  and  why  she  disquieted  me 
sorely:5  but  she  knew  not  what  to  answer  me. 
And  if  I  said,  “Trust  in  God,” 6  she  very  rightly 
obeyed  me  not;  because  that  most  dear  friend, 
whom  she  had  lost,  was,  being  man,  both  truer 
and  better  than  that  phantasm  she  was  bid  to 
trust  in.  Only  tears  were  sweet  to  me,  for  they 
succeeded  my  friend  in  the  dearest  of  my  affec¬ 
tions. 

[V]  10.  And  now,  Lord,  these  things  are 
passed  by,  and  time  hath  assuaged  my  wound. 
May  I  learn  from  Thee,  Who  art  Truth,  and  ap¬ 
proach  the  ear  of  my  heart  unto  Thy  mouth, 
that  Thou  mayest  tell  me  why  weeping  is  sweet 
to  the  miserable?  Hast  Thou,  although  present 
everywhere,  cast  away  our  misery  far  from 
Thee?  And  Thou  abidest  in  Thyself,  but  we  are 
tossed  about  in  divers  trials.  And  yet,  unless  we 
mourned  in  Thine  ears,  we  should  have  no  hope 
left.  Whence  then  is  sweet  fruit  gathered  from 
the  bitterness  of  life,  from  groaning,  tears,  sighs, 
and  complaints?  Doth  this  sweeten  it,  that  we 
hope  Thou  hearest?  This  is  true  of  prayer,  for 
therein  is  a  longing  to  approach  unto  Thee.  But 
is  it  also  in  grief  for  a  thing  lost,  and  the  sorrow 
wherewith  I  was  then  overwhelmed?  For  I  nei¬ 
ther  hoped  he  should  return  to  life,  nor  did  I  de¬ 
sire  this  with  my  tears;  but  I  wept  only  and 
grieved.  For  I  was  miserable,  and  had  lost  my 
joy.  Or  is  weeping  indeed  a  bitter  thing,  and  for 
very  loathing  of  the  things  which  we  before  en¬ 
joyed,  does  it  then,  when  we  shrink  from  them, 
please  us? 

[VI]  11.  But  what  speak  I  of  these  things? 
for  now  is  no  time  to  question,  but  to  confess 
unto  Thee.  Wretched  I  was;  and  wretched  is  ev¬ 
ery  soul  bound  by  the  friendship  of  perishable 
things;  he  is  torn  asunder  when  he  loses  them, 
and  then  he  feels  the  wretchedness  which  he  had 
ere  yet  he  lost  them.  So  was  it  then  with  me;  I 
wept  most  bitterly,  and  found  my  repose  in  bit¬ 
terness.  Thus  was  I  wretched,  and  that  wretched 
life  I  held  dearer  than  my  friend.  For  though  I 
would  willingly  have  changed  it,  yet  was  I  more 
unwilling  to  part  with  it  than  with  him;  yea,  I 
know  not  whether  I  would  have  parted  with  it 
even  for  him,  as  is  related  (if  not  feigned)  of 
Pylades  and  Orestes,  that  they  would  gladly 
have  died  for  each  other  or  together,  not  to  live 
together  being  to  them  worse  than  death.  But  in 
me  there  had  arisen  some  unexplained  feeling, 
too  contrary  to  this,  for  at  once  I  loathed  ex¬ 
ceedingly  to  live,  and  feared  to  die.  I  suppose, 

8Ps.  42.  5.  6Ibid. 


22 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  more  I  loved  him,  the  more  did  I  hate,  and 
fear  (as  a  most  cruel  enemy)  death,  which  had 
bereaved  me  of  him:  and  I  imagined  it  would 
speedily  make  an  end  of  all  men,  since  it  had 
power  over  him.  Thus  was  it  with  me,  I  remem¬ 
ber.  Behold  my  heart,  0  my  God,  behold  and 
see  into  me;  for  well  I  remember  it,  0  my  Hope, 
who  cleansest  me  from  the  impurity  of  such  af¬ 
fections,  directing  mine  eyes  towards  Thee,  and 
plucking  my  feet  out  of  the  snare.1  For  I  won¬ 
dered  at  others,  subject  to  death,  did  live,  since 
he  whom  I  loved,  as  if  he  should  never  die,  was 
dead:  and  I  wondered  yet  more  that  myself, 
who  was  to  him  a  second  self,  could  live,  he  be¬ 
ing  dead.  Well  said  one  of  his  friend,  “Thou  half 
of  my  soul”:  for  I  felt  that  my  soul  and  his 
soul  were  “one  soul  in  two  bodies”:  and  there¬ 
fore  was  my  life  a  horror  to  me,  because  I  would 
not  live  halved.  And  therefore  perchance  I 
feared  to  die,  lest  he  whom  I  had  much  loved 
should  die  wholly. 

[VII]  12.  0  madness,  which  knowest  not  how 
to  love  men,  like  men!  0  foolish  man  that  I 
then  was,  enduring  impatiently  the  lot  of  man! 
I  fretted  then,  sighed,  wept,  was  distracted;  had 
neither  rest  nor  counsel.  For  I  bore  about  a  shat¬ 
tered  and  bleeding  soul,  impatient  of  being 
borne  by  me,  yet  where  to  repose  it  I  found  not. 
Not  in  calm  groves,  not  in  games  and  music,  nor 
in  fragrant  spots,  nor  in  curious  banquettings, 
nor  in  the  pleasures  of  the  bed  and  the  couch ; 
nor  (finally)  in  books  or  poesy,  found  in  repose. 
All  things  looked  ghastly,  yea,  the  very  light; 
whatsoever  was  not  what  he  was,  was  revolting 
and  hateful,  except  groaning  and  tears.  For  in 
those  alone  found  I  a  little  refreshment.  But 
when  my  soul  was  withdrawn  from  them,  a  huge 
load  of  misery  weighed  me  down.  To  Thee,  0 
Lord,  it  ought  to  have  been  raised,  for  Thee  to 
lighten;  I  knew  it;  but  neither  could  nor  would; 
the  more  since,  when  I  thought  of  Thee,  Thou 
wert  not  to  me  any  solid  or  substantial  thing. 
For  Thou  wert  not  Thyself,  but  a  mere  phan¬ 
tom,  and  my  error  was  my  God.  If  I  offered  to 
discharge  my  load  thereon,  that  it  might  rest,  it 
glided  through  the  void,  and  came  rushing  down 
again  on  me;  and  I  had  remained  to  myself  a 
hapless  spot,  where  I  could  neither  be,  nor  be 
from  thence.  For  whither  should  my  heart  flee 
from  my  heart?  Whither  should  I  flee  from  my¬ 
self?  Whither  not  follow  myself?  And  yet  I  fled 
out  of  my  country;  for  so  should  mine  eyes  less 
look  for  him,  where  they  were  not  wont  to  see 
him.  And  thus  from  Thagaste  I  came  to  Car¬ 
thage. 

*Ps.  25.  15. 


[VIII]  13.  Times  lose  no  time;  nor  do  they 
roll  idly  by;  through  our  senses  they  work 
strange  operations  on  the  mind.  Behold,  they 
went  and  came  day  by  day,  and  by  coming  and 
going  introduced  into  my  mind  other  imagina¬ 
tions  and  other  remembrances ;  and  little  by  lit¬ 
tle  patched  me  up  again  with  my  old  kind  of  de¬ 
lights,  unto  which  that  my  sorrow  gave  way. 
And  yet  there  succeeded,  not  indeed  other  griefs, 
yet  the  causes  of  other  griefs.  For  whence  had 
that  former  grief  so  easily  reached  my  very  in¬ 
most  soul,  but  that  I  had  poured  out  my  soul 
upon  the  dust,  in  loving  one  that  must  die,  as  if 
he  would  never  die?  For  what  restored  and  re¬ 
freshed  me  chiefly  was  the  solaces  of  other 
friends,  with  whom  I  did  love  what  instead  of 
Thee  I  loved:  and  this  was  a  great  fable,  and 
protracted  lie,  by  whose  adulterous  stimulus 
our  soul,  which  lay  itching  in  our  ears,  was  be¬ 
ing  defiled.  But  that  fable  would  not  die  to  me, 
so  oft  as  any  of  my  friends  died.  There  were 
other  things  which  in  them  did  more  take  my 
mind;  to  talk  and  jest  together,  to  do  kind  offi¬ 
ces  by  turns;  to  read  together  honied  books;  to 
play  the  fool  or  be  earnest  together;  to  dissent 
at  times  without  discontent,  as  a  man  might 
with  his  own  self;  and  even  with  the  seldom- 
ness  of  these  dissentings,  to  season  our  more  fre¬ 
quent  consentings;  sometimes  to  teach,  and 
sometimes  learn;  long  for  the  absent  with  im¬ 
patience;  and  welcome  the  coming  with  joy. 
These  and  the  like  expressions,  proceeding  out 
of  the  hearts  of  those  that  loved  and  were  loved 
again,  by  the  countenance,  the  tongue,  the  eyes, 
and  a  thousand  pleasing  gestures,  were  so  much 
fuel  to  melt  our  souls  together,  and  out  of  many 
make  but  one. 

[IX]  14.  This  is  it  that  is  loved  in  friends ;  and 
so  loved  that  a  man’s  conscience  condemns  itself 
if  he  love  not  him  that  loves  him  again,  or  love 
not  again  him  that  loves  him,  looking  for  noth¬ 
ing  from  his  person  but  indications  of  his  love. 
Hence  that  mourning,  if  one  die,  and  darkenings 
of  sorrows,  that  steeping  of  the  heart  in  tears, 
all  sweetness  turned  to  bitterness ;  and  upon  the 
loss  of  life  of  the  dying,  the  death  of  the  living. 
Blessed  whoso  loveth  Thee,  and  his  friend  in 
Thee,  and  his  enemy  for  Thee.  For  he  alone  loses 
none  dear  to  him,  to  whom  all  are  dear  in  Him 
Who  cannot  be  lost.  And  who  is  this  but  our 
God,  the  God  that  made  heaven  and  earth,2  and 
filleth  them,3  because  by  filling  them  He  created 
them?4  Thee  none  loseth,  but  who  leaveth.  And 
who  leaveth  Thee,  whither  goeth  or  whither 
fleeth  he,  but  from  Thee  well-pleased,  to  Thee 
2Gen.  1.  1.  3Jer.  23.  24.  4See  Bk.  1.  2,  3. 


CONFESSIONS  IV.  12-18  23 


displeased?  For  where  doth  he  not  find  Thy  law 
in  his  own  punishment?  “And  Thy  law  is 
truth,”  1  and  truth  Thou.2 

fX]  15.  “Turn  us,  0  God  of  Hosts,  shew  us 
Thy  countenance,  and  we  shall  be  whole.”  3  For 
whithersoever  the  soul  of  man  turns  itself,  un¬ 
less  towards  Thee,  it  is  rivetted  upon  sorrows,4 
yea  though  it  is  rivetted  on  things  beautiful. 
And  yet  they,  out  of  Thee,  and  out  of  the  soul, 
were  not,  unless  they  were  from  Thee.  They 
rise,  and  set;  and  by  rising,  they  begin  as  it 
were  to  be;  they  grow,  that  they  may  be  per¬ 
fected:  and  perfected,  they  wax  old  and  wither; 
and  all  grow  not  old,  but  all  wither.  So  then 
when  they  rise  and  tend  to  be,  the  more  quickly 
they  grow  that  they  may  be,  so  much  the  more 
they  haste  not  to  be.  This  is  the  law  of  them. 
Thus  much  hast  Thou  allotted  them,  because 
they  are  portions  of  things,  which  exist  not  all 
at  once,  but  by  passing  away  and  succeeding 
they  together  complete  that  universe  whereof 
they  are  portions.  And  even  thus  is  our  speech 
completed  by  signs  giving  forth  a  sound:  but 
this  again  is  not  perfected  unless  one  word  pass 
away  when  it  hath  sounded  its  part,  that  another 
may  succeed.  Out  of  all  these  things  let  my  soul 
praise  Thee,  0  God,  Creator  of  all;  yet  let  not 
my  soul  be  rivetted  unto  these  things  with  the 
glue  of  love,  through  the  senses  of  the  body. 
For  they  go  whither  they' were  to  go,  that  they 
might  not  be;  and  they  rend  her  with  pestilent 
longings,  because  she  longs  to  be,  yet  loves  to 
repose  in  what  she  loves.  But  in  these  things  is 
no  place  of  repose;  they  abide  not,  they  flee; 
and  who  can  follow  them  with  the  senses  of  the 
flesh?  yea,  who  can  grasp  them,  when  they  are 
hard  by?  For  the  sense  of  the  flesh  is  slow,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  the  sense  of  the  flesh ;  and  thereby  is 
it  bounded.  It  sufficeth  for  that  it  was  made  for; 
but  it  sufficeth  not  to  stay  things  running  their 
course  from  their  appointed  starting  place  to  the 
end  appointed.  For  in  Thy  Word,  by  which  they 
are  created,  they  hear  their  decree,  “hence  and 
hitherto.” 

[XI]  16.  Be  not  foolish,  0  my  soul,  nor  be¬ 
come  deaf  in  the  ear  of  thine  heart  with  the  tu¬ 
mult  of  thy  folly.  Hearken  thou  too.  The  Word 
Itself  calleth  thee  to  return:  and  there  is  the 
place  of  rest  imperturbable,  where  love  is  not 
forsaken,  if  itself  forsaketh  not.  Behold,  these 
things  pass  away,  that  others  may  replace  them, 
and  so  this  lower  universe  be  completed  by  all 
his  parts.  But  do  I  depart  any  whither?  saith  the 
Word  of  God.  There  fix  thy  dwelling,  trust  there 

Ts.  119.  142;  John,  17.  17.  2John,  14.  6. 

3Ps.  80.  19.  4See  Bk.  iv.  13. 


whatsoever  thou  hast  thence,  0  my  soul,  at  least 
now  thou  art  tired  out  with  vanities.  Entrust 
Truth,  whatsoever  thou  hast  from  the  Truth, 
and  thou  shalt  lose  nothing;  and  thy  decay  shall 
bloom  again,  and  all  thy  diseases  be  healed,5  and 
thy  mortal  parts  be  re-formed  and  renewed,  and 
bound  around  thee:  nor  shall  they  lay  thee 
whither  themselves  descend;  but  they  shall 
stand  fast  with  thee,  and  abide  for  ever  before 
God,  Who  abideth  and  standeth  fast  for  ever.6 

17.  Why  then  be  perverted  and  follow  thy 
flesh?  Be  it  converted  and  follow  thee.  What¬ 
ever  by  her  thou  hast  sense  of  is  in  part ;  and  the 
whole,  whereof  these  are  parts,  thou  knowest 
not;  and  yet  they  delight  thee.  But  had  the 
sense  of  thy  flesh  a  capacity  for  comprehending 
the  whole,  and  not  itself  also,  for  thy  punish¬ 
ment,  been  justly  restricted  to  a  part  of  the 
whole,  thou  wouldest  that  whatsoever  existeth 
at  this  present  should  pass  away,  that  so  the 
whole  might  better  please  thee.7  For  what  we 
speak  also,  by  the  same  sense  of  the  flesh  thou 
hearest;  yet  wouldest  not  thou  have  the  sylla¬ 
bles  stay,  but  fly  away,  that  others  may  come, 
and  thou  hear  the  whole.  And  so  ever,  when  any 
one  thing  is  made  up  of  many,  all  of  which  do 
not  exist  together,  all  collectively  would  please 
more  than  they  do  severally,  could  all  be  per¬ 
ceived  collectively.  But  far  better  than  these  is 
He  who  made  all ;  and  He  is  our  God,  nor  doth 
He  pass  away,  for  neither  doth  aught  succeed 
Him. 

[XII]  18.  If  bodies  please  thee,  praise  God 
on  occasion  of  them,  and  turn  back  thy  love 
upon  their  Maker;  lest  in  these  things  which 
please  thee,  thou  displease.  If  souls  please  thee, 
be  they  loved  in  God:  for  they  too  are  mutable, 
but  in  Him  are  they  firmly  stablished;  else 
would  they  pass,  and  pass  away.  In  Him  then  be 
they  beloved;  and  carry  unto  Him  along  with 
thee  what  souls  thou  canst,  and  say  to  them, 
“Him  let  us  love,  Him  let  us  love:  He  made 
these,  nor  is  He  far  off.  For  He  did  not  make 
them,  and  so  depart,  but  they  are  of  Him,  and  in 
Him.  See  there  He  is,  where  truth  is  loved.  He  is 
within  the  very  heart,  yet  hath  the  heart  strayed 
from  Him.  Go  back  into  your  heart,  ye  trans¬ 
gressors,8  and  cleave  fast  to  Him  that  made  you. 
Stand  with  Him,  and  ye  shall  stand  fast.  Rest  in 
Him,  and  ye  shall  be  at  rest.  Whither  go  ye  in 
rough  ways?  Whither  go  ye?  The  good  that  you 
love  is  from  Him ;  but  it  is  good  and  pleasant9 
through  reference  to  Him,  and  justly  shall  it  be 
embittered,  because  unjustly  is  anything  loved 

BPs.  103.  3.  6I  Pet.  1.  23.  7See  Bk.  xm.  22  below. 

8Isa.  66.  8.  9Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xi.  8. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


which  is  from  Him,  if  He  be  forsaken  for  it.  To 
what  end  then  would  ye  still  and  still  walk  these 
difficult  and  toilsome  ways?  There  is  no  rest 
where  ye  seek  it.  Seek  what  ye  seek;  but  it  is 
not  there  where  ye  seek.  Ye  seek  a  blessed  life 
in  the  land  of  death;  it  is  not  there.  For  how 
should  there  be  a  blessed  life,  where  life  itself  is 
not?” 

19.  But  our  true  Life  came  down  hither,  and 
bore  our  death,  and  slew  him.  out  of  the  abun¬ 
dance  of  His  own  life :  and  He  thundered,  calling 
aloud  to  us  to  return  hence  to  Him  into  that  se¬ 
cret  place  whence  He  came  forth  to  us,  first  into 
the  Virgin’s  womb,  wherein  He  espoused  the  hu¬ 
man  creation,  our  mortal  flesh,  that  it  might  not 
be  for  ever  mortal,  and  thence  “like  a  bride¬ 
groom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,  rejoicing  as 
a  giant  to  run  his  course.”1  For  He  lingered  not, 
but  ran,  calling  aloud  by  words,  deeds,  death, 
life,  descent,  ascension;  crying  aloud  to  us  to 
return  unto  Him.  And  He  departed  from  our 
eyes,  that  we  might  return  into  our  heart,  and 
there  find  Him.  For  He  departed,  and  lo,  He  is 
here.  He  would  not  be  long  with  us,  yet  left  us 
not;  for  He  departed  thither,  whence  He  never 
parted,  “because  the  world  was  made  by  Him.”2 
And  in  this  world  He  was,  and  into  this  world 
He  came  to  save  sinners,3  unto  Whom  my  soul 
confesseth,  and  He  healeth  it,  for  it  hath  sinned 
against  Him.4  0  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long  so 
slow  of  heart?5  Even  now,  after  the  descent  of 
Life  to  you,  will  ye  not  ascend  and  live?  But 
whither  ascend  ye,  when  ye  are  on  high,  and  set 
your  mouth  against  the  heavens?6  Descend,  that 
ye  may  ascend,7  and  ascend  to  God.  For  ye  have 
fallen,  by  “ascending  against  Him.”8  Tell  them 
this,  that  they  may  weep  in  the  valley  of  tears, 
and  so  carry  them  up  with  thee  unto  God ;  be¬ 
cause  out  of  His  Spirit  thou  speakest  thus  unto 
them,  if  thou  speakest,  burning  with  the  fire  of 
charity. 

[XIII]  20.  These  things  I  then  knew  not,  and 
I  loved  these  lower  beauties,  and  I  was  sinking 
to  the  very  depths,  and  to  my  friends  I  said, 
“Do  we  love  anything  but  the  beautiful?  What 
then  is  the  beautiful?  And  what  is  beauty?  What 
is  it  that  attracts  and  wins  us  to  the  things  we 
love?  For  unless  there  were  in  them  a  grace  and 
beauty,  they  could  by  no  means  draw  us  unto 
them.”  And  I  marked  and  perceived  that  in  bod¬ 
ies  themselves  there  was  a  beauty,  from  their 
forming  a  sort  of  whole,  and  again,  another  from 
apt  and  mutual  correspondence,  as  of  a  part  of 

4Ps.  19.  5.  2John,  1.  10.  3I  Tim.  1.  15. 

4Ps.  41.  4.  5Luke,  24.  25.  6Ps.  72.  9. 

7Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xiv.  13.  8Ps.  84.  6. 


the  body  with  its  whole,  or  a  shoe  with  a  foot, 
and  the  like.  And  this  consideration  sprang  up 
in  my  mind,  out  of  my  inmost  heart,  and  I  wrote 
“on  the  fair  and  fit,”  I  think,  two  or  three  books. 
Thou  knowest,  0  Lord,  for  it  is  gone  from  me; 
for  I  have  them  not,  but  they  are  strayed  from 
me,  I  know  not  how. 

[XIV]  21.  But  what  moved  me,  0  Lord  my 
God,  to  dedicate  these  books  unto  Hierius,  an 
orator  of  Rome,  whom  I  knew  not  by  face,  but 
loved  for  the  fame  of  his  learning  which  was  em¬ 
inent  in  him.  and  some  words  of  his  I  had  heard, 
which  pleased  me?  But  more  did  he  please  me, 
for  that  he  pleased  others,  who  highly  extolled 
him,  amazed  that  out  of  a  Syrian,  first  instruct¬ 
ed  in  Greek  eloquence,  should  afterwards  be 
formed  a  wonderful  Latin  orator,  and  one  most 
learned  in  things  pertaining  unto  philosophy. 
One  is  commended,  and,  unseen,  he  is  loved: 
doth  this  love  enter  the  heart  of  the  hearer  from 
the  mouth  of  the  commender?  Not  so.  But  by 
one  who  loveth  is  another  kindled.  For  hence  he 
is  loved,  who  is  commended,  when  the  commend¬ 
er  is  believed  to  extol  him  with  an  unfeigned 
heart ;  that  is,  when  one  that  loves  him  praises 
him. 

22.  For  so  did  I  then  love  men  upon  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  men,  not  thine,  0  my  God,  in  Whom 
no  man  is  deceived.  But  yet  why  not  for  quali¬ 
ties  like  those  of  a  famous  charioteer,  or  fighter 
with  beasts  in  the  theatre,9  known  far  and  wide 
by  a  vulgar  popularity,  but  far  otherwise,  and 
earnestly,  and  so  as  I  would  be  myself  com¬ 
mended?  For  I  would  not  be  commended  or 
loved,  as  actors  are  (though  I  myself  did  com¬ 
mend  and  love  them),  but  had  rather  be  un¬ 
known  than  so  known ;  and  even  hated  than  so 
loved.  Where  now  are  the  impulses  to  such  vari¬ 
ous  and  divers  kinds  of  loves  laid  up  in  one  soul? 
Why,  since  we  are  equally  men,  do  I  love  in  an¬ 
other  what,  if  I  did  not  hate,  I  should  not  spurn 
and  cast  from  myself?  For  it  holds  not  that,  as  a 
good  horse  is  loved  by  him  who  would  not, 
though  he  might,  be  that  horse,  therefore  the 
same  may  be  said  of  an  actor,  who  shares  our 
nature.  Do  I  then  love  in  a  man  what  I  hate  to 
be,  who  am  a  man?  Man  himself  is  a  great  deep, 
whose  very  hairs  Thou  numberest,  0  Lord,  and 
they  fall  not  to  the  ground  without  Thee.10  And 
yet  are  the  hairs  of  his  head  easier  to  be  num¬ 
bered  than  are  his  feelings,  and  the  beatings  of 
his  heart. 

23.  But  that  orator  was  of  that  sort  whom  I 
loved,  as  wishing  to  be  myself  such;  and  I  erred 
through  a  swelling  pride,  and  was  “tossed  about 

9See  Bk.  vi.  13,  below.  10Matt.  10.  29,  30. 


CONFESSIONS  IV.  19-27  25 


with  every  wind,”  1  but  yet  was  steered  by  Thee, 
though  very  secretly.  And  whence  do  I  know, 
and  whence  do  I  confidently  confess  unto  Thee, 
that  I  had  loved  him  more  for  the  love  of  his 
commenders  than  for  the  very  things  for  which 
he  was  commended?  Because,  had  he  been  un¬ 
praised,  and  these  self-same  men  had  dispraised 
him,  and  with  dispraise  and  contempt  told  the 
very  same  things  of  him,  I  had  never  been  so 
kindled  and  excited  to  love  him.  And  yet  the 
things  had  not  been  other,  nor  he  himself  other; 
but  only  the  feelings  of  the  relators.  See  where 
the  impotent  soul  lies  along,  that  is  not  yet 
stayed  up  by  the  solidity  of  truth!  Just  as  the 
gales  of  tongues  blow  from  the  breast  of  the 
opinionative,  so  is  it  carried  this  way  and  that, 
driven  forward  and  backward,  and  the  light  is 
overclouded  to  it,  and  the  truth  unseen.  And  lo, 
it  is  before  us.  And  it  was  to  me  a  great  matter 
that  my  discourse  and  labours  should  be  known 
to  that  man:  which  should  he  approve,  I  were 
the  more  kindled;  but  if  he  disapproved,  my 
empty  heart,  void  of  Thy  solidity,  had  been 
wounded.  And  yet  the  “fair  and  fit,”  whereon  I 
wrote  to  him,  I  dwelt  on  with  pleasure,  and  sur¬ 
veyed  it,  and  admired  it,  though  none  joined 
therein. 

[XV]  24.  But  I  saw  not  yet,  whereon  this 
weighty  matter  turned  in  Thy  wisdom,  0  Thou 
Omnipotent,  “Who  only  doest  wonders”;2  and 
my  mind  ranged  through  corporeal  forms;  and 
“fair”  I  defined  and  distinguished  what  is  so  in 
itself,  and  “fit”  whose  beauty  is  in  correspon¬ 
dence  to  some  other  thing:  and  this  I  supported 
by  corporeal  examples.  And  I  turned  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  mind,  but  the  false  notion  which  I 
had  of  spiritual  things  let  me  not  see  the  truth. 
Yet  the  force  of  truth  did  of  itself  flash  into 
mine  eyes,  and  I  turned  away  my  panting  soul 
from  incorporeal  substance  to  lineaments,  and 
colours,  and  bulky  magnitudes.  And,  not  being 
able  to  see  these  in  the  mind,  I  thought  I  could 
not  see  my  mind.  And  whereas  in  virtue  I  loved 
peace,  and  in  viciousness  I  abhorred  discord;  in 
the  first,  I  observed  an  unity,  but  in  the  other,  a 
sort  of  division.  And  in  that  unity,  I  conceived 
the  rational  soul,  and  the  nature  of  truth  and  of 
the  chief  good  to  consist :  but  in  this  division  I 
miserably  imagined  there  to  be  some  unknown 
substance  of  irrational  life,  and  the  nature  of  the 
chief  evil,  which  should  not  only  be  a  substance, 
but  real  life  also,  and  yet  not  derived  from  Thee, 
0  my  God,  of  whom  are  all  things.  And  yet  that 
first  I  called  a  Monad,  as  it  had  been  a  soul  with¬ 
out  sex;3  but  the  latter  a  Duad:  anger  in  deeds 
1Eph.  4. 14.  2Ps.  136. 4.  3Or  “an  unintelligent  soul.” 


of  violence,  and  in  flagitiousness,  lust;  not 
knowing  whereof  I  spake.  For  I  had  not  known 
or  learned  that  neither  was  evil  a  substance,  nor 
our  soul  that  chief  and  unchangeable  good. 

25.  For  as  deeds  of  violence  arise,  if  that  emo¬ 
tion  of  the  soul  be  corrupted  whence  vehement 
action  springs,  stirring  itself  insolently  and  un- 
rulily,  and  lusts,  when  that  affection  of  the  soul 
is  ungoverned,  whereby  carnal  pleasures  are 
drunk  in,  so  do  errors  and  false  opinions  defile 
the  conversation,  if  the  reasonable  soul  itself  be 
corrupted ;  as  it  was  then  in  me,  who  knew  not 
that  it  must  be  enlightened  by  another  light, 
that  it  may  be  partaker  of  truth,  seeing  itself  is 
not  that  nature  of  truth.  “For  Thou  shalt  light 
my  candle,  0  Lord  my  God,  Thou  shalt  en¬ 
lighten  my  darkness”:4  and  “of  Thy  fulness 
have  we  all  received,”5  for  “Thou  art  the  true 
light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world”;6  for  in  Thee  there  is  no  variable¬ 
ness,  neither  shadow  of  change.” 7 

26.  But  I  pressed  towards  Thee,  and  was 
thrust  from  Thee,  that  I  might  taste  of  death: 
for  thou  “resistest  the  proud.”8  But  what 
prouder  than  for  me  with  a  strange  madness  to 
maintain  myself  to  be  that  by  nature  which 
Thou  art?  For  whereas  I  was  subject  to  change 
(so  much  being  manifest  to  me,  my  very  desire 
to  become  wise,  being  the  wish,  of  worse  to  be¬ 
come  better) ;  yet  chose  I  rather  to  imagine 
Thee  subject  to  change,  than  myself  not  to  be 
that  which  Thou  art.  Therefore  I  was  repelled 
by  Thee,  and  Thou  resistedst  my  vain  stiff¬ 
neckedness,  and  I  imagined  corporeal  forms, 
and,  myself  flesh,  I  accused  flesh;  and,  “a  wind 
that  passeth  away,”  I  returned  not9  to  Thee,  but 
I  passed  on  and  on  to  things  which  have  no  be¬ 
ing,  neither  in  Thee,  nor  in  me,  nor  in  the  body. 
Neither  were  they  created  for  me  by  Thy  truth, 
but  by  my  vanity  devised  out  of  things  corpo¬ 
real.  And  I  was  wont  to  ask  Thy  faithful  little 
ones,  my  fellow-citizens  (from  whom,  unknown 
to  myself,  I  stood  exiled) — I  was  wont,  prating 
and  foolishly,  to  ask  them,  “Why  then  doth  the 
soul  err  which  God  created?”  But  I  would  not 
be  asked,  “Why  then  doth  God  err?”  And  I 
maintained  that  Thy  unchangeable  substance 
did  err  upon  constraint,  rather  than  confess  that 
my  changeable  substance  had  gone  astray  vol¬ 
untarily,  and  now,  in  punishment,  lay  in  error. 

27.  I  was  then  some  six  or  seven  and  twenty 
years  old  when  I  wrote  those  volumes ;  revolv¬ 
ing  within  me  corporeal  fictions,  buzzing  in  the 
ears  of  my  heart,  which  I  turned,  0  sweet  truth, 

4Ps.  18.  28.  5John,  1.  16.  6John,  i.  9. 

7James,  1.17.  sIbid.,  4.6;  I  Pet.  5.  5.  9Ps.  78. 39. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


26 

to  thy  inward  melody,  meditating  on  the  “fair 
and  fit,”  and  longing  to  stand  and  hearken  to 
Thee,  and  to  rejoice  greatly  at  the  Bridegroom’s 
voice,1  but  could  not;  for  by  the  voices  of  mine 
own  errors  I  was  hurried  abroad,  and  through 
the  weight  of  my  own  pride  I  was  sinking  into 
the  lowest  pit.  For  Thou  didst  not  “make  me  to 
hear  joy  and  gladness,”  nor  did  the  bones  exult 
which  were  not  yet  humbled.2 

fXVI]  28.  And  what  did  it  profit  me  that, 
scarce  twenty  years  old,  a  book  of  Aristotle, 
which  they  call  The  Ten  Predicaments ,  falling 
into  my  hands  (on  whose  very  name  I  hung,  as 
on  something  great  and  divine,  so  often  as  my 
rhetoric  master  of  Carthage,  and  others,  ac¬ 
counted  learned,  mouthed  it  with  cheeks  burst¬ 
ing  with  pride),  I  read  and  understood  it  unaid¬ 
ed?  And  on  my  conferring  with  others,  who  said 
that  they  scarcely  understood  it  with  very  able 
tutors,  not  only  orally  explaining  it,  but  drawing 
many  things  in  sand,  they  could  tell  me  no  more 
of  it  than  I  had  learned,  reading  it  by  myself. 
And  the  book  appeared  to  me  to  speak  very 
clearly  of  substances,  such  as  “man,”  and  of 
their  qualities,  as  the  figure  of  a  man,  of  what 
sort  it  is;  and  stature,  how  many  feet  high;  and 
his  relationship,  whose  brother  he  is;  or  where 
placed;  or  when  born;  or  whether  he  stands  or 
sits ;  or  be  shod  or  armed ;  or  does  or  suffers  any¬ 
thing;  and  all  the  innumerable  things  which 
might  be  ranged  under  these  nine  Predicaments, 
of  which  I  have  given  some  specimens,  or  under 
that  chief  Predicament  of  Substance. 

29.  What  did  all  this  further  me,  seeing  it  even 
hindered  me?  when,  imagining  whatever  was, 
was  comprehended  under  those  ten  Predica¬ 
ments,  I  essayed  in  such  wise  to  understand,  0 
my  God,  Thy  wonderful  and  unchangeable  Uni¬ 
ty  also,  as  if  Thou  also  hadst  been  subjected  to 
Thine  own  greatness  or  beauty;  so  that  (as  in 
bodies)  they  should  exist  in  Thee,  as  their  sub¬ 
ject:  whereas  Thou  Thyself  art  Thy  greatness 
and  beauty;  but  a  body  is  not  great  or  fair  in 
that  it  is  a  body,  seeing  that,  though  it  were  less 
great  or  fair,  it  should  notwithstanding  be  a 
body.  But  it  was  falsehood  which  of  Thee  I  con¬ 
ceived,  not  truth;  fictions  of  my  misery,  not  the 
realities  of  Thy  Blessedness.  For  Thou  hadst 
commanded,  and  it  was  done  in  me,  that  the 
earth  should  bring  forth  briars  and  thorns  to 
me,3  and  that  in  the  sweat  of  my  brows  I  should 
eat  my  bread.4 

30.  And  what  did  it  profit  me  that  all  the 
books  I  could  procure  of  the  so-called  liberal 

Tohn,  3.  29.  2Ps.  si.  8,  Vulg.  3Isa.  32.  13. 

4Gen.  3.  19. 


arts,  I,  the  vile  slave  of  vile  affections,  read  by 
myself,  and  understood?  And  I  delighted  in 
them,  but  knew  not  whence  came  all  that  therein 
was  true  or  certain.  For  I  had  my  back  to  the 
light,  and  my  face  to  the  things  enlightened; 
whence  my  face,  with  which  I  discerned  the 
things  enlightened,  itself  was  not  enlightened. 
Whatever  was  written,  either  on  rhetoric,  or 
logic,  geometry,  music,  and  arithmetic,  by  my¬ 
self  without  much  difficulty  or  any  instructor,  I 
understood.  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord  my  God;  be¬ 
cause  both  quickness  of  understanding,  and 
acuteness  in  discerning,  is  Thy  gift:  yet  did  I 
not  thence  sacrifice  to  Thee.  So  then  it  served 
not  to  my  use,  but  rather  to  my  perdition,  since 
I  went  about  to  get  so  good  a  portion  of  my  sub¬ 
stance5  into  my  own  keeping;  and  I  kept  not  my 
strength  for  Thee,6  but  wandered  from  Thee 
into  a  far  country,  to  spend  it  upon  harlotries.7 
For  what  profited  me  good  abilities,  not  em¬ 
ployed  to  good  uses?  For  I  felt  not  that  those 
arts  were  attained  with  great  difficulty,  even  by 
the  studious  and  talented,  until  I  attempted  to 
explain  them  to  such ;  when  he  most  excelled  in 
them,  who  followed  me  not  altogether  slowly. 

31.  But  what  did  this  further  me,  imagining 
that  Thou,  0  Lord  God,  the  Truth,  wert  a  vast 
and  bright  body,8 and  I  a  fragment  of  that  body? 
Perverseness  too  great!  But  such  was  I.  Nor  do 
I  blush,  0  my  God.  to  confess  to  Thee  Thy  mer¬ 
cies  towards  me,  and  to  call  upon  Thee,  who 
blushed  not  then  to  profess  to  men  my  blasphe¬ 
mies,  and  to  bark  against  Thee.  What  profited 
me  then  my  nimble  wit  in  those  sciences  and  all 
those  most  knotty  volumes,  unravelled  by  me 
without  aid  from  human  instruction;  seeing  I 
erred  so  foully,  and  with  such  sacrilegious 
shamefulness,  in  the  doctrine  of  piety?  Or  what 
hindrance  was  a  far  slower  wit  to  Thy  little  ones, 
since  they  departed  not  far  from  Thee,  that  in 
the  nest  of  Thy  Church  they  might  securely  be 
fledged,  and  nourish  the  wings  of  charity,  by  the 
food  of  a  sound  faith.  0  Lord  our  God.  under 
the  shadow  of  Thy  wings  let  us  hope;9  protect 
us,  and  carry  us.  Thou  wilt  carry  us  both  when 
little,  and  even  to  hoar  hairs  wilt  Thou  carry 
us;10  for  our  firmness,  when  it  is  Thou,  then  is  it 
firmness;  but  when  our  own,  it  is  infirmity.  Our 
good  ever  lives  with  Thee;  from  which  when  we 
turn  away,  we  are  turned  aside.  Let  us  now,  0 
Lord,  return,  that  we  may  not  be  overturned, 
because  with  Thee  our  good  lives  without  any 
decay,  which  good  art  Thou;  nor  need  we  fear, 

6Luke,  15.  12.  6Ps.  59.  5,  Vulg.  HLuke,  15.  13. 

8See  Bk.  hi.  12;  Bk.  iv.  3,  12;  Bk.  v.  19. 

9Ps.  36.  7.  10Isa.  46.  4. 


CONFESSIONS  IV.  28-31,  V.  1-4  27 


lest  there  be  no  place  whither  to  return,  because 
we  fell  from  it:  for  through  our  absence,  our 
mansion  fell  not — Thy  eternity. 

BOOK  V.  Augustine's  twenty-ninth  year.  Faus¬ 
tus,  a  snare  of  Satan  to  many ,  made  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  deliverance  to  Augustine,  by  shew¬ 
ing  the  ignorance  of  the  Manichees  on  those 
things  wherein  they  professed  to  have  divine 
knowledge.  Augustine  gives  up  all  thought  of 
going  further  among  the  Manichees:  is  guided 
to  Rome  and  Milan,  where  he  hears  St.  Am¬ 
brose,  leaves  the  Manichees ,  and  becomes 
again  a  catechumen  in  the  Church  Catholic. 
[I]  1.  Accept  the  sacrifice  of  my  confessions 
from  the  ministry  of  my  tongue,  which  Thou 
hast  formed  and  stirred  up  to  confess  unto  Thy 
name.  Heal  Thou  all  my  bones,  and  let  them 
say,  “0  Lord,  who  is  like  unto  Thee?”1  For  he 
who  confesses  to  Thee  doth  not  teach  Thee  what 
takes  place  within  him;  seeing  a  closed  heart 
closes  not  out  Thy  eye,  nor  can  man’s  hard¬ 
heartedness  thrust  back  Thy  hand:  for  Thou 
dissolvest  it  at  Thy  will  in  pity  or  in  vengeance, 
“and  nothing  can  hide  itself  from  Thy  heat.”2 
But  let  my  soul  praise  Thee,  that  it  may  love 
Thee;  and  let  it  confess  Thy  own  mercies  to 
Thee,  that  it  may  praise  Thee.  Thy  whole  crea¬ 
tion  ceaseth  not,  nor  is  silent  in  Thy  praises; 
neither  the  spirit  of  man  with  voice  directed 
unto  Thee,  nor  creation  animate  or  inanimate, 
by  the  voice  of  those  who  meditate  thereon: 
that  so  our  souls  may  from  their  weariness  arise 
towards  Thee,  leaning  on  those  things  which 
Thou  hast  created,  and  passing  on  to  Thyself, 
who  madest  them  wonderfully;  and  there  is  re¬ 
freshment  and  true  strength. 

2.  Let  the  restless,  the  godless,  depart  and  flee 
from  Thee;  yet  Thou  seest  them,  and  dividest 
the  darkness.  And  behold,  the  universe  with 
them  is  fair,  though  they  are  foul.3  And  how 
have  they  injured  Thee?  4  or  how  have  they  dis¬ 
graced  Thy  government  which,  from  the  heav¬ 
en  to  this  lowest  earth,  is  just  and  perfect?  For 
whither  fled  they,  when  they  fled  from  Thy 
presence?  5  Or  where  dost  not  Thou  find  them? 
But  they  fled,  that  they  might  not  see  Thee  see¬ 
ing  them,  and,  blinded,  might  stumble  against 
Thee6  (because  Thou  forsakest  nothing  Thou 
hast  made)  ;7  that  the  unjust,  I  say,  might  stum¬ 
ble  upon  Thee,  and  justly  be  hurt;  withdrawing 
themselves  from  Thy  gentleness,  and  stumbling 
at  Thy  uprightness,  and  falling  upon  their  own 

xPs.  35.  10.  Hbid.,  19.  6.  zCityof  God,  Bk.  xi.  23. 
AIbid.,  Bk.  xn.  3.  BPs.  139.  7.  6Gen.  16.  13,  14. 
7Wisd.  2.  26.  old  version. 


ruggedness.  Ignorant,  in  truth,  that  Thou  art 
everywhere,  Whom  no  place  encompasseth !  and 
Thou  alone  art  near,  even  to  those  that  remove 
far  from  Thee.8  Let  them  then  be  turned,  and 
seek  Thee;  because  not  as  they  have  forsaken 
their  Creator,  hast  Thou  forsaken  Thy  creation. 
Let  them  be  turned  and  seek  Thee ;  and  behold, 
Thou  art  there  in  their  heart,  in  the  heart  of 
those  that  confess  to  Thee,  and  cast  themselves 
upon  Thee,  and  weep  in  Thy  bosom,  after  all 
their  rugged  ways.  Then  dost  Thou  gently  wipe 
away  their  tears,  and  they  weep  the  more,  and 
joy  in  weeping;  even  for  that  Thou,  Lord — not 
man  of  flesh  and  blood,  but  Thou,  Lord,  who 
madest  them — re-makest  and  comfortest  them. 
But  where  was  I,  when  I  was  seeking  Thee?  And 
Thou  wert  before  me,  but  I  had  gone  away 
from  Thee;  nor  did  I  find  myself,  how  much  less 
Thee! 

[HI]  3. 1  would  lay  open  before  my  God  that 
nine-and-twentieth  year  of  mine  age.  There  had 
then  come  to  Carthage  a  certain  Bishop  of  the 
Manichees,  Faustus  by  name,  a  great  snare  of 
the  Devil,  and  many  were  entangled  by  him 
through  that  lure  of  his  smooth  language :  which 
though  I  did  commend,  yet  could  I  separate 
from  the  truth  of  the  things  which  I  was  earnest 
to  learn :  nor  did  I  so  much  regard  the  service  of 
oratory,  as  the  science  which  this  Faustus,  so 
praised  among  them,  set  before  me  to  feed  upon. 
Fame  had  before  bespoken  him  most  knowing 
in  all  valuable  learning,  and  exquisitely  skilled  in 
the  liberal  sciences.  And  since  I  had  read  and 
well  remembered  much  of  the  philosophers,  I 
compared  some  things  of  theirs  with  those  long 
fables  of  the  Manichees,  and  found  the  former 
the  more  probable;  even  although  they  could 
only  prevail  so  far  as  to  make  judgment  of  this 
lower  world,  the  Lord  of  it  they  could  by  no 
means  find  out.9  For  Thou  art  great,  0  Lord,  and 
hast  “respect  unto  the  humble,  but  the  proud 
Thou  beholdest  afar  off.”  10  Nor  dost  thou  draw 
near  but  to  the  contrite  in  heart,11  nor  art  found 
by  the  proud,  no,  not  though  by  curious  skill 
they  could  number  the  stars  and  the  sand,  and 
measure  the  starry  heavens,  and  track  the 
courses  of  the  planets. 

4.  For  with  their  understanding  and  wit, 
which  Thou  bestowedst  on  them,  they  search 
out  these  things;  and  much  have  they  found 
out;  and  foretold,  many  years  before,  eclipses  of 
those  luminaries,  the  sun  and  moon — what  day 
and  hour,  and  how  many  digits;  nor  did  their 
calculation  fail;  and  it  came  to  pass  as  they 

8Ps.  73.  27.  9Wisd.  13.  9.  10Ps.  138.  6. 

nPs.  34.  18;  145.  18. 


28  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


foretold;  and  they  wrote  down  the  rules  they 
had  found  out,  and  these  are  read  at  this  day, 
and  out  of  them  do  others  foretell  in  what  year, 
and  month  of  the  year,  and  what  day  of  the 
month,  and  what  hour  of  the  day,  and  what  part 
of  its  light,  moon  or  sun  is  to  be  eclipsed,  and  so 
it  shall  be,  as  it  is  foreshewed.  At  these  things 
men  that  know  not  this  art  marvel  and  are  as¬ 
tonished,  and  they  that  know  it  exult  and  are 
puffed  up;  and  by  an  ungodly  pride  departing 
from  Thee,  and  failing  of  Thy  light,  they  fore¬ 
see  a  failure  of  the  sun’s  light,  which  shall  be,  so 
long  before,  but  see  not  their  own,  which  is.  For 
they  search  not  religiously  whence  they  have  the 
wit,  wherewith  they  search  out  this.  And  finding 
that  Thou  madest  them,  they  give  not  them¬ 
selves  up  to  Thee,  to  preserve  what  Thou  mad¬ 
est,  nor  sacrifice  to  Thee  what  they  have  made 
themselves ;  nor  slay  their  own  soaring  imagina¬ 
tions,  as  fowls  of  the  air,1  nor  their  own  diving 
curiosities  (wherewith,  like  the  fishes  of  the  sea, 
they  wander  over  the  unknown  paths  of  the 
abyss),  nor  their  own  luxuriousness,  as  “beasts 
of  the  field,”2  that  Thou,  Lord,  “a  consuming 
fire,”3  mayest  burn  up  those  dead  cares  of  thfeirs, 
and  re-create  themselves  immortally. 

5.  But  they  knew  not  the  way,  Thy  Word,  by 
Whom  Thou  madest  these  things  which  they 
number,  and  themselves  who  number,  and  the 
sense  whereby  they  perceive  what  they  number, 
and  the  understanding  out  of  which  they  num¬ 
ber;  or  that  of  Thy  wisdom  there  is  no  number.4 
But  the  Only  Begotten  is  Himself  “made  unto 
us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctifica¬ 
tion,”5  and  was  numbered  among  us,  and  paid 
tribute  unto  Caesar.6  They  knew  not  this  Way 
whereby  to  descend  to  Him  from  themselves,  and 
by  Him  ascend  unto  Him.  They  knew  not  this 
way,  and  deemed  themselves  exalted  amongst 
the  stars7  and  shining;  and  behold,  they  fell  up¬ 
on  the  earth,8  and  “their  foolish  heart  was  dark¬ 
ened.”  9  They  discourse  many  things  truly  con¬ 
cerning  the  creature;  but  Truth,  Artificer  of  the 
creature,  they  seek  not  piously,  and  therefore 
find  Him  not ;  or  if  they  find  Him,  knowing  Him 
to  be  God,  they  glorify  Him  not  as  God,  neither 
are  thankful,10  but  become  vain  in  their  imagina¬ 
tions, and  profess  themselves  to  be  wise,11  attrib¬ 
uting  to  themselves  what  is  Thine ;  and  thereby 
with  most  perverse  blindness,  study  to  impute 
to  Thee  what  is  their  own,  forging  lies  of  Thee 
Who  are  the  Truth,  and  changing  the  glory  of 

xSee  above.  Bk.  m.  16,  below  Bk.  x.  41. 

2Ps.  8.  7,  8.  3Deut.  4.  24.  4Ps.  147.  5,  Vulg. 

6I  Cor.  1.  30  6Matt.  17.  27.  7Isa.  14,  13. 

8Rev.  12.  4.  9Rom.  1.  21.  10Ibid.  nIbid.,  22. 


the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like 
corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four-footed 
beasts,  and  creeping  things,12  changing  Thy  truth 
into  a  lie,  and  worshipping  and  serving  the  crea¬ 
ture  more  than  the  Creator.13 

6.  Yet  many  truths  concerning  the  creature 
retained  I  from  these  men,  and  saw  the  reason 
thereof  from  calculations,  the  succession  of 
times,  and  the  visible  testimonies  of  the  stars; 
and  compared  them  with  the  saying  of  Mani- 
chaeus,  which  in  his  phrenzy  he  had  written  most 
largely  on  these  subjects;  but  discovered  not 
any  account  of  the  solstices,  or  equinoxes,  or 
the  eclipses  of  the  greater  lights,  nor  whatever 
of  this  sort  I  had  learned  in  the  books  of  secular 
philosophy.  But  I  was  commanded  to  believe; 
and  yet  it  corresponded  not  with  what  had  been 
established  by  calculations  and  my  own  sight, 
but  was  quite  contrary. 

[IV]  7.  Doth  then,  0  Lord  God  of  truth,  who¬ 
so  knoweth  these  things  therefore  please  Thee? 
Surely  unhappy  is  he  who  knoweth  all  these,  and 
knoweth  not  Thee:  but  happy  whoso  knoweth 
Thee,  though  he  know  not  these.  And  whoso 
knoweth  both  Thee  and  them  is  not  the  happier 
for  them,  but  for  Thee  only,  if,  knowing  Thee, 
he  glorifies  Thee  as  God,  and  is  thankful,  and  be¬ 
comes  not  vain  in  his  imaginations.14  For  as  he  is 
better  off  who  knows  how  to  possess  a  tree,  and 
returns  thanks  to  Thee  for  the  use  thereof,  al¬ 
though  he  know  not  how  many  cubits  high  it  is, 
or  how  wide  it  spreads,  than  he  that  can  measure 
it  and  count  all  its  boughs,  and  neither  owns  it 
nor  knows  or  loves  its  Creator:  so  a  believer, 
whose  all  this  world  of  wealth  is,15  and  who  hav¬ 
ing  nothing  yet  possesseth  all  things,16  by  cleav¬ 
ing  unto  Thee,  whom  all  things  serve,  though  he 
know  not  even  the  circles  of  the  Great  Bear,  yet 
is  it  folly  to  doubt  but  he  is  in  a  better  state  than 
one  who  can  measure  the  heavens,  and  number 
the  stars,  and  poise  the  elements,  yet  neglecteth 
Thee  “who  hast  made  all  things  in  number, 
weight,  and  measure.”  17 

[V]  8.  But  yet  who  bade  that  Manichseus 
write  on  these  things  also,  skill  in  which  was  no 
element  of  piety?  For  Thou  hast  said  to  man, 
Behold,  piety  and  wisdom;18  of  which  he  might 
be  ignorant,  though  he  had  perfect  knowledge  of 
these  things;  but  these  things,  since,  knowing 
not,  he  most  impudently  dared  to  teach,  he 
plainly  could  have  no  knowledge  of  piety.  For  it 
is  vanity  to  make  profession  of  these  worldly 
things  even  when  known;  but  confession  to 

nIbid.,  2 3.  xzIbid.t  25.  14Rom.  1.  21. 

16Prov.  17.  6,  in  the  LXX.  “II  Cor.  6.  10. 

17Wisd.  2.  20.  i8Cf.  Job,  28.  28,  in  the  LXX. 


CONFESSIONS  V.  5-1 1  29 


Thee  is  piety.  Wherefore  this  wanderer  to  this 
end  spake  much  of  these  things,  that,  convicted 
by  those  who  had  truly  learned  them,  it  might 
be  manifest  what  understanding  he  had  in  the 
other  abstruser  things.  For  he  would  not  have 
himself  meanly  thought  of,  but  went  about  to 
persuade  men,  “That  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Com¬ 
forter  and  Enricher  of  Thy  faithful  ones,  was 
with  plenary  authority  personally  within  him.” 
When  then  he  was  found  out  to  have  taught 
falsely  of  the  heaven  and  stars,  and  of  the  mo¬ 
tions  of  the  sun  and  moon  (although  these 
things  pertain  not  to  the  doctrine  of  religion), 
yet  his  sacrilegious  presumption  would  become 
evident  enough,  seeing  he  delivered  things  which 
not  only  he  knew  not,  but  which  were  falsified, 
with  so  mad  a  vanity  of  pride  that  he  sought  to 
ascribe  them  to  himself,  as  to  a  divine  person. 

9.  For  when  I  hear  any  Christian  brother  ig¬ 
norant  of  these  things,  and  mistaken  on  them,  I 
can  patiently  behold  such  a  man  holding  his 
opinion;  nor  do  I  see  that  any  ignorance  as  to 
the  position  or  character  of  the  corporeal  crea¬ 
tion  can  injure  him,  so  long  as  he  doth  not  be¬ 
lieve  anything  unworthy  of  Thee,  0  Lord,  the 
Creator  of  all.  But  it  doth  injure  him  if  he  imag¬ 
ine  it  to  pertain  to  the  form  of  the  doctrine  of 
piety,  and  will  yet  affirm  that  too  stiffly  whereof 
he  is  ignorant.  And  yet  is  even  such  an  infirmity, 
in  the  infancy  of  faith,  borne  by  our  mother 
Charity,  till  the  new-born  may  grow  up  “unto  a 
perfect  man,”  so  as  not  to  be  “carried  about 
with  every  wind  of  doctrine.”1  But  in  him  who 
in  such  wise  presumed  to  be  the  teacher,  source, 
guide,  chief  of  all  whom  he  could  so  persuade, 
that  whoso  followed  him  thought  that  he  fol¬ 
lowed  not  a  mere  man,  but  Thy  Holy  Spirit; 
who  would  not  judge  that  so  great  madness, 
when  once  convicted  of  having  taught  anything 
false,  were  to  be  detested  and  utterly  rejected? 
But  I  had  not  as  yet  clearly  ascertained  whether 
the  vicissitudes  of  longer  and  shorter  days  and 
nights,  and  of  day  and  night  itself,  with  the 
eclipses  of  the  greater  lights,  and  whatever  else 
of  the  kjnd  I  had  read  of  in  other  books,  might 
be  explained  consistently  with  his  sayings;  so 
that,  if  they  by  any  means  might,  it  should  still 
remain  a  question  to  me  whether  it  were  so  or 
no;  but  I  might,  on  account  of  his  reputed  sanc¬ 
tity,  rest  my  credence  upon  his  authority. 

[VI]  10.  And  for  almost  all  those  nine  years, 
wherein  with  unsettled  mind  I  had  been  their 
disciple,  I  had  longed  but  too  intensely  for  the 
coming  of  this  Faustus.  For  the  rest  of  the  sect, 
whom  by  chance  I  had  lighted  upon  when  unable 

1Eph.  4. 13, 14. 


to  solve  my  objections  about  these  things,  still 
held  out  to  me  the  coming  of  this  Faustus,  by 
conference  with  whom  these  and  greater  difficul¬ 
ties,  if  I  had  them,  were  to  be  most  readily  and 
abundantly  cleared.  When  then  he  came,  I  found 
him  a  man  of  pleasing  discourse,  and  wTho  could 
speak  fluently  and  in  better  terms,  yet  still  but 
the  self-same  things  which  they  were  wTont  to 
say.  But  what  availed  the  utmost  neatness  of 
the  cup-bearer  to  my  thirst  for  a  more  precious 
draught?  Mine  ears  were  already  cloyed  with 
the  like,  nor  did  they  seem  to  me  therefore  bet¬ 
ter,  because  better  said;  nor  therefore  true,  be¬ 
cause  eloquent ;  nor  the  soul  therefore  wise,  be¬ 
cause  the  face  was  comely  and  the  language 
graceful.  But  they  who  held  him  out  to  me  were 
no  good  judges  of  things;  and  therefore  to  them 
he  appeared  understanding  and  wise,  because  in 
words  pleasing.  I  felt  however  that  another  sort 
of  people  were  suspicious  even  of  truth,  and  re¬ 
fused  to  assent  to  it,  if  delivered  in  a  smooth  and 
copious  discourse.  But  Thou,  0  my  God,  hadst 
already  taught  me  by  wonderful  and  secret 
ways,  and  therefore  I  believe  that  Thou  taught- 
est  me,  because  it  is  truth,  nor  is  there  besides 
Thee  any  teacher  of  truth,  where  or  whenceso¬ 
ever  it  may  shine  upon  us.2  Of  Thyself  therefore 
had  I  now  learned,  that  neither  ought  anything 
to  seem  to  be  spoken  truly,  because  eloquently; 
nor  therefore  falsely,  because  the  utterance  of 
the  lips  is  inharmonious;  nor,  again,  therefore 
true,  because  rudely  delivered;  nor  therefore 
false,  because  the  language  is  rich;  but  that  wis¬ 
dom  and  folly  are  as  wholesome  and  unwhole¬ 
some  food;  and  adorned  or  unadorned  phrases, 
as  courtly  or  country  vessels;  either  kind  of 
meats  may  be  served  up  in  either  kind  of  dishes. 

11.  That  greediness  then,  wherewith  I  had  of 
so  long  time  expected  that  man,  was  delighted 
verily  with  his  action  and  feeling  when  disput¬ 
ing,  and  his  choice  and  readiness  of  words  to 
clothe  his  ideas.  I  was  then  delighted,  and,  with 
many  others  and  more  than  they,  did  I  praise 
and  extol  him.  It  troubled  me,  however,  that  in 
the  assembly  of  his  auditors  I  was  not  allowed 
to  put  in,  and  communicate  those  questions  that 
troubled  me,  in  familiar  converse  with  him. 
Which  when  I  might,  and  with  my  friends  began 
to  engage  his  ears  at  such  times  as  it  was  not  un¬ 
becoming  for  him  to  discuss  with  me,  and  had 
brought  forward  such  things  as  moved  me,  I 
found  him  first  utterly  ignorant  of  liberal  sci¬ 
ences,  save  grammar,  and  that  but  in  an  ordi¬ 
nary  way.  But  because  he  had  read  some  of 
Tully’s  Orations ,  a  very  few  books  of  Seneca, 
2See  below,  Bk.  vn.  15. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


some  things  of  the  poets,  and  such  few  volumes 
of  his  own  sect  as  were  written  in  Latin  and 
neatly,  and  was  daily  practised  in  speaking,  he 
acquired  a  certain  eloquence,  which  proved  the 
more  pleasing  and  seductive  because  under  the 
guidance  of  a  good  wit  and  with  a  kind  of  nat¬ 
ural  gracefulness.  Is  it  not  thus,  as  I  recall  it,  0 
Lord  my  God,  Thou  Judge  of  my  conscience? 
Before  Thee  is  my  heart,  and  my  remembrance, 
Who  didst  at  that  time  direct  me  by  the  hidden 
mystery  of  Thy  providence,  and  didst  set  those 
shameful  errors  of  mine  before  my  face,  that  I 
might  see  and  hate  them. 

[VII]  12.  For  after  it  was  clear  that  he  was 
ignorant  of  those  arts  in  which  I  thought  he  ex¬ 
celled,  I  began  to  despair  of  his  opening  and 
solving  the  difficulties  which  perplexed  me  (of 
which  indeed  however  ignorant,  he  might  have 
held  the  truths  of  piety,  had  he  not  been  a  Mani- 
chee).  For  their  books  are  fraught  with  prolix 
fables,  of  the  heaven,  and  stars,  sun,  and  moon, 
and  I  now  no  longer  thought  him  able  satisfac¬ 
torily  to  decide  what  I  much  desired,  whether, 
on  comparison  of  these  things  with  the  calcula¬ 
tions  I  had  elsewhere  read,  the  account  given  in 
the  books  of  Manichaeus  were  preferable,  or  at 
least  as  good.  Which  when  I  proposed  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  and  discussed,  he,  so  far  modestly, 
shrunk  from  the  burthen.  For  he  knew  that  he 
knew  not  these  things,  and  was  not  ashamed  to 
confess  it.  For  he  was  not  one  of  those  talking 
persons,  many  of  whom  I  had  endured,  who  un¬ 
dertook  to  teach  me  these  things,  and  said  noth¬ 
ing.  But  this  man  had  a  heart,  though  not  right 
towards  Thee,  yet  neither  altogether  treacher¬ 
ous  to  himself.  For  he  was  not  altogether  ignor¬ 
ant  of  his  own  ignorance,  nor  would  he  rashly  be 
entangled  in  a  dispute  whence  he  could  neither 
retreat,  nor  extricate  himself  fairly.  Even  for 
this  I  liked  him  the  better.  For  fairer  is  the  mod¬ 
esty  of  a  candid  mind  than  the  knowledge  of 
those  things  which  I  desired ;  and  such  I  found 
him,  in  all  the  more  difficult  and  subtile  ques¬ 
tions. 

13.  My  zeal  for  the  writings  of  Manichaeus  be¬ 
ing  thus  blunted,  and  despairing  yet  more  of 
their  other  teachers,  seeing  that,  in  divers  things 
which  perplexed  me,  he,  so  renowned  among 
them,  had  so  turned  out;  I  began  to  engage  with 
him  in  the  study  of  that  literature  on  which  he 
also  was  much  set  (and  which  as  rhetoric-reader 
I  was  at  that  time  teaching  young  students  at 
Carthage),  and  to  read  with  him  either  what 
himself  desired  to  hear,  or  such  as  I  judged  fit 
for  his  genius.  But  all  my  efforts  whereby  I  had 
purposed  to  advance  in  that  sect,  upon  knowl¬ 


edge  of  that  man,  came  utterly  to  an  end;  not 
that  I  detached  myself  from  them  altogether, 
but  as  one  finding  nothing  better,  I  had  settled 
to  be  content  meanwhile  with  what  I  had  in 
whatever  way  fallen  upon,  unless  by  chance 
something  more  eligible  should  dawn  upon  me. 
Thus  that  Faustus,  to  so  many  a  snare  of  death, 
had  now,  neither  willing  nor  witting  it,  begun  to 
loosen  that  wherein  I  was  taken.  For  Thy  hands, 
0  my  God,  in  the  secret  purpose  of  Thy  provi¬ 
dence.  did  not  forsake  my  soul;  and  out  of  my 
mother’s  heart’s  blood,  through  her  tears  night 
and  day  poured  out,  was  a  sacrifice  offered  for 
me  unto  Thee ;  and  Thou  didst  deal  with  me  by 
wondrous  ways.1  Thou  didst  it,  0  my  God:  for 
the  steps  of  a  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord,  and 
He  shall  dispose  his  way.2  Or  how  shall  we  ob¬ 
tain  salvation,  but  from  Thy  hand,  re-making 
what  It  made? 

[VIII]  14.  Thou  didst  deal  with  me,  that  I 
should  be  persuaded  to  go  to  Rome,  and  to  teach 
there  rather  what  I  was  teaching  at  Carthage. 
And  how  I  was  persuaded  to  this,  I  will  not  neg¬ 
lect  to  confess  to  Thee:  because  herein  also  the 
deepest  recesses  of  Thy  wisdom,  and  Thy  most 
present  mercy  to  us,  must  be  considered  and 
confessed.  I  did  not  wish  therefore  to  go  to 
Rome,  because  higher  gains  and  higher  dignities 
were  warranted  me  by  my  friends  who  persuad¬ 
ed  me  to  this  (though  even  these  things  had  at 
that  time  an  influence  over  my  mind),  but  my 
chief  and  almost  only  reason  was  that  I  heard 
that  young  men  studied  there  more  peacefully, 
and  were  kept  quiet  under  a  restraint  of  more 
regular  discipline;  so  that  they  did  not,  at  their 
pleasure,  petulantly  rush  into  the  school  of  one 
whose  pupils  they  were  not,  nor  were  even  ad¬ 
mitted  without  his  permission.  Whereas  at  Car¬ 
thage  there  reigns  among  the  scholars  a  most 
disgraceful  and  unruly  license.  They  burst  in  au¬ 
daciously,  and  with  gestures  almost  frantic  dis¬ 
turb  all  order  which  anyone  hath  established  for 
the  good  of  his  scholars.  Divers  outrages  they 
commit,  with  a  wonderful  stolidity,  punishable 
by  law,  did  not  custom  uphold  them ;  that  cus¬ 
tom  evincing  them  to  be  the  more  miserable,  in 
that  they  now  do  as  lawful  what  by  Thy  eternal 
law  shall  never  be  lawful;  and  they  think  they 
do  it  unpunished,  whereas  they  are  punished 
with  the  very  blindness  whereby  they  do  it,  and 
suffer  incomparably  worse  than  what  they  do. 
The  manners  then  which,  when  a  student,  I 
would  not  make  my  own,3 1  was  fain,  as  a  teach¬ 
er,  to  endure  in  others :  and  so  I  was  well  pleased 
to  go  where  all  that  knew  it  assured  me  that  the 
Toel,  2.  26.  2Ps.  37.  23.  3See  above,  Bk.  m.  6. 


CONFESSIONS  V.  12-17  31 


like  was  not  done.  But  Thou,  “my  refuge  and 
my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  living,”  1  that  I 
might  change  my  earthly  dwelling  for  the  salva¬ 
tion  of  my  soul,  at  Carthage  didst  goad  me,  that 
I  might  thereby  be  torn  from  it ;  and  at  Rome 
didst  proffer  me  allurements,  whereby  I  might 
be  drawn  thither  by  men  in  love  with  a  dying 
life,  the  one  doing  frantic,  the  other  promising 
vain,  things;  and,  to  correct  my  steps,  didst  se¬ 
cretly  use  their  and  my  own  perverseness.  For 
both  they  who  disturbed  my  quiet  were  blinded 
with  a  disgraceful  phrenzy.  and  they  who  invit¬ 
ed  me  elsewhere  savoured  of  earth.  And  I,  who 
here  detested  real  misery,  was  there  seeking  un¬ 
real  happiness. 

15.  But  why  I  went  hence,  and  went  thither, 
Thou  knewest,  0  God,  yet  shewedst  it  neither  to 
me  nor  to  my  mother,  who  grievously  bewailed 
my  journey,  and  followed  me  as  far  as  the  sea. 
But  I  deceived  her,  holding  me  by  force,  that 
either  she  might  keep  me  back,  or  go  with  me, 
and  I  feigned  that  I  had  a  friend  whom  I  could 
not  leave  till  he  had  a  fair  wind  to  sail.  And  I 
lied  to  my  mother,  and  such  a  mother,  and  es¬ 
caped:  for  this  also  hast  Thou  mercifully  for¬ 
given  me,  preserving  me,  thus  full  of  execra¬ 
ble  defilements,  from  the  waters  of  the  sea,  for 
the  water2  of  Thy  Grace;  whereby  when  I  was 
cleansed,  the  streams  of  my  mother’s  eyes 
should  be  dried,  with  which  for  me  she  daily 
watered  the  ground  under  her  face.  And  yet  re¬ 
fusing  to  return  without  me,  I  scarcely  persuad¬ 
ed  her  to  stay  that  night  in  a  place  hard  by  our 
ship,  where  was  an  Oratory  in  memory  of  the 
blessed  Cyprian.  That  night  I  privily  departed, 
but  she  was  not  behind  in  weeping  and  prayer. 
And  what,  0  Lord,  was  she  with  so  many  tears 
asking  of  Thee,  but  that  Thou  wouldest  not  suf¬ 
fer  me  to  sail?  But  Thou,  in  the  depth  of  Thy 
counsels  and  hearing  the  main  point  of  her  de¬ 
sire,  regardest  not  what  she  then  asked,  that 
Thou  mightest  make  me  what  she  ever  asked. 
The  wind  blew  and  swelled  our  sails,  and  with¬ 
drew  the  shore  from  our  sight;  and  she  on  the 
morrow  was  there,  frantic  with  sorrow,  and  with 
complaints  and  groans  filled  Thine  ears,  who 
didst  then  disregard  them ;  whilst,  through  my 
desires,  Thou  wert  hurrying  me  to  end  all  desire, 
and  the  earthly  part  of  her  affection  to  me  was 
chastened  by  the  allotted  scourge  of  sorrows. 
For  she  loved  my  being  with  her,  as  mothers  do, 
but  much  more  than  many;  and  she  knew  not 
how  great  joy  Thou  wert  about  to  work  for  her 
out  of  my  absence.  She  knew  not ;  therefore  did 
she  weep  and  wail,  and  by  this  agony  there  ap- 
1Ps.  142.  5.  2The  waters  of  Baptism. 


peared  in  her  the  inheritance  of  Eve,  with  sor¬ 
row  seeking  what  in  sorrow  she  had  brought 
forth.  And  yet,  after  accusing  my  treachery  and 
hardheartedness,  she  betook  herself  again  to  in¬ 
tercede  to  Thee  for  me,  went  to  her  wonted 
place,  and  I  to  Rome. 

[IX]  16.  And  lo,  there  was  I  received  by  the 
scourge  of  bodily  sickness,  and  I  was  going  down 
to  hell,  carrying  all  the  sins  which  I  had  com¬ 
mitted,  both  against  Thee  and  myself,  and  oth¬ 
ers,  many  and  grievous,  over  and  above  that 
bond  of  original  sin  whereby  we  all  die  in  Adam.3 
For  Thou  hadst  not  forgiven  me  any  of  these 
things  in  Christ,  nor  had  He  “abolished”  by  His 
cross  “the  enmity”  which  by  my  sins  I  had  in¬ 
curred  with  Thee.  For  how  should  He,  by  the 
crucifixion  of  a  phantasm,  which  I  believed  Him 
to  be?  So  true,  then,  was  the  death  of  my  soul,  as 
that  of  His  flesh  seemed  to  me  false;  and  how 
true  the  death  of  His  body,  so  false  was  the  life 
of  my  soul,  which  did  not  believe  it.  And  now 
the  fever  heightening,  I  was  parting  and  depart¬ 
ing  for  ever.  For  had  I  then  parted  hence,  whith¬ 
er  had  I  departed,  but  into  fire  and  torments, 
such  as  my  misdeeds  deserved  in  the  truth  of 
Thy  appointment?  And  this  she  knew  not,  yet 
in  absence  prayed  for  me.  But  Thou,  everywhere 
present,  heardst  her  where  she  was,  and,  where  I 
was,  hadst  compassion  upon  me;  that  I  should 
recover  the  health  of  my  body,  though  phren- 
zied  as  yet  in  my  sacrilegious  heart.  For  I  did 
not  in  all  that  danger  desire  Thy  baptism ;  and  I 
was  better  as  a  boy,  when  I  begged  it  of  my 
mother’s  piety,  as  I  have  before  recited  and  con¬ 
fessed.4  But  I  had  grown  up  to  my  own  shame, 
and  I  madly  scoffed  at  the  prescripts  of  Thy 
medicine,  who  wouldest  not  suffer  me,  being 
such,  to  die  a  double  death.  With  which  wound 
had  my  mother’s  heart  been  pierced,  it  could 
never  be  healed.  For  I  cannot  express  the  effec- 
tion  she  bare  to  me,  and  with  how  much  more 
vehement  anguish  she  was  now  in  labour  of  me 
in  the  spirit  than  at  her  childbearing  in  the  flesh. 

17.  I  see  not  then  how  she  should  have  been 
healed,  had  such  a  death  of  mine  stricken 
through  the  bowels  of  her  love.  And  where 
would  have  been  those  her  so  strong  and  unceas¬ 
ing  prayers,  unintermitting  to  Thee  alone?  But 
wouldest  Thou,  God  of  mercies,  despise  the 
“contrite  and  humbled  heart” 5  of  that  chaste 
and  sober  widow,  so  frequent  in  almsdeeds,  so 
full  of  duty  and  service  to  Thy  saints,  no  day 
intermitting  the  oblation  at  Thine  altar,  twice  a 
day,  morning  and  evening,  without  any  inter¬ 
mission,  coming  to  Thy  church,  not  for  idle  tat- 
*1  Cor.  15.  22.  4See  above,  Bk.  i.  io.  5Ps.  51.  19. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tlings  and  old  wives’  “fables”;1  but  that  she 
might  hear  Thee  in  Thy  discourses,  and  Thou 
her  in  her  prayers.  Couldest  Thou  despise  and 
reject  from  Thy  aid  the  tears  of  such  an  one, 
wherewith  she  begged  of  Thee  not  gold  or  silver, 
nor  any  mutable  or  passing  good,  but  the  salva¬ 
tion  of  her  son’s  soul?  Thou,  by  whose  gift  she 
was  such?  Never,  Lord.  Yea,  Thou  wert  at 
hand,  and  wert  hearing  and  doing,  in  that  order 
wherein  Thou  hadst  determined  before  that  it 
should  be  done.  Far  be  it  that  Thou  shouldest 
deceive  her  in  Thy  visions  and  answers,  some 
whereof  I  have,2  some  I  have  not3  mentioned, 
which  she  laid  up  in  her  faithful  heart,  and  ever 
praying,  urged  upon  Thee,  as  Thine  own  hand¬ 
writing.  For  Thou,  because  Thy  mercy  endureth 
for  ever,4  vouchsafest  to  those  to  whom  Thou 
forgivest  all  their  debts,  to  become  also  a  debtor 
by  Thy  promises. 

[X]  18.  Thou  recoveredst  me  then  of  that 
sickness,  and  healedst  the  son  of  Thy  handmaid, 
for  the  time  in  body,  that  he  might  live,  for  Thee 
to  bestow  upon  him  a  better  and  more  abiding 
health.  And  even  then,  at  Rome,  I  joined  myself 
to  those  deceiving  and  deceived  “holy  ones”; 
not  with  their  disciples  only  (of  which  number 
was  he  in  whose  house  I  had  fallen  sick  and  re¬ 
covered)  ;  but  also  with  those  whom  they  call 
“The  Elect.”  For  I  still  thought  “that  it  was  not 
we  that  sin,  but  that  I  know  not  what  other  na¬ 
ture  sinned  in  us”;  and  it  delighted  my  pride  to 
be  free  from  blame;  and  when  I  had  done  any 
evil,  not  to  confess  I  had  done  any,  “that  Thou 
mightest  heal  my  soul  because  it  had  sinned 
against  Thee”  :5  but  I  loved  to  excuse  it,  and  to 
accuse  I  know  not  what  other  thing,  which  was 
with  me,  but  which  I  was  not.  But  in  truth  it  was 
wholly  I,  and  mine  impiety  had  divided  me 
against  myself :  and  that  sin  was  the  more  incur¬ 
able  whereby  I  did  not  judge  myself  a  sinner; 
and  execrable  iniquity  it  was,  that  I  had  rather 
have  Thee,  Thee,  0  God  Almighty,  to  be  over¬ 
come  in  me  to  my  destruction,  than  myself  of 
Thee  to  salvation.  Not  as  yet  then  hadst  Thou 
set  a  watch  before  my  mouth,  and  a  door  of  safe 
keeping  around  my  lips,  that  my  heart  might  not 
turn  aside  to  wicked  speeches,  to  make  excuses 
of  sins,  with  men  that  work  iniquity:6  and, 
therefore,  was  I  still  united  with  their  “Elect.” 

19.  But  now  despairing  to  make  proficiency  in 
that  false  doctrine,  even  those  things  (with 
which  if  I  should  find  no  better,  I  had  resolved 
to  rest  contented)  I  now  held  more  laxly  and 

ll  Tim.  5.  10.  2See  above,  Bk.  111.  19,  20,  21. 

3lbid.,  21.  4Ps.  118.  1.  6Ps.  41.  4. 

®Ps.  1 41.  3,  4,  old  version. 


carelessly.  For  there  half  arose  a  thought  in  me, 
that  those  philosophers  whom  they  call  “Aca¬ 
demics”  were  wiser  than  the  rest,  for  that  they 
held,  men  ought  to  doubt  everything,  and  laid 
down  that  no  truth  can  be  comprehended  by 
man :  for  so,  not  then  understanding  even  their 
meaning,  I  also  was  clearly  convinced  that  they 
thought,  as  they  are  commonly  reported.  Yet 
did  I  freely  and  openly  discourage  that  host  of 
mine  from  that  over-confidence  which  I  per¬ 
ceived  him  to  have  in  those  fables  which  the 
books  of  Manichaeus  are  full  of.  Yet  I  lived  in 
more  familiar  friendship  with  them  than  with 
others  who  were  not  of  this  heresy.  Nor  did  I 
maintain  it  with  my  ancient  eagerness;  still  my 
intimacy  with  that  sect  (Rome  secretly  har¬ 
bouring  many  of  them)  made  me  slower  to  seek 
any  other  way:  especially  since  I  despaired  of 
finding  the  truth,  from  which  they  had  turned 
me  aside,  in  Thy  Church,  0  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth.  Creator  of  all  things  visible  and  invis¬ 
ible:  and  it  seemed  to  me  very  unseemly  to  be¬ 
lieve  Thee  to  have  the  shape  of  human  flesh,  and 
to  be  bounded  by  the  bodily  lineaments  of  our 
members.  And  because,  when  I  wished  to  think 
on  my  God,  I  knew  not  what  to  think  of,  but  a 
mass  of  bodies  (for  what  was  not  such,  did  not 
seem  to  me  to  be  any  thing),  this  was  the  great¬ 
est  and  almost  only  cause  of  my  inevitable  error. 

20.  For  hence  I  believed  Evil  also  to  be  some 
such  kind  of  substance,  and  to  have  its  own  foul 
and  hideous  bulk;  whether  gross,  which  they 
called  earth,  or  thin  and  subtile  (like  the  body  of 
the  air),  which  they  imagine  to  be  some  malig¬ 
nant  mind,  creeping  through  that  earth.  And  be¬ 
cause  a  piety,  such  as  it  was,  constrained  me  to 
believe,  that  the  good  God  never  created  any 
evil  nature,  I  conceived  two  masses,  contrary  to 
one  another,  both  unbounded,  but  the  evil  nar¬ 
rower,  the  good  more  expansive.  And  from  this 
pestilent  beginning,  the  other  sacrilegious  con¬ 
ceits  followed  on  me.  For  when  my  mind  en¬ 
deavoured  to  recur  to  the  Catholic  faith,  I  was 
driven  back,  since  that  was  not  the  Catholic 
faith,  which  I  thought  to  be  so.  And  I  seemed  to 
myself  more  reverential,  if  I  believed  of  Thee, 
my  God  (to  whom  Thy  mercies  confess  out  of 
my  mouth),  as  unbounded,  at  least  on  other 
sides,  although  on  that  one  where  the  mass  of 
evil  was  opposed  to  Thee,  I  was  constrained  to 
confess  Thee  bounded;  than  if  on  all  sides  I 
should  imagine  Thee  to  be  bounded  by  the  form 
of  a  human  body.  And  it  seemed  to  me  better  to 
believe  Thee  to  have  created  no  evil  (which  to 
me  ignorant  seemed  not  some  only,  but  a  bodily, 
substance,  because  I  could  not  conceive  of  mind 


CONFESSIONS  V.  18-23  33 


unless  as  a  subtile  body,  and  that  diffused  in 
definite  spaces)  than  to  believe  the  nature  of 
evil,  such  as  I  conceived  it,  could  come  from 
Thee.  Yea,  and  our  Saviour  Himself,  Thy  Only 
Begotten,  I  believed  to  have  been  reached  forth 
(as  it  were)  for  our  salvation,  out  of  the  mass 
of  Thy  most  lucid  substance,  so  as  to  believe 
nothing  of  Him  but  what  I  could  imagine  in  my 
vanity.  His  Nature  then,  being  such,  I  thought 
could  not  be  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  without 
being  mingled  with  the  flesh:  and  how  that 
which  I  had  so  figured  to  myself,  could  be  min¬ 
gled,  and  not  defiled,  I  saw  not.  I  feared  there¬ 
fore  to  believe  Him  born  in  the  flesh,  lest  I 
should  be  forced  to  believe  Him  defiled  by  the 
flesh.  Now  will  Thy  spiritual  ones  mildly  and 
lovingly  smile  upon  me  if  they  shall  read  these 
my  confessions.  Yet  such  was  I. 

[XI]  21.  Furthermore,  what  the  Manichees 
had  criticised1  in  Thy  Scriptures,  I  thought 
could  not  be  defended;  yet  at  times  verily  I  had 
a  wish  to  confer  upon  these  several  points  with 
someone  very  well  skilled  in  those  books,  and  to 
make  trial  what  he  thought  thereon:  for  the 
words  of  one  Helpidius,  as  he  spoke  and  dis¬ 
puted  face  to  face  against  the  said  Manichees, 
had  begun  to  stir  me  even  at  Carthage :  in  that 
he  had  produced  things  out  of  the  Scriptures  not 
easily  withstood,  the  Manichees’  answer  where¬ 
to  seemed  to  me  weak.  Arid  this  answer  they 
liked  not  to  give  publicly,  but  only  to  us  in  pri¬ 
vate.  It  was  that  the  Scriptures  of  the  New 
Testament  had  been  corrupted  by  I  know  not 
whom,  who  wished  to  ingraft  the  law  of  the 
Jews  upon  the  Christian  faith:  yet  themselves 
produced  not  any  uncorrupted  copies.  But  I, 
conceiving  of  things  corporeal  only,  was  mainly 
held  down,  vehemently  oppressed  and  in  a  man¬ 
ner  suffocated  by  those  “masses”;2  panting  un¬ 
der  which  after  the  breath  of  Thy  truth,  I  could 
not  breathe  it  pure  and  untainted. 

[XII]  22.  I  began  then  diligently  to  practise 
that  for  which  I  came  to  Rome,  to  teach  rheto¬ 
ric;  and  first,  to  gather  some  to  my  house  to 
whom,  apd  through  whom,  I  had  begun  to  be 
known;  when  lo,  I  found  other  offences  commit¬ 
ted  in  Rome,  to  which  I  was  not  exposed  in 
Africa.  True,  those  “subvertings”  3  by  profligate 
young  men  were  not  here  practised,  as  was  told 
me:  but  on  a  sudden,  said  they,  to  avoid  paying 
their  master’s  stipend,  a  number  of  youths  plot 
together,  and  remove  to  another;  breakers  of 
faith,  who  for  love  of  money  hold  justice  cheap. 
These  also  my  heart  “hated,”  though  not  with 

1See  above,  Bk.  m.  14.  2See  above,  Bk.  v.  19. 

3See  Bk.  jii.  6. 


a  “perfect  hatred”  :4  for  perchance  I  hated  them 
more  because  I  was  to  suffer  by  them,  than  be¬ 
cause  they  did  things  utterly  unlawful.  Of  a 
truth  such  are  base  persons,  and  they  go  a-whor- 
ing  from  Thee,  loving  these  fleeting  mockeries 
of  things  temporal,  and  filthy  lucre  which  fouls 
the  hand  that  grasps  it;  hugging  the  fleeting 
world,  and  despising  Thee,  Who  abidest,  and  re- 
callest,  and  forgivest  the  adulteress  soul  of  man, 
when  she  returns  to  Thee.  And  now  I  hate  such 
depraved  and  crooked  persons,  though  I  love 
them  if  corrigible,  so  as  to  prefer  to  money  the 
learning  which  they  acquire,  and  to  learning, 
Thee,  0  God,  the  truth  and  fulness  of  assured 
good,  and  most  pure  peace.  But  then  I  rather  for 
my  own  sake  misliked  them  evil,  than  liked  and 
wished  them  good  for  Thine. 

[XIII]  23.  When  therefore  they  of  Milan  had 
sent  to  Rome  to  the  prefect  of  the  city,  to  fur¬ 
nish  them  with  a  rhetoric  reader  for  their  city, 
and  send  him  at  the  public  expense,  I  made  ap¬ 
plication  (through  those  very  persons,  intoxi¬ 
cated  with  Manichaean  vanities,  to  be  freed 
wherefrom  I  was  to  go,  neither  of  us  however 
knowing  it)  that  Symmachus,  then  prefect  of 
the  city,  would  try  me  by  setting  me  some  sub¬ 
ject,  and  so  send  me.  To  Milan  I  came,  to  Am¬ 
brose  the  Bishop,  known  to  the  whole  world  as 
among  the  best  of  men,  Thy  devout  servant; 
whose  eloquent  discourse  did  then  plentiful¬ 
ly  dispense  unto  Thy  people  the  flour  of  Thy 
wheat,  the  “gladness”  of  Thy  “oil,”  and  the  so¬ 
ber  inebriation  of  Thy  “wine.”  5  To  him  was  I 
unknowing  led  by  Thee,  that  by  him  I  might 
knowingly  be  led  to  Thee.  That  man  of  God  re¬ 
ceived  me  as  a  father,  and  shewed  me  an  episco¬ 
pal  kindness  on  my  coming.  Thenceforth  I  be¬ 
gan  to  love  him,  at  first  indeed  not  as  a  teacher 
of  the  truth  (which  I  utterly  despaired  of  in  Thy 
Church),  but  as  a  person  kind  towards  myself. 
And  I  listened  diligently  to  him  preaching  to 
the  people,  not  with  that  intent  I  ought,  but,  as 
it  were,  trying  his  eloquence,  whether  it  an¬ 
swered  the  fame  thereof,  or  flowed  fuller  or  low¬ 
er  than  was  reported;  and  I  hung  on  his  words 
attentively;  but  of  the  matter  I  was  as  a  careless 
and  scornful  looker-on;  and  I  was  delighted 
with  the  sweetness  of  his  discourse,  more  recon¬ 
dite,  yet  in  manner  less  winning  and  harmonious 
than  that  of  Faustus.  Of  the  matter,  however, 
there  was  no  comparison;  for  the  one  was  wan¬ 
dering  amid  Manichaean  delusions,  the  other 
teaching  salvation  most  soundly.  But  “salvation 
is  far  from  sinners,”6  such  as  I  then  stood  before 

4Ps.  139.  22.  5Ps.  4.  7;  104.  15. 

6Ps.  1 19.  155. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


him ;  and  yet  was  I  drawing  nearer  by  little  and 
little,  and  unconsciously. 

[XIV]  24.  For  though  I  took  no  pains  to  learn 
what  he  spake,  but  only  to  hear  how  he  spake 
(for  that  empty  care  alone  was  left  me,  despair¬ 
ing  of  a  way  open  for  man  to  Thee) ;  yet,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  words  which  I  would  choose, 
came  also  into  my  mind  the  things  which  I 
would  refuse;  for  I  could  not  separate  them. 
And  while  I  opened  my  heart  to  admit  “how  elo¬ 
quently  he  spake,”  there  also  entered  “how  truly 
he  spake”;  but  this  by  degrees.  For  first,  these 
things  also  had  now  begun  to  appear  to  me  capa¬ 
ble  of  defence;  and  the  Catholic  faith,  for  which 
I  had  thought  nothing  could  be  said  against  the 
Manichees’  objections,  I  now  thought  might  be 
maintained  without  shamelessness;  especially 
after  I  had  heard  one  or  twm  places  of  the  Old 
Testament  resolved,  and  oft-times  “in  a  figure,” 
which  when  I  understood  literally,  I  was  “slain” 
spiritually.1  Very  many  places  then  of  those 
books  having  been  explained,  I  now  blamed  my 
despair  in  believing  that  no  answer  could  be  giv¬ 
en  to  such  as  hated  and  scoffed  at  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets.  Yet  did  I  not  therefore  then  see 
that  the  Catholic  way  was  to  be  held  because  it 
also  could  find  learned  maintainers,  who  could 
at  large  and  with  some  shew  of  reason  answer 
objections;  nor  that  what  I  held  was  therefore 
to  be  condemned  because  both  sides  could  be 
maintained.  For  the  Catholic  cause  seemed  to 
me  in  such  sort  not  vanquished,  as  still  not  as 
yet  to  be  victorious. 

25.  Hereupon  I  earnestly  bent  my  mind,  to  see 
if  in  any  way  I  could  by  any  certain  proof  con¬ 
vict  the  Manichees  of  falsehood.  Could  I  once 
have  conceived  a  spiritual  substance,  all  their 
strong  holds  had  been  beaten  down,  and  cast  ut¬ 
terly  out  of  my  mind;  but  I  could  not.  Not¬ 
withstanding,  concerning  the  frame  of  this 
world,  and  the  whole  of  nature,  which  the  senses 
of  the  flesh  can  reach  to,  as  I  more  and  more 
considered  and  compared  things,  I  judged  the 
tenets  of  most  of  the  philosophers  to  have  been 
much  more  probable.  So  then  after  the  manner 
of  the  Academics  (as  they  are  supposed2)  doubt¬ 
ing  of  everything,  and  wavering  between  all,  I 
settled  so  far,  that  the  Manichees  were  to  be 
abandoned;  judging  that,  even  while  doubting,  I 
might  not  continue  in  that  sect,  to  which  I  al¬ 
ready  preferred  some  of  the  philosophers;  to 
which  philosophers  notwithstanding,  for  that 
they  were  without  the  saving  Name  of  Christ,  I 
utterly  refused  to  commit  the  cure  of  my  sick 
soul.  I  determined  therefore  so  long  to  be  a  cate- 
XI  Cor.  113.  12;  II  Cor.  3.  6.  2See  above,  Bk.  v.  19. 


chumen  in  the  Catholic  Church,  to  which  I  had 
been  commended  by  my  parents,  till  something 
certain  should  dawn  upon  me,  whither  I  might 
steer  my  course. 

BOOK  VI.  Arrival  of  Monica  at  Milan;  her 
obedience  to  St.  Ambrose ,  and  his  value  for 
her;  St.  Ambrose’s  habits;  Augustine’s  grad¬ 
ual  abandonment  of  error;  finds  that  he  has 
blamed  the  Church  Catholic  wrongly;  desire 
of  absolute  certainty ,  but  struck  with  the  con¬ 
trary  analogy  of  God’s  natural  Providence; 
how  shaken  in  his  worldly  pursuits;  God’s 
guidance  of  his  friend  Alypius;  Augustine  de¬ 
bates  with  himself  and  his  friends  about  their 
mode  of  life;  his  inveterate  sins ,  and  dread  of 
judgment. 

[I]  1.  0  Thou,  my  hope  from  my  youth,3  where 
wert  Thou  to  me,  and  wither  wert  Thou  gone? 
Hadst  not  Thou  created  me,  and  separated  me 
from  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  fowls  of  the 
air?  Thou  hadst  made  me  wiser,  yet  did  I  walk 
in  darkness,  and  in  slippery  places,  and  sought 
Thee  abroad4  out  of  myself,  and  found  not  the 
God  of  my  heart;  and  had  come  into  the  depths 
of  the  sea,  and  distrusted  and  despaired  of  ever 
finding  truth.  My  mother  had  now  come  to  me, 
resolute  through  piety,  following  me  over  sea 
and  land,  in  all  perils  confiding  in  Thee.  For  in 
perils  of  the  sea,  she  comforted  the  very  mari¬ 
ners  (by  whom  passengers  unacquainted  with 
the  deep  use  rather  to  be  comforted  when  trou¬ 
bled),  assuring  them  of  a  safe  arrival,  because 
Thou  hadst  by  a  vision  assured  her  thereof.  She 
found  me  in  grievous  peril,  through  despair  of 
ever  finding  truth.  But  when  I  had  discovered  to 
her  that  I  was  now  no  longer  a  Manichee,  though 
not  yet  a  Catholic  Christian,  she  was  not  over¬ 
joyed  as  at  something  unexpected;  although  she 
was  now  assured  concerning  that  part  of  my 
misery  for  which  she  bewailed  me  as  one  dead, 
though  to  be  reawakened  by  Thee,  carrying  me 
forth  upon  the  bier  of  her  thoughts,  that  Thou 
mightest  say  to  the  son  of  the  widow,  “Young 
man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise”;  and  he  should  re¬ 
vive,  and  begin  to  speak,  and  thou  shouldest  de¬ 
liver  him  to  his  mother.5  Her  heart  then  was 
shaken  with  no  tumultuous  exultation,  when  she 
heard  that  what  she  daily  with  tears  desired  of 
Thee  was  already  in  so  great  part  realized;  in 
that,  though  I  had  not  yet  attained  the  truth,  I 
was  rescued  from  falsehood;  but,  as  being  as¬ 
sured  that  Thou,  Who  hadst  promised  the 
whole,  wouldest  one  day  give  the  rest,  most 

3Ps.  71.  5.  4See  below,  Bk.  vn.  11,  16. 

6Luke,  7.  12.  15. 


CONFESSIONS  V.  24-25,  VI.  1-3 


calmly,  and  with  an  heart  full  of  confidence,  she 
replied  to  me,  “She  believed  in  Christ,  that  be¬ 
fore  she  departed  this  life,  she  should  see  me  a 
Catholic  believer.”  1  Thus  much  to  me.  But  to 
Thee,  Fountain  of  mercies,  poured  she  forth 
more  copious  prayers  and  tears,  that  Thou 
wouldest  hasten  Thy  help,  and  enlighten  my 
darkness ;  and  she  hastened  the  more  eagerly  to 
the  church,  and  hung  upon  the  lips  of  Ambrose, 
praying  for  the  fountain  of  that  water,  which 
springeth  up  into  life  everlasting.2  But  that  man 
she  loved  as  an  angel  of  God,  because  she  knew 
that  by  him  I  had  been  brought  for  the  present 
to  that  doubtful  state  of  faith  I  now  was  in, 
through  which  she  anticipated  most  confidently 
that  I  should  pass  from  sickness  unto  health, 
after  the  access,  as  it  were,  of  a  sharper  fit, 
which  physicians  call  “the  crisis.” 

[II]  2.  When  then  my  mother  had  once,  as 
she  was  wTont  in  Africa,  brought  to  the  churches 
built  in  memory  of  the  Saints3  certain  cakes, 
and  bread  and  wine,  and  was  forbidden  by  the 
door-keeper;  so  soon  as  she  knew  that  the  Bish¬ 
op  had  forbidden  this,  she  so  piously  and  obedi¬ 
ently  embraced  his  wishes  that  I  myself  won¬ 
dered  how  readily  she  censured  her  own  practice 
rather  than  discuss  his  prohibition.  For  wine- 
bibbing  did  not  lay  siege  to  her  spirit,  nor  did 
love  of  wine  provoke  her  to  hatred  of  the  truth, 
as  it  doth  too  many  (both  men  and  women), 
who  revolt  at  a  lesson  of  sobriety,  as  men  well- 
drunk  at  a  draught  mingled  with  water.  But  she, 
when  she  had  brought  her  basket  with  the  accus¬ 
tomed  festival-food,  to  be  but  tasted  by  herself 
and  then  given  away,  never  joined  therewith 
more  than  one  small  cup  of  wine,  diluted  accord¬ 
ing  to  her  own  abstemious  habits,  which  for 
courtesy  she  would  taste.  And  if  there  were 
many  churches  of  the  departed  saints,  that  were 
to  be  honoured  in  that  manner,  she  still  carried 
round  that  same  one  cup,  to  be  used  every¬ 
where  ;  and  this,  though  not  only  made  very  wa¬ 
tery,  but  unpleasantly  heated  with  carrying 
about,  she  would  distribute  to  those  about  her 
by  small  sips;  for  she  sought  their  devotion,  not 
pleasure.  So  soon,  then,  as  she  found  this  custom 
to  be  forbidden  by  that  famous  preacher  and 
most  pious  prelate,  even  to  those  that  would  use 
it  soberly,  lest  so  an  occasion  of  excess  might  be 
given  to  the  drunken;  and  for  that  these,  as  it 
were,  anniversary  funeral  solemnities  did  much 
resemble  the  superstition  of  the  Gentiles,  she 
most  willingly  forbore  it:  and  for  a  basket  filled 

1Fidelem  Catholicum,  one  baptized  into  the  Catholic 
faith. 

2 John,  4.  14.  3Cf.  City  0 f  God ,  Bk.  vra.  27. 


with  fruits  of  the  earth,  she  had  learned  to  bring 
to  the  churches  of  the  martyrs  a  breast  filled 
with  more  purified  petitions,  and  to  give  what 
she  could  to  the  poor;  that  so  the  communica¬ 
tion  of  the  Lord’s  Body  might  be  there  rightly 
celebrated  where,  after  the  example  of  His  Pas¬ 
sion,  the  martyrs  had  been  sacrificed  and 
crowned.  But  yet  it  seems  to  me,  0  Lord  my 
God,  and  thus  thinks  my  heart  of  it  in  Thy  sight, 
that  perhaps  she  would  not  so  readily  have 
yielded  to  the  cutting  off  of  this  custom,  had  it 
been  forbidden  by  another,  whom  she  loved  not 
as  Ambrose,  whom,  for  my  salvation,  she  loved 
most  entirely;  and  he  her  again,  for  her  most 
religious  conversation,  whereby  in  good  works, 
so  “fervent  in  spirit,”4  she  was  constant  at 
church;  so  that,  when  he  saw  me,  he  often  burst 
forth  into  her  praises;  congratulating  me  that  I 
had  such  a  mother;  not  knowing  what  a  son  she 
had  in  me,  who  doubted  of  all  these  things,  and 
imagined  the  way  to  life  could  not  be  found  out. 

[Ill]  3.  Nor  did  I  yet  groan  in  my  prayers 
that  Thou  wouldest  help  me ;  but  my  spirit  was 
wholly  intent  on  learning,  and  restless  to  dis¬ 
pute.  And  Ambrose  himself,  as  the  world  counts 
happy,  I  esteemed  a  happy  man,  whom  person¬ 
ages  so  great  held  in  such  honour;  only  his  celi¬ 
bacy  seemed  to  me  a  painful  course.  But  what 
hope  he  bore  within  him,  what  struggles  he  had 
against  the  temptations  which  beset  his  very  ex¬ 
cellencies,  or  what  comfort  in  adversities,  and 
what  sweet  joys  Thy  Bread  had  for  the  hidden 
mouth  of  his  spirit  when  chewing  the  cud  there¬ 
of,  I  neither  could  conjecture,  nor  had  experi¬ 
enced.  Nor  did  he  know  the  tides  of  my  feelings, 
or  the  abyss  of  my  danger.  For  I  could  not  ask 
of  him  what  I  would  as  I  would,  being  shut  out 
both  from  his  ear  and  speech  by  multitudes  of 
busy  people,  whose  weaknesses  he  served.  With 
whom  when  he  was  not  taken  up  (which  was  but 
a  little  time),  he  was  either  refreshing  his  body 
with  the  sustenance  absolutely  necessary,  or  his 
mind  with  reading.  But  when  he  was  reading,  his 
eye  glided  over  the  pages,  and  his  heart  searched 
out  the  sense,  but  his  voice  and  tongue  were  at 
rest.  Oft-times  when  we  had  come  (for  no  man 
was  forbidden  to  enter,  nor  was  it  his  wont  that 
any  who  came  should  be  announced  to  him),  we 
saw  him  thus  reading  to  himself,  and  never  oth¬ 
erwise;  and  having  long  sat  silent  (for  who  durst 
intrude  on  one  so  intent?),  we  were  fain  to  de¬ 
part,  conjecturing  that  in  the  small  interval 
which  he  obtained,  free  from  the  din  of  others’ 
business,  for  the  recruiting  of  his  mind,  he  was 
loath  to  be  taken  off ;  and  perchance  he  dreaded 
4Rom.  12.  11. 


36  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


lest,  if  the  author  he  read  should  deliver  any¬ 
thing  obscurely,  some  attentive  or  perplexed 
hearer  should  desire  him  to  expound  it,  or  to  dis¬ 
cuss  some  of  the  harder  questions;  so  that  his 
time  being  thus  spent,  he  could  not  turn  over  so 
many  volumes  as  he  desired;  although  the  pre¬ 
serving  of  his  voice  (which  a  very  little  speaking 
would  weaken)  might  be  the  truer  reason  for  his 
reading  to  himself.  But  with  what  intent  soever 
he  did  it,  certainly  in  such  a  man  it  was  good. 

4.  I  however  certainly  had  no  opportunity  of 
enquiring  what  I  wished  of  that  so  holy  oracle 
of  Thine,  his  breast,  unless  the  thing  might  be 
answered  briefly.  But  those  tides  in  me,  to  be 
poured  out  to  him,  required  his  full  leisure,  and 
never  found  it.  I  heard  him  indeed,  every  Lord’s 
day,  “rightly  expounding  the  Word  of  Truth”1 
among  the  people;  and  I  was  more  and  more 
convinced  that  all  the  knots  of  those  crafty  cal¬ 
umnies,  which  those  our  deceivers  had  knit 
against  the  Divine  Books,  could  be  unravelled. 
But  when  I  understood  withal  that  “man,  cre¬ 
ated  by  Thee,  after  Thine  own  image”2  was  not 
so  understood  by  Thy  spiritual  sons,  whom  of 
the  Catholic  Mother  Thou  hast  born  again 
through  grace,  as  though  they  believed  and  con¬ 
ceived  of  Thee  as  bounded  by  human  shape  (al¬ 
though  what  a  spiritual  substance  should  be  I 
had  not  even  a  faint  or  shadowy  notion) ;  yet 
with  joy  I  blushed  at  having  so  many  years 
barked  not  against  the  Catholic  faith,  but  against 
the  fictions  of  carnal  imaginations.  For  so  rash 
and  impious  had  I  been  that  what  I  ought  by  en¬ 
quiring  to  have  learned,  I  had  pronounced  on, 
condemning.  For  Thou,  Most  High,  and  most 
near;  most  secret,  and  most  present;  Who  hast 
not  limbs  some  larger,  some  smaller,  but  art 
wholly  everywhere  and  nowhere  in  space,  art  not 
of  such  corporeal  shape,  yet  hast  Thou  made 
man  after  Thine  own  image;  and  behold,  from 
head  to  foot  is  he  contained  in  space. 

[IV]  5.  Ignorant  then  how  this  Thy  image 
should  subsist,  I  should  have  knocked  and  pro¬ 
posed  the  doubt,  how  it  was  to  be  believed,  not 
insultingly  opposed  it,  as  if  believed.  Doubt, 
then,  what  to  hold  for  certain  the  more  sharply 
gnawed  my  heart,  the  more  ashamed  I  was  that, 
so  long  deluded  and  deceived  by  the  promise  of 
certainties,  I  had  with  childish  error  and  vehe¬ 
mence  prated  of  so  many  uncertainties.  For  that 
they  were  falsehoods  became  clear  to  me  later. 
However  I  was  certain  that  they  were  uncertain, 
and  that  I  had  formerly  accounted  them  certain, 
when  with  a  blind  contentiousness  I  accused 
Thy  Catholic  Church,  whom  I  now  discovered, 
*11  Tim.  2.  15.  2Col.  13.  10;  Gen.  1.  26,  27. 


not  indeed  as  yet  to  teach  truly,  but  at  least  not 
to  teach  that  for  which  I  had  grievously  cen¬ 
sured  her.  So  I  was  confounded,  and  converted : 
and  I  joyed,  0  my  God,  that  the  One  Only 
Church,  the  body  of  Thine  Only  Son  (wherein 
the  name  of  Christ  had  been  put  upon  me  as  an 
infant),  had  no  taste  for  infantine  conceits; 
nor,  in  her  sound  doctrine,  maintained  any  tenet 
which  should  confine  Thee,  the  Creator  of  all,  in 
space,  however  great  and  large,  yet  bounded  ev¬ 
erywhere  by  the  limits  of  a  human  form. 

6.  I  joyed  also  that  the  old  Scriptures  of  the 
Law  and  the  Prophets  were  laid  before  me,  not 
now  to  be  perused  with  that  eye  to  which  before 
they  seemed  absurd,  when  I  reviled  Thy  holy 
ones  for  so  thinking,  whereas  indeed  they 
thought  not  so:  and  with  joy  I  heard  Ambrose 
in  his  sermons  to  the  people  oftentimes  most 
diligently  recommend  this  text  for  a  rule,  “The 
letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life”;3  whilst 
he  drew  aside  the  mystic  veil,  laying  open  spirit¬ 
ually  what  according  to  the  “letter”  seemed  to 
teach  something  unsound;  teaching  herein  noth¬ 
ing  that  offended  me,  though  he  taught  what  I 
knew  not  as  yet  whether  it  were  true.  For  I  kept 
my  heart  from  assenting  to  anything,  fearing  to 
fall  headlong;  but  by  hanging  in  suspense  I  was 
the  worse  killed.  For  I  wished  to  be  as  assured 
of  the  things  I  saw  not  as  I  was  that  seven  and 
three  are  ten.  For  I  was  not  so  mad  as  to  think 
that  even  this  could  not  be  comprehended;  but 
I  desired  to  have  other  things  as  clear  as  this, 
whether  things  corporeal,  which  were  not  pres¬ 
ent  to  my  senses,  or  spiritual,  whereof  I  knew 
not  how  to  conceive,  except  corporeally.  And  by 
believing  might  I  have  been  cured,  that  so  the 
eyesight  of  my  soul,  being  cleared,  might  in 
some  way  be  directed  to  Thy  truth,  which  abid- 
eth  always,  and  in  no  part  faileth.  But  as  it  hap¬ 
pens  that  one  who  has  tried  a  bad  physician 
fears  to  trust  himself  with  a  good  one,  so  was  it 
with  the  health  of  my  soul,  which  could  not  be 
healed  but  by  believing,  and,  lest  it  should  be¬ 
lieve  falsehoods,  refused  to  be  cured;  resisting 
Thy  hands,  Who  hast  prepared  the  medicines  of 
faith,  and  hast  applied  them  to  the  diseases  of 
the  whole  world,  and  given  unto  them  so  great 
authority. 

[V]  7.  Being  led,  however,  from  this  to  prefer 
the  Catholic  doctrine,  I  felt  that  her  proceeding 
was  more  unassuming  and  honest,  in  that  she  re¬ 
quired  to  be  believed  things  not  demonstrated 
(whether  it  was  that  they  could  in  themselves 
be  demonstrated  but  not  to  certain  persons,  or 
could  not  at  all  be),  whereas  among  the  Mani- 
3II  Cor.  3.  6. 


CONFESSIONS  VI.  4-9  37 


chees  our  credulity  was  mocked  by  a  promise  of 
certain  knowledge,  and  then  so  many  most  fab¬ 
ulous  and  absurd  things  were  imposed  to  be  be¬ 
lieved.  because  they  could  not  be  demonstrated. 
Then  Thou,  0  Lord,  little  by  little  with  most 
tender  and  most  merciful  hand  touching  and 
composing  my  heart,  didst  persuade  me — con¬ 
sidering  what  innumerable  things  I  believed, 
which  I  saw  not,  nor  was  present  while  they 
were  done,  as  so  many  things  in  secular  history, 
so  many  reports  of  places  and  of  cities  which  I 
had  not  seen;  so  many  of  friends,  so  many  of 
physicians,  so  many  continually  of  other  men, 
which  unless  we  should  believe,  we  should  do 
nothing  at  all  in  this  life;  lastly,  with  how  un¬ 
shaken  an  assurance  I  believed  of  what  parents 
I  was  born,  which  I  could'not  know  had  I  not  be¬ 
lieved  upon  hearsay — considering  all  this,  Thou 
didst  persuade  me,  that  not  they  who  believed 
Thy  Books  (which  Thou  hast  established  in  so 
great  authority  among  almost  all  nations),  but 
they  who  believed  them  not,  were  to  be  blamed; 
and  that  they  were  not  to  be  heard,  who  should 
say  to  me,  “How  knowest  thou  those  Scriptures 
to  have  been  imparted  unto  mankind  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  one  true  and  most  true  God?”  For 
this  very  thing  was  of  all  most  to  be  believed, 
since  no  contentiousness  of  blasphemous  ques¬ 
tionings,  of  all  that  multitude  which  I  had  read 
in  the  self-contradicting  philosophers,  could 
wring  this  belief  from  me,  “That  Thou  art” 
whatsoever  Thou  wert  (what  I  knew  not),  and 
“That  the  government  of  human  things  belongs 
to  Thee.” 

8.  This  I  believed,  sometimes  more  strongly, 
more  weakly  other-whiles;  yet  I  ever  believed 
both  that  Thou  wert  and  hadst  a  care  of  us; 
though  I  was  ignorant,  both  what  was  to  be 
thought  of  Thy  substance  and  what  way  led  or 
led  back  to  Thee.  Since  then  we  were  too  weak 
by  abstract  reasonings  to  find  out  truth,  and  for 
this  very  cause  needed  the  authority  of  Holy 
Writ,  I  had  now  begun  to  believe  that  Thou 
wouldest  never  have  given  such  excellency  of 
authority  to  that  Writ  in  all  lands,  hadst  Thou 
not  willed  thereby  to  be  believed  in,  thereby 
sought.  For  now  what  things  sounding  strangely 
in  the  Scripture  were  wont  to  offend  me,  having 
heard  divers  of  them  expounded  satisfactorily,  I 
referred  to  the  depth  of  the  mysteries,  and  its 
authority  appeared  to  me  the  more  venerable, 
and  more  worthy  of  religious  credence,  in  that, 
while  it  lay  open  to  all  to  read,  it  reserved  the 
majesty  of  its  mysteries  within  its  profounder 
meaning,  stooping  to  all  in  the  great  plainness  of 
its  words  and  lowliness  of  its  style,  yet  calling 


forth  the  intensest  application  of  such  as  are  not 
light  of  heart;  that  so  it  might  receive  all  in  its 
open  bosom,  and  through  narrow  passages  waft 
over  towards  Thee  some  few,  yet  many  more 
than  if  it  stood  not  aloft  on  such  a  height  of 
authority,  nor  drew  multitudes  within  its  bosom 
by  its  holy  lowliness.  These  things  I  thought  on. 
and  Thou  wert  with  me;  I  sighed,  and  Thou 
heardest  me;  I  wavered,  and  Thou  didst  guide 
me;  I  wandered  through  the  broad  way1  of  the 
world,  and  Thou  didst  not  forsake  me. 

[VI]  9.  I  panted  after  honours,  gains,  mar¬ 
riage  ;  and  Thou  deridedst  me.  In  these  desires  I 
underwent  most  bitter  crosses,  Thou  being  the 
more  gracious,  the  less  Thou  sufferedst  aught 
to  grow  sweet  to  me,  which  was  not  Thou.  Be¬ 
hold  my  heart,  0  Lord,  who  wouldest  I  should 
remember  all  this,  and  confess  to  Thee.  Let  my 
soul  cleave  unto  Thee,  now  that  Thou  hast  freed 
it  from  that  fast-holding  birdlime  of  death.  How 
wretched  was  it!  and  Thou  didst  irritate  the 
feeling  of  its  wound,  that,  forsaking  all  else,  it 
might  be  converted  unto  Thee,  Who  art  above 
all  and  without  Whom  all  things  would  be  noth¬ 
ing;  be  converted,  and  be  healed.  How  miserable 
was  I  then,  and  how  didst  Thou  deal  with  me,  to 
make  me  feel  my  misery  on  that  day  when  I  was 
preparing  to  recite  a  panegyric  of  the  Emperor 
wherein  I  was  to  utter  many  a  lie,  and,  lying, 
was  to  be  applauded  by  those  who  knew  I  lied; 
and  my  heart  was  panting  with  these  anxieties, 
and  boiling  with  the  feverishness  of  consuming 
thoughts.  For,  passing  through  one  of  the  streets 
of  Milan,  I  observed  a  poor  beggar,  then,  I  sup¬ 
pose,  with  a  full  belly,  joking  and  joyous;  and  I 
sighed,  and  spoke  to  the  friends  around  me  of 
the  many  sorrows  of  our  phrenzies;  for  that  by 
all  such  efforts  of  ours,  as  those  wherein  I  then 
toiled,  dragging  along,  under  the  goading  of  de¬ 
sire,  the  burthen  of  my  own  wretchedness,  and, 
by  dragging,  augmenting  it,  we  yet  looked  to  ar¬ 
rive  only  at  that  very  joyousness  whither  that 
beggar-man  had  arrived  before  us,  who  should 
never  perchance  attain  it.  For  what  he  had  ob¬ 
tained  by  means  of  a  few  begged  pence,  the 
same  was  I  plotting  for  by  many  a  toilsome 
turning  and  winding:  the  joy  of  a  temporary 
felicity.  For  he  verily  had  not  the  true  joy;  but 
yet  I  with  those  my  ambitious  designs  was  seek¬ 
ing  one  much  less  true.  And  certainly  he  was 
joyous,  I  anxious;  he  void  of  care,  I  full  of 
fears.  But  should  any  ask  me,  had  I  rather  be 
merry  or  fearful?  I  would  answer,  merry.  Again, 
if  he  asked  had  I  rather  be  such  as  he  was.  or 
what  I  then  was?  I  should  choose  to  be  myself, 
^att.  7.  13. 


38  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


though  worn  with  cares  and  fears;  but  out  of 
wrong  judgment;  for  was  it  the  truth?  For  I 
ought  not  to  prefer  myself  to  him,  because  more 
learned  than  he,  seeing  I  had  no  joy  therein,  but 
sought  to  please  men  by  it ;  and  that  not  to  in¬ 
struct,  but  simply  to  please.  Wherefore  also 
Thou  didst  break  my  bones  with  the  staff  of  Thy 
correction.1 

io.  Away  with  those  then  from  my  soul,  who 
say  to  her,  “It  makes  a  difference  whence  a 
man’s  joy  is.  That  beggar-man  joyed  in  drunk¬ 
enness;  thou  desiredst  to  joy  in  glory.”  What 
glory,  Lord?  That  which  is  not  in  Thee.  For  even 
as  his  was  no  true  joy,  so  was  that  no  true  glory: 
and  it  overthrew  my  soul  more.  He  that  very 
night  should  digest  his  drunkenness;  but  I  had 
slept  and  risen  again  with  mine,  and  was  to 
sleep  again,  and  again  to  rise  with  it,  how  many 
days,  Thou,  God,  knowest.  But  “it  doth  make  a 
difference  whence  a  man’s  joy  is.”  I  know  it,  and 
the  joy  of  a  faithful  hope  lieth  incomparably 
beyond  such  vanity.  Yea,  and  so  was  he  then  be¬ 
yond  me:  for  he  verily  was  the  happier;  not 
only  for  that  he  was  thoroughly  drenched  in 
mirth.  I  disembowelled  with  cares:  but  he,  by 
fair  wishes,  had  gotten  wine;  I,  by  lying,  was 
seeking  for  empty,  swelling  praise.  Much  to  this 
purpose  said  I  then  to  my  friends;  and  I  often 
marked  in  them  how  it  fared  with  me;  and  I 
found  it  went  ill  with  me,  and  grieved,  and  dou¬ 
bled  that  very  ill ;  and  if  any  prosperity  smiled 
on  me,  I  was  loath  to  catch  at  it,  for,  almost  be¬ 
fore  I  could  grasp  it,  it  flew  away. 

[VII]  n.  These  things  we,  who  were  living  as 
friends  together,  bemoaned  together,  but  chiefly 
and  most  familiarly  did  I  speak  thereof  with 
Alypius  and  Nebridius,  of  whom  Alypius  was 
born  in  the  same  town  with  me,  of  persons  of 
chief  rank  there,  but  younger  than  I.  For  he 
had  studied  under  me,  both  when  I  first  lectured 
in  our  town,  and  afterwards  at  Carthage,  and  he 
loved  me  much,  because  I  seemed  to  him  kind 
and  learned;  and  I  him,  for  his  great  towardli- 
ness  to  virtue,  which  was  eminent  enough  in  one 
of  no  greater  years.  Yet  the  whirlpool  of  Car¬ 
thaginian  habits  (amongst  whom  those  idle 
spectacles  are  hotly  followed)  had  drawn  him 
into  the  madness  of  the  Circus.  But  while  he 
was  miserably  tossed  therein,  and  I,  professing 
rhetoric  there,  had  a  public  school,  as  yet  he 
used  not  my  teaching,  by  reason  of  some  un¬ 
kindness  risen  betwixt  his  father  and  me.  I  had 
found  then  how  deadly  he  doted  upon  the  Cir¬ 
cus,  and  was  deeply  grieved  that  he  seemed  like¬ 
ly,  nay,  or  had  thrown  away  so  great  promise: 
lProv.  22.  15. 


yet  had  I  no  means  of  advising  or  with  a  sort  of 
constraint  reclaiming  him.  either  by  the  kind¬ 
ness  of  a  friend  or  the  authority  of  a  master. 
For  I  supposed  that  he  thought  of  me  as  did  his 
father ;  but  he  was  not  such ;  laying  aside  then 
his  father’s  mind  in  that  matter,  he  began  to 
greet  me,  come  sometimes  into  my  lecture-room, 
hear  a  little,  and  be  gone. 

12. 1  however  had  forgotten  to  deal  with  him, 
that  he  should  not,  through  a  blind  and  head¬ 
long  desire  of  vain  pastimes,  undo  so  good  a  wit. 
But  Thou,  0  Lord,  Who  guidest  the  course  of  all 
Thou  hast  created,  hadst  not  forgotten  him,  who 
was  one  day  to  be  among  Thy  children,  Priest 
and  Dispenser  of  Thy  Sacrament ;  and  that  his 
amendment  might  plainly  be  attributed  to  Thy¬ 
self.  Thou  effectedst  it  through  me,  but  unknow¬ 
ingly.  For  as  one  day  I  sat  in  my  accustomed 
place,  with  my  scholars  before  me,  he  entered, 
greeted  me,  sat  down,  and  applied  his  mind  to 
what  I  then  handled.  I  had  by  chance  a  passage 
in  hand,  which  while  I  was  explaining,  a  likeness 
from  the  Circensian  races  occurred  to  me,  as 
likely  to  make  what  I  would  convey  pleasanter 
and  plainer,  seasoned  with  biting  mockery  of 
those  whom  that  madness  had  enthralled ;  God, 
Thou  knowest  that  I  then  thought  not  of  curing 
Alypius  of  that  infection.  But  he  took  it  wholly 
to  himself,  and  thought  that  I  said  it  simply  for 
his  sake.  And  whence  another  would  have  taken 
occasion  of  offence  with  me,  that  right-minded 
youth  took  as  a  ground  of  being  offended  at  him¬ 
self,  and  loving  me  more  fervently.  For  Thou 
hadst  said  it  long  ago,  and  put  it  into  Thy  book, 
“Rebuke  a  wise  man  and  he  will  love  thee.”2 
But  I  had  not  rebuked  him,  but  Thou,  Who  em- 
ployest  all,  knowing  or  not  knowing,  in  that  or¬ 
der  which  Thyself  knowest  (and  that  order  is 
just),  didst  of  my  heart  and  tongue  make  burn¬ 
ing  coals,  by  which  to  set  on  fire  the  hopeful 
mind,  thus  languishing,  and  so  cure  it.  Let  him 
be  silent  in  Thy  praises,  who  considers  not  Thy 
mercies,  which  confess  unto  Thee  out  of  my  in¬ 
most  soul.  For  he,  upon  that  speech,  burst  out 
of  that  pit  so  deep,  wherein  he  was  wilfully 
plunged,  and  was  blinded  with  its  wretched  pas¬ 
times  ;  and  he  shook  his  mind  with  a  strong  self- 
command;  whereupon  all  the  filths  of  the  Cir¬ 
censian  pastimes  flew  off  from  him,  nor  came  he 
again  thither.  Upon  this,  he  prevailed  with  his 
unwilling  father,  that  he  might  be  my  scholar. 
He  gave  way,  and  gave  in.  And  Alypius,  begin¬ 
ning  to  be  my  hearer  again,  was  involved  in  the 
same  superstition  with  me,  loving  in  the  Mani- 
chees  that  show  of  continency  which  he  sup- 
2Prov.  9.  8. 


CONFESSIONS  VI.  10-15 


posed  true  and  unfeigned.  Whereas  it  was  a 
senseless  and  seducing  continency,  ensnaring 
precious  souls,  unable  as  yet  to  reach  the  depth 
of  virtue,  yet  readily  beguiled  with  the  surface 
of  what  was  but  a  shadowy  and  counterfeit  vir¬ 
tue. 

[VIII]  13.  He,  not  forsaking  that  secular 
course  which  his  parents  had  charmed  him  to 
pursue,  had  gone  before  me  to  Rome,  to  study 
law.  and  there  he  was  carried  away  incredibly 
with  an  incredible  eagerness  after  the  shows  of 
gladiators.  For  being  utterly  averse  to  and  de¬ 
testing  such  spectacles,  he  was  one  day  by 
chance  met  by  divers  of  his  acquaintance  and 
fellow-students  coming  from  dinner,  and  they 
with  a  familiar  violence  haled  him,  vehemently 
refusing  and  resisting,  into  the  Amphitheatre, 
during  these  cruel  and  deadly  shows,  he  thus 
protesting;  “Though  you  hale  my  body  to  that 
place,  and  there  set  me,  can  you  force  me  also  to 
turn  my  mind  or  my  eyes  to  those  shows?  I  shall 
then  be  absent  while  present,  and  so  shall  over¬ 
come  both  you  and  them.”  They,  hearing  this, 
led  him  on  nevertheless,  desirous  perchance  to 
try  that  very  thing,  whether  he  could  do  as  he 
said.  When  they  were  come  thither,  and  had  tak¬ 
en  their  places  as  they  could,  the  whole  place 
kindled  with  that  savage  pastime.  But  he,  clos¬ 
ing  the  passages  of  his  eyes,  forbade  his  mind  to 
range  abroad  after  such  evils;  and  would  he  had 
stopped  his  ears  also!  For  in  the  fight,  when 
one  fell,  a  mighty  cry  of  the  whole  people  strik¬ 
ing  him  strongly,  overcome  by  curiosity  and  as 
if  prepared  to  despise  and  be  superior  to  it  what¬ 
soever  it  were,  even  when  seen,  he  opened  his 
eyes,  and  was  stricken  with  a  deeper  wound  in 
his  soul  than  the  other,  whom  he  desired  to  be¬ 
hold,  was  in  his  body;  and  he  fell  more  miser¬ 
ably  than  he  upon  whose  fall  that  mighty  noise 
was  raised,  which  entered  through  his  ears  and 
unlocked  his  eyes,  to  make  way  for  the  striking 
and  beating  down  of  a  soul,  bold  rather  than  res¬ 
olute,  and  the  weaker  in  that  it  had  presumed  on 
itself,  which  ought  to  have  relied  on  Thee.  For 
so  soon  ^s  he  saw  that  blood,  he  therewith  drunk 
down  savageness;  nor  turned  away,  but  fixed  his 
eye,  drinking  in  phrenzy,  unawares,  and  was  de¬ 
lighted  with  that  guilty  fight,  and  intoxicated 
with  the  bloody  pastime.  Nor  was  he  now  the 
man  he  came,  but  one  of  the  throng  he  came 
unto,  yea,  a  true  associate  of  theirs  that  brought 
him  thither.  Why  say  more?  He  beheld,  shout¬ 
ed,  kindled,  carried  thence  with  him  the  madness 
which  should  goad  him  to  return  not  only  with 
them  who  first  drew  him  thither,  but  also  before 
them,  yea  and  to  draw  in  others.  Yet  thence 


39 

didst  Thou  with  a  most  strong  and  most  merci¬ 
ful  hand  pluck  him,  and  taughtest  him  to  have 
confidence  not  in  himself,  but  in  Thee.  But  this 
was  after. 

[IX]  14.  But  this  was  already  being  laid  up  in 
his  memory  to  be  a  medicine  hereafter.  So  was 
that  also  that,  when  he  was  yet  studying  under 
me  at  Carthage,  and  was  thinking  over  at  mid¬ 
day  in  the  market-place  what  he  was  to  say  by 
heart  (as  scholars  use  to  practise).  Thou  suffer  - 
edst  him  to  be  apprehended  by  the  officers  of 
the  market-place  for  a  thief.  For  no  other  cause, 
I  deem,  didst  Thou,  our  God.  suffer  it.  but  that 
he,  who  was  hereafter  to  prove  so  great  a  man. 
should  already  begin  to  learn  that,  in  judging  of 
causes,  man  was  not  readily  to  be  condemned  by 
man  out  of  a  rash  credulity.  For  as  he  was  walk¬ 
ing  up  and  down  by  himself  before  the  judg¬ 
ment-seat,  with  his  note-book  and  pen,  lo,  a 
young  man,  a  lawyer,  the  real  thief,  privily 
bringing  a  hatchet,  got  in,  unperceived  by  Aly- 
pius,  as  far  as  the  leaden  gratings  which  fence  in 
the  silversmiths’  shops,  and  began  to  cut  away 
the  lead.  But  the  noise  of  the  hatchet  being 
heard,  the  silversmiths  beneath  began  to  make  a 
stir,  and  sent  to  apprehend  whomever  they 
should  find.  But  he,  hearing  their  voices,  ran 
away,  leaving  his  hatchet,  fearing  to  be  taken 
with  it.  Alypius  now,  who  had  not  seen  him  en¬ 
ter,  was  aware  of  his  going,  and  saw  with  what 
speed  he  made  away.  And,  being  desirous  to 
know  the  matter,  entered  the  place;  where,  find¬ 
ing  the  hatchet,  he  was  standing,  wondering  and 
considering  it,  when  behold,  those  that  had  been 
sent,  find  him  alone  with  the  hatchet  in  his  hand, 
the  noise  whereof  had  startled  and  brought  them 
thither.  They  seize  him,  hale  him  away,  and 
gathering  the  dwellers  in  the  market-place  to¬ 
gether,  boast  of  having  taken  a  notorious  thief, 
and  so  he  was  being  led  away  to  be  taken  before 
the  judge. 

15.  But  thus  far  was  Alypius  to  be  instructed. 
For  forthwith,  0  Lord,  Thou  succouredst  his  in- 
nocency,  whereof  Thou  alone  wert  witness.  For 
as  he  was  being  led  either  to  prison  or  to  punish¬ 
ment,  a  certain  architect  met  them,  who  had  the 
chief  charge  of  the  public  buildings.  Glad  they 
were  to  meet  him  especially,  by  whom  they  were 
wont  to  be  suspected  of  stealing  the  goods  lost 
out  of  the  market-place,  as  though  to  shew  him 
at  last  by  whom  these  thefts  were  committed. 
He,  however,  had  divers  times  seen  Alypius  at  a 
certain  Senator’s  house,  to  whom  he  often  went 
to  pay  his  respects;  and,  recognizing  him  im¬ 
mediately,  took  him  aside  by  the  hand,  and  en¬ 
quiring  the  occasion  of  so  great  a  calamity, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


heard  the  whole  matter,  and  bade  all  present, 
amid  much  uproar  and  threats,  to  go  with  him. 
So  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  young  man 
who  had  done  the  deed.  There,  before  the  door, 
was  a  boy  so  young  as  to  be  likely,  not  appre¬ 
hending  any  harm  to  his  master,  to  disclose  the 
whole.  For  he  had  attended  his  master  to  the 
market-place.  Whom  so  soon  as  Alypius  remem¬ 
bered,  he  told  the  architect:  and  he  shewing  the 
hatchet  to  the  boy,  asked  him  “Whose  that 
was?”  “Ours,”  quoth  he  presently:  and,  being 
further  questioned,  he  discovered  everything. 
Thus  the  crime  being  transferred  to  that  house, 
and  the  multitude  ashamed,  which  had  begun  to 
insult  over  Alypius,  he  who  was  to  be  a  dispenser 
of  Thy  Word,  and  an  examiner  of  many  causes 
in  Thy  Church,  went  away  better  experienced 
and  instructed. 

[X]  1 6.  Him  then  I  had  found  at  Rome,  and 
he  clave  to  me  by  a  most  strong  tie,  and  went 
with  me  to  Milan,  both  that  he  might  not  leave 
me,  and  might  practise  something  of  the  law  he 
had  studied,  more  to  please  his  parents  than 
himself.  There  he  had  thrice  sat  as  assessorjvith 
an  uncorruptness  much  wondered  at  by  others, 
he  wondering  at  others,  rather,  who  could  pre¬ 
fer  gold  to  honesty.  His  character  was  tried  be¬ 
sides,  not  only  with  the  bait  of  covetousness, 
but  with  the  goad  of  fear.  At  Rome  he  was  as¬ 
sessor  to  the  Count  of  the  Italian  Treasury. 
There  was  at  that  time  a  very  powerful  senator, 
to  whose  favours  many  stood  indebted,  many 
much  feared.  He  would  needs,  by  his  usual  pow¬ 
er,  have  a  thing  allowed  him  which  by  the  laws 
was  unallowed.  Alypius  resisted  it;  a  bribe  was 
promised;  with  all  his  heart  he  scorned  it; 
threats  were  held  out ;  he  trampled  upon  them : 
all  wondering  at  so  unwonted  a  spirit,  which  nei¬ 
ther  desired  the  friendship  nor  feared  the  enmi¬ 
ty  of  one  so  great  and  so  mightily  renowned  for 
innumerable  means  of  doing  good  or  evil.  And 
the  very  judge  whose  councillor  Alypius  was, 
although  also  unwilling  it  should  be.  yet  did  not 
openly  refuse,  but  put  the  matter  off  upon  Aly¬ 
pius,  alleging  that  he  would  not  allow  him  to  do 
it;  for  in  truth  had  the  judge  done  it,  Alypius 
would  have  decided  otherwise.  With  this  one 
thing  in  the  way  of  learning  was  he  well-nigh  se¬ 
duced,  that  he  might  have  books  copied  for  him 
at  Praetorian  prices,1  but,  consulting  justice,  he 
altered  his  deliberation  for  the  better ;  esteeming 
equity  whereby  he  was  hindered  more  gainful 
than  the  power  whereby  he  were  allowed.  These 
are  slight  things,  but  “he  that  is  faithful  in  little 

lPretiis  Pratorianis ,  Pretium  regium ,  is  the  privilege  of 
a  king  or  lord  to  purchase  things  at  a  fixed  price. 


is  faithful  also  in  much.” 2  Nor  can  that  anyhow 
be  void  which  proceeded  out  of  the  mouth  of 
Thy  Truth;  “If  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the 
unrighteous  Mammon,  who  will  commit  to  your 
trust  true  riches?  And  if  ye  have  not  been  faith¬ 
ful  in  that  which  is  another  man’s,  who  shall 
give  you  that  which  is  your  own?”3  He,  being 
such,  did  at  that  time  cleave  to  me,  and  with  me 
wavered  in  purpose,  what  course  of  life  was  to 
be  taken. 

17.  Nebridius  also,  having  left  his  native 
country  near  Carthage,  yea,  and  Carthage  itself, 
where  he  had  much  lived,  leaving  his  excellent 
family-estate  and  house  and  a  mother  behind, 
who  was  not  to  follow  him,  had  come  to  Milan, 
for  no  other  reason  but  that  with  me  he  might 
live  in  a  most  ardent  search  after  truth  and  wis¬ 
dom.  Like  me  he  sighed,  like  me  he  wavered,  an 
ardent  searcher  after  true  life,  and  a  most  acute 
examiner  of  the  most  difficult  questions.  Thus 
were  there  the  mouths  of  three  indigent  persons, 
sighing  out  their  wants  one  to  another,  and  wait¬ 
ing  upon  Thee  that  Thou  mightest  give  them 
their  meat  in  due  season.4  And  in  all  the  bitter¬ 
ness  which  by  Thy  mercy  followed  our  worldly 
affairs,  as  we  looked  towards  the  end,  why  we 
should  suffer  all  this,  darkness  met  us;  and  we 
turned  away  groaning,  and  saying,  “How  long 
shall  these  things  be?”  This  too  we  often  said; 
and  so  saying  forsook  them  not,  for  as  yet  there 
dawned  nothing  certain,  which,  these  forsaken, 
we  might  embrace. 

[XI]  18.  And  I,  viewing  and  reviewing  things, 
most  wondered  at  the  length  of  time  from  that 
my  nineteenth  year,  wherein  I  had  begun  to  kin¬ 
dle  with  the  desire  of  wisdom,  settling,  when  I 
had  found  her,  to  abandon  all  the  empty  hopes 
and  lying  phrenzies  of  vain  desires.  And  lo,  I  was 
now  in  my  thirtieth  year,  sticking  in  the  same 
mire,  greedy  of  enjoying  things  present,  which 
passed  away  and  wasted  my  soul;  while  I  said 
to  myself,  “Tomorrow  I  shall  find  it;  it  will  ap¬ 
pear  manifestly,  and  I  shall  grasp  it;  lo,  Faustus 
the  Manichee  will  come,  and  clear  everything! 
0  you  great  men,  ye  Academicians,  it  is  true, 
then,  that  no  certainty  can  be  attained  for  the 
ordering  of  life!  Nay,  let  us  search  the  more  dil¬ 
igently,  and  despair  not.  Lo,  things  in  the  ec¬ 
clesiastical  books  are  not  absurd  to  us  now, 
which  sometimes  seemed  absurd,  and  may  be 
otherwise  taken,  and  in  a  good  sense.  I  will  take 
my  stand  where,  as  a  child,  my  parents  placed 
me,  until  the  clear  truth  be  found  out.  But 
where  shall  it  be  sought  or  when?  Ambrose  has 
no  leisure;  we  have  no  leisure  to  read;  where 
2Luke.  16.  10.  zIbid .,  11,  12.  4Ps.  145.  15. 


CONFESSIONS  VI.  16-22 


shall  we  find  even  the  books?  Whence,  or  when, 
procure  them?  from  whom  borrow  them?  Let 
set  times  be  appointed,  and  certain  hours  be  or¬ 
dered  for  the  health  of  our  soul.  Great  hope  has 
dawned;  the  Catholic  Faith  teaches  not  what 
we  thought,  and  vainly  accused  it  of;  her  in¬ 
structed  members  hold  it  profane,  to  believe 
God  to  be  bounded  by  the  figure  of  a  human 
body;  and  do  we  doubt  to  ‘knock,’  that  the  rest 
‘may  be  opened?’ 1  The  forenoons  our  scholars 
take  up;  what  do  we  during  the  rest?  Why  not 
this?  But  when  then  pay  we  court  to  our  great 
friends,  whose  favour  we  need?  WThen  compose 
what  we  may  sell  to  scholars?  When  refresh 
ourselves,  unbending  our  minds  from  this  in¬ 
tenseness  of  care?” 

19.  “Perish  everything,  dismiss  we  these  emp¬ 
ty  vanities,  and  betake  ourselves  to  the  one 
search  for  truth!  Life  is  vain,  death  uncertain; 
if  it  steals  upon  us  on  a  sudden,  in  what  state 
shall  we  depart  hence?  and  where  shall  we  learn 
what  here  we  have  neglected?  and  shall  we  not 
rather  suffer  the  punishment  of  this  negligence? 
What,  if  death  itself  cut  off  and  end  all  care  and 
feeling?  Then  must  this  be  ascertained.  But  God 
forbid  this!  It  is  no  vain  and  empty  thing  that 
the  excellent  dignity  of  the  authority  of  the 
Christian  Faith  hath  overspread  the  whole 
world.  Never  would  such  and  so  great  things  be 
by  God  wrought  for  us,  if  with  the  death  of  the 
body  the  life  of  the  soul  came  to  an  end.  Where¬ 
fore  delay  then  to  abandon  worldly  hopes,  and 
give  ourselves  wholly  to  seek  after  God  and  the 
blessed  life?  But  wait!  Even  those  things  are 
pleasant;  they  have  some,  and  no  small  sweet¬ 
ness.  We  must  hot  lightly  abandon  them,  for  it 
were  a  shame  to  return  again  to  them.  See,  it  is 
no  great  matter  now  to  obtain  some  station,  and 
then  what  should  we  more  wish  for?  We  have 
store  of  powerful  friends;  if  nothing  else  offer, 
and  we  be  in  much  haste,  at  least  a  presidentship 
may  be  given  us :  and  a  wife  with  some  money, 
that  she  increase  not  our  charges :  and  this  shall 
be  the  bound  of  desire.  Many  great  men,  and 
most  worthy  of  imitation,  have  given  them¬ 
selves  to  the  study  of  wisdom  in  the  state  of 
marriage.” 

20.  While  I  went  over  these  things,  and  these 
winds  shifted  and  drove  my  heart  this  way  and 
that,  time  passed  on,  but  I  delayed  to  turn  to  the 
Lord;  and  from  day  to  day  deferred  to  live  in 
Thee,  and  deferred  not  daily  to  die  in  myself. 
Loving  a  happy  life,  I  feared  it  in  its  own  abode, 
and  sought  it,  by  fleeing  from  it.  I  thought  I 
should  be  too  miserable,  unless  folded  in  female 

xMatt.  7.  7. 


41 

arms;  and  of  the  medicine  of  Thy  mercy  to  cure 
that  infirmity  I  thought  not,  not  having  tried  it. 
As  for  continency,  I  suppose  it  to  be  in  our  own 
power  (though  in  myself  I  did  not  find  that 
power),  being  so  foolish  as  not  to  know  what  is 
written.  None  can  be  continent  unless  Thou  give 
it;2  and  that  Thou  wouldest  give  it,  if  with  in¬ 
ward  groanings  I  did  knock  at  Thine  ears,  and 
with  a  settled  faith  did  cast  my  care  on  Thee. 

[XII]  21.  Alypius  indeed  kept  me  from  mar¬ 
rying;  alleging  that  so  could  we  by  no  means 
with  undistracted  leisure  live  together  in  the 
love  of  wisdom,  as  we  had  long  desired.  For 
himself  was  even  then  most  pure  in  this  point, 
so  that  it  was  wonderful;  and  that  the  more, 
since  in  the  outset  of  his  youth  he  had  entered 
into  that  course,  but  had  not  stuck  fast  therein; 
rather  had  he  felt  remorse  and  revolting  at  it, 
living  thenceforth  until  now  most  continently. 
But  I  opposed  him  with  the  examples  of  those 
who  as  married  men  had  cherished  wisdom,  and 
served  God  acceptably,  and  retained  their 
friends,  and  loved  them  faithfully.  Of  whose 
greatness  of  spirit  I  was  far  short;  and  bound 
with  the  disease  of  the  flesh,  and  its  deadly 
sweetness,  drew  along  my  chain,  dreading  to  be 
loosed,  and,  as  if  my  wound  had  been  fretted, 
put  back  his  good  persuasions,  as  it  were  the 
hand  of  one  that  would  unchain  me.  Moreover, 
by  me  did  the  serpent  speak  unto  Alypius  him¬ 
self,  by  my  tongue  weaving  and  laying  in  his 
path  pleasurable  snares,  wherein  his  virtuous 
and  free  feet  might  be  entangled. 

22.  For  when  he  wondered  that  I,  whom  he 
esteemed  not  slightly,  should  stick  so  fast  in  the 
birdlime  of  that  pleasure  as  to  protest  (so  oft  as 
we  discussed  it)  that  I  could  never  lead  a  single 
life;  and  urged  in  my  defence,  when  I  saw  him 
wonder,  that  there  was  great  difference  between 
his  momentary  and  scarce-remembered  knowl¬ 
edge  of  that  life,  which  so  he  might  easily  de¬ 
spise,  and  my  continued  acquaintance  whereto, 
if  but  the  honourable  name  of  marriage  were 
added,  he  ought  not  to  wonder  why  I  could  not 
contemn  that  course ;  he  began  also  to  desire  to 
be  married;  not  as  overcome  with  desire  of  such 
pleasure,  but  out  of  curiosity.  For  he  would  fain 
know,  he  said,  what  that  should  be,  without 
which  my  life,  to  him  so  pleasing,  would  to  me 
seem  not  life  but  a  punishment.  For  his  mind, 
free  from  that  chain,  was  amazed  at  my  thral¬ 
dom  ;  and  through  that  amazement  was  going  on 
to  a  desire  of  trying  it,  thence  to  the  trial  itself, 
and  thence  perhaps  to  sink  into  that  bondage 
whereat  he  wondered,  seeing  he  was  willing  to 
2Wisd.  8.  2,  Vulg. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


make  “a  covenant  with  death”;1  and  he  that 
loves  danger,  shall  fall  into  it.2  For  whatever 
honour  there  be  in  the  office  of  well-ordering  a 
married  life,  and  a  family,  moved  us  but  slight¬ 
ly.  But  me  for  the  most  part  the  habit  of  satis¬ 
fying  an  insatiable  appetite  tormented,  while  it 
held  me  captive;  him,  an  admiring  wonder  was 
leading  captive.  So  were  we,  until  Thou,  0  Most 
High,  not  forsaking  our  dust,  commiserating  us 
miserable,  didst  come  to  our  help  by  wondrous 
and  secret  ways. 

[XIII]  23.  Continual  effort  was  made  to  have 
me  married.  I  wooed,  I  was  promised,  chiefly 
through  my  mother’s  pains,  that  so  once  mar¬ 
ried,  the  health-giving  baptism  might  cleanse 
me,  towards  which  she  rejoiced  that  I  was  being 
daily  fitted,  and  observed  that  her  prayers,  and 
Thy  promises,  were  being  fulfilled  in  my  faith. 
At  which  time  verily,  both  at  my  request  and 
her  own  longing,  with  strong  cries  of  heart  she 
daily  begged  of  Thee  that  Thou  wouldest  by  a 
vision  discover  unto  her  something  concerning 
my  future  marriage;  Thou  never  wouldest.  She 
saw  indeed  certain  vain  and  phantastic  things, 
such  as  the  energy  of  the  human  spirit,  busied 
thereon,  brought  together;  and  these  she  told 
me  of,  not  with  that  confidence  she  was  wont, 
when  Thou  shewedst  her  anything,  but  slight¬ 
ing  them.  For  she  could,  she  said,  through  a  cer¬ 
tain  feeling,  which  in  words  she  could  not  ex¬ 
press,  discern  betwixt  Thy  revelations  and  the 
dreams  of  her  own  soul.  Yet  the  matter  was 
pressed  on,  and  a  maiden  asked  in  marriage,  two 
years  under  the  fit  age;  and,  as  pleasing,  was 
waited  for. 

[XIV]  24.  And  many  of  us  friends,  conferring 
about  and  detesting  the  turbulent  turmoils  of 
human  life,  had  debated  and  now  almost  re¬ 
solved  on  living  apart  from  business  and  the 
bustle  of  men ;  and  this  was  to  be  thus  obtained : 
we  were  to  bring  whatever  we  might  severally 
procure,  and  make  one  household  of  all;  so  that 
through  the  truth  of  our  friendship  nothing 
should  belong  especially  to  any;  but  the  whole, 
thus  derived  from  all,  should  as  a  whole  belong 
to  each,  and  all  to  all.  We  thought  there  might 
be  some  ten  persons  in  this  society;  some  of 
whom  were  very  rich,  especially  Romanianus 
our  townsman,  from  childhood  a  very  familiar 
friend  of  mine,  whom  the  grievous  perplexities 
of  his  affairs  had  brought  up  to  court ;  who  was 
the  most  earnest  for  this  project;  and  therein 
was  his  voice  of  great  weight,  because  his  ample 
estate  far  exceeded  any  of  the  rest.  We  had  set¬ 
tled  also  that  two  annual  officers,  as  it  were, 

Visa.  28.  15.  2Ecclus.  3.  27. 


should  provide  all  things  necessary,  the  rest  be¬ 
ing  undisturbed.  But  when  we  began  to  consider 
whether  the  wives,  which  some  of  us  already 
had,  others  hoped  to  have,  would  allow  this,  all 
that  plan,  which  was  being  so  well  moulded,  fell 
to  pieces  in  our  hands,  was  utterly  dashed  and 
cast  aside.  Thence  we  betook  us  to  sighs,  and 
groans,  and  our  steps  to  follow  the  broad  and 
beaten  ways3  of  the  world ;  for  many  thoughts 
were  in  our  heart,  but  Thy  counsel  standeth  for 
ever.4  Out  of  which  counsel  Thou  didst  deride 
ours,  and  preparedst  Thine  own;  purposing  to 
give  us  meat  in  due  season,  and  to  open  Thy 
hand,  and  to  fill  our  souls  with  blessing.5 

[XV]  25.  Meanwhile  my  sins  were  being  mul¬ 
tiplied,  and  my  concubine  being  torn  from  my 
side  as  a  hindrance  to  my  marriage,  my  heart 
which  clave  unto  her  was  torn  and  wounded  and 
bleeding.  And  she  returned  to  Africa,  vowing 
unto  Thee  never  to  know  any  other  man,  leav¬ 
ing  with  me  my  son  by  her.  But  unhappy  I,  who 
could  not  imitate  a  very  woman,  impatient  of 
delay,  inasmuch  as  not  till  after  two  years  was 
I  to  obtain  her  I  sought,  not  being  so  much  a 
lover  of  marriage  as  a  slave  to  lust,  procured  an¬ 
other,  though  no  wife,  that  so,  by  the  servitude 
of  an  enduring  custom,  the  disease  of  my  soul 
might  be  kept  up  and  carried  on  in  its  vigor,  or 
even  augmented,  into  the  dominion  of  marriage. 
Nor  was  that  my  wound  cured,  which  had  been 
made  by  the  cutting  away  of  the  former,  but  af¬ 
ter  inflammation  and  most  acute  pain,  it  morti¬ 
fied,  and  my  pains  became  less  acute,  but  more 
desperate. 

[XVI]  26.  To  Thee  be  praise,  glory  to  Thee, 
Fountain  of  mercies.  I  was  becoming  more  mis¬ 
erable,  and  Thou  nearer.  Thy  right  hand  was 
continually  ready  to  pluck  me  out  of  the  mire, 
and  to  wash  me  thoroughly,  and  I  knew  it  not; 
nor  did  anything  call  me  back  from  a  yet  deeper 
gulf  of  carnal  pleasures,  but  the  fear  of  death 
and  of  Thy  judgment  to  come,  which  amid  all 
my  changes  never  departed  from  my  breast. 
And  in  my  disputes  with  my  friends  Alypius  and 
Nebridius,  of  the  nature  of  good  and  evil,  I  held 
that  Epicurus  had  in  my  mind  won  the  palm, 
had  I  not  believed  that  after  death  there  re¬ 
mained  a  life  for  the  soul,  and  places  of  requital 
according  to  men’s  deserts,  which  Epicurus 
would  not  believe.  And  I  asked,  “Were  we  im¬ 
mortal,  and  to  live  in  perpetual  bodily  pleasure 
without  fear  of  losing  it,  why  should  we  not  be 
happy,  or  what  else  should  we  seek?”  not  know¬ 
ing  that  great  misery  was  involved  in  this  very 
thing,  that,  being  thus  sunk  and  blinded,  I  could 

3Matt.  7.  13.  4Ps.  33.  11.  6Ps.  1 14.  15,  16. 


CONFESSIONS  VI.  23-26,  VII.  1-2  43 


not  discern  that  light  of  excellence  and  beauty, 
to  be  embraced  for  its  own  sake,  which  the  eye 
of  flesh  cannot  see,  and  is  seen  by  the  inner  man. 
Nor  did  I,  unhappy,  consider  from  what  source 
it  sprung  that  even  on  these  things,  foul  as  they 
were,  I  with  pleasure  discoursed  with  my 
friends;  nor  could  I,  even  according  to  the  no¬ 
tions  I  then  had  of  happiness,  be  happy  without 
friends,  amid  what  abundance  soever  of  carnal 
pleasures.  And  yet  these  friends  I  loved  for 
themselves  only,  and  I  felt  that  I  was  beloved 
of  them  again  for  myself  only. 

0  crooked  paths!  Woe  to  the  audacious  soul 
which  hoped,  by  forsaking  Thee,  to  gain  some 
better  thing!  Turned  it  hath,  and  turned  again, 
upon  back,  sides,  and  belly,  yet  all  was  painful, 
and  Thou  alone  rest.  And  behold.  Thou  art  at 
hand,  and  deliverest  us  from  our  wretched  wan¬ 
derings,  and  placest  us  in  Thy  way,  and  dost 
comfort  us,  and  say,  “Run ;  I  will  carry  you ;  yea 
I  will  bring  you  through ;  there  also  will  I  carry 
you.” 

BOOK  VII.  Augustine’s  thirty-first  year;  gradu¬ 
ally  extricated  from  his  errors ,  but  still  with 
material  conceptions  of  God;  much  aided  by 
an  argument  of  Nebridius;  sees  that  the  cause 
of  sin  lies  in  free-will,  rejects  the  Manichcean 
heresy,  but  cannot  altogether  embrace  the 
doctrine  of  the  Church  ;  recovered  from  the 
belief  in  Astrology ,  but  miserably  perplexed 
about  the  origin  of  evil;  is  led  to  find  in  the 
Platonists  the  seeds  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Di¬ 
vinity  of  the  Word,  but  not  of  His  humilia¬ 
tion;  hence  he  obtains  clearer  notions  of 
God’s  majesty ,  but,  not  knowing  Christ  to  be 
the  Mediator,  remains  estranged  from  Him; 
all  his  doubts  removed  by  the  study  of  Holy 
Scripture ,  especially  St.  Paid. 

[I]  1.  Deceased  was  now  that  my  evil  and  abom¬ 
inable  youth,  and  I  was  passing  into  early  man¬ 
hood;  the  more  defiled  by  vain  things  as  I  grew 
in  years,  who  could  not  imagine  any  substance 
but  such  as  is  wont  to  be  seen  with  these  eyes.  I 
thought  aiot  of  Thee,  0  God,  under  the  figure  of 
an  human  body;  since  I  began  to  hear  aught  of 
wisdom,  I  always  avoided  this;  and  rejoiced  to 
have  found  the  same  in  the  faith  of  our  spiritual 
mother,  Thy  Catholic  Church.  But  what  else  to 
conceive  Thee  I  knew  not.  And  I,  a  man,  and 
such  a  man,  sought  to  conceive  of  Thee  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  only,  true  God;  and  I  did  in  my  inmost 
soul  believe  that  Thou  wert  incorruptible,  and 
uninjurable,  and  unchangeable;  because,  though 
not  knowing  whence  or  how,  yet  I  saw  plainly 
and  was  sure  that  that  which  may  be  corrupted 


must  be  inferior  to  that  which  cannot;  what 
could  not  be  injured  I  preferred  unhesitatingly 
to  what  could  receive  injury;  the  unchangeable 
to  things  subject  to  change.  My  heart  passion¬ 
ately  cried  out  against  all  my  phantoms,  and 
with  this  one  blow  I  sought  to  beat  away  from 
the  eye  of  my  mind  all  that  unclean  troop  which 
buzzed  around  it.1  And  lo,  being  scarce  put  off, 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  they  gathered  again 
thick  about  me,  flew  against  my  face  and  be¬ 
clouded  it;  so  that,  though  not  under  the  form 
of  the  human  body,  yet  was  I  constrained  to 
conceive  of  Thee  (that  incorruptible,  uninjura¬ 
ble,  and  unchangeable,  which  I  preferred  before 
the  corruptible,  and  injurable,  and  changeable) 
as  being  in  space,  whether  infused  into  the 
world,  or  diffused  infinitely  without  it.  Because 
whatsoever  I  conceived,  deprived  of  this  space, 
seemed  to  me  nothing,  yea  altogether  nothing, 
not  even  a  void,  as  if  a  body  were  taken  out  of 
its  place,  and  the  place  should  remain  empty  of 
any  body  at  all,  of  earth  and  water,  air  and  heav¬ 
en,  yet  would  it  remain  a  void  place,  as  it  were 
a  spacious  nothing. 

2.  I  then  being  thus  gross-hearted,  nor  clear 
even  to  myself,  whatsoever  was  not  extended 
over  certain  spaces,  nor  diffused,  nor  condensed, 
nor  swelled  out,  or  did  not  or  could  not  receive 
some  of  these  dimensions,  I  thought  to  be  alto¬ 
gether  nothing.  For  over  such  forms  as  my  eyes 
are  wont  to  range,  did  my  heart  then  range :  nor 
yet  did  I  see  that  this  same  notion  of  the  mind, 
whereby  I  formed  those  very  images,  was  not  of 
this  sort,  and  yet  it  could  not  have  formed  them, 
had  not  itself  been  some  great  thing.  So  also  did 
I  endeavour  to  conceive  of  Thee,  Life  of  my 
life,  as  vast,  through  infinite  spaces,  on  every 
side  penetrating  the  whole  mass  of  the  universe, 
and  beyond  it,  every  way,  through  unmeasurable 
boundless  spaces;  so  that  the  earth  should  have 
Thee,  the  heaven  have  Thee,  all  things  have 
Thee,  and  they  be  bounded  in  Thee,  and  Thou 
bounded  nowhere.  For  that  as  the  body  of  this 
air  which  is  above  the  earth  hindereth  not  the 
light  of  the  sun  from  passing  through  it,  pene¬ 
trating  it,  not  by  bursting  or  by  cutting,  but  by 
filling  it  wholly:  so  I  thought  the  body  not  of 
heaven,  air,  and  sea  only,  but  of  the  earth  too, 
pervious  to  Thee,  so  that  in  all  its  parts,  the 
greatest  as  the  smallest,  it  should  admit  Thy 
presence,  by  a  secret  inspiration,  within  and 
without,  directing  all  things  which  Thou  hast 
created.  So  I  guessed,  only  as  unable  to  conceive 
aught  else,  for  it  was  false.  For  thus  should  a 
greater  part  of  the  earth  contain  a  greater  por- 

^ee  Bk.  hi.  12;  Bk.  iv.  3,  12;  Bk.  v.  19,  above. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tion  of  Thee,  and  a  less,  a  lesser :  and  all  things 
should  in  such  sort  be  full  of  Thee  that  the  body 
of  an  elephant  should  contain  more  of  Thee 
than  that  of  a  sparrow,  by  how  much  larger  it  is, 
and  takes  up  more  room;  and  thus  shouldest 
Thou  make  the  several  portions  of  Thyself  pres¬ 
ent  unto  the  several  portions  of  the  world,  in 
fragments,  large  to  the  large,  petty  to  the  petty. 
But  such  art  not  Thou.  But  not  as  yet  hadst 
Thou  enlightened  my  darkness. 

[II]  3.  It  was  enough  for  me,  Lord,  to  op¬ 
pose  to  those  deceived  deceivers  and  dumb  prat¬ 
ers,  since  Thy  word  sounded  not  out  of  them; 
that  was  enough  which  long  ago,  while  we  were 
yet  at  Carthage.  Nebridius  used  to  propound,  at 
which  all  we  that  heard  it  were  staggered:  “That 
said  nation  of  darkness,  which  the  Manichees 
are  wont  to  set  as  an  opposing  mass  over  against 
Thee,  what  could  it  have  done  unto  Thee,  hadst 
Thou  refused  to  fight  with  it?  For,  if  they  an¬ 
swered,  ‘it  would  have  done  Thee  some  hurt,’ 
then  shouldest  Thou  be  subject  to  injury  and 
corruption :  but  if  ‘it  could  do  Thee  no  hurt,’ 
then  was  no  reason  brought  for  Thy  fighting 
with  it;  and  fighting  in  such  wise,  as  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  portion  or  member  of  Thee,  or  offspring  of 
Thy  very  Substance,  should  be  mingled  with  op¬ 
posed  powers,  and  natures  not  created  by  Thee, 
and  be  by  them  so  far  corrupted  and  changed  to 
the  worse,  as  to  be  turned  from  happiness  into 
misery,  and  need  assistance,  whereby  it  might 
be  extricated  and  purified;  and  that  this  off¬ 
spring  of  Thy  Substance  was  the  soul,  which  be¬ 
ing  enthralled,  defiled,  corrupted,  Thy  Word, 
free,  pure,  and  whole,  might  relieve;  that  Word 
Itself  being  still  corruptible,  because  It  was  of 
one  and  the  same  Substance.  So  then,  should 
they  affirm  Thee,  whatsoever  Thou  art,  that  is, 
Thy  Substance  whereby  Thou  art,  to  be  incor¬ 
ruptible,  then  were  all  these  sayings  false  and 
execrable ;  but  if  corruptible,  the  very  statement 
shewed  it  to  be  false  and  revolting.”  This  argu¬ 
ment  then  of  Nebridius  sufficed  against  those 
who  deserved  wholly  to  be  vomited  out  of  the 
overcharged  stomach ;  for  they  had  no  escape, 
without  horrible  blasphemy  of  heart  and  tongue, 
thus  thinking  and  speaking  of  Thee. 

[III]  4.  But  I  also  as  yet,  although  I  held  and 
was  firmly  persuaded  that  Thou  our  Lord  the 
true  God,  Who  madest  not  only  our  souls,  but 
our  bodies,  and  not  only  our  souls  and  bodies, 
but  all  beings,  and  all  things,  wert  undefilable 
and  unalterable,  and  in  no  degree  mutable;  yet 
understood  I  not,  clearly  and  without  difficulty, 
the  cause  of  evil.  And  yet,  whatever  it  were,  I 
perceived  it  was  in  such  wise  to  be  sought  out 


as  should  not  constrain  me  to  believe  the  im¬ 
mutable  God  to  be  mutable,  lest  I  should  be¬ 
come  that  evil  I  was  seeking  out.  I  sought  it  out 
then,  thus  far  free  from  anxiety,  certain  of  the 
untruth  of  what  these  held  from  whom  I  shrunk 
with  my  whole  heart:  for  I  saw  that,  through 
enquiring  the  origin  of  evil,  they  were  filled  with 
evil,  in  that  they  preferred  to  think  that  Thy 
substance  did  suffer  ill  than  their  own  did  com¬ 
mit  it. 

5.  And  I  strained  to  perceive  what  I  now 
heard,  that  free-will  was  the  cause  of  our  doing 
ill,  and  Thy  just  judgment,  of  our  suffering  ill. 
But  I  was  not  able  clearly  to  discern  it.  So  then, 
endeavouring  to  draw  my  soul’s  vision  out  of 
that  deep  pit,  I  was  again  plunged  therein,  and, 
endeavouring  often,  I  was  plunged  back  as  of¬ 
ten.  But  this  raised  me  a  little  into  Thy  light, 
that  I  knew  as  well  that  I  had  a  will  as  that  I 
lived:  when  then  I  did  will  or  nill  anything,  I 
was  most  sure  that  no  other  than  myself  did 
will  and  nill:  and  I  all  but  saw  that  there  was 
the  cause  of  my  sin.  But  what  I  did  against  my 
will,  I  saw  that  I  suffered  rather  than  did.  and  I 
judged  not  to  be  my  fault,  but  my  punishment; 
whereby,  however,  holding  thee  to  be  just,  I 
speedily  confessed  myself  to  be  not  unjustly 
punished.  But  again  I  said.  “Who  made  me?  Did 
not  my  God,  Who  is  not  only  good,  but  good¬ 
ness  itself?  Whence  then  came  I  to  will  evil  and 
nill  good,  so  that  I  am  thus  justly  punished? 
who  set  this  in  me,  and  ingrafted  into  me  this 
plant  of  bitterness,  seeing  I  was  wholly  formed 
by  my  most  sweet  God?  If  the  devil  were  the 
author,  whence  is  that  same  devil?  And  if  he 
also,  by  his  own  perverse  will,  of  a  good  angel 
became  a  devil,  whence,  again,  came  in  him  that 
evil  will  whereby  he  became  a  devil,  seeing  the 
whole  nature  of  angels  was  made  by  that  most 
good  Creator?”  By  these  thoughts  I  was  again 
sunk  down  and  choked;  yet  not  brought  down  to 
that  hell  of  error  (where  no  man  confesseth 
unto  Thee),1  to  think  rather  that  Thou  dost  suf¬ 
fer  ill  than  that  man  doth  it. 

[IV]  6.  For  I  was  in  such  wise  striving  to  find 
out  the  rest,  as  one  who  had  already  found  that 
the  incorruptible  must  needs  be  better  than  the 
corruptible;  and  Thee  therefore,  whatsoever 
Thou  wert,  I  confessed  to  be  incorruptible.  For 
never  soul  was,  nor  shall  be,  able  to  conceive 
anything  which  may  be  better  than  Thou,  Who 
art  the  sovereign  and  the  best  good.  But  since, 
most  truly  and  certainly,  the  incorruptible  is 
preferable  to  the  corruptible  (as  I  did  now  pre¬ 
fer  it),  then,  wert  Thou  not  incorruptible,  I 

Ts.  6.  5. 


CONFESSIONS  VII.  3-8  45 


could  in  thought  have  arrived  at  something  bet¬ 
ter  than  my  God.  Where  then  I  saw  the  incor¬ 
ruptible  to  be  preferable  to  the  corruptible, 
there  ought  I  to  seek  for  Thee,  and  there  ob¬ 
serve  “wherein  evil  itself  was”;  that  is,  whence 
corruption  comes,  by  which  Thy  substance  can 
by  no  means  be  impaired.  For  corruption  does 
no  ways  impair  our  God;  by  no  will,  by  no  ne¬ 
cessity,  by  no  unlooked-for  chance :  because  He 
is  God,  and  what  He  wills  is  good,  and  Himself 
is  that  good;  but  to  be  corrupted  is  not  good. 
Nor  art  Thou  against  Thy  will  constrained  to 
anything,  since  Thy  will  is  not  greater  than  Thy 
power.  But  greater  should  it  be,  were  Thyself 
greater  than  Thyself.  For  the  will  and  power  of 
God  is  God  Himself.  And  what  can  be  unlooked- 
for  by  Thee,  Who  knowest  all  things?  Nor  is 
there  any  nature  in  things,  but  Thou  knowest  it. 
And  what  should  we  more  say,  “why  that  sub¬ 
stance  which  God  is  should  not  be  corruptible,” 
seeing  if  it  were  so,  it  should  not  be  God? 

[V]  7.  And  I  sought  “whence  is  evil,”  and 
sought  in  an  evil  way;  and  saw  not  the  evil  in 
my  very  search.  I  set  now  before  the  sight  of  my 
spirit  the  whole  creation,  whatsoever  we  can  see 
therein  (as  sea,  earth,  air,  stars,  trees,  mortal 
creatures) ;  yea,  and  whatever  in  it  we  do  not 
see,  as  the  firmament  of  heaven,  all  angels  more¬ 
over,  and  all  the  spiritual  inhabitants  thereof. 
But  these  very  beings,  as  though  they  were  bod¬ 
ies,  did  my  fancy  dispose  in  place,  and  I  made 
one  great  mass  of  Thy  creation,  distinguished 
as  to  the  kinds  of  bodies;  some,  real  bodies, 
some,  what  myself  had  feigned  for  spirits.  And 
this  mass  I  made  huge,  not  as  it  was  (which  I 
could  not  know),  but  as  I  thought  convenient, 
yet  every  way  finite.  But  Thee,  0  Lord,  I  im¬ 
agined  on  every  part  environing  and  penetrating 
it,  though  every  way  infinite:  as  if  there  were  a 
sea,  everywhere  and  on  every  side,  through  un¬ 
measured  space,  one  only  boundless  sea,  and  it 
contained  within  it  some  sponge,  huge,  but 
bounded;  that  sponge  must  needs,  in  all  its 
parts,  be  filled  from  that  unmeasurable  sea:  so 
conceived  I  Thy  creation,  itself  finite,  full  of 
Thee,  the  Infinite;  and  I  said,  Behold  God,  and 
behold  what  God  hath  created;  and  God  is  good, 
yea,  most  mightily  and  incomparably  better 
than  all  these:  but  yet  He,  the  Good,  created 
them  good;  and  see  how  He  environeth  and  ful¬ 
fils  them.  Where  is  evil  then,  and  whence,  and 
how  crept  it  in  hither?  What  is  its  root,  and 
what  its  seed?  Or  hath  it  no  being?  Why  then 
fear  we  and  avoid  what  is  not?  Or,  if  we  fear  it 
idly,  then  is  that  very  fear  evil,  whereby  the 
soul  is  thus  idly  goaded  and  racked.  Yea,  and  so 


much  a  greater  evil,  as  we  have  nothing  to  fear, 
and  yet  do  fear.  Therefore  either  is  that  evil 
which  we  fear,  or  else  evil  is,  that  we  fear. 
Whence  is  it  then?  seeing  God,  the  Good,  hath 
created  all  these  things  good.  He  indeed,  the 
greater  and  chiefest  Good,  hath  created  these 
lesser  goods;  still  both  Creator  and  created,  all 
are  good.  Whence  is  evil?  Or,  was  there  some 
evil  matter  of  which  He  made,  and  formed,  and 
ordered  it,  yet  left  something  in  it  which  He  did 
not  convert  into  good?  Why  so  then?  Had  He 
no  might  to  turn  and  change  the  whole,  so  that 
no  evil  should  remain  in  it,  seeing  He  is  Al¬ 
mighty?  Lastly,  why  would  He  make  anything 
at  all  of  it,  and  not  rather  by  the  same  Almighti- 
ness  cause  it  not  to  be  at  all?  Or  could  it  then  be 
against  His  will?  Or,  if  it  were  from  eternity, 
why  suffered  He  it  30  to  be  for  infinite  spaces  of 
times  past,  and  was  pleased  so  long  after  to 
make  something  out  of  it?  Or  if  He  were  sud¬ 
denly  pleased  now  to  effect  somewhat,  this  rath¬ 
er  should  the  Almighty  have  effected,  that  this 
evil  matter  should  not  be,  and  He  alone  be,  the 
whole,  true,  sovereign,  and  infinite  Good.  Or  if 
it  was  not  good  that  He  who  was  good  should 
not  also  frame  and  create  something  that  were 
good,  then,  that  evil  matter  being  taken  away 
and  brought  to  nothing,  He  might  form  good 
matter,  whereof  to  create  all  things.  For  He 
should  not  be  Almighty  if  He  might  not  create 
something  good  without  the  aid  of  that  matter 
which  Himself  had  not  created.  These  thoughts 
I  revolved  in  my  miserable  heart,  overcharged 
with  most  gnawing  cares,  lest  I  should  die  ere  I 
had  found  the  truth;  yet  was  the  faith  of  Thy 
Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  professed  in  the 
Church  Catholic,  firmly  fixed  in  my  heart,  in 
many  points,  indeed,  as  yet  unformed,  and  fluc¬ 
tuating  from  the  rule  of  doctrine;  yet  did  not 
my  mind  utterly  leave  it,  but  rather  daily  took 
in  more  and  more  of  it. 

8.  By  this  time  also  had  I  rejected  the  lying 
divinations  and  impious  dotages  of  the  astrolo¬ 
gers.  Let  Thine  own  mercies,  out  of  my  very  in¬ 
most  soul,  confess  unto  Thee1  for  this  also,  0  my 
God.  For  Thou,  Thou  altogether  (for  who  else 
calls  us  back  from  the  death  of  all  errors,  save 
the  Life  which  cannot  die,  and  the  Wisdom 
which  needing  no  light  enlightens  the  minds  that 
need  it,  whereby  the  universe  is  directed,  down 
to  the  whirling  leaves  of  trees?) — Thou  madest 
provision  for  my  obstinacy  wherewith  I  strug¬ 
gled  against  Vindicianus,2  an  acute  old  man,  and 
Nebridius,  a  young  man  of  admirable  talents; 
the  first  vehemently  affirming,  and  the  latter  of- 

1Ps.  107.  8,  Vulg.  2gee  Bk.  iv.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ten  (though  with  some  doubtfulness)  saying, 
“That  there  was  no  such  art  whereby  to  foresee 
things  to  come,  but  that  men’s  conjectures  were 
a  sort  of  lottery,  and  that  out  of  many  things, 
which  they  said  should  come  to  pass,  some  ac¬ 
tually  did,  unawares  to  them  who  spake  it,  who 
stumbled  upon  it  through  their  oft  speaking.” 
Thou  providedst  then  a  friend  for  me,  no  negli¬ 
gent  consulter  of  the  astrologers;  nor  yet  well 
skilled  in  those  arts,  but  (as  I  said)  a  curious 
consulter  with  them,  and  yet  knowing  something 
which  he  said  he  had  heard  of  his  father,  which 
how  far  it  went  to  overthrow  the  estimation  of 
that  art,  he  knew  not.  This  man  then,  Firminus 
by  name,  having  had  a  liberal  education  and 
well  taught  in  Rhetoric,  consulted  me,  as  one 
very  dear  to  him,  what,  according  to  his  so- 
called  constellations,  I  thought  on  certain  af¬ 
fairs  of  his,  wherein  his  worldly  hopes  had  risen; 
and  I,  who  had  herein  now  begun  to  incline  to¬ 
wards  Nebridius’  opinion,  did  not  altogether  re¬ 
fuse  to  conjecture,  and  tell  him  what  came  into 
my  unresolved  mind ;  but  added  that  I  was  now 
almost  persuaded  that  these  were  but  empty  and 
ridiculous  follies.  Thereupon  he  told  me  that  his 
father  had  been  very  curious  in  such  books,  and 
had  a  friend  as  earnest  in  them  as  himself,  who 
with  joint  study  and  conference  fanned  the 
flame  of  their  affections  to  these  toys,  so  that 
they  would  observe  the  moments  whereat  the 
very  dumb  animals,  which  bred  about  their 
houses,  gave  birth,  and  then  observed  the  rela¬ 
tive  position  of  the  heavens,  thereby  to  make 
fresh  experiments  in  this  so-called  art.  He  said 
then  that  he  had  heard  of  his  father  that,  what 
time  his  mother  was  about  to  give  birth  to  him, 
Firminus,  a  woman-servant  of  that  friend  of  his 
father’s  was  also  with  child,  which  could  not  es¬ 
cape  her  master,  who  took  care  with  most  exact 
diligence  to  know  the  births  of  his  very  puppies. 
And  so  it  was  that  (the  one  for  his  wife,  and  the 
other  for  his  servant,  with  the  most  careful  ob¬ 
servation,  reckoning  days,  hours,  nay,  the  lesser 
divisions  of  the  hours)  both  were  delivered  at 
the  same  instant ;  so  that  both  were  constrained 
to  allow  the  same  constellations,  even  to  the 
minutest  points,  the  one  for  his  son,  the  other 
for  his  new-born  slave.  For  so  soon  as  the  wom¬ 
en  began  to  be  in  labour,  they  each  gave  notice 
to  the  other  what  was  fallen  out  in  their  houses, 
and  had  messengers  ready  to  send  to  one  an¬ 
other,  so  soon  as  they  had  notice  of  the  actual 
birth,  of  which  they  had  easily  provided,  each 
in  his  own  province,  to  give  instant  intelligence. 
Thus  then  the  messengers  of  the  respective  par¬ 
ties  met,  he  averred,  at  such  an  equal  distance 


from  either  house  that  neither  of  them  could 
make  out  any  difference  in  the  position  of  the 
stars,  or  any  other  minutest  points;  and  yet  Fir¬ 
minus,  born  in  a  high  estate  in  his  parents’ 
house,  ran  his  course  through  the  gilded  paths 
of  life,  was  increased  in  riches,  raised  to  hon¬ 
ours  ;  whereas  that  slave  continued  to  serve  his 
masters,  without  any  relaxation  of  his  yoke,  as 
Firminus,  who  knew  him,  told  me. 

9.  Upon  hearing  and  believing  these  things, 
told  by  one  of  such  credibility,  all  that  my  re¬ 
sistance  gave  way;  and  first  I  endeavoured  to 
reclaim  Firminus  himself  from  that  curiosity  by 
telling  him  that,  upon  inspecting  his  constella¬ 
tions,  I  ought,  if  I  were  to  predict  truly,  to  have 
seen  in  them,  parents  eminent  among  their 
neighbours,  a  noble  family  in  its  own  city,  high 
birth,  good  education,  liberal  learning.  But  if 
that  servant  had  consulted  me  upon  the  same 
constellations,  since  they  were  his  also,  I  ought 
again  (to  tell  him  too  truly)  to  see  in  them  a  lin¬ 
eage  the  most  abject,  a  slavish  condition,  and 
everything  else  utterly  at  variance  with  the  for¬ 
mer.  Whence  then,  if  I  spake  the  truth,  I  should, 
from  the  same  constellations,  speak  diversely, 
or  if  I  spake  the  same,  speak  falsely:  thence  it 
followed  most  certainly  that  whatever,  upon 
consideration  of  the  constellations,  was  spoken 
truly,  was  spoken  not  out  of  art,  but  chance; 
and  whatever  spoken  falsely  was  not  out  of  ig¬ 
norance  in  the  art,  but  the  failure  of  the  chance. 

10.  An  opening  thus  made,  ruminating  with 
myself  on  the  like  things,  that  no  one  of  those 
dotards  (who  lived  by  such  a  trade,  and  whom  I 
longed  to  attack,  and  with  derision  to  confute) 
might  urge  against  me,  that  Firminus  had  in¬ 
formed  me  falsely,  or  his  father  him;  I  bent  my 
thoughts  on  those  that  are  born  twins,  who  for 
the  most  part  come  out  of  the  womb  so  near  one 
to  other  that  the  small  interval  (how  much  force 
soever  in  the  nature  of  things  folk  may  pretend 
it  to  have)  cannot  be  noted  by  human  observa¬ 
tion,  or  be  at  all  expressed  in  those  figures  which 
the  astrologer  is  to  inspect,  that  he  may  pro¬ 
nounce  truly.  Yet  they  cannot  be  true :  for  look¬ 
ing  into  the  same  figures,  he  must  have  predicted 
the  same  of  Esau  and  Jacob,1  whereas  the  same 
happened  not  to  them.  Therefore  he  must  speak 
falsely;  or  if  truly,  then,  looking  into  the  same 
figures,  he  must  not  give  the  same  answer.  Not 
by  art,  then,  but  by  chance,  would  he  speak  tru¬ 
ly.  For  Thou,  0  Lord,  most  righteous  Ruler  of 
the  Universe,  while  consulters  and  consulted 
know  it  not,  dost  by  Thy  hidden  inspiration  ef¬ 
fect  that  the  consulter  should  hear  what,  accord- 

1See  also,  On  Christian  Doctrine ,  Bk.  n.  ch.  22. 


CONFESSIONS  VII.  9-14  47 


ing  to  the  hidden  deservings  of  souls,  he  ought 
to  hear,  out  of  the  unsearchable  depth  of  Thy 
just  judgment,  to  Whom  let  no  man  say,  “What 
is  this?”  “Why  that?”  Let  him  not  so  say,  for 
he  is  man. 

[VII]  11.  Now  then,  0  my  Helper,  hadst 
Thou  loosed  me  from  those  fetters ;  and  I  sought 
“whence  is  evil,”  and  found  no  way.  But  Thou 
sufferedst  me  not  by  any  fluctuations  of  thought 
to  be  carried  away  from  the  Faith  whereby  I  be¬ 
lieved  Thee  both  to  be,  and  Thy  substance  to  be 
unchangeable,  and  that  Thou  hast  a  care  of,  and 
wouldest  judge  men,  and  that  in  Christ,  Thy 
Son.  our  Lord,  and  the  holy  Scriptures,  which 
the  authority  of  Thy  Catholic  Church  pressed 
upon  me.  Thou  hadst  set  the  way  of  man’s  sal¬ 
vation,  to  that  life  which  is  to  be  after  this 
death.  These  things  being  safe  and  immoveably 
settled  in  my  mind,  I  sought  anxiously  “whence 
was  evil?”  What  were  the  pangs  of  my  teeming 
heart,  what  groans,  0  my  God!  yet  even  there 
were  Thine  ears  open,  and  I  knew  it  not:  and 
when  in  silence  I  vehemently  sought,  those  si¬ 
lent  contritions  of  my  soul  were  strong  cries 
unto  Thy  mercy.  Thou  knewest  what  I  suffered, 
and  no  man.  For  what  was  that  which  was 
thence  through  my  tongue  distilled  into  the  ears 
of  my  most  familiar  friends?  Did  the  whole  tu¬ 
mult  of  my  soul,  for  which  neither  time  nor  ut¬ 
terance  sufficed,  reach  them?  Yet  went  up  the 
whole  to  Thy  hearing,  all  which  I  roared  out 
from  the  groanings  of  my  heart;  and  my  desire 
was  before  Thee,  and  the  light  of  mine  eyes  was 
not  with  me:1  for  that  was  within,  I  without: 
nor  was  that  confined  to  place,  but  I  was  intent 
on  things  contained  in  place,  but  there  found  I 
no  resting-place,  nor  did  they  so  receive  me, 
that  I  could  say.  “It  is  enough,”  “it  is  well” :  nor 
did  they  yet  suffer  me  to  turn  back,  where  it 
might  be  well  enough  with  me.  For  to  these 
things  was  I  superior,  but  inferior  to  Thee;  and 
Thou  art  my  true  joy  when  subjected  to  Thee, 
and  Thou  hadst  subjected  to  me  what  Thou  cre- 
atedst  below  me.  And  this  was  the  true  tempera¬ 
ment,  apd  middle  region  of  my  safety,  to  remain 
in  Thy  Image,  and  by  serving  Thee  rule  the 
body.  But  when  I  rose  proudly  against  Thee, 
and  “ran  against  the  Lord  with  my  neck,  with 
the  thick  bosses”  of  my  buckler,2  even  these  in¬ 
ferior  things  were  set  above  me,  and  pressed  me 
down,  and  nowhere  was  there  respite  or  space  of 
breathing.  They  met  my  sight  on  all  sides  by 
heaps  and  troops,  and  in  thought  the  images 
thereof  presented  themselves  unsought,  as  I 
would  return  to  Thee,  as  if  they  would  say  unto 
xPs.  37.  9-1 1,  Vulg.  2Job,  15. 26. 


me,  “Whither  goest  thou,  unworthy  and  de¬ 
filed?”  And  these  things  had  grown  out  of  my 
wound;  for  Thou  “humbledst  the  proud  like  one 
that  is  wounded,”  and  through  my  own  swelling 
was  I  separated  from  Thee;  yea,  my  pride-swol¬ 
len  face  closed  up  mine  eyes. 

[VIII]  12.  “But  Thou,  Lord,  abidest  for 
ever,”  3  yet  not  for  ever  art  Thou  angry  with  us ; 
because  Thou  pitiest  our  dust  and  ashes,  and  it 
was  pleasing  in  Thy  sight  to  reform  my  deformi¬ 
ties;  and  by  inward  goads  didst  Thou  rouse  me, 
that  I  should  be  ill  at  ease  until  Thou  wert  man¬ 
ifested  to  my  inward  sight.  Thus,  by  the  secret 
hand  of  Thy  medicining.  was  my  swelling  abat¬ 
ed,  and  the  troubled  and  bedimmed  eyesight  of 
my  mind,  by  the  smarting  anointings  of  health¬ 
ful  sorrows,  was  from  day  to  day  healed. 

[IX]  13.  And  Thou,  willing  first  to  shew  me 
how  Thou  “resistest  the  proud,  but  givest  grace 
unto  the  humble,”4  and  by  how  great  an  act  of 
Thy  mercy  Thou  hadst  traced  out  to  men  the 
way  of  humility,  in  that  Thy  “Word  was  made 
flesh,”  and  dwelt  among  men — Thou  procuredst 
for  me,  by  means  of  one  puffed  up  with  most  un¬ 
natural  pride,  certain  books  of  the  Platonists, 
translated  from  Greek  into  Latin.  And  therein  I 
read,  not  indeed  in  the  very  words,  but  to  the 
very  same  purpose,  enforced  by  many  and  div¬ 
ers  reasons,  that  “In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God: 
the  Same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God:  all 
things  were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was 
nothing  made :  that  which  was  made  by  Him  is 
‘life’,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men,  and  the 
light  shineth  in  the  darkness,  and  the  darkness 
comprehended  it  not.”5  And  that  the  soul  of 
man,6  though  it  “bears  witness  to  the  light,7  yet 
itself  is  not  that  light;  but  the  Word  of  God,  be¬ 
ing  God,  “is  that  true  light  that  lighteth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world.”  8  And  that 
“He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made 
by  Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not.”9  But 
that  “He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  re¬ 
ceived  Him  not ; 10  but  as  many  as  received  Him, 
to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of 
God,  as  many  as  believed  in  His  name”;11  this  I 
read  not  there. 

14.  Again  I  read  there,  that  God  the  Word  was 
born  not  of  flesh  nor  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God. 
But  that  “the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
among  us,”  12  I  read  not  there.  For  I  traced  in 

3Ps.  102.  12.  4James,  4.  6;  I  Pet.  5.  5. 

6John,  1.  1-5.  6See  also,  City  of  God ,  Bk.  x.  2. 

7John,  1.  7,  8.  8Ibid.,  1.  9.  9Ibid.,  1.  10. 

10Ibid.,  1.  11.  nJohn,  1.  12.  12Ibid.,  1.  14. 


48  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


those  books  that  it  was  many  and  divers  ways 
said  that  the  Son  was  in  the  form  of  the  Father, 
and  “thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
God,”  for  that  naturally  He  was  the  Same  Sub¬ 
stance.  But  that  He  emptied  himself,  “taking 
the  form  of  a  servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness 
of  men,  and  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  humbled 
Himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  and 
that  the  death  of  the  cross:  wherefore  God  ex¬ 
alted  Him”  from  the  dead,  “and  gave  Him  a 
name  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Je¬ 
sus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven, 
and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth; 
and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father”;1  those  books  have  not.  For  that  before 
all  times  and  above  all  times  Thy  Only-Begotten 
Son  remaineth  unchangeably  co-eternal  with 
Thee,  and  that  of  “His  fulness”  souls  receive2 
that  they  may  be  blessed;  and  that  by  participa¬ 
tion  of  wisdom  abiding  in  them,  they  are  re¬ 
newed,  so  as  to  be  wise,  is  there.  But  that  “in  due 
time  He  died  for  the  ungodly”;3  and  that  Thou 
sparedst  not  Thine  Only  Son,  but  deliveredst 
Him  for  us  all 4  is  not  there.  “For  Thou  hiddest 
these  things  from  the  wise,  and  revealedst  them 
to  babes”  ;5  that  they  “that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden  might  “come”  unto  Him,  and  He  refresh 
them,  because  “He  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart”  ;6 
and  “the  meek  He  directeth  in  judgment,  and 
the  gentle  He  teacheth  His  ways,”  7  beholding 
our  lowliness  and  trouble,  and  forgiving  all  our 
sins.8  But  such  as  are  lifted  up  in  the  lofty  walk 
of  some  would-be  sublimer  learning,  hear  not 
Him,  saying,  “Learn  of  Me,  for  I  am  meek  and 
lowly  in  heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your 
souls.”9  “Although  they  knew  God,  yet  they 
glorify  Him  not  as  God,  nor  are  thankful,  but 
wax  vain  in  their  thoughts;  and  their  foolish 
heart  is  darkened;  professing  that  they  were 
wise,  they  became  fools.”  10 

15.  And  therefore  did  I  read  there  also  that 
they  had  changed  the  glory  of  Thy  incorruptible 
nature  into  idols  and  divers  shapes,  “into  the 
likeness  of  the  image  of  corruptible  man,  and 
birds,  and  beasts,  and  creeping  things”;11  name¬ 
ly  into  that  Egyptian  food,  for  which  Esau  lost 
his  birthright,  for  that  Thy  first-born  people 
worshipped  the  head  of  a  four-footed  beast  in¬ 
stead  of  Thee;  turning  in  heart  back  towards 
Egypt,  and  bowing  Thy  image,  their  own  soul, 
before  the  image  of  “a  calf  that  eateth  hay.”  12 

1Phil.  2.  6-1 1.  2John,  1.  16.  3Rom.  5.  6. 

AIbid.,  8.  32.  6Matt.  11.  25.  6Ibid.,  11.  28,  29. 

7Ps.  25.  9.  *Ibid.,  ver.  18.  9Matt.  11.  29. 

10Rom.  1.  21,  22.  uIbid.,  1.  23. 

^Ps.  106.  20;  Ex.  32.  1-6. 


These  things  found  I  here,  but  I  fed  not  on 
them.  For  it  pleased  Thee,  0  Lord,  to  take  away 
the  reproach  of  diminution  from  Jacob,  that  the 
elder  should  serve  the  younger;13  and  Thou 
calledst  the  Gentiles  into  Thine  inheritance. 
And  I  had  come  to  Thee  from  among  the  Gen¬ 
tiles;  and  I  set  my  mind  upon  the  gold  which 
Thou  willedst  Thy  people  to  take  from  Egypt, 
seeing  Thine  it  was,  whersoever  it  were.  And  to 
the  Athenians  Thou  saidst  by  Thy  Apostle  that 
in  Thee  “we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being,”  as 
one  of  their  own  poets  had  said.14  And  verily 
these  books  came  from  thence.  But  I  set  not  my 
mind  on  the  idols  of  Egypt,  whom  they  served 
with  Thy  gold,15  “who  changed  the  truth  of  God 
into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and  served  the  crea¬ 
ture  more  than  the  Creator.”  16 

[X]  16.  And  being  thence  admonished  to 
return  to  myself,  I  entered  even  into  my  in¬ 
ward  self,  Thou  being  my  Guide:  and  able 
I  was,  for  Thou  wert  become  my  Helper.  And  I 
entered  and  beheld  with  the  eye  of  my  soul 
(such  as  it  was),  above  the  same  eye  of  my  soul, 
above  my  mind,  the  Light  Unchangeable.  Not 
this  ordinary  light,  which  all  flesh  may  look 
upon,17  nor  as  it  were  a  greater  of  the  same  kind, 
as  though  the  brightness  of  this  should  be  mani¬ 
fold  brighter,  and  with  its  greatness  take  up  all 
space.  Not  such  was  this  light,  but  other,  yea, 
far  other  from  all  these.  Nor  was  it  above  my 
soul,  as  oil  is  above  water,  nor  yet  as  heaven 
above  earth :  but  above  to  my  soul,  because  It 
made  me;  and  I  below  It,  because  I  was  made 
by  It.  He  that  knows  the  Truth  knows  what  that 
Light  is ;  and  he  that  knows  It  knows  eternity. 
Love  knoweth  it.  0  Truth  Who  art  Eternity! 
and  Love  Who  art  Truth!  and  Eternity  Who 
art  Love !  18  Thou  art  my  God,  to  Thee  do  I  sigh 
night  and  day.  Thee  when  I  first  knew,  Thou 
liftedst  me  up,  that  I  might  see  there  was  what 
I  might  see,  and  that  I  was  not  yet  such  as  to 
see.  And  Thou  didst  beat  back  the  weakness  of 
my  sight,  streaming  forth  Thy  beams  of  light 
upon  me  most  strongly,  and  I  trembled  with 
love  and  awe;  and  I  perceived  myself  to  be  far 
off  from  Thee,  in  the  region  of  unlikeness,  as  if 
I  heard  this  Thy  voice  from  on  high:  “I  am  the 
food  of  grown  men;  grow,  and  thou  shalt  feed 
upon  Me;  nor  shalt  thou  convert  Me,  like  the 
food  of  thy  flesh,  into  thee,  but  thou  shalt  be 
converted  into  Me.”  And  I  learned  that  Thou 
for  iniquity  chastenest  man,  and  Thou  madest 

13Rom.  9.  12.  14Acts,  17.  28.  16Hosea,  2.  8. 

ieOn  Christian  Doctrine ,  Bk.  n.  ch.  18,  40;  Rom.  1.  25. 

17See  above,  Bk.  m.  10,  12;  Bk.  iv.  3;  Bk.  vn.  2. 

18See  also,  City  of  God,  Bk.  xi.  28. 


CONFESSIONS  VII.  15-21 


my  soul  to  consume  away  like  a  spider.1  And  I 
said,  “Is  Truth  therefore  nothing  because  it  is 
not  diffused  through  space  finite  or  infinite?” 
And  Thou  criedst  to  me  from  afar;  “Yea  verily, 
‘I  AM  that  I  AM’.”  2  And  I  heard  as  the  heart 
heareth,  nor  had  I  room  to  doubt,  and  I  should 
sooner  doubt  that  I  live  than  that  Truth  is  not, 
which  is  “clearly  seen  being  understood  by  those 
things  which  are  made.”3 

[XI]  17.  And  I  beheld  the  other  things  below 
Thee,  and  I  perceived  that  they  neither  alto¬ 
gether  are,  nor  altogether  are  not,  for  they  are, 
since  they  are  from  Thee,  but  are  not,  because 
they  are  not  what  Thou  art.  For  that  truly  is 
which  remains  unchangeably.  It  is  good  then 
for  me  to  hold  fast  unto  God;4  for  if  I  remain 
not  in  Him,  I  cannot  in  myself ;  but  He  remain¬ 
ing  in  himself,  reneweth  all  things.5  And  Thou 
art  the  Lord  my  God,  since  Thou  standest  not 
in  need  of  my  goodness.6 

[XII]  18.  And  it  was  manifested  unto  me 
that  those  things  be  good  which  yet  are  corrupt¬ 
ed;  which  neither  were  they  sovereignly  good, 
nor,  unless  they  were  good,  could  be  corrupted; 
for  if  sovereignly  good,  they  were  incorruptible, 
if  not  good  at  all,  there  were  nothing  in  them  to 
be  corrupted.  For  corruption  injures,  but  unless 
it  diminished  goodness,  it  could  not  injure.  Ei¬ 
ther  then  corruption  injures  not,  which  cannot 
be;  or.  which  is  most  certain,  all  which  is  cor¬ 
rupted  is  deprived  of  good.  But  if  they  be  de¬ 
prived  of  all  good,  they  shall  cease  to  be.  For  if 
they  shall  be,  and  can  now  no  longer  be  corrupt¬ 
ed,  they  shall  be  better  than  before,  because 
they  shall  abide  incorruptibly.  And  what  more 
monstrous  than  to  affirm  things  to  become  bet¬ 
ter  by  losing  all  their  good?  Therefore,  if  they 
shall  be  deprived  of  all  good,  they  shall  no  long¬ 
er  be.  So  long  therefore  as  they  are,  they  are 
good:  therefore  whatsoever  is,  is  good.  That 
evil  then,  which  I  sought  whence  it  is,  is  not  any 
substance :  for  were  it  a  substance,  it  should  be 
good.  For  either  it  should  be  an  incorruptible 
substance,  and  so  a  chief  good;  or  a  corruptible 
substance,  which,  unless  it  were  good,  could  not 
be  corrupted.  I  perceived  therefore,  and  it  was 
manifested  to  me,  that  Thou  madest  all  things 
good,  nor  is  there  any  substance  at  all  which 
Thou  madest  not ;  and  for  that  Thou  madest  not 
all  things  equal,  therefore  are  all 7  things;  be¬ 
cause  each  is  good,  and  altogether  very  good, 
because  our  God  made  all  things  very  good.8 

1P».  39-  11,  Vulg.  2Ex.  3.  14.  3Rom.  i.  20. 

4Ps.  73.  28.  5Wisd.  7.  27.  6Ps.  17.  2. 

7See  also,  City  of  God,  Bk.  11.  22. 

8Gen.  1.  31;  Ecclus.  39.  21. 


[XIII]  19.  And  to  Thee  is  nothing  whatso¬ 
ever  evil :  yea,  not  only  to  Thee,  but  also  to  Thy 
creation  as  a  whole,  because  there  is  nothing 
without,  which  may  break  in  and  corrupt  that 
order  which  Thou  hast  appointed  it.  But  in  the 
parts  thereof  some  things,  because  unharmoniz¬ 
ing  with  other  some,  are  accounted  evil;  where¬ 
as  those  very  things  harmonize9  with  others,  and 
are  good;  and  in  themselves  are  good.  And  all 
these  things  which  harmonize  not  together  do 
yet  with  the  inferior  part,  which  we  call  Earth, 
having  its  own  cloudy  and  windy  sky  harmoniz¬ 
ing  with  it.  Far  be  it  then  that  I  should  say, 
“These  things  should  not  be”:  for  should  I  see 
nought  but  these,  I  should  indeed  long  for  the 
better;  but  still  must  even  for  these  alone  praise 
Thee ;  for  that  Thou  art  to  be  praised,  do  shew 
from  the  “earth,  dragons,  and  all  deeps,  fire, 
hail,  snow,  ice,  and  stormy  wind,  which  fulfil 
Thy  word;  mountains,  and  all  hills,  fruitful 
trees,  and  all  cedars;  beasts,  and  all  cattle, 
creeping  things,  and  flying  fowls;  kings  of  the 
earth,  and  all  people,  princes,  and  all  judges  of 
the  earth;  young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  and 
young,”  praise  Thy  Name.  But  when,  from 
heaven,  these  praise  Thee,  praise  Thee,  our 
God,  “in  the  heights,”  all  Thy  “angels,”  all  Thy 
“hosts,”  “sun  and  moon,”  all  the  stars  and 
light,  “the  Heaven  of  heavens,”  and  “the  waters 
that  be  above  the  heavens,”  praise  Thy  Name;10 
I  did  not  now  long  for  things  better,  because  I 
conceived  of  all :  and  with  a  sounder  judgment 
I  apprehended  that  the  things  above  were  bet¬ 
ter  than  these  below,  but  all  together  better  than 
those  above  by  themselves. 

[XIV]  20.  There  is  no  soundness  in  them 
whom  aught  of  Thy  creation  displeaseth :  as  nei¬ 
ther  in  me,  when  much  which  Thou  hast  made 
displeased  me.  And  because  my  soul  durst  not 
be  displeased  at  my  God,  it  would  fain  not  ac¬ 
count  that  Thine  which  displeased  it.  Hence  it 
had  gone  into  the  opinion  of  two  substances,  and 
had  no  rest,  but  talked  idly.  And  returning 
thence,  it  had  made  to  itself  a  God,  through  in¬ 
finite  measures  of  all  space;  and  thought  it  to  be 
Thee,  and  placed  it  in  its  heart ;  and  had  again 
become  the  temple  of  its  own  idol,  to  Thee 
abominable.  But  after  Thou  hadst  soothed  my 
head,  unknown  to  me,  and  closed  mine  eyes  that 
they  should  not  “behold  vanity,”  11  I  ceased 
somewhat  of  my  former  self,  and  my  phrenzy 
was  lulled  to  sleep;  and  I  awoke  in  Thee,  and 
saw  Thee  infinite,  but  in  another  way,  and  this 
sight  was  not  derived  from  the  flesh. 

[XV]  21.  And  I  looked  back  on  other  things; 

9See  above,  Bk.  v.  1.  10Ps.  148. 1-12.  nPs.  119.  37. 


ARCHBISHOP  WITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL  LIBRARY- 
San  Jess,  California 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  I  saw  that  they  owed  their  being  to  Thee, 
and  were  all  bounded  in  Thee,  but  in  a  different 
way:  not  as  being  in  space,  but  because  Thou 
containest  all  things  in  Thine  hand  in  Thy 
Truth;  and  all  things  are  true  so  far  as  they  be; 
nor  is  there  any  falsehood,  unless  when  that  is 
thought  to  be  which  is  not.  And  I  saw  that  all 
things  did  harmonize,  not  with  their  places  only, 
but  with  their  seasons.  And  that  Thou,  Who 
only  art  Eternal,  didst  not  begin  to  work  after 
innumerable  spaces  of  times  spent;  for  that  all 
spaces  of  times,  both  which  have  passed  and 
which  shall  pass,  neither  go  nor  come,  but 
through  Thee,  working,  and  abiding.1 

[XVI]  22.  And  I  perceived  and  found  it  noth¬ 
ing  strange  that  bread  which  is  pleasant  to  a 
healthy  palate  is  loathsome  to  one  distempered : 
and  to  sore  eyes  light  is  offensive,  which  to  the 
sound  is  delightful.  And  Thy  righteousness  dis- 
pleaseth  the  wicked;  much  more  the  viper  and 
reptiles,  wdiich  Thou  hast  created  good,  fitting  in 
with  the  inferior  portions  of  Thy  Creation,  with 
which  the  very  wicked  also  fit  in ;  and  that  the 
more,  by  how  much  they  be  unlike  Thee;  but 
with  the  superior  creatures,  by  how  much  "they 
become  more  like  to  Thee.  And  I  enquired  what 
iniquity  was,  and  found  it  to  be  no  substance, 
but  the  perversion  of  the  will,  turned  aside  from 
Thee,  0  God,  the  Supreme,  towards  these  lower 
things,  and  casting  out  its  bowels,2  and  puffed 
up  outwardly. 

[XVII]  23.  And  I  wondered  that  I  now  loved 
Thee,  and  no  phantasm  for  Thee.  And  yet  did  I 
not  press  on  to  enjoy  my  God ;  but  was  borne  up 
to  Thee  by  Thy  beauty,  and  soon  borne  down 
from  Thee  by  mine  own  weight,  sinking  with  sor¬ 
row  into  these  inferior  things.  This  weight  was 
carnal  custom.  Yet  dwelt  there  with  me  a  remem¬ 
brance  of  Thee;  nor  did  I  any  way  doubt  that 
there  wTas  One  to  Whom  I  might  cleave,  but  that 
I  was  not  yet  such  as  to  cleave  to  Thee:  for  that 
the  body  which  is  corrupted  presseth  down  the 
soul,  and  the  earthly  tabernacle  weigheth  down 
the  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things.3  And 
most  certain  I  was  that  Thy  “invisible  works 
from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen, 
being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made, 
even  Thy  eternal  power  and  Godhead.”  4  For  ex¬ 
amining  whence  it  was  that  I  admired  the  beau¬ 
ty  of  bodies  celestial  or  terrestrial,  and  what  aid¬ 
ed  me  in  judging  soundly  on  things  mutable  and 
pronouncing,  “This  ought  to  be  thus,  this  not”; 
examining,  I  say,  whence  it  was  that  I  so  judged, 
seeing  I  did  so  judge,  I  had  found  the  unchange- 

^ee  below,  Bk.  xi.  15,  16,  26.  2Ecclus.  10.  9. 

^Visd.  9.  15.  4Rom.  1.  20. 


able  and  true  Eternity  of  Truth,  above  my 
changeable  mind.  And  thus  by  degrees,  I  passed 
from  bodies  to  the  soul,  which  through  the  bod¬ 
ily  senses  perceives;  and  thence  to  its  inward5 
faculty,  to  which  the  bodily  senses  represent 
things  external,  whitherto  reach  the  faculties  of 
beasts;  and  thence  again  to  the  reasoning  fac¬ 
ulty,  to  which  what  is  received  from  the  senses 
of  the  body  is  referred  to  be  judged.  Which, 
finding  itself  also  to  be  in  me  a  thing  variable, 
raised  itself  up  to  its  own  understanding,  and 
drew  away  my  thoughts  from  the  power  of  hab¬ 
it,  withdrawing  itself  from  those  troops  of  con¬ 
tradictory  phantasms ;  that  so  it  might  find  what 
that  light  was,  whereby  it  was  bedewed,  when, 
without  all  doubting,  it  cried  out,  “That  the  un¬ 
changeable  was  to  be  preferred  to  the  change¬ 
able”;  whence  also  it  knew  That  Unchangeable, 
which  unless  it  had  in  some  way  known,  it  had 
had  no  sure  ground  to  prefer  it  to  the  change¬ 
able.  And  thus  with  the  flash  of  one  trembling 
glance  it  arrived  at  That  Which  Is.  And  then 
I  saw  Thy  invisible  things  understood  by  the 
things  which  are  made.6  But  I  could  not  fix  my 
gaze  thereon;  and  my  infirmity  being  struck 
back,  I  was  thrown  again  on  my  wonted  habits, 
carrying  along  with  me  only  a  loving  memory 
thereof,  and  a  longing  for  what  I  had,  as  it  were, 
perceived  the  odour  of,  but  was  not  yet  able  to 
feed  on. 

[XVIII]  24.  Then  I  sought  a  way  of  obtain¬ 
ing  strength,  sufficient  to  enjoy  Thee;  and  found 
it  not  until  I  embraced  that  “Mediator  betwixt 
God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,”  7  “who  is 
over  all,  God  blessed  for  evermore,”8  calling 
unto  me,  and  saying,  “I  am  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life,” 9  and  mingling  that  food  which  I 
was  unable  to  receive,  with  our  flesh.  For  “the 
Word  was  made  flesh,”  10  that  Thy  wisdom, 
whereby  Thou  createdst  all  things,  might  pro¬ 
vide  milk  for  our  infant  state.  For  I  did  not  hold 
to  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  humbled  to  the  hum¬ 
ble  ;  nor  knew  I  yet  whereto  His  infirmity  would 
guide  us.  For  Thy  Word,  the  Eternal  Truth,  far 
above  the  higher  parts  of  Thy  Creation,  raises 
up  the  subdued  unto  Itself :  but  in  this  lower 
world  built  for  Itself  a  lowly  habitation  of  our 
clay,  whereby  to  abase  from  themselves  such  as 
would  be  subdued,  and  bring  them  over  to  Him¬ 
self  ;  allaying  their  swelling,  and  fomenting  their 
love;  to  the  end  they  might  go  on  no  further  in 
self-confidence,  but  rather  consent  to  become 
weak,  seeing  before  their  feet  the  Divinity  weak 

6See  above,  Bk.  vn.  16.  6Rom.  1.  20. 

7I  Tim.  2.  5.  8Rom.  9.  5.  9John,  14.  6. 

10Ibid.,  1.  14. 


CONFESSIONS  VII.  22-27 


by  taking  our  “coats  of  skin”;1  and,  wearied, 
might  cast  themselves  down  upon  It,  and  It,  ris¬ 
ing,  might  lift  them  up. 

[XIX]  25.  But  I  thought  otherwise;  conceiv¬ 
ing  only  of  my  Lord  Christ,  as  of  a  man  of  excel¬ 
lent  wisdom,  whom  no  one  could  be  equalled 
unto;  especially,  for  that  being  wonderfully 
bom  of  a  Virgin,  He  seemed,  in  conformity 
therewith,  through  the  Divine  care  for  us,  to 
have  attained  that  great  eminence  of  authority, 
for  an  ensample  of  despising  things  temporal 
for  the  obtaining  of  immortality.  But  what  mys¬ 
tery  there  lay  in  “The  Word  was  made  flesh,” 2 
I  could  not  even  imagine.  Only  I  had  learnt  out 
of  what  is  delivered  to  us  in  writing  of  Him,  that 
He  did  eat.  and  drink,  sleep,  walk,  rejoiced  in 
spirit,  was  sorrowful,  discoursed;  that  flesh  did 
not  cleave  by  itself  unto  Thy  Word,  but  with 
the  human  soul  and  mind.  All  know  this,  who 
know  the  unchangeableness  of  Thy  Word,  which 
I  now  knew,  as  far  as  I  could,  nor  did  I  at  all 
doubt  thereof.  For,  now  to  move  the  limbs  of 
the  body  by  will,  now  not;  now  to  be  moved  by 
some  affection,  now  not;  now  to  deliver  wise 
sayings  through  human  signs,  now  to  keep  si¬ 
lence — belong  to  soul  and  mind  subject  to  vari¬ 
ation.  And  should  these  things  be  falsely  written 
of  Him,  all  the  rest  also  would  risk  the  charge, 
nor  would  there  remain  in  those  books  any  sav¬ 
ing  faith  for  mankind.  Since  then  they  were 
written  truly,  I  acknowledged  a  perfect  man  to 
be  in  Christ ;  not  the  body  of  a  man  only,  nor, 
with  the  body,  a  sensitive  soul  without  a  ration¬ 
al,  but  very  man;  whom,  not  only  as  being  a 
form  of  Truth,  but  for  a  certain  great  excellen¬ 
cy  of  human  nature  and  a  more  perfect  partici¬ 
pation  of  wisdom,  I  judged  to  be  preferred  be¬ 
fore  others.  But  Alypius  imagined  the  Catholics 
to  believe  God  to  be  so  clothed  with  flesh  that, 
besides  God  and  flesh,  there  was  no  soul  at  all 
in  Christ,  and  did  not  think  that  a  human  mind 
was  ascribed  to  Him.  And  because  he  was  well 
persuaded  that  the  actions  recorded  of  Him 
could  only  be  performed  by  a  vital  and  a  ration¬ 
al  creature,  he  moved  the  more  slowly  towards 
the  Christian  Faith.  But  understanding  after¬ 
wards  that  this  was  the  error  of  the  Apollinarian 
heretics,  he  joyed  in  and  wras  conformed  to  the 
Catholic  Faith.  But  somewhat  later,  I  confess, 
did  I  learn  how  in  that  saying,  “The  Word  was 
made  flesh,”  the  Catholic  Truth  is  distinguished 
from  the  falsehood  of  Photinus.  For  the  rejec¬ 
tion  of  heretics  makes  the  tenets  of  Thy  Church 
and  sound  doctrine  to  stand  out  more  clearly. 
For  there  must  also  be  heresies,  that  the  ap- 
1Gen.  3.  21.  2John,  i.  14. 


proved  may  be  made  manifest  among  the  weak.3 

[XX]  26.  But  having  then  read  those  books 
of  the  Platonists,  and  thence  been  taught  to 
search  for  incorporeal  truth,  I  saw  Thy  invisible 
things,  understood  by  those  things  which  are 
made;4  and  though  cast  back,  I  perceived  what 
that  was,  which  through  the  darkness  of  my 
mind  I  was  hindered  from  contemplating,  being 
assured,  “That  Thou  wert,  and  wert  infinite, 
and  yet  not  diffused  in  space,  finite  or  infinite; 
and  that  Thou  truly  art  who  art  the  same  ever,5 
in  no  part  nor  motion,  varying;  and  that  all  oth¬ 
er  things  are  from  Thee,  on  this  most  sure 
ground  alone,  that  they  are.”  Of  these  things  I 
was  assured,  yet  too  unsure  to  enjoy  Thee.  I 
prated  as  one  well  skilled;  but  had  I  not  sought 
Thy  way  in  Christ  our  Saviour,  I  had  proved  to 
be,  not  skilled,  but  killed.  For  now  I  had  begun 
to  wish  to  seem  wise,  being  filled  with  mine  own 
punishment,  yet  I  did  not  mourn,  but  rather 
scorn,  puffed  up  with  knowledge.6  For  where 
was  that  charity  building  upon  the  “foundation” 
of  humility,  “which  is  Christ  Jesus”?  7  or  when 
should  these  books  teach  me  it?  Upon  these,  I 
believe,  Thou  therefore  willedst  that  I  should 
fall,  before  I  studied  Thy  Scriptures,  that  it 
might  be  imprinted  on  my  memory,  how  I  was 
affected  by  them;  and  that  afterwards  when  my 
spirits  were  tamed  through  Thy  books,  and  my 
wounds  touched  by  Thy  healing  fingers,  I  might 
discern  and  distinguish  between  presumption 
and  confession;  between  those  who  saw  whither 
they  were  to  go,  yet  saw  not  the  way,8  and  the 
way  that  leadeth  not  to  behold  only  but  to  dwell 
in  the  beatific  country.  For  had  I  first  been 
formed  in  Thy  Holy  Scriptures,  and  hadst  Thou, 
in  the  familiar  use  of  them,  grown  sweet  unto 
me,  and  had  I  then  fallen  upon  those  other  vol¬ 
umes,  they  might  perhaps  have  withdrawn  me 
from  the  solid  ground  of  piety;  or,  had  I  con¬ 
tinued  in  that  healthful  frame  which  I  had 
thence  imbibed,  I  might  have  thought  that  it 
might  have  been  obtained  by  the  study  of  those 
books  alone. 

[XXI]  27.  Most  eagerly  then  did  I  seize  that 
venerable  writing  of  Thy  Spirit ;  and  chiefly  the 
Apostle  Paul.  Whereupon  those  difficulties  van¬ 
ished  away,  wherein  he  once  seemed  to  me  to 
contradict  himself,  and  the  text  of  his  discourse 
not  to  agree  with  the  testimonies  of  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets.  And  the  face  of  that  pure  word  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  one  and  the  same ;  and  I  learned  to 
“rejoice  with  trembling.” 9  So  I  began;  and 

3I  Cor.  11.  tq.  4Rom.  1.  20. 

6See  above,  Bk.  vn.  17.  6I  Cor.  8.  1.  7 Ibid.,  3.  11. 

8See  also,  City  of  God,  Bk.  xi.  2.  9Ps.  2.  11. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


whatsoever  truth  I  had  read  in  those  other 
books,  I  found  here  amid  the  praise  of  Thy 
Grace ;  that  whoso  sees  may  not  so  glory  as  if  he 
had  not  received.1  not  only  what  he  sees,  but 
also  that  he  sees  (for  what  hath  he,  which  he 
hath  not  received?),  and  that  he  may  be  not 
only  admonished  to  behold  Thee,  Who  art  ever 
the  same,  but  also  healed,  to  hold  Thee;  and 
that  he  who  cannot  see  afar  off  may  yet  walk  on 
the  way,  whereby  he  may  arrive,  and  behold, 
and  hold  Thee.  For,  though  a  man  be  “delighted 
with  the  law  of  God  after  the  inner  man,”2 
what  shall  he  do  with  that  other  law  in  his  mem¬ 
bers  which  warreth  against  the  law  of  his  mind, 
and  bringeth  him  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin 
which  is  in  his  members?  3  For  Thou  art  right¬ 
eous.  0  Lord,  but  we  have  sinned  and  committed 
iniquity,  and  have  done  wickedly,4  and  Thy 
hand  is  grown  heavy  upon  us,  and  we  are  justly 
delivered  over  unto  that  ancient  sinner,  the  king 
of  death;  because  he  persuaded  our  will  to  be 
like  his  will,  whereby  he  abode  not  in  Thy  truth. 
What  shall  “wretched  man”  do?  “Who  shall  de¬ 
liver  him  from  the  body  of  this  death.”  but  only 
Thy  Grace,  “through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lotd,”5 
whom  Thou  hast  begotten  co-eternal,  and 
formedst  in  the  beginning  of  Thy  ways,6  in 
whom  the  prince  of  this  world  found  nothing 
worthy  of  death,7  yet  killed  he  Him;8  and  the 
handwriting,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  was 
blotted  out?9  This  those  writings  contain  not. 
Those  pages  present  not  the  image  of  this  piety, 
the  tears  of  confession.  Thy  sacrifice,  a  troubled 
spirit,  “a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,”  10  the  sal¬ 
vation  of  the  people,  the  Bridal  City,11  the  earn¬ 
est  of  the  Holy  Ghost,12  the  Cup  of  our  Redemp¬ 
tion.13  No  man  sings  there,  Shall  not  my  soul  be 
submitted  unto  God?  for  of  Him  cometh  my  sal¬ 
vation.  For  he  is  my  God  and  my  salvation,  my 
guardian,  I  shall  no  more  be  moved.14  No  one 
there  hears  Him  call,  “Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that 
labour.”  They  scorn  to  learn  of  Him,  because 
He  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ; 15  for  these  things 
“hast  Thou  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 
hast  revealed  them  unto  babes.16  For  it  is  one 
thing,  from  the  mountain’s  shaggy  top  to  see  the 
land  of  peace,17  and  to  find  no  way  thither;  and 
in  vain  to  essay  through  ways  unpassable,  op¬ 
posed  and  beset  by  fugitives  and  deserters,  un- 

JI  Cor.  4.  7.  2Rom.  7.  22.  zIbid.,  ver.  23. 

*Song  of  the  Three  Holy  Children ,  4  sq. 

5Rom.  8.  24,  25. 

6See  also,  On  Christian  Doctrine,  Bk.  1,  ch.  34. 

7John,  18.  38.  8See  below,  Bk.  ix.  36.  9Col.  2.  14. 

10Ps.  51.  17.  nRev.  22.  2.  “II  Cor.  5.  2. 

13Ps.  1 16,  13.  uIbid.,  62.  1,  2.  15Matt.  11.  28,  29. 

l*Ibid.,  ver.  25.  17Deut.  32.  49. 


der  their  captain  the  “lion”  18  and  the  “drag¬ 
on”:19  and  another  to  keep  on  the  way  that  leads 
thither,  guarded  by  the  host  of  the  heavenly 
General ;  where  they  spoil  not  who  have  desert¬ 
ed  the  heavenly  army;  for  they  avoid  it,  as  very 
torment.  These  things  did  wonderfully  sink  into 
my  bowels,  when  I  read  that  “least  of  Thy  Apos¬ 
tles,”  20  and  had  meditated  upon  Thy  works,  and 
trembled  exceedingly. 

BOOK  VIII.  Augustine's  thirty-second  year.  He 
consults  Simplicianus,  from  him  hears  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  conversion  of  Victorinus,  and 
longs  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  God ,  hut  is 
mastered  by  his  old  habits;  is  still  further 
roused  by  the  history  of  St.  Anthony,  and  the 
conversion  of  two  courtiers;  during  a  severe 
struggle,  hears  a  voice  from  heaven,  opens 
Scripture,  and  is  converted,  with  his  friend 
Alypius.  His  mother's  vision  fulfilled. 

[I]  1.  0  my  God,  let  me  with  thanksgiving  re¬ 
member,  and  confess  unto  Thee,  Thy  mercies  on 
me.  Let  my  bones  be  bedewed  with  Thy  love,  and 
let  them  say  unto  Thee,  “Who  is  like  unto  Thee, 
0  Lord?” 21  Thou  hast  broken  my  bonds  in  sun¬ 
der,  I  will  offer  unto  Thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanks¬ 
giving.”  22  And  how  Thou  hast  broken  them,  I 
will  declare;  and  all  who  worship  Thee,  when 
they  hear  this,  shall  say,  “Blessed  be  the  Lord, 
in  heaven  and  in  earth,  great  and  wonderful  is 
His  name.”  Thy  words  had  stuck  fast  in  my 
heart,  and  I  was  hedged  round  about  on  all  sides 
by  Thee.23  Of  Thy  eternal  life  I  was  now  certain, 
though  I  saw  it  in  a  figure  and  as  “through  a 
glass.”24  Yet  I  had  ceased  to  doubt  that  there 
was  an  incorruptible  substance,  whence  was  all 
other  substance;  nor  did  I  now  desire  to  be  more 
certain  of  Thee,  but  more  steadfast  in  Thee.  But 
for  my  temporal  life,  all  was  wavering,  and  my 
heart  had  to  be  purged  from  the  old  leaven.25 
The  “Way,” 26  the  Saviour  Himself,  well  pleased 
me,  but  as  yet  I  shrunk  from  going  through  its 
straitness.  And  Thou  didst  put  into  my  mind, 
and  it  seemed  good  in  my  eyes,  to  go  to  Simplici¬ 
anus,  who  seemed  to  me  a  good  servant  of 
Thine;  and  Thy  grace  shone  in  him.  I  had  heard 
also  that  from  his  very  youth  he  had  lived  most 
devoted  unto  Thee.  Now  he  was  grown  into 
years;  and  by  reason  of  so  great  age  spent  in 
such  zealous  following  of  Thy  ways,  he  seemed 
to  me  likely  to  have  learned  much  experience ; 
and  so  he  had.  Out  of  which  store,  I  wished  that 
he  would  tell  me  (setting  before  him  my  anxie- 

18I  Pet.  5.  8.  19Rev.  12.  3.  20I  Cor.  15.  9- 

21Ps.  35.  10.  MPs.  116.  16,  17.  23Job,  1.  10. 

24I  Cor.  13.  12.  25 Ibid .,  5.  7.  26John,  14.  6. 


CONFESSIONS  VIII.  1-4  53 


ties)  which  were  the  fittest  way  for  one  in  my 
case  to  walk  in  Thy  paths. 

2.  For  I  saw  the  church  full ;  and  one  went  this 
way,  and  another  that  way.  But  I  was  displeased 
that  I  led  a  secular  life;  yea.  now  that  my  de¬ 
sires  no  longer  inflamed  me,  as  of  old.  with 
hopes  of  honour  and  profit,  a  very  grievous  bur¬ 
den  it  was  to  undergo  so  heavy  a  bondage.  For, 
in  comparison  of  Thy  sweetness,  and  the  beauty 
of  Thy  house  which  I  loved,1  those  things  de¬ 
lighted  me  no  longer.  But  still  I  was  enthralled 
with  the  love  of  woman;  nor  did  the  Apostle 
forbid  me  to  marry,  although  he  advised  me  to 
something  better,  chiefly  wishing  that  all  men 
were  as  himself  was.2  But  I,  being  weak,  chose 
the  more  indulgent  place;  and  because  of  this 
alone  wras  tossed  up  and  down  in  all  beside,  faint 
and  wasted  with  withering  cares,  because  in 
other  matters  I  was  constrained  against  my  will 
to  conform  myself  to  a  married  life,  to  which  I 
was  given  up  and  enthralled.  I  had  heard  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Truth  that  “there  were  some 
eunuchs,  which  had  made  themselves  eunuchs 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven’s  sake”:  but,  saith 
He,  “let  him  who  can  receive  it  receive  it.”3 
Surely  vain  are  all  men  who  are  ignorant  of  God, 
and  could  not  out  of  the  good  things  which  are 
seen,  find  out  Him  who  is  good.4  But  I  was  no 
longer  in  that  vanity;  I  had  surmounted  it;  and, 
by  the  common  witness  of  all  Thy  creatures,  had 
found  Thee  our  Creator,5  and  Thy  Word,  God 
with  Thee,  and  together  with  Thee  one  God,  by 
whom  Thou  createdst  all  things.  There  is  yet  an¬ 
other  kind  of  ungodly,  who  “knowing  God,  glori¬ 
fied  Him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful.” 6 
Into  this  also  had  I  fallen,  but  Thy  right  hand 
upheld  me,7  and  took  me  thence,  and  Thou 
placedst  me  where  I  might  recover.  For  Thou 
hadst  said  unto  man,  “Behold,  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  wisdom,”8  and  desire  not  to  seem  wise;9 
because  they  “who  affirmed  themselves  to  be 
wise  became  fools.”  10  But  I  had  now  found  the 
goodly  pearl,  which,  selling  all  that  I  had,  I 
ought  to  have  bought,11  and  I  hesitated. 

[II]  3.  To  Simplicianus  then  I  went,  the  fa¬ 
ther  of  Ambrose  (a  Bishop  now)  in  receiving 
Thy  grace,  and  whom  Ambrose  truly  loved  as  a 
father.  To  him  I  related  the  mazes  of  my  wan¬ 
derings.  But  when  I  mentioned  that  I  had  read 
certain  books  of  the  Platonists,  which  Victori- 
nus,  sometime  Rhetoric  Professor  of  Rome 
(who  had  died  a  Christian,  as  I  had  heard),  had 

Ts.  26.  8.  2I  Cor.  7.  7.  3Matt.  19.  12. 

4\Visd.  13.  1.  6See  above,  Bk.  iv.  18. 

6Rom.  1.  21.  7Ps.  18.  35.  8Job,  28.  28. 

9Prov.  3.  7.  10Rom.  1.  22.  nMatt.  13.  46. 


translated  into  Latin,  he  testified  his  joy  that  I 
had  not  fallen  upon  the  writings  of  other  philos¬ 
ophers,  full  of  fallacies  and  deceits,  “after  the 
rudiments  of  this  world,”  12  whereas  the  Platon¬ 
ists13  many  ways  led  to  the  belief  in  God,  and 
His  Word.  Then  to  exhort  me  to  the  humility  of 
Christ,14  hidden  from  the  wise,  and  revealed  to 
little  ones,15  he  spoke  of  Victorinus  himself 
whom  while  at  Rome  he  had  most  intimately 
known:  and  of  him  he  related  what  I  will  not 
conceal.  For  it  contains  great  praise  of  Thy 
grace,  to  be  confessed  unto  Thee,  how  that  aged 
man,  most  learned  and  skilled  in  the  liberal  sci¬ 
ences,  and  who  had  read  and  weighed  so  many 
works  of  the  philosophers ;  the  instructor  of  so 
many  noble  Senators,  who  also,  as  a  monument 
of  his  excellent  discharge  of  his  office,  had 
(which  men  of  this  world  esteem  a  high  honour) 
both  deserved  and  obtained  a  statue  in  the  Ro¬ 
man  Forum;  he,  to  that  age  a  worshipper  of 
idols,  and  a  partaker  of  the  sacrilegious  rites,  to 
which  almost  all  the  nobility  of  Rome  were  giv¬ 
en  up,  and  had  inspired  the  people  with  the  love 
of 

Anubis,  barking  Deity,  and  all 

The  monster  Gods  of  every  kind,  who  fought 

’ Gainst  Neptune,  Venus,  and  Minerva :16 

whom  Rome  once  conquered,  now  adored,  all 
which  the  aged  Victorinus  had  with  thundering 
eloquence  so  many  years  defended — he  now 
blushed  not  to  be  the  child  of  Thy  Christ,  and 
the  new-born  babe  of  Thy  fountain ;  submitting 
his  neck  to  the  yoke  of  humility,  and  subduing 
his  forehead  to  the  reproach  of  the  Cross. 

4.  0  Lord,  Lord,  which  hast  bowed  the  heav¬ 
ens  and  come  down,  touched  the  mountains  and 
they  did  smoke,17  by  what  means  didst  Thou 
convey  Thyself  into  that  breast?  He  used  to 
read  (as  Simplicianus  said)  the  Holy  Scripture, 
most  studiously  sought  and  searched  into  all  the 
Christian  writings,  and  said  to  Simplicianus  (not 
openly,  but  privately  and  as  a  friend),  “Under¬ 
stand  that  I  am  already  a  Christian.”  Whereto 
he  answered,  “I  will  not  believe  it,  nor  will  I 
rank  you  among  Christians,  unless  I  see  you  in 
the  Church  of  Christ.”  The  other,  in  banter,  re¬ 
plied.  “Do  walls  then  make  Christians?”  And 
this  he  often  said,  that  he  was  already  a  Chris¬ 
tian;  and  Simplicianus  as  often  made  the  same 
answer,  and  the  conceit  of  the  “walls”  was  by 
the  other  as  often  renewed.  For  he  feared  to  of¬ 
fend  his  friends,  proud  daemon-worshippers, 

12Col.  2.  8.  13Cf.  City  of  God,  Bk.  x.  29. 

14See  above,  Bk.  iv.  19.  16Matt.  11.  25. 

mAZneid,  vm.  698-700.  17Ps.  144.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


from  the  height  of  whose  Babylonian  dignity,  as 
from  cedars  of  Libanus,  which  the  Lord  had  not 
yet  broken  down,1  he  supposed  the  weight  of  en¬ 
mity  would  fall  upon  him.  But  after  that  by 
reading  and  earnest  thought  he  had  gathered 
firmness,  and  feared  to  be  denied  by  Christ  be¬ 
fore  the  holy  angels,  should  he  now  be  afraid  to 
confess  him  before  men,2  and  appeared  to  him¬ 
self  guilty  of  a  heavy  offence,  in  being  ashamed 
of  the  Sacraments  of  the  humility  of  Thy  Word, 
and  not  being  ashamed  of  the  sacrilegious  rites 
of  those  proud  daemons,  whose  pride  he  had  imi¬ 
tated  and  their  rites  adopted,  he  became  bold¬ 
faced  against  vanity,  and  shame-faced  towards 
the  truth,  and  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  said 
to  Simplicianus  (as  himself  told  me),  “Go  we  to 
the  Church;  I  wish  to  be  made  a  Christian.” 
But  he,  not  containing  himself  for  joy,  went 
with  him.  And  having  been  admitted  to  the  first 
Sacrament  and  become  a  catechumen,  not  long 
after  he  further  gave  in  his  name  that  he  might 
be  regenerated  by  baptism,  Rome  wondering, 
the  Church  rejoicing.  The  proud  saw,  and  were 
wroth;  they  gnashed  with  their  teeth,  and  melt¬ 
ed  away.3  But  the  Lord  God  was  the  hope  oT  Thy 
servant,  and  he  regarded  not  vanities  and  lying 
madness.4 

5.  To  conclude,  when  the  hour  was  come  for 
making  profession  of  his  faith  (which  at  Rome 
they  who  are  about  to  approach  to  Thy  grace  de¬ 
liver,  from  an  elevated  place,  in  the  sight  of  all 
the  faithful,  in  a  set  form  of  words5  committed 
to  memory) ,  the  presbyters,  he  said,  offered  Vic¬ 
torious  (as  was  done  to  such  as  seemed  likely 
through  bashfulness  to  be  alarmed)  to  make  his 
profession  more  privately;  but  he  chose  rather 
to  profess  his  salvation  in  the  presence  of  the 
holy  multitude.  “For  it  was  not  salvation  that  he 
taught  in  rhetoric,  and  yet  that  he  had  publicly 
professed.  How  much  less  then  ought  he,  when 
pronouncing  Thy  word,  to  dread  Thy  meek 
flock,  who,  when  delivering  his  own  words,  had 
not  feared  a  mad  multitude!”  When,  then,  he 
went  up  to  make  his  profession,  all,  as  they 
knew  him,  whispered  his  name  one  to  another 
with  the  voice  of  congratulation.  And  who  there 
knew  him  not?  and  there  ran  a  low  murmur 
through  all  the  mouths  of  the  rejoicing  multi¬ 
tude,  “Victorinus!  Victorinus!”  Sudden  was  the 
burst  of  rapture,  that  they  saw  him;  suddenly 
were  they  hushed  that  they  might  hear  him.  He 
pronounced  the  true  faith  with  an  excellent 
boldness,  and  all  wished  to  draw  him  into  their 
very  heart:  yea,  by  their  love  and  joy  they  drew 

JPs.  29.  5.  2Luke,  9.  26.  3Ps.  112.  10. 

*Ibid.,  31.  6,  14,  18.  6The  Apostles’  Creed. 


him  thither;  such  were  the  hands  wherewith 
they  drew  him. 

[Ill]  6.  Good  God!  what  takes  place  in  man, 
that  he  should  more  rejoice  at  the  salvation  of  a 
soul  despaired  of,  and  freed  from  greater  peril, 
than  if  there  had  always  been  hope  of  him,  or 
the  danger  had  been  less?  For  so  Thou  also, 
merciful  Father,  dost  “more  rejoice  over  one 
penitent,  than  over  ninety-nine  just  persons  that 
need  no  repentance.”  And  with  much  joyfulness 
do  we  hear,  so  often  as  we  hear  with  what  joy 
the  sheep  which  had  strayed,  is  brought  back  up¬ 
on  the  shepherd’s  shoulder,  and  the  groat  is  re¬ 
stored  to  Thy  treasury,  the  neighbours  rejoicing 
with  the  woman  who  found  it;6  and  the  joy  of 
the  solemn  service  of  Thy  house  forceth  to  tears, 
when  in  Thy  house  it  is  read  of  Thy  younger  son, 
that  he  “was  dead,  and  lived  again;  had  been 
lost,  and  is  found.”  7  For  Thou  rejoicest  in  us, 
and  in  Thy  holy  angels,  holy  through  holy  char¬ 
ity.  For  Thou  art  ever  the  same;  for  all  things 
which  abide  not  the  same  nor  for  ever,  Thou  for 
ever  knowest  in  the  same  way. 

7.  What  then  takes  place  in  the  soul,  when  it  is 
more  delighted  at  finding  or  recovering  the 
things  it  loves  than  if  it  had  ever  had  them?  yea, 
and  other  things  witness  hereunto ;  and  all  things 
are  full  of  witnesses,  crying  out,  “so  is  it.”  The 
conquering  commander  triumpheth ;  yet  had  he 
not  conquered,  unless  he  had  fought;  and  the 
more  peril  there  was  in  the  battle,  so  much  the 
more  joy  is  there  in  the  triumph.  The  storm 
tosses  the  sailors,  threatens  shipwreck;  all  wax 
pale  at  approaching  death;  sky  and  sea  are 
calmed,  and  they  are  exceeding  joyed,  as  having 
been  exceeding  afraid.  A  friend  is  sick,  and  his 
pulse  threatens  danger;  all  who  long  for  his  re¬ 
covery  are  sick  in  mind  with  him.  He  is  restored, 
though  as  yet  he  walks  not  with  his  former 
strength ;  yet  there  is  such  joy  as  was  not  when 
before  he  walked  sound  and  strong.  Yea,  the 
very  pleasures  of  human  life  men  acquire  by  dif¬ 
ficulties,  not  those  only  which  fall  upon  us  un¬ 
looked  for,  and  against  our  wills,  but  even  by 
self-chosen  and  pleasure-seeking  trouble.  Eating 
and  drinking  have  no  pleasure,  unless  there  pre¬ 
cede  the  pinching  of  hunger  and  thirst.  Men, 
given  to  drink,  eat  certain  salt  meats,  to  procure 
a  troublesome  heat,  which,  the  drink  allaying, 
causes  pleasure.  It  is  also  ordered  that  the  affi¬ 
anced  bride  should  not  at  once  be  given,  lest  as 
a  husband  he  should  hold  cheap  whom,  as  be¬ 
trothed,  he  sighed  not  after. 

8.  This  law  holds  in  foul  and  accursed  joy; 
this,  in  permitted  and  lawful  joy;  this,  in  the 

6Luke  15.  4-10.  7Ibid.,  ver.  32. 


CONFESSIONS  VIII.  5-1 1  55 


very  purest  perfection  of  friendship;  this,  in  him 
who  was  dead,  and  lived  again,  had  been  lost, 
and  was  found.1  Everywhere  the  greater  joy  is 
ushered  in  by  the  greater  pain.  What  means  this, 
0  Lord  my  God,  whereas  Thou  art  everlastingly 
joy  to  Thyself,  and  some  things  around  Thee 
evermore  rejoice  in  Thee?2  What  means  this, 
that  this  portion  of  things  thus  ebbs  and  flows 
alternately  displeased  and  reconciled?  Is  this 
their  allotted  measure?  Is  this  all  Thou  hast  as¬ 
signed  to  them,  whereas  from  the  highest  heav¬ 
ens  to  the  lowest  earth,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  to  the  end  of  ages,  from  the  angel  to 
the  worm,  from  the  first  motion  to  the  last,  Thou 
settest  each  in  its  place,  and  realizest  each  in 
their  season,  everything  good  after  its  kind? 
Woe  is  me!  how  high  art  Thou  in  the  highest, 
and  how  deep  in  the  deepest!  and  Thou  never 
departest,  and  we  scarcely  return  to  Thee. 

9.  Up,  Lord,  and  do;  stir  us  up,  and  recall  us; 
kindle  and  draw  us;  inflame,  grow  sweet  unto 
us;  let  us  now  love,  “let  us  run.”3  Do  not  many, 
out  of  a  deeper  hell  of  blindness  than  Victorinus, 
return  to  Thee,  approach,  and  are  enlightened, 
receiving  that  Light  which  they  who  receive,  re¬ 
ceive  power  from  Thee  to  become  Thy  sons?4 
But  if  they  be  less  known  to  the  nations,  even 
they  that  know  them  joy  less  for  them.  For 
when  many  joy  together,  each  also  has  more  ex¬ 
uberant  joy;  for  that  they  are  kindled  and  in¬ 
flamed  one  by  the  other.  Again,  because  those 
known  to  many  influence  the  more  towards  sal¬ 
vation,  and  lead  the  way  with  many  to  follow. 
And  therefore  do  they  also  who  preceded  them 
much  rejoice  in  them,  because  they  rejoice  not 
in  them  alone.  For  far  be  it  that  in  Thy  taber¬ 
nacle  the  persons  of  the  rich  should  be  accepted 
before  the  poor,  or  the  noble  before  the  ignoble; 
seeing  rather  “Thou  hast  chosen  the  weak  things 
of  the  world,  to  confound  the  strong;  and  the 
base  things  of  this  world,  and  the  things  de¬ 
spised  hast  Thou  chosen,  and  those  things  which 
are  not,  that  Thou  mightest  bring  to  nought 
things  that  are.5  And  yet  even  that  “least  of  Thy 
apostles,”6  by  whose  tongue  Thou  soundedst 
forth  these  words,  when  through  his  warfare 
Paulus  the  Proconsul,7  his  pride  conquered,  was 
made  to  pass  under  the  easy  yoke8  of  Thy 
Christ,  and  became  a  provincial  of  the  great 
King;  he  also,  for  his  former  name  Saul,  was 
pleased  to  be  called  Paul,  in  testimony  of  so 
great  a  victory.  For  the  enemy  is  more  overcome 
in  one  of  whom  he  hath  more  hold;  by  whom  he 

^uke,  15.  32.  2See  below,  Bk.  xii.  12;  Bk.  xm.  11. 

3Cant.  1.  4.  4John,  i.  12.  6I  Cor.  1.  27,  28. 

*Ibid.,  15.  9.  7Acts,  13.  12.  8Matt.  n.  30. 


hath  hold  of  more.  But  the  proud  he  hath  more 
hold  of,  through  their  nobility;  and  by  them,  of 
more  through  their  authority.  By  how  much  the 
more  welcome  then  the  heart  of  Victorinus  was 
esteemed,  which  the  devil  had  held  as  an  im¬ 
pregnable  possession;  the  tongue  of  Victorinus, 
with  which  mighty  and  keen  weapon  he  had  slain 
many;  so  much  the  more  abundantly  ought  Thy 
sons  to  rejoice,  for  that  our  King  hath  bound  the 
strong  man,9  and  they  saw  his  vessels  taken 
from  him  and  cleansed,10  and  made  meet  for 
Thy  honour,  and  become  serviceable  for  the 
Lord,  unto  every  good  work.11 

[V]  10.  But  when  that  man  of  Thine,  Simpli- 
cianus,  related  to  me  this  of  Victorinus,  I  was  on 
fire  to  imitate  him;  for  for  this  very  end  had  he 
related  it.  But  when  he  had  subjoined  also  how, 
in  the  days  of  the  Emperor  Julian,  a  law  was 
made  whereby  Christians  were  forbidden  to 
teach  the  liberal  sciences  or  oratory;  and  how 
he,  obeying  this  law,  chose  rather  to  give  over 
the  wordy  school,  than  Thy  Word,  by  which 
Thou  makest  eloquent  the  tongues  of  the 
dumb;12  he  seemed  to  me  not  more  resolute  than 
blessed,  in  having  thus  found  opportunity  to 
wait  on  Thee  only.  Which  thing  I  was  sighing 
for,  bound  as  I  was,  not  with  another’s  irons,  but 
by  my  own  iron  will.  My  will  the  enemy  held, 
and  thence  had  made  a  chain  for  me,  and  bound 
me.  For  of  a  froward  will  was  a  lust  made ;  and  a 
lust  served  became  custom ;  and  custom  not  re¬ 
sisted  became  necessity.  By  which  links,  as  it 
were,  joined  together  (whence  I  called  it  a 
“chain”),  a  hard  bondage  held  me  enthralled. 
But  that  new  will  which  had  begun  to  be  in  me, 
freely  to  serve  Thee,  and  to  wish  to  enjoy  Thee, 
0  God,  the  only  assured  pleasantness,  was  not 
yet  able  to  overcome  my  former  wilfulness, 
strengthened  by  age.  Thus  did  my  two  wills,  one 
new,  and  the  other  old,  one  carnal,  the  other 
spiritual,  struggle  within  me;  and  by  their  dis¬ 
cord,  undid  my  soul. 

11.  Thus  I  understood,  by  my  own  experience, 
what  I  had  read,  how  “the  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  spirit  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.”  13  My¬ 
self  verily  either  way;  yet  more  myself,  in  that 
which  I  approved  in  myself,  than  in  that  which 
in  myself  I  disapproved.  For  in  this  last,  it  was 
now  for  the  more  part  not  myself,  because  in 
much  I  rather  endured  against  my  will,  than 
acted  willingly.  And  yet  it  was  through  me  that 
custom  had  obtained  this  power  of  warring 
against  me,  because  I  had  come  willingly,  whith¬ 
er  I  willed  not.  And  who  has  any  right  to  speak 

9Ibid .,  12.  29.  10Luke,  11.  22,  25.  nII  Tim.  2.  21. 

^Wisd.  10.  21.  13Gal.  5.  17. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


against  it,  if  just  punishment  follow  the  sinner? 
Nor  had  I  now  any  longer  my  former  plea,  that 
I  therefore  as  yet  hesitated  to  be  above  the 
world  and  serve  Thee,  for  that  the  truth  was  not 
altogether  ascertained  to  me ;  for  now  it  too  was. 
But  I,  still  under  service  to  the  earth,  refused  to 
fight  under  Thy  banner,  and  feared  as  much  to 
be  freed  of  all  incumbrances,  as  we  should  fear 
to  be  encumbered  with  it.  Thus  with  the  baggage 
of  this  present  world  was  I  held  down  pleasant¬ 
ly,  as  in  sleep :  and  the  thoughts  wherein  I  medi¬ 
tated  on  Thee  were  like  the  efforts  of  such  as 
would  awake,  who  yet,  overcome  with  a  heavy 
drowsiness,  are  again  drenched  therein.  And  as 
no  one  would  sleep  for  ever,  and  in  all  men’s  so¬ 
ber  judgment,  waking  is  better,  yet  a  man  for 
the  most  part,  feeling  a  heavy  lethargy  in  all  his 
limbs,  defers  to  shake  off  sleep,  and,  though  half 
displeased,  yet,  even  after  it  is  time  to  rise,  with 
pleasure  yields  to  it,  so  was  I  assured  that  much 
better  were  it  for  me  to  give  myself  up  to  thy 
charity,  than  to  give  myself  over  to  mine  own 
cupidity;  but  though  the  former  course  satisfied 
me  and  gained  the  mastery,  the  latter  pleased 
me  and  held  me  mastered.  Nor  had  I  anything  to 
answer  Thee  calling  to  me,  “Awake,  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light.”1  And  when  Thou  didst  on 
all  sides  shew  me  that  what  Thou  saidst  was 
true,  I.  convicted  by  the  truth,  had  nothing  at 
all  to  answer,  but  only  those  dull  and  drowsy 
words,  “Anon,  anon,”  ‘‘presently,”  “leave  me 
but  a  little.”  But  “presently,  presently,”  had  no 
present,  and  my  “little  while”  went  on  for  a  long 
while;  in  vain  I  “delighted  in  Thy  law  according 
to  the  inner  man,”  when  “another  law  in  my 
members  rebelled  against  the  law  of  my  mind, 
and  led  me  captive  under  the  law  of  sin  which 
was  in  my  members.”  For  the  law  of  sin  is  the 
violence  of  custom,  whereby  the  mind  is  drawn 
and  holden,  even  against  its  will;  but  deservedly, 
for  that  it  willingly  fell  into  it.  “Who  then  should 
deliver  me  thus  wretched  from  the  body  of  this 
death,”  but  Thy  grace  only,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord?2 

[VI]  13.  And  how  Thou  didst  deliver  me  out 
of  the  bonds  of  desire,  wherewith  I  was  bound 
most  straitly  to  carnal  concupiscence,  and  out 
of  the  drudgery  of  worldly  things,  I  will  now  de¬ 
clare,  and  confess  unto  Thy  name,  “0  Lord,  my 
helper  and  my  redeemer.”3  Amid  increasing  anx¬ 
iety,  I  was  doing  my  wonted  business,  and  daily 
sighing  unto  Thee.  I  attended  Thy  Church,  when¬ 
ever  free  from  the  business  under  the  bur¬ 
den  of  which  I  groaned.  Alypius  was  with  me, 
1Eph.  5.  14.  2Rom.  7.  22-24.  3Ps.  19.  14. 


now  after  the  third  sitting  released  from  his  law 
business,  and  awaiting  to  whom  to  sell  his  coun¬ 
sel,  as  I  sold  the  skill  of  speaking,  if  indeed 
teaching  can  impart  it.  Nebridius  had  now,  in 
consideration  of  our  friendship,  consented  to 
teach  under  Verecundus,  a  citizen  and  a  gram¬ 
marian  of  Milan,  and  a  very  intimate  friend  of 
us  all;  who  urgently  desired,  and  by  the  right  of 
friendship  challenged  from  our  company,  such 
faithful  aid  as  he  greatly  needed.  Nebridius 
then  was  not  drawn  to  this  by  any  desire  of  ad¬ 
vantage  (for  he  might  have  made  much  more  of 
his  learning  had  he  so  willed)  but,  as  a  most 
kind  and  gentle  friend,  he  would  not  be  wanting 
to  a  good  office,  and  slight  our  request.  But  he 
acted  herein  very  discreetly,  shunning  to  be¬ 
come  known  to  personages  great  according  to 
this  world,  avoiding  the  distraction  of  mind 
thence  ensuing,  and  desiring  to  have  it  free 
and  at  leisure,  as  many  hours  as  might  be,  to 
seek,  or  read,  or  hear  something  concerning 
wisdom. 

14.  Upon  a  day  then,  Nebridius  being  absent 
(I  recollect  not  why),  lo,  there  came  to  see  me 
and  Alypius  one  Pontitianus,  our  countryman 
so  far  as  being  an  African,  in  high  office  in  the 
Emperor’s  court.  What  he  would  with  us,  I  know 
not.  but  we  sat  down  to  converse,  and  it  hap¬ 
pened  that  upon  a  table  for  some  game  before 
us,  he  observed  a  book,  took,  opened  it,  and  con¬ 
trary  to  his  expectation,  found  it  the  Apostle 
Paul;  for  he  had  thought  it  some  of  those  books 
which  I  was  wearing  myself  in  teaching.  Where¬ 
at  smiling,  and  looking  at  me,  he  expressed  his 
joy  and  wonder  that  he  had  on  a  sudden  found 
this  book,  and  this  only  before  my  eyes.  For  he 
was  a  Christian,  and  baptized,  and  often  bowed 
himself  before  Thee  our  God  in  the  Church,  in 
frequent  and  continued  prayers.  When  then  I 
had  told  him  that  I  bestowed  very  great  pains 
upon  those  Scriptures,  a  conversation  arose  (sug¬ 
gested  by  his  account)  on  Anthony4  the  Egyp¬ 
tian  monk,  whose  name  was  in  high  reputation 
among  Thy  servants,  though  to  that  hour  un¬ 
known  to  us.  Which  when  he  discovered,  he 
dwelt  the  more  upon  that  subject,  informing  and 
wondering  at  our  ignorance  of  one  so  eminent. 
But  we  stood  amazed,  hearing  Thy  wonderful 
works  most  fully  attested,  in  times  so  recent, 
and  almost  in  our  own,  wrought  in  the  true  Faith 
and  Church  Catholic.  We  all  wondered;  we,  that 
they  were  so  great,  and  he,  that  they  had  not 
reached  us. 

15.  Thence  his  discourse  turned  to  the  flocks 
in  the  monasteries,  and  their  holy  ways,  a  sweet- 

4See  also,  On  Christian  Doctrine ,  Fref.  4. 


CONFESSIONS  VIII.  13-18  57 


smelling  savour  unto  Thee,  and  the  fruitful  des¬ 
erts  of  the  wilderness,  whereof  we  knew  nothing. 
And  there  was  a  monastery  at  Milan,  full  of 
good  brethren,  without  the  city  walls,  under  the 
fostering  care  of  Ambrose,  and  we  knew  it  not. 
He  went  on  with  his  discourse,  and  we  listened 
in  intent  silence.  He  told  us  then  how  one  after¬ 
noon  at  Trier,  when  the  Emperor  was  taken  up 
with  the  Circensian  games,  he  and  three  others, 
his  companions,  went  out  to  walk  in  gardens 
near  the  city  walls,  and  there  as  they  happened 
to  walk  in  pairs,  one  went  apart  with  him,  and 
the  other  two  wandered  by  themselves;  and 
these,  in  their  wanderings,  lighted  upon  a  certain 
cottage,  inhabited  by  certain  of  thy  servants, 
“poor  in  spirit,  of  whom  is  the  kingdom  of  heav¬ 
en,”1  and  there  they  found  a  little  book,  con¬ 
taining  the  life  of  Anthony.  This  one  of  them  be¬ 
gan  to  read,  admire,  and  kindle  at  it ;  and,  as  he 
read,  to  meditate  on  taking  up  such  a  life,  and 
giving  over  his  secular  service  to  serve  Thee. 
And  these  two  were  of  those  whom  they  style 
“Agents  for  the  Public  Affairs.  ”2  Then  sudden¬ 
ly,  filled  with  an  holy  love  and  a  sober  shame,  in 
anger  with  himself  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  his 
friend,  saying,  “Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  what  would 
we  attain  by  all  these  labours  of  ours?  what  aim 
we  at?  what  serve  we  for?  Can  our  hopes  in 
court  rise  higher  than  to  be  the  Emperor’s  fa¬ 
vourites?  and  in  this,  what*  is  there  not  brittle, 
and  full  of  perils?  and  by  how  many  perils  ar¬ 
rive  we  at  a  greater  peril?  And  when  arrive  we 
thither?  But  a  friend  of  God,  if  I  wish  it,  I  be¬ 
come  now  at  once.”  So  spake  he.  And  in  pain 
with  the  travail  of  a  new  life,  he  turned  his  eyes 
again  upon  the  book,  and  read  on,  and  was 
changed  inwardly,  where  Thou  sawest,  and  his 
mind  was  stripped  of  the  world,  as  soon  ap¬ 
peared.  For  as  he  read,  and  rolled  up  and  down 
the  waves  of  his  heart,  he  stormed  at  himself  a 
while,  then  discerned  and  determined  on  a  bet¬ 
ter  course;  and  now  being  Thine,  said  to  his 
friend,  “Now  have  I  broken  loose  from  those 
our  hopes,  and  am  resolved  to  serve  God;  and 
this,  fropi  this  hour,  in  this  place.  I  begin  upon. 
If  thou  likest  not  to  imitate  me,  oppose  not.” 
The  other  answered,  he  would  cleave  to  him,  to 
partake  so  glorious  a  reward,  so  glorious  a  serv¬ 
ice.  Thus  both,  being  now  Thine,  were  building 
the  tower  at  the  necessary  cost,  the  forsaking  all 
that  they  had,  and  following  Thee.3  Then  Ponti- 
tianus  and  the  other  with  him,  that  had  walked 
in  other  parts  of  the  garden,  came  in  search  of 
them  to  the  same  place;  and  finding  them,  re¬ 
minded  them  to  return,  for  the  day  was  now  far 
lMatt.  5.  3.  2Agentes  in  rebus.  3Luke,  14.  26-35. 


spent.  But  they,  relating  their  resolution  and 
purpose,  and  how  that  will  was  begun  and  set¬ 
tled  in  them,  begged  them,  if  they  would  not 
join,  not  to  molest  them.  But  the  others,  though 
nothing  altered  from  their  former  selves,  did  yet 
bewail  themselves  (as  he  affirmed)  and  piously 
congratulated  them,  recommending  themselves 
to  their  prayers ;  and  so,  with  hearts  lingering  on 
the  earth,  went  away  to  the  palace.  But  the  other 
two,  fixing  their  heart  on  heaven,  remained  in 
the  cottage.  And  both  had  affianced  brides,  who, 
when  they  heard  hereof,  also  dedicated  their  vir¬ 
ginity  unto  God. 

[VII]  16.  Such  was  the  story  of  Pontitianus; 
but  Thou,  0  Lord,  while  he  was  speaking,  didst 
turn  me  round  towards  myself,  taking  me  from 
behind  my  back,  where  I  had  placed  me,  unwill¬ 
ing  to  observe  myself ;  and  setting  me  before  my 
face,  that  I  might  see  how  foul  I  was,  how 
crooked  and  defiled,  bespotted  and  ulcerous. 
And  I  beheld  and  stood  aghast;  and  whither  to 
flee  from  myself  I  found  not.  And  if  I  sought  to 
turn  mine  eye  from  off  myself,  he  went  on  with 
his  relation,  and  Thou  again  didst  set  me  over 
against  myself,  and  thrustedst  me  before  my 
eyes,  that  I  might  find  out  mine  iniquity,  and 
hate  it.4  I  had  known  it,  but  made  as  though  I 
saw  it  not,  winked  at  it,  and  forgot  it. 

17.  But  now,  the  more  ardently  I  loved  those 
whose  healthful  affections  I  heard  of,  that  they 
had  resigned  themselves  wholly  to  Thee  to  be 
cured,  the  more  did  I  abhor  myself,  when  com¬ 
pared  with  them.  For  many  of  my  years  (some 
twelve)  had  now  run  out  with  me  since  my  nine¬ 
teenth,  when,  upon  the  reading  of  Cicero’s  Hor- 
tensius,5 1  was  stirred  to  an  earnest  love  of  wis¬ 
dom;  and  still  I  was  deferring  to  reject  mere 
earthly  felicity,  and  give  myself  to  search  out 
that  whereof  not  the  finding  only,  but  the  very 
search,  was  to  be  preferred  to  the  treasures  and 
kingdoms  of  the  world,  though  already  found, 
and  to  the  pleasures  of  the  body,  though  spread 
around  me  at  my  will.  But  I  wretched,  most 
wretched,  in  the  very  commencement  of  my 
early  youth,  had  begged  chastity  of  Thee,  and 
said,  “Give  me  chastity  and  continency,  only  not 
yet.”  For  I  feared  lest  Thou  shouldest  hear  me 
soon,  and  soon  cure  me  of  the  disease  of  concu¬ 
piscence,  which  I  wished  to  have  satisfied,  rather 
than  extinguished.  And  I  had  wandered  through 
crooked  ways  in  a  sacrilegious  superstition,  not 
indeed  assured  thereof,  but  as  preferring  it  to 
the  others  which  I  did  not  seek  religiously,  but 
opposed  maliciously. 

18.  And  1  had  thought  that  I  therefore  de- 
4Ps.  36.  2.  8See  above,  Bk.  in.  7. 


c8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ferred  from  day  to  day  to  reject  the  hopes  of 
this  world,  and  follow  Thee  only,  because  there 
did  not  appear  aught  certain,  whither  to  direct 
my  course.  And  now  was  the  day  come  wherein 
I  was  to  be  laid  bare  to  myself,  and  my  con¬ 
science  was  to  upbraid  me.  “Where  art  thou 
now,  my  tongue?  Thou  saidst  that  for  an  uncer¬ 
tain  truth  thou  likedst  not  to  cast  off  the  bag¬ 
gage  of  vanity;  now,  it  is  certain,  and  yet  that 
burthen  still  oppresseth  thee,  while  they  who 
neither  have  so  worn  themselves  out  with  seek¬ 
ing  it.  nor  for  ten  years  and  more  have  been 
thinking  thereon,  have  had  their  shoulders  light¬ 
ened,  and  received  wings  to  fly  away.”  Thus  was 
I  gnawed  within,  and  exceedingly  confounded 
with  an  horrible  shame,  while  Pontitianus  was 
so  speaking.  And  he.  having  brought  to  a  close 
his  tale  and  the  business  he  came  for,  went  his 
way;  and  I  into  myself.  What  said  I  not  against 
myself?  with  what  scourges  of  condemnation 
lashed  I  not  my  soul,  that  it  might  follow  me, 
striving  to  go  after  Thee!  Yet  it  drew  back;  re¬ 
fused,  but  excused  not  itself.  All  arguments  were 
spent  and  confuted;  there  remained  a  mute 
shrinking;  and  she  feared,  as  she  would  death,  to 
be  restrained  from  the  flux  of  that  custom, 
whereby  she  was  wasting  to  death. 

[VIII]  19.  Then  in  this  great  contention  of 
my  inward  dwelling,  which  I  had  strongly  raised 
against  my  soul,  in  the  chamber  of  my  heart,1 
troubled  in  mind  and  countenance,  I  turned 
upon  Alypius.  “What  ails  us?”  I  exclaim.  “What 
is  it?  what  heardest  thou?  The  unlearned  start 
up  and  ‘take’  heaven  by  force.2  and  we  with  our 
learning,  and  without  heart,  lo,  where  we  wallow 
in  flesh  and  blood!  Are  we  ashamed  to  follow, 
because  others  are  gone  before,  and  not  ashamed 
not  even  to  follow?”  Some  such  words  I  uttered, 
and  my  fever  of  mind  tore  me  away  from  him, 
while  he,  gazing  on  me  in  astonishment,  kept  si¬ 
lence.  For  it  was  not  my  wonted  tone;  and  my 
forehead,  cheeks,  eyes,  colour,  tone  of  voice, 
spake  my  mind  more  than  the  words  I  uttered. 
A  little  garden  there  was  to  our  lodging,  which 
we  had  the  use  of,  as  of  the  whole  house;  for  the 
master  of  the  house,  our  host,  was  not  living 
there.  Thither  had  the  tumult  of  my  breast  hur¬ 
ried  me,  where  no  man  might  hinder  the  hot 
contention  wherein  I  had  engaged  with  myself, 
until  it  should  end  as  Thou  knewest,  I  knew  not. 
Only  I  was  healthfully  distracted  and  dying,  to 
live;  knowing  what  evil  thing  I  was,  and  not 
knowing  what  good  thing  I  was  shortly  to  be¬ 
come.  I  retired  then  into  the  garden,  and  Alypius 
on  my  steps.  For  his  presence  did  not  lessen  my 
^sa.  26.  20;  Matt.  6.  6.  2Matt.  11.  12. 


privacy;  or  how  could  he  forsake  me  so  dis¬ 
turbed?  We  sat  down  as  far  removed  as  might 
be  from  the  house.  I  was  troubled  in  spirit,  most 
vehemently  indignant  that  I  entered  not  into 
Thy  will  and  covenant,  0  my  God,  which  all  my 
bones  cried  out  unto  me  to  enter,  and  praised  it 
to  the  skies.  And  therein  we  enter  not  by  ships, 
or  chariots,  or  feet,  no,  move  not  so  far  as  I  had 
come  from  the  house  to  that  place  where  we 
were  sitting.  For  not  to  go  only,  but  to  go  in 
thither,  was  nothing  else  but  to  will  to  go,  but 
to  will  resolutely  and  thoroughly;  not  to  turn 
and  toss,  this  way  and  that,  a  maimed  and  half- 
divided  will,  struggling,  with  one  part  sinking  as 
another  rose. 

20.  Lastly,  in  the  very  fever  of  my  irresolute¬ 
ness,  I  made  with  my  body  many  such  motions 
as  men  sometimes  would,  but  cannot,  if  either 
they  have  not  the  limbs,  or  these  be  bound  with 
bands,  weakened  with  infirmity,  or  any  other 
way  hindered.  Thus,  if  I  tore  my  hair,  beat  my 
forehead,  if  locking  my  fingers  I  clasped  my 
knee,  I  willed,  I  did  it.  But  I  might  have  willed, 
and  not  done  it,  if  the  power  of  motion  in  my 
limbs  had  not  obeyed.  So  many  things  then  I 
did,  when  “to  will”  was  not  in  itself  “to  be 
able”;  and  I  did  not  what  both  I  longed  incom¬ 
parably  more  to  do,  and  which  soon  after,  when 
I  should  will,  I  should  be  able  to  do;  because 
soon  after,  when  I  should  will,  I  should  will 
thoroughly.  For  in  these  things  the  ability  was 
one  with  the  will,  and  to  will  was  to  do ;  and  yet 
was  it  not  done:  and  more  easily  did  my  body 
obey  the  weakest  willing  of  my  soul,  in  moving 
its  limbs  at  its  nod,  than  the  soul  obeyed  itself 
to  accomplish  in  the  will  alone  this  its  momen¬ 
tous  will. 

[IX]  21.  Whence  is  this  monstrousness?  and 
to  what  end?  Let  Thy  mercy  gleam  that  I  may 
ask,  if  so  be  the  secret  penalties  of  men,  and 
those  darkest  pangs  of  the  sons  of  Adam,  may 
perhaps  answer  me.  Whence  is  this  monstrous¬ 
ness?  and  to  what  end?  The  mind  commands  the 
body,  and  it  obeys  instantly;  the  mind  com¬ 
mands  itself,  and  is  resisted.  The  mind  com¬ 
mands  the  hand  to  be  moved;  and  such  readi¬ 
ness  is  there  that  command  is  scarce  distinct 
from  obedience.  Yet  the  mind  is  mind,  the  hand 
is  body.  The  mind  commands  the  mind,  its  own 
self,  to  will,  and  yet  it  doth  not.  Whence  this 
monstrousness?  and  to  what  end?  It  commands 
itself,  I  say,  to  will,  and  would  not  command, 
unless  it  willed,  and  what  it  commands  is  not 
done.  But  it  willeth  not  entirely:  therefore  doth 
it  not  command  entirely.  For  so  far  forth  it  com- 
mandeth,  as  it  willeth:  and,  so  far  forth  is  the 


CONFESSIONS  VIII.  19-24  59 


thing  commanded,  not  done,  as  it  willeth  not. 
For  the  will  commandeth  that  there  be  a  will; 
not  another,  but  itself.  But  it  doth  not  command 
entirely,  therefore  what  it  commandeth  is  not. 
For  were  the  will  entire,  it  would  not  even  com¬ 
mand  it  to  be,  because  it  would  already  be.  It  is 
therefore  no  monstrousness  partly  to  will,  part¬ 
ly  to  nill,  but  a  disease  of  the  mind,  that  it  doth 
not  wholly  rise,  by  truth  up-borne,  borne  down 
by  custom.  And  therefore  are  there  two  wills, 
for  that  one  of  them  is  not  entire :  and  what  the 
one  lacketh,  the  other  hath. 

[X]  22.  Let  them  perish  from  Thy  presence,1 
0  God,  as  perish  vain  talkers,  and  seducers2  of 
the  soul:  who,  observing  that  in  deliberating 
there  were  two  wills,  affirm  that  there  are  two 
minds  in  us  of  two  kinds,  one  good,  the  other 
evil.  Themselves  are  truly  evil,  when  they  hold 
these  evil  things;  and  themselves  shall  become 
good,  when  they  hold  the  truth,  and  assent  unto 
the  truth,  that  Thy  Apostle  may  say  to  them, 
“Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  light  in 
the  Lord.”  3  But  they,  wishing  to  be  light,  not 
“in  the  Lord.”  but  in  themselves,  imagining  the 
nature  of  the  soul  to  be  that  which  God  is,4  are 
made  more  gross  darkness  through  a  dreadful 
arrogancy ;  for  that  they  went  back  farther  from 
Thee,  “the  true  Light  that  enlighteneth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world.”5  Take  heed 
what  you  say,  and  blush  for  shame:  draw  near 
unto  Him  and  be  “enlightened,”  and  your  faces 
shall  not  be  “ashamed.”  6  Myself  when  I  was  de¬ 
liberating  upon  serving  the  Lord  my  God  now, 
as  I  had  long  purposed,  it  was  I  who  willed,  I 
who  nilled,  I,  I  myself.  I  neither  willed  entirely, 
nor  nilled  entirely.  Therefore  was  I  at  strife  with 
myself,  and  rent  asunder  by  myself.  And  this 
rent  befel  me  against  my  will,  and  yet  indicated, 
not  the  presence  of  another  mind,  but  the  pun¬ 
ishment  of  my  own.  “Therefore  it  was  no  more 
I  that  wrought  it,  but  sin  that  dwelt  in  me”;7 
the  punishment  of  a  sin  more  freely  committed, 
in  that  I  was  a  son  of  Adam. 

23.  For  if  there  be  so  many  contrary  natures, 
as  there*  be  conflicting  wills ;  there  shall  now  be 
not  two  only,  but  many.  If  a  man  deliberate 
whether  he  should  go  to  their  conventicle  or  to 
the  theatre,  these  Manichees  cry  out,  “Behold, 
here  are  two  natures:  one  good,  draws  this  way; 
another  bad,  draws  back  that  way.  For  whence 
else  is  this  hesitation  between  conflicting  wills?” 
But  I  say  that  both  be  bad :  that  which  draws  to 
them,  as  that  which  draws  back  to  the  theatre. 

1Ps.  68.  2.  2Titus,  1.  10.  3Eph.  5.8. 

4See  above,  Bk.  iv.  26.  6John,  1.  9. 

6Ps.  4.  5.  7Rom.  7.  17. 


But  they  believe  not  that  will  to  be  other  than 
good,  which  draws  to  them.  What  then  if  one  of 
us  should  deliberate,  and  amid  the  strife  of  his 
two  wills  be  in  a  strait,  whether  he  should  go  to 
the  theatre,  or  to  our  church?  would  not  these 
Manichees  also  be  in  a  strait  what  to  answer? 
For  either  they  must  confess  (which  they  fain 
would  not)  that  the  will  which  leads  to  our 
church  is  good,  as  well  as  theirs,  who  have  re¬ 
ceived  and  are  held  by  the  mysteries  of  theirs : 
or  they  must  suppose  two  evil  natures,  and  two 
evil  souls  conflicting  in  one  man,  and  it  will  not 
be  true,  which  they  say,  that  there  is  one  good 
and  another  bad;  or  they  must  be  converted  to 
the  truth,  and  no  more  deny,  that  where  one  de¬ 
liberates,  one  soul  fluctuates  between  contrary 
wills. 

24.  Let  them  no  more  say  then,  when  they 
perceive  two  conflicting  wills  in  one  man,  that 
the  conflict  is  between  two  contrary  souls,  of 
two  contrary  substances,  from  two  contrary 
principles,  one  good,  and  the  other  bad.  For 
Thou,  0  true  God,  dost  disprove,  check,  and 
convict  them ;  as  when,  both  wills  being  bad,  one 
deliberates  whether  he  should  kill  a  man  by  poi¬ 
son  or  by  the  sword;  whether  he  should  seize 
this  or  that  estate  of  another’s,  when  he  cannot 
both;  whether  he  should  purchase  pleasure  by 
luxury,  or  keep  his  money  by  covetousness; 
whether  he  go  to  the  circus,  or  the  theatre,  if 
both  be  open  on  one  day;  or,  thirdly,  to  rob  an¬ 
other’s  house,  if  he  have  the  opportunity;  or, 
fourthly,  to  commit  adultery,  if  at  the  same 
time  he  have  the  means  thereof  also;  all  these 
meeting  together  in  the  same  juncture  of  time, 
and  all  being  equally  desired,  which  cannot  at 
one  time  be  acted:  for  they  rend  the  mind  amid 
four,  or  even  (amid  the  vast  variety  of  things 
desired)  more,  conflicting  wills,  nor  do  they  yet 
allege  that  there  are  so  many  divers  substances. 
So  also  in  wills  which  are  good.  For  I  ask  them, 
is  it  good  to  take  pleasure  in  reading  the  Apos¬ 
tle?  8  or  good  to  take  pleasure  in  a  sober  Psalm? 
or  good  to  discourse  on  the  Gospel?  They  will 
answer  to  each,  “It  is  good.”  What  then  if  all 
give  equal  pleasure,  and  all  at  once?  Do  not  div¬ 
ers  wills  distract  the  mind,  while  he  deliberates 
which  he  should  rather  choose?  yet  are  they  all 
good,  and  are  at  variance  till  one  be  chosen, 
whither  the  one  entire  will  may  be  borne,  which 
before  was  divided  into  many.  Thus  also,  when, 
above,  eternity  delights  us,  and  the  pleasure  of 
temporal  good  holds  us  down  below,  it  is  the 
same  soul  which  willeth  not  this  or  that  with  an 
entire  will,  and  therefore  is  rent  asunder  with 

8St.  Paul. 


6o  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


grievous  perplexities ;  while  out  of  truth  it  sets 
this  first,  but  out  of  habit  sets  not  that  aside. 

[XI]  25.  Thus  soul-sick  was  I,  and  torment¬ 
ed,  accusing  myself  much  more  severely  than 
my  wont,  rolling  and  turning  me  in  my  chain, 
till  that  were  wholly  broken,  whereby  I  now  was 
but  just,  but  still  was,  held.  And  Thou,  0  Lord, 
pressedst  upon  me  in  my  inward  parts  by  a  se¬ 
vere  mercy,  re-doubling  the  lashes  of  fear  and 
shame,  lest  I  should  again  give  way,  and  not 
bursting  that  same  slight  remaining  tie,  it  should 
recover  strength,  and  bind  me  the  faster.  For  I 
said  within  myself,  “Be  it  done  now,  be  it  done 
now.”  And  as  I  spake,  I  all  but  enacted  it.  I  all 
but  did  it,  and  did  it  not :  yet  sunk  not  back  to 
my  former  state,  but  kept  my  stand  hard  by, 
and  took  breath.  And  I  essayed  again,  and  want¬ 
ed  somewhat  less  of  it,  and  somewhat  less,  and 
all  but  touched  and  laid  hold  of  it ;  and  yet  came 
not  at  it,  nor  touched,  nor  laid  hold  of  it:  hesi¬ 
tating  to  die  to  death  and  to  live  to  life:  and  the 
worse  whereto  I  was  inured  prevailed  more  with 
me  than  the  better,  whereto  I  was  unused :  and 
the  very  moment  wherein  I  was  to  become  other 
than  I  was,  the  nearer  it  approached  me,  the 
greater  horror  did  it  strike  into  me;  yet  did  it 
not  strike  me  back,  nor  turned  me  away,  but 
held  me  in  suspense. 

26.  The  very  toys  of  toys,  and  vanities  of  van¬ 
ities,  my  ancient  mistresses,  still  held  me;  they 
plucked  my  fleshly  garment,  and  whispered  soft¬ 
ly,  “Dost  thou  cast  us  off?  and  from  that  mo¬ 
ment  shall  we  no  more  be  with  thee  for  ever? 
and  from  that  moment  shall  not  this  or  that  be 
lawful  for  thee  for  ever?”  And  what  was  it 
which  they  suggested  in  that  I  said,  “this  or 
that,”  what  did  they  suggest,  0  my  God?  Let 
Thy  mercy  turn  it  away  from  the  soul  of  Thy 
servant.  What  defilements  did  they  suggest! 
what  shame!  And  now  I  much  less  than  half 
heard  them,  and  not  openly  shewing  themselves 
and  contradicting  me,  but  muttering'  as  it  were 
behind  my  back,  and  privily  plucking  me,  as  I 
was  departing,  but  to  look  back  on  them.  Yet 
they  did  retard  me,  so  that  I  hesitated  to  burst 
and  shake  myself  free  from  them,  and  to  spring 
over  whither  I  was  called ;  a  violent  habit  saying 
to  me,  “Thinkest  thou,  thou  canst  live  without 
them?” 

27.  But  now  it  spake  very  faintly.  For  on  that 
side  whither  I  had  set  my  face,  and  whither  I 
trembled  to  go,  there  appeared  unto  me  the 
chaste  dignity  of  Continency,  serene,  yet  not  re- 
laxedly  gay,  honestly  alluring  me  to  come  and 
doubt  not;  and  stretching  forth  to  receive  and 
embrace  me,  her  holy  hands  full  of  multitudes  of 


good  examples.  There  were  so  many  young  men 
and  maidens  here,  a  multitude  of  youth  and  ev¬ 
ery  age,  grave  widows  and  aged  virgins;  and 
Continence  herself  in  all,  not  barren,  but  a  fruit¬ 
ful  mother  of  children  of  joys,  by  Thee  her  Hus¬ 
band,  0  Lord.  And  she  smiled  on  me  with  a  per¬ 
suasive  mockery,  as  would  she  say,  “Canst  not 
thou  what  these  youths,  what  these  maidens 
can?  or  can  they  either  in  themselves,  and  not 
rather  in  the  Lord  their  God?  The  Lord  their 
God  gave  me  unto  them.  Why  standest  thou  in 
thyself,  and  so  standest  not?  Cast  thyself  upon 
Him,  fear  not  He  will  not  withdraw  Himself 
that  thou  shouldest  fall;  cast  thyself  fearlessly 
upon  Him,  He  will  receive,  and  will  heal  thee.” 
And  I  blushed  exceedingly,  for  that  I  yet  heard 
the  muttering  of  those  toys,  and  hung  in  sus¬ 
pense.  And  she  again  seemed  to  say,  “Stop  thine 
ears  against  those  thy  unclean  members  on  the 
earth,  that  they  may  be  mortified.1  They  tell 
thee  of  delights,  but  not  as  doth  the  law  of  the 
Lord  thy  God.”  2  This  controversy  in  my  heart 
was  self  against  self  only.  But  Alypius,  sitting 
close  by  my  side,  in  silence  waited  the  issue  of 
my  unwonted  emotion. 

[XII]  28.  But  when  a  deep  consideration  had 
from  the  secret  bottom  of  my  soul  drawn  to¬ 
gether  and  heaped  up  all  my  misery  in  the  sight 
of  my  heart,  there  arose  a  mighty  storm,  bring¬ 
ing  a  mighty  shower  of  tears.  Which  that  I 
might  pour  forth  wholly,  in  its  natural  expres¬ 
sions,  I  rose  from  Alypius:  solitude  wTas  sug¬ 
gested  to  me  as  fitter  for  the  business  of  weep¬ 
ing;  so  I  retired  so  far  that  even  his  presence 
could  not  be  a  burthen  to  me.  Thus  was  it  then 
with  me,  and  he  perceived  something  of  it;  for 
something  I  suppose  I  had  spoken,  wherein  the 
tones  of  my  voice  appeared  choked  with  weep¬ 
ing,  and  so  had  risen  up.  He  then  remained 
where  we  were  sitting,  most  extremely  aston¬ 
ished.  I  cast  myself  down  I  know  not  how,  un¬ 
der  a  certain  fig-tree,  giving  full  vent  to  my 
tears;  and  the  floods  of  mine  eyes  gushed  out, 
an  acceptable  sacrifice  to  Thee.3  And,  not  indeed 
in  these  words,  yet  to  this  purpose,  spake  I  much 
unto  Thee:  “And  Thou,  0  Lord,  how  long?”4 
“How  long,  Lord,  wilt  Thou  be  angry,  for  ever? 
Remember  not  our  former  iniquities,”5  for  I  felt 
that  I  was  held  by  them.  I  sent  up  these  sorrow¬ 
ful  words:  “How  long?  how  long?  Tomorrow, 
and  tomorrow?  Why  not  now?  why  not  is  there 
this  hour  an  end  to  my  uncleanness?” 

29.  So  was  I  speaking,  and  weeping  in  the 
most  bitter  contrition  of  my  heart,  when,  lo!  I 

1Col.  3.  5.  2Ps.  1 19.  85,  old  version. 

3I  Pet.  2.  5.  4Ps.  6.  3.  6Ps.  79.  s,  8. 


CONFESSIONS  VIII.  25-30,  IX.  1-2  61 


heard  from  a  neighbouring  house  a  voice,  as  of 
boy  or  girl,  I  know  not,  chanting,  and  oft  re¬ 
peating,  “Take  up  and  read;  take  up  and  read.” 
Instantly,  my  countenance  altered,  I  began  to 
think  most  intently,  whether  children  were  wont 
in  any  kind  of  play  to  sing  such  words;  nor 
could  I  remember  ever  to  have  heard  the  like. 
So  checking  the  torrent  of  my  tears,  I  arose;  in¬ 
terpreting  it  to  be  no  other  than  a  command 
from  God,  to  open  the  book,  and  read  the  first 
chapter  I  should  find.  For  I  had  heard  of  An¬ 
thony  that,  coming  in  during  the  reading  of  the 
Gospel,  he  received  the  admonition,  as  if  what 
was  being  read,  was  spoken  to  him;  “Go,  sell  all 
that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou 
shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven,  and  come  and  fol¬ 
low  me.”  1  And  by  such  oracle  he  was  forthwith 
converted  unto  Thee.  Eagerly  then  I  returned  to 
the  place  where  Alypius  was  sitting;  for  there 
had  I  laid  the  volume  of  the  Apostle,  when  I 
arose  thence.  I  seized,  opened,  and  in  silence 
read  that  section,  on  which  my  eyes  first  fell: 
“Not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in  cham¬ 
bering  and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and  envy¬ 
ing:  but  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
make  not  provision  for  the  flesh,”  2  in  concupis¬ 
cence.  No  further  would  I  read;  nor  needed  I: 
for  instantly  at  the  end  of  this  sentence,  by  a 
light  as  it  were  of  serenity  infused  into  my  heart, 
all  the  darkness  of  doubt  vanished  away. 

30.  Then  putting  my  finger  between,  or  some 
other  mark,  I  shut  the  volume,  and  wflth  a 
calmed  countenance  made  it  known  to  Alypius. 
And  what  was  wrought  in  him,  which  I  knew 
not,  he  thus  shewed  me.  He  asked  to  see  what  I 
had  read:  I  shewed  him;  and  he  looked  even 
further  than  I  had  read,  and  I  knew  not  what 
followed.  This  followed,  “Him  that  is  weak  in 
the  faith,  receive”  ;3  which  he  applied  to  himself, 
and  disclosed  to  me.  And  by  this  admonition  was 
he  strengthened;  and  by  a  good  resolution  and 
purpose,  and  most  corresponding  to  his  charac¬ 
ter,  wherein  he  did  always  very  far  differ  from 
me  for  the  better,  without  any  turbulent  delay 
he  joinod  me.  Thence  we  go  into  my  mother;  we 
tell  her;  she  rejoiceth :  we  relate  in  order  how  it 
took  place;  she  leaps  for  joy,  and  triumpheth, 
and  blesseth  Thee,  “Who  art  able  to  do  above 
that  which  we  ask  or  think”;4  for  she  perceived 
that  Thou  hadst  given  her  more  for  me  than  she 
was  wTont  to  beg  by  her  pitiful  and  most  sorrow¬ 
ful  groanings.  For  Thou  convertedst  me  unto 
Thyself,  so  that  I  sought  neither  wife,  nor  any 
hope  of  this  world,  standing  in  that  rule  of  faith5 

4Matt.  19.  21.  2Rom.  13.  13,  14.  3Rom.  14.  1. 

4Eph.  3.  20.  5See  above,  Bk.  id.  19. 


where  Thou  hadst  shewed  me  unto  her  in  a  vi¬ 
sion,  so  many  years  before.  And  Thou  didst  con¬ 
vert  her  mourning  into  joy,6  much  more  plenti¬ 
ful  than  she  had  desired,  and  in  a  much  more 
precious  and  purer  way  than  she  erst  required, 
by  having  grandchildren  of  my  body. 

BOOK  IX.  Augustine  determines  to  devote  his 
life  to  God ,  and  to  abandon  his  profession  of 
Rhetoric,  quietly  however;  retires  to  the 
country  to  prepare  himself  to  receive  the 
grace  of  baptism,  and  is  baptized  with  Alypi¬ 
us,  and  his  son  Adeodatus.  At  Ostia,  on  his 
way  to  Africa,  his  mother  Monica  dies,  in  her 
fifty-sixth  year,  the  thirty-third  of  Augustine . 
Her  life  and  character. 

[I]  1.  “0  Lord,  I  am  Thy  servant;.  I  am  Thy 
servant,  and  the  son  of  Thy  handmaid:  Thou 
hast  broken  my  bonds  in  sunder.  I  will  offer  to 
Thee  the  sacrifice  of  praise.” 7  Let  my  heart  and 
my  tongue  praise  Thee;  yea  let  all  my  bones 
say,  “0  Lord,  who  is  like  unto  Thee?”8  Let 
them  say,  and  answer  Thou  me,  and  “say  unto 
my  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation.”9  Who  am  I,  and 
what  am  I?  What  evil  have  not  been  either  my 
deeds,  or  if  not  my  deeds,  my  words,  or  if  not 
my  words,  my  will?  But  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  good 
and  merciful,  and  Thy  right  hand  had  respect 
unto  the  depth  of  my  death,  and  from  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  my  heart  emptied  that  abyss  of  corrup¬ 
tion.  And  this  Thy  whole  gift  was,  to  nill  wThat 
I  willed,  and  to  will  what  Thou  willedst.  But 
where  through  all  those  years,  and  out  of  what 
low  and  deep  recess  was  my  free-will  called 
forth  in  a  moment,  w’hereby  to  submit  my  neck 
to  Thy  “easy  yoke,”  and  my  shoulders  unto  Thy 
“light  burthen,”  10  0  Christ  Jesus,  “my  Helper 
and  my  Redeemer?”  11  How  sweet  did  it  at  once 
become  to  me  to  want  the  sweetnesses  of  those 
joys!  and  what  I  feared  to  be  parted  from  was 
now  a  joy  to  part  with.  For  Thou  didst  cast 
them  forth  from  me,  Thou  true  and  highest 
sweetness.  Thou  castest  them  forth,  and  for 
them  enteredst  in  Thyself,  swTeeter  than  all 
pleasure,  though  not  to  flesh  and  blood;  brighter 
than  all  light,  but  more  hidden  than  all  depths; 
higher  than  all  honour,  but  not  to  the  high  in 
their  own  conceits.  Now  was  my  soul  free  from 
the  biting  cares  of  canvassing  and  getting,  and 
weltering  in  filth,  and  scratching  off  the  itch  of 
lust.  And  my  infant  tongue  spake  freely  to  Thee, 
my  brightness,  and  my  riches,  and  my  health, 
the  Lord  my  God. 

[II]  2.  And  I  resolved  in  Thy  sight,  not  tu- 

6Ps.  30.  11.  7Ps.  116.  16,  17.  *Ibid.,  35.  10. 

9Ibid.,  ver.  3.  10Matt.  11.  30.  nPs.  19.  14. 


62  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


multuously  to  tear,  but  gently  to  withdraw,  the 
service  of  my  tongue  from  the  marts  of  lip- 
labour:  that  the  young,  no  students  in  Thy  law, 
nor  in  Thy  peace,  but  in  lying  dotages  and  law- 
skirmishes,  should  no  longer  buy  at  my  mouth 
arms  for  their  madness.  And  very  seasonably,  it 
now  wanted  but  very  few  days  unto  the1  Vaca¬ 
tion  of  the  Vintage,  and  I  resolved  to  endure 
them,  then  in  a  regular  way  to  take  my  leave, 
and,  having  been  purchased  by  Thee,  no  more 
to  return  for  sale.  Our  purpose  then  was  known 
to  Thee;  but  to  men,  other  than  our  own 
friends,  was  it  not  known.  For  we  had  agreed 
among  ourselves  not  to  let  it  out  abroad  to  any : 
although  to  us,  now  ascending  from  the  valley 
of  tears,2  and  singing  that  song  of  degrees,  Thou 
hadst  given  “sharp  arrows,”  and  destroying 
coals  against  the  “subtile  tongue”3  which,  as 
though  advising  for  us,  would  thwart,  and  would 
out  of  love  devour  us,  as  it  doth  its  meat. 

3.  Thou  hadst  pierced  our  hearts  with  Thy 
charity,  and  we  carried  Thy  words  as  it  were 
fixed  in  our  entrails ;  and  the  examples  of  Thy 
servants,  whom  for  black  Thou  hadst  {nade 
bright,  and  for  dead,  alive,  being  piled  together 
in  the  receptacle  of  our  thoughts,  kindled  and 
burned  up  that  our  heavy  torpor,  that  we  should 
not  sink  down  to  the  abyss ;  and  they  fired  us  so 
vehemently,  that  all  the  blasts  of  subtile  tongues 
from  gainsayers  might  only  inflame  us  the  more 
fiercely,  not  extinguish  us.  Nevertheless,  be¬ 
cause  for  Thy  Name’s  sake  which  Thou  hast 
hallowed  throughout  the  earth,  this  our  vow  and 
purpose  might  also  find  some  to  commend  it,  it 
seemed  like  ostentation  not  to  wait  for  the  va¬ 
cation  now  so  near,  but  to  quit  beforehand  a 
public  profession,  which  was  before  the  eyes  of 
all;  so  that  all  looking  on  this  act  of  mine,  and 
observing  how  near  was  the  time  of  vintage 
which  I  wished  to  anticipate,  would  talk  much 
of  me,  as  if  I  had  desired  to  appear  some  great 
one.  And  what  end  had  it  served  me,  that  people 
should  repute  and  dispute  upon  my  purpose,  and 
that  our  good  should  be  evil  spoken  of?4 

4.  Moreover,  it  had  at  first  troubled  me  that 
in  this  very  summer  my  lungs  began  to  give  way, 
amid  too  great  literary  labour,  and  to  breathe 
deeply  with  difficulty,  and  by  the  pain  in  my 
chest  to  shew  that  they  were  injured,  and  to  re¬ 
fuse  any  full  or  lengthened  speaking;  this  had 
troubled  me,  for  it  almost  constrained  me  of  ne¬ 
cessity  to  lay  down  that  burthen  of  teaching,  or, 
if  I  could  be  cured  and  recover,  at  least  to  in¬ 
termit  it.  But  when  the  full  wish  for  leisure,  that 

Tn  harvest  and  vintage-time  the  lawyers  had  their  va¬ 
cation.  2Ps.  84.  6.  zIbid.,  120. 3,4,  old  version.  4Rom.  14. 16. 


I  might  see  how  that  Thou  art  the  Lord,5  arose, 
and  was  fixed,  in  me;  my  God,  Thou  knowest,  I 
began  even  to  rejoice  that  I  had  this  secondary, 
and  that  no  feigned,  excuse,  which  might  some¬ 
thing  moderate  the  offence  taken  by  those  who, 
for  their  sons’  sake,  wished  me  never  to  have  the 
freedom  of  Thy  sons.  Full  then  of  such  joy,  I 
endured  till  that  interval  of  time  were  run;  it 
may  have  been  some  twenty  days,  yet  they  were 
endured  manfully;  endured,  for  the  covetous¬ 
ness  which  aforetime  bore  a  part  of  this  heavy 
business,  had  left  me,  and  I  remained  alone,  and 
had  been  overwhelmed  had  not  patience  taken 
its  place.  Perchance  some  of  Thy  servants,  my 
brethren,  may  say  that  I  sinned  in  this,  that  with 
a  heart  fully  set  on  Thy  service,  I  suffered  my¬ 
self  to  sit  even  one  hour  in  the  chair  of  lies.  Nor 
would  I  be  contentious.  But  hast  not  Thou,  0 
most  merciful  Lord,  pardoned  and  remitted  this 
sin  also,  with  my  other  most  horrible  and  deadly 
sins,  in  the  holy  water? 

[Ill]  5.  Verecundus  was  worn  down  with  care 
about  this  our  blessedness,  for  that  being  held 
back  by  bonds,  whereby  he  was  most  straitly 
bound,  he  saw  that  he  should  be  severed  from 
us.  For  himself  was  not  yet  a  Christian,  his  wife 
one  of  the  faithful;  and  yet  hereby,  more  rigid¬ 
ly  than  by  any  other  chain,  was  he  let  and  hin¬ 
dered  from  the  journey  which  we  had  now  es¬ 
sayed.  For  he  would  not,  he  said,  be  a  Christian 
on  any  other  terms  than  on  those  he  could  not. 
However,  he  offered  us  courteously  to  remain  at 
his  country-house,  so  long  as  we  should  stay 
there.  Thou,  0  Lord,  shalt  reward  him  “in  the 
resurrection  of  the  just,” 6  seeing  thou  hast  al¬ 
ready  given  him  “the  lot  of  the  righteous.”  7  For 
although,  in  our  absence,  being  now  at  Rome,  he 
was  seized  with  bodily  sickness,  and  therein  be¬ 
ing  made  a  Christian  and  one  of  the  faithful,  he 
departed  this  life,  yet  hadst  Thou  mercy  not  on 
him  only,  but  on  us  also:8  lest  remembering  the 
exceeding  kindness  of  our  friend  towards  us,  yet 
unable  to  number  him  among  Thy  flock,  we 
should  be  agonized  with  intolerable  sorrow. 
Thanks  unto  Thee,  our  God,  we  are  Thine :  Thy 
suggestions  and  consolations  tell  us,  Faithful  in 
promises,  Thou  now  requitest  Verecundus  for 
his  country-house  of  Cassiacum,  where  from  the 
fever  of  the  world  we  reposed  in  Thee,  with  the 
eternal  freshness  of  Thy  Paradise:  for  that 
Thou  hast  forgiven  him  his  sins  upon  earth,  in 
that  rich  mountain,  that  mountain  which  yield- 
eth  milk,  Thine  own  mountain.9 

BPs.  41.  10.  6Luke,  14.  14.  7Ps.  125.  2. 

8Phil.  2.  27. 

9Ps.  68.  16,  old  version.  See  also,  Augustine,  Epist. 


CONFESSIONS  IX.  3-8  63 


6.  He  then  had  at  that  time  sorrow,  but  Ne- 
bridius  joy.  For  although  he  also,  not  being  yet 
a  Christian,  had  fallen  into  the  pit  of  that  most 
pernicious  error,  believing  the  flesh  of  Thy  Son 
to  be  a  phantom,  yet  emerging  thence,  he  be¬ 
lieved  as  we  did ;  not  as  yet  indued  with  any  Sac¬ 
raments  of  Thy  Church,  but  a  most  ardent 
searcher  out  of  truth.  Whom,  not  long  after  our 
conversion  and  regeneration  by  Thy  baptism, 
being  also  a  faithful  member  of  the  Church 
Catholic,  and  serving  Thee  in  perfect  chastity 
and  continence  amongst  his  people  in  Africa,  his 
whole  house  having  through  him  first  been  made 
Christian,  didst  Thou  release  from  the  flesh ;  and 
now  he  lives  in  Abraham’s  bosom.1  Whatever 
that  be  which  is  signified  by  that  bosom,  there 
lives  my  Nebridius,  my  sweet  friend,  and  Thy 
child,  0  Lord,  adopted  of  a  freed  man;  there  he 
liveth.  For  what  other  place  is  there  for  such  a 
soul?  There  he  liveth,  whereof  he  asked  much 
of  me,  a  poor  inexperienced  man.  Now  lays  he 
not  his  ear  to  my  mouth,  but  his  spiritual  mouth 
unto  Thy  fountain,  and  drinketh  as  much  as  he 
can  receive,  wisdom  in  proportion  to  his  thirst, 
endlessly  happy.  Nor  do  I  think  that  he  is  so  in¬ 
ebriated  therewith  as  to  forget  me;  seeing  Thou, 
Lord,  Whom  he  drinketh,  art  mindful  of  us.  So 
were  we  then,  comforting  Verecundus,  who  sor¬ 
rowed,  as  far  as  friendship  permitted,  that  our 
conversion  was  of  such  sort;  and  exhorting  him 
to  become  faithful,  according  to  his  measure, 
namely,  of  a  married  estate;  and  awaiting  Ne¬ 
bridius  to  follow  us,  which,  being  so  near,  he 
was  all  but  doing:  and  so,  lo!  those  days  rolled 
by  at  length;  for  long  and  many  they  seemed, 
for  the  love  I  bare  to  the  easeful  liberty,  that  I 
might  sing  to  Thee  from  my  inmost  marrow, 
My  heart  hath  said  unto  Thee.  I  have  sought 
Thy  face:  “Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek.”  2 

[IV]  7.  Now  was  the  day  come  wherein  I  was 
in  deed  to  be  freed  of  my  Rhetoric  Professor¬ 
ship,  whereof  in  thought  I  was  already  freed. 
And  it  was  done.  Thou  didst  rescue  my  tongue, 
whence  Thou  hadst  before  rescued  my  heart. 
And  I  blessed  Thee,  rejoicing;  retiring  with  all 
mine  to  the  villa.  What  I  there  did  in  writing, 
which  was  now  enlisted  in  Thy  service,  though 
still,  in  this  breathing-time  as  it  were,  panting 
from  the  school  of  pride,  my  books  may  wit¬ 
ness,3  as  well  what  I  debated  with  others,  as 
what  with  myself  alone,4  before  Thee:  what 

!See  City  of  God,  Bk.  xiii.  19.  2Ps.  27.  8. 

3These  are  the  three  disputations  against  the  Academ¬ 
ics.  His  book  De  Vita  Beata,  and  the  two  books,  De  Ordine. 

4His  Soliloquies ,  two  books,  in  which,  “being  alone,  he 
held  a  dialogue  with  himself,  he  and  his  reason,  as  though 
they  were  two.” 


with  Nebridius,  who  was  absent,  my  epistles 
bear  witness.  And  when  shall  I  have  time  to  re¬ 
hearse  all  Thy  great  benefits  towards  us  at  that 
time,  especially  when  hasting  on  to  yet  greater 
mercies?  For  my  remembrance  recalls  me,  and 
pleasant  is  it  to  me,  0  Lord,  to  confess  to  Thee 
by  what  inward  goads  Thou  tamedst  me;  and 
how  Thou  hast  evened  me,  lowering  the  moun¬ 
tains  and  hills  of  my  high  imaginations,  straight¬ 
ening  my  crookedness,  and  smoothing  my  rough 
ways;5  and  how  Thou  also  subduedst  the  broth¬ 
er  of  my  heart,  Alypius,  unto  the  Name  of  Thy 
Only  Begotten,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  which  he  would  not  at  first  vouchsafe  to 
have  inserted  in  our  writings.  For  rather  would 
he  have  them  savour  of  the  lofty  “cedars”  of  the 
Schools,  which  the  Lord  hath  now  broken  down,6 
than  of  the  wholesome  herbs  of  the  Church,  the 
antidote  against  serpents. 

8.  Oh,  in  what  accents  spake  I  unto  Thee,  my 
God,  when  I  read  the  Psalms  of  David,  those 
faithful  songs  and  sounds  of  devotion,  which  al¬ 
low  of  no  swelling  spirit,  as  yet  a  catechumen, 
and  a  novice  in  Thy  real  love,  resting  in  that  vil¬ 
la,  with  Alypius,  a  catechumen,  my  mother 
cleaving  to  us,  in  female  garb  with  masculine 
faith,  with  the  tranquillity  of  age,  motherly  love, 
Christian  piety.  Oh,  what  accents  did  I  utter 
unto  Thee  in  those  Psalms,  and  how  was  I  by 
them  kindled  towards  Thee,  and  on  fire  to  re¬ 
hearse  them,  if  possible,  through  the  whole 
world,  against  the  pride  of  mankind.  And  yet 
they  are  sung  through  the  whole  world,  nor  can 
any  hide  himself  from  Thy  heat.7  With  what  ve¬ 
hement  and  bitter  sorrow  was  I  angered  at  the 
Manichees!  and  again  I  pitied  them,  for  that 
they  knew  not  those  Sacraments,  those  medi¬ 
cines,  and  were  made  against  the  antidote,  which 
might  have  recovered  them  of  their  madness. 
How  I  would  they  had  then  been  somewhere 
near  me,  and,  without  my  knowing  that  they 
were  there,  could  have  beheld  my  countenance, 
and  heard  my  words,  when  I  read  the  fourth 
Psalm  in  that  time  of  my  rest,  and  how  that 
Psalm  wrought  upon  me,  when  I  called,  the  God 
of  my  righteousness  heard  me;  in  tribulation 
Thou  enlargedst  me.  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0 
Lord,  and  hear  my  prayer.8  Would  that  what  I 
uttered  on  these  words,  they  could  hear,  without 
my  knowing  whether  they  heard,  lest  they 
should  think  I  spake  it  for  their  sakes!  Because 
in  truth  neither  should  I  speak  the  same  things, 
nor  in  the  same  way,  if  I  perceived  that  they 
heard  and  saw  me;  nor  if  I  spake  them  would 
they  so  receive  them,  as  when  I  spake  by  and  for 

6Luke,  3.  5.  6Ps.  29.  5.  7Ps.  19.  6.  sIbid.,  4.  1. 


64  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


myself  before  Thee,  out  of  the  natural  feelings 
of  my  soul. 

9.  I  trembled  for  fear,  and  again  kindled  with 
hope,  and  with  rejoicing  in  Thy  mercy,  O  Fa¬ 
ther;  and  all  issued  forth  both  by  mine  eyes  and 
voice,  when  Thy  good  Spirit,  turning  unto  us, 
said,  0  ye  sons  of  men,  how  long  slow  of  heart?” 
why  do  ye  love  vanity,  and  seek  after  leasing?”1 
For  I  had  loved  vanity,  and  sought  after  leasing. 
And  Thou,  0  Lord,  hadst  already  magnified  Thy 
Holy  One,  raising  Him  from  the  dead,  and  set¬ 
ting  Him  at  Thy  right  hand,2  whence  from  on 
high  He  should  send  His  promise,3  the  Comfort¬ 
er,  “the  Spirit  of  truth.”4  And  He  had  already 
sent  Him,5  but  I  knew  it  not;  He  had  sent  Him, 
because  He  was  now  magnified,  rising  again 
from  the  dead,  and  ascending  into  heaven.  For 
till  then,  “the  Spirit  was  not  yet  given,  because 
Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified.” 6  And  the  prophet 
cries  out.  How  long,  slow  of  heart?  why  do  ye 
love  vanity,  and  seek  after  leasing?  Know  this, 
that  the  Lord  hath  magnified  his  Holy  One.  He 
cries  out,  “How  long?”  He  cries  out,  “Know 
this” :  and  I  so  long,  not  knowing,  “loved  vanity, 
and  sought  after  leasing”;  and  therefore  I  heard 
and  trembled,  because  it  was  spoken  unto  such 
as  I  remembered  myself  to  have  been.  For  in 
those  phantoms  which  I  had  held  for  truths  was 
there  “vanity”  and  “leasing”;  and  I  spake  aloud 
many  things  earnestly  and  forcibly,  in  the  bitter¬ 
ness  of  my  remembrance.  Which  would  they  had 
heard,  who  yet  “love  vanity  and  seek  after  leas¬ 
ing”!  They  would  perchance  have  been  trou¬ 
bled.  and  have  vomited  it  up ;  and  Thou  would- 
est  hear  them  when  they  cried  unto  Thee;7  for 
by  a  true  death  in  the  flesh  did  He  die  for  us, 
Who  now  intercedeth  unto  Thee  for  us.8 

10.  I  further  read,  “Be  angry,  and  sin  not.”9 
And  how  was  I  moved,  0  my  God.  who  had  now 
learned  to  “be  angry”  at  myself  for  things  past, 
that  I  might  not  sin  in  time  to  come!  Yea,  to  be 
justly  angry;  for  that  it  was  not  another  nature 
of  a  people  of  darkness  which  sinned  for  me,  as 
they  say  who  are  not  angry  at  themselves,  and 
treasure  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
of  the  revelation  of  Thy  just  judgment.10  Nor 
were  my  good  things11  now  without,  nor  sought 
with  the  eyes  of  flesh  in  that  earthly  sun;  for 
they  that  would  have  joy  from  without  soon  be¬ 
come  vain,  and  waste  themselves  on  the  things 
seen,  and  temporal,  and  in  their  famished 
thoughts  do  lick  their  very  shadows.  Oh  that 

lIbid.,  ver.  23.  2Eph.  1.  20.  3Luke,  24.  49. 

4John,  14.  16,  17.  5Acts,  2.  1-4.  6 John,  7.  39. 

7Ps.  4.  1.  8Rom.  8.  34.  9Eph.  4.  26. 

10Rom.  2.  5.  nPs.  4.  6. 


they  were  wearied  out  with  their  famine,  and 
said,  “Who  will  shew  us  good  things?”  12  And  we 
would  say,  and  they  hear,  The  light  of  Thy 
countenance  is  sealed  upon  us.13  For  we  are  not 
that  light  which  enlighteneth  every  man,14  but 
we  are  enlightened  by  Thee;  that  having  been 
sometimes  darkness,  we  may  be  light  in  Thee.15 
Oh  that  they  could  see  the  eternal  Internal, 
which  having  tasted,  I  was  grieved  that  I  could 
not  shew  It  them,  so  long  as  they  brought  me 
their  heart  in  their  eyes,  roving  abroad  from 
Thee,  while  they  said,  “Who  will  shew  us  good 
things?”  For  there,  where  I  was  angry  within 
myself  in  my  chamber,  where  I  was  inwardly 
pricked,  where  I  had  sacrificed,  slaying  my  old 
man  and  commencing  the  purpose  of  a  new  life, 
putting  my  trust  in  Thee16 — there  hadst  Thou 
begun  to  grow  sweet  unto  me,  and  “hadst  put 
gladness  in  my  heart.”  17  And  I  cried  out,  as  I 
read  this  outwardly,  finding  it  inwardly.  Nor 
would  I  be  multiplied  with  worldly  goods;  wast¬ 
ing  away  time,  and  wasted  by  time;  wrhereas  I 
had  in  thy  eternal  Simple  Essence  other  corn, 
and  wine,  and  oil.18 

11.  And  with  a  loud  cry  of  my  heart  I  cried 
out  in  the  next  verse,  “Oh  in  peace,”  0  for  “The 
Self-Same!”  19  Oh  what  said  he,  “I  will  lay  me 
down  and  sleep,”  20  for  who  shall  hinder  us,  when 
“cometh  to  pass  that  saying  which  is  written, 
Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory”?21  And  Thou 
surpassingly  art  “the  Self-same,”  Who  art  not 
changed ;  and  in  Thee  is  rest  which  forgetteth  all 
toil,  for  there  is  none  other  with  Thee,  nor  are 
we  to  seek  those  many  other  things,  which  are 
not  what  Thou  art;  but  Thou  Lord,  alone  hast 
made  me  dwell  in  hope.22  I  read,  and  kindled; 
nor  found  I  what  to  do  to  those  deaf  and  dead, 
of  whom  myself  had  been,  a  pestilent  person,  a 
bitter  and  a  blind  bawler  against  those  writings 
which  are  honied  with  the  honey  of  heaven,  and 
lightsome  with  Thine  own  light :  and  I  was  con¬ 
sumed  with  zeal  at  the  enemies  of  this  Scripture. 

12.  When  shall  I  recall  all  which  passed  in 
those  holy-days?  Yet  neither  have  I  forgotten 
nor  will  I  pass  over  the  severity  of  Thy  scourge, 
and  the  wonderful  swiftness  of  Thy  mercy. 
Thou  didst  then  torment  me  with  pain  in  my 
teeth;  which  when  it  had  come  to  such  height 
that  I  could  not  speak,  it  came  into  my  heart  to 
desire  all  my  friends  present  to  pray  for  me  to 
Thee,  the  God  of  all  manner  of  health.  And  this 
I  wrote  on  wax,  and  gave  it  them  to  read.  Pres- 

!2Ps.  4.  6.  nIbid.  14John,  1.  9.  16Eph.  5.  8. 

16Ps.  4.  5.  17Ibid .,  ver.  7.  18Ps.  4.  7. 

l9Ibid.,  ver.  8,  Vulg.  20Ps.  4.  8. 

21I  Cor.  15.  54.  22Ps.  9.  9,  Vulg. 


CONFESSIONS  IX.  9-16 


ently,  so  soon  as  with  humble  devotion  we  had 
bowed  our  knees,  that  pain  went  away.  But  what 
pain?  or  how  went  it  away?  I  was  affrighted,  0 
my  Lord,  my  God;  for  from  infancy  I  had  never 
experienced  the  like.  And  the  power  of  Thy  Nod 
was  deeply  conveyed  to  me,  and  rejoicing  in 
faith,  I  praised  Thy  Name.  And  that  faith  suf¬ 
fered  me  not  to  be  at  ease  about  my  past  sins, 
which  were  not  yet  forgiven  me  by  Thy  baptism. 

[V]  13.  The  Vintage  Vacation  ended,  I  gave 
notice  to  the  Milanese  to  provide  their  scholars 
with  another  master  to  sell  words  to  them;  for 
that  I  had  both  made  choice  to  serve  Thee,  and 
through  my  difficulty  of  breathing  and  pain  in 
my  chest  was  not  equal  to  the  professorship. 
And  by  letters  I  signified  to  Thy  Prelate,  the 
holy  man  Ambrose,  my  former  errors  and  pres¬ 
ent  desires,  begging  his  advice  what  of  Thy 
Scriptures  I  had  best  read,  to  become  readier 
and  fitter  for  receiving  so  great  grace.  He  rec¬ 
ommended  Isaiah1  the  Prophet:  I  believe  be¬ 
cause  he  above  the  rest  is  a  more  clear  foreshew- 
er  of  the  Gospel  and  of  the  calling  of  the  Gen¬ 
tiles.  But  I,  not  understanding  the  first  lesson  in 
him,  and  imagining  the  whole  to  be  like  it,  laid 
it  by,  to  be  resumed  when  better  practised  in 
our  Lord’s  own  words. 

[VI]  14.  Thence,  when  the  time  was  come, 
wherein  I  was  to  give  in  my  name,  we  left  the 
country  and  returned  to  Milan.  It  pleased  Alypi- 
us  also  to  be  with  me  born  again  in  Thee,  being 
already  clothed  with  the  humility  befitting  Thy 
Sacraments;  and  a  most  valiant  tamer  of  the 
body,  so  as,  with  unwonted  venture,  to  wear  the 
frozen  ground  of  Italy  with  his  bare  feet.  We 
joined  with  us  the  boy  Adeodatus,  born  after  the 
flesh  of  my  sin.  Excellently  hadst  Thou  made 
him.  He  was  not  quite  fifteen,  and  in  wit  sur¬ 
passed  many  grave  and  learned  men.  I  confess 
unto  Thee  Thy  gifts,  0  Lord  my  God,  Creator  of 
all,  and  abundantly  able  to  reform  our  deformi¬ 
ties:  for  I  had  no  part  in  that  boy,  but  the  sin. 
For  that  we  brought  him  up  in  Thy  discipline,  it 
was  Thou,  none  else,  had  inspired  us  with  it.  I 
confess  ynto  Thee  Thy  gifts.  There  is  a  book  of 
ours  entitled  The  Master ;2  it  is  a  dialogue  be¬ 
tween  him  and  me.  Thou  knowest  that  all  there 
ascribed  to  the  person  conversing  with  me  were 
his  ideas,  in  his  sixteenth  year.  Much  besides, 
and  yet  more  admirable,  I  found  in  him.  That 
talent  struck  awe  into  me.  And  Who  but  Thou 
could  be  the  workmaster  of  such  wonders?  Soon 
didst  Thou  take  his  life  from  the  earth :  and  I 
now  remember  him  without  anxiety,  fearing 
nothing  for  his  childhood  or  youth,  or  his  whole 

1Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xvm.  29.  2De  Magistro. 


6S 

self.  Him  we  joined  with  us,  our  contemporary 
in  grace,  to  be  brought  up  in  Thy  discipline;  and 
we  were  baptized,  and  anxiety  for  our  past  life 
vanished  from  us.  Nor  was  I  sated  in  those  days 
with  the  wondrous  sweetness  of  considering  the 
depth  of  Thy  counsels  concerning  the  salvation 
of  mankind.  How  did  I  weep,  in  Thy  Hymns  and 
Canticles,  touched  to  the  quick  by  the  voices  of 
Thy  sweet-attuned  Church!  The  voices  flowed 
into  mine  ears,  and  the  Truth  distilled  into  my 
heart,  whence  the  affections  of  my  devotion 
overflowed,  and  tears  ran  down,  and  happy 
was  I  therein. 

[VII]  15.  Not  long  had  the  Church  of  Milan 
begun  to  use  this  kind  of  consolation  and  ex¬ 
hortation,  the  brethren  zealously  joining  with 
harmony  of  voice  and  hearts.  For  it  was  a  year, 
or  not  much  more,  that  Justina,  mother  to  the 
Emperor  Valentinian,  a  child,  persecuted  Thy 
servant  Ambrose,  in  favour  of  her  heresy,  to 
which  she  was  seduced  by  the  Arians.  The  de¬ 
vout  people  kept  watch  in  the  church  ready  to 
die  with  their  Bishop  Thy  servant.  There  my 
mother  Thy  handmaid,  bearing  a  chief  part  of 
those  anxieties  and  watchings,  lived  for  prayer. 
We,  yet  unwarmed  by  the  heat  of  Thy  Spirit, 
still  were  stirred  up  by  the  sight  of  the  amazed 
and  disquieted  city.  Then  it  was  first  instituted 
that,  after  the  manner  of  the  Eastern  churches, 
Hymns  and  Psalms  should  be  sung,  lest  the  peo¬ 
ple  should  wax  faint  through  the  tediousness  of 
sorrow:  and  from  that  day  to  this  the  custom  is 
retained,  divers,  yea,  almost  all  Thy  congrega¬ 
tions,  throughout  other  parts  of  the  world,  fol¬ 
lowing  herein. 

16.  Then  didst  Thou  by  a  vision  discover  to 
Thy  forenamed  Bishop  where  the  bodies  of  Ger- 
vasius  and  Protasius  the  martyrs  lay  hid  (whom 
Thou  hadst  in  Thy  secret  treasury  stored  un¬ 
corrupted  so  many  years),  whence  Thou  might- 
est  seasonably  produce  them  to  repress  the  fury 
of  a  woman,  but  an  Empress.  For  when  they 
were  discovered  and  dug  up,  and  with  due  hon¬ 
our  translated  to  the  Ambrosian  Basilica,  not 
only  they  who  were  vexed  with  unclean  spirits 
(the  devils  confessing  themselves)  were  cured, 
but  a  certain  man  who  had  for  many  years  been 
blind,3  a  citizen  and  well  known  to  the  city,  ask¬ 
ing  and  hearing  the  reason  of  the  people’s  con¬ 
fused  joy,  sprang  forth,  desiring  his  guide  to 
lead  him  thither.  Led  thither,  he  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  touch  with  his  handkerchief  the  bier 
of  Thy  saints,  whose  death  is  precious  in  Thy 
sight.4  Which  when  he  had  done,  and  put  to  his 
eyes,  they  were  forthwith  opened.  Thence  did 
3Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xxn.  8.  4Ps.  116.  15. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


66 

the  fame  spread,  thence  Thy  praises  glowed, 
shone;  thence  the  mind  of  that  enemy,  though 
not  turned  to  the  soundness  of  believing,  was  yet 
turned  back  from  her  fury  of  persecuting. 
Thanks  to  Thee,  0  my  God.  Whence  and  whith¬ 
er  hast  Thou  thus  led  my  remembrance,  that  I 
should  confess  these  things  also  unto  Thee? 
which,  great  though  they  be,  I  had  passed  by  in 
forgetfulness.  And  yet  then,  when  the  “odour” 
of  Thy  “ointments”  was  so  fragrant,  did  we  not 
“run  after  Thee.”  1  Therefore  did  I  more  weep 
among  the  singing  of  Thy  Hymns,  formerly 
sighing  after  Thee,  and  at  length  breathing  in 
Thee,  as  far  as  the  breath  may  enter  into  this 
our  house  of  grass. 

[VIII]  17.  Thou  that  makest  men  to  dwell  of 
one  mind  in  one  house2  didst  join  with  us  Euodi- 
us  also,  a  young  man  of  our  own  city.  Who,  be¬ 
ing  an  officer  of  Court,  was  before  us  converted 
to  Thee  and  baptized:  and  quitting  his  secular 
warfare,  girded  himself  to  Thine.  We  were  to¬ 
gether,  about  to  dwell  together  in  our  devout 
purpose.  We  sought  where  we  might  serve  Thee 
most  usefully,  and  were  together  returning  to 
Africa:  whitherward  being  as  far  as  Ostia,  my 
mother  departed  this  life.  Much  I  omit,  as  hast¬ 
ening  much.  Receive  my  confessions  and 
thanksgivings,  0  my  God,  for  innumerable 
things  whereof  I  am  silent.  But  I  will  not  omit 
whatsoever  my  soul  would  bring  forth  concern¬ 
ing  that  Thy  handmaid,  who  brought  me  forth, 
both  in  the  flesh,  that  I  might  be  born  to  this 
temporal  light,  and  in  heart,  that  I  might  be 
born  to  Light  eternal.  Not  her  gifts,  but  Thine 
in  her,  would  I  speak  of;  for  neither  did  she 
make  nor  educate  herself.  Thou  createdst  her; 
nor  did  her  father  and  mother  know  what  a  one 
should  come  from  them.  And  the  sceptre  of  Thy 
Christ,  the  discipline  of  Thine  only  Son,  in  a 
Christian  house,  a  good  member  of  Thy  Church, 
educated  her  in  Thy  fear.  Yet  for  her  good  disci¬ 
pline  was  she  wont  to  commend  not  so  much  her 
mother’s  diligence,  as  that  of  a  certain  decrepit 
maid-servant,  who  had  carried  her  father  when 
a  child,  as  little  ones  used  to  be  carried  at  the 
backs  of  elder  girls.  For  which  reason,  and  for 
her  great  age.  and  excellent  conversation,  was 
she,  in  that  Christian  family,  well  respected  by 
its  heads.  Whence  also  the  charge  of  her  mas¬ 
ter’s  daughters  was  entrusted  to  her,  to  which 
she  gave  diligent  heed,  restraining  them  earnest¬ 
ly,  when  necessary,  with  a  holy  severity,  and 
teaching  them  with  a  grave  discretion.  For,  ex¬ 
cept  at  those  hours  wherein  they  were  most  tem¬ 
perately  fed  at  their  parents’  table,  she  would 
^ant.  1.  3,  4.  2Ps.  69.  6. 


not  suffer  them,  though  parched  with  thirst,  to 
drink  even  water;  preventing  an  evil  custom, 
and  adding  this  wholesome  advice;  ‘Ye  drink 
water  now,  because  you  have  not  wine  in  your 
power;  but  when  you  come  to  be  married,  and 
be  made  mistresses  of  cellars  and  cupboards, 
you  will  scorn  water,  but  the  custom  of  drink¬ 
ing  will  abide.”  By  this  method  of  instruction, 
and  the  authority  she  had,  she  refrained  the 
greediness  of  childhood,  and  moulded  their  very 
thirst  to  such  an  excellent  moderation,  that  what 
they  should  not,  that  they  would  not. 

18.  And  yet  (as  Thy  handmaid  told  me  her 
son)  there  had  crept  upon  her  a  love  of  wine. 
For  when  (as  the  manner  was)  she,  as  though  a 
sober  maiden,  was  bidden  by  her  parents  to  draw 
wine  out  of  the  hogshead,  holding  the  vessel 
under  the  opening,  before  she  poured  the  wine 
into  the  flagon  she  sipped  a  little  with  the  tip  of 
her  lips;  for  more  her  instinctive  feelings  re¬ 
fused.  For  this  she  did,  not  out  of  any  desire  of 
drink,  but  out  of  the  exuberance  of  youth, 
whereby  it  boils  over  in  mirthful  freaks,  which 
in  youthful  spirits  are  wont  to  be  kept  under  by 
the  gravity  of  their  elders.  And  thus  by  adding 
to  that  little,  daily  littles  (for  whoso  despiseth 
little  things  shall  fall  by  little  and  little”),3  she 
had  fallen  into  such  a  habit  as  greedily  to  drink 
off  her  little  cup  brimfull  almost  of  wine.  Where 
was  then  that  discreet  old  woman,  and  that  her 
earnest  countermanding?  Would  aught  avail 
against  a  secret  disease  if  Thy  healing  hand,  0 
Lord,  watched  not  over  us?  Father,  mother,  and 
governors  absent,  Thou  present,  Who  createdst, 
Who  callest,  Who  also  by  those  set  over  uswork- 
est  something  towards  the  salvation  of  our 
souls,  what  didst  Thou  then,  0  my  God?  how 
didst  Thou  cure  her?  how  heal  her?  didst  Thou 
not  out  of  another  soul  bring  forth  a  hard  and  a 
sharp  taunt,  like  a  lancet  out  of  Thy  secret 
store,  and  with  one  touch  remove  all  that  foul 
stuff?  For  a  maid-servant  with  whom  she  used 
to  go  to  the  cellar,  falling  to  words  (as  it  hap¬ 
pens)  with  her  little  mistress,  when  alone  with 
her,  taunted  her  with  this  fault,  with  most  bit¬ 
ter  insult,  calling  her  “wine-bibber.”  With  which 
taunt  she,  stung  to  the  quick,  saw  the  foulness  of 
her  fault,  and  instantly  condemned  and  forsook 
it.  As  flattering  friends  pervert,  so  reproachful 
enemies  mostly  correct.  Yet  not  what  by  them 
Thou  doest,  but  what  themselves  purposed,  dost 
Thou  repay  them.  For  she  in  her  anger  sought  to 
vex  her  young  mistress,  not  to  amend  her;  and 
did  it  in  private,  either  for  that  the  time  and 
place  of  the  quarrel  so  found  them,  or  lest  her- 
3Ecclus.  19.  1. 


CONFESSIONS  IX.  17-22 


self  also  should  have  anger,  for  discovering  it 
thus  late.  But  Thou,  Lord,  Governor  of  all  in 
heaven  and  earth,  Who  turnest  to  Thy  purposes 
the  deepest  currents,  and  the  ruled  turbulence  of 
the  tide  of  times,1  didst  by  the  very  unhealthi¬ 
ness  of  one  soul  heal  another ;  lest  any,  when  he 
observes  this,  should  ascribe  it  to  his  own  pow¬ 
er,  even  when  another,  whom  he  wished  to  be  re¬ 
formed  is  reformed  through  words  of  his. 

[IX]  19.  Brought  up  thus  modestly  and  so¬ 
berly,  and  made  subject  rather  by  Thee  to  her 
parents  than  by  her  parents  to  Thee,  so  soon  as 
she  was  of  marriageable  age  being  bestowed 
upon  a  husband,  she  served  him  as  her  lord;  and 
did  her  diligence  to  win  him  unto  Thee,  preach¬ 
ing  Thee  unto  him  by  her  conversation;  by 
which  Thou  ornamentedst  her,  making  her  rev¬ 
erently  amiable,  and  admirable  unto  her  hus¬ 
band.  And  she  so  endured  the  wronging  of  her 
bed,  as  never  to  have  any  quarrel  with  her  hus¬ 
band  thereon.  For  she  looked  for  Thy  mercy 
upon  him,  that,  believing  in  Thee,  he  might  be 
made  chaste.  But  besides  this,  he  was  fervid,  as 
in  his  affections,  so  in  anger:  but  she  had  learnt 
not  to  resist  an  angry  husband,  not  in  deed  only, 
but  not  even  in  word.  Only  when  he  was 
smoothed  and  tranquil,  and  in  a  temper  to  re¬ 
ceive  it,  she  would  give  an  account  of  her  ac¬ 
tions,  if  haply  he  had  overhastily  taken  offence. 
In  a  word,  while  many  matrons,  who  had  milder 
husbands,  yet  bore  even  in  their  faces  marks  of 
shame,  would  in  familiar  talk  blame  their  hus¬ 
bands’  lives,  she  would  blame  their  tongues,  giv¬ 
ing  them,  as  in  jest,  earnest  advice:  “That  from 
the  time  they  heard  the  marriage  writings  read 
to  them,  they  should  account  them  as  inden¬ 
tures,  whereby  they  were  made  servants;  and  so, 
remembering  their  condition,  ought  not  to  set 
themselves  up  against  their  lords.”  And  when 
they,  knowing  what  a  choleric  husband  she  en¬ 
dured,  marvelled,  that  it  had  never  been  heard, 
nor  by  any  token  perceived,  that  Patricius  had 
beaten  his  wife,  or  that  there  had  been  any  do¬ 
mestic  difference  between  them,  even  for  one 
day,  an^  confidentially  asking  the  reason,  she 
taught  them  her  practice  above  mentioned. 
Those  wives  who  observed  it  found  the  good, 
and  returned  thanks;  those  who  observed  it  not, 
found  no  relief,  and  suffered. 

20.  Her  mother-in-law  also,  at  first  by  whis¬ 
perings  of  evil  servants  incensed  against  her,  she 
so  overcame  by  observance  and  persevering  en¬ 
durance  and  meekness,  that  she  of  her  own  ac¬ 
cord  discovered  to  her  son  the  meddling  tongues 
whereby  the  domestic  peace  betwixt  her  and  her 
JCf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xxn.  2. 


67 

daughter-in-law  had  been  disturbed,  asking  him 
to  correct  them.  Then,  when  in  compliance  with 
his  mother  and  for  the  well-ordering  of  the  fam¬ 
ily  and  the  harmony  of  its  members,  he  had  with 
stripes  corrected  those  discovered,  at  her  will 
who  had  discovered  them,  she  promised  the  like 
reward  to  any  who,  to  please  her,  should  speak 
ill  of  her  daughter-in-law  to  her;  and,  none  now 
venturing,  they  lived  together  with  a  remarkable 
sweetness  of  mutual  kindness. 

21.  This  great  gift  also  Thou  bestowedst,  O 
my  God,  my  mercy,  upon  that  good  handmaid 
of  Thine,  in  whose  womb  Thou  createdst  me, 
that  between  any  disagreeing  and  discordant 
parties,  where  she  was  able,  she  shewed  herself 
such  a  peacemaker  that,  hearing  on  both  sides 
most  bitter  things,  such  as  swelling  and  indigest¬ 
ed  choler  uses  to  break  out  into  when  the  crudi¬ 
ties  of  enmities  are  breathed  out  in  sour  dis¬ 
courses  to  a  present  friend  against  an  absent  en¬ 
emy,  she  never  would  disclose  aught  of  the  one 
unto  the  other,  but  what  might  tend  to  their  rec¬ 
oncilement.  A  small  good  this  might  appear  to 
me,  did  I  not  to  my  grief  know  numberless  per¬ 
sons  who,  through  some  horrible  and  wide- 
spreading  contagion  of  sin,  not  only  disclose  to 
persons  mutually  angered  things  said  in  anger, 
but  add  withal  things  never  spoken;  whereas  to 
humane  humanity,  it  ought  to  seem  a  light  thing 
not  to  foment  or  increase  ill  will  by  ill  words, 
unless  one  study  withal  by  good  words  to  quench 
it.  Such  was  she,  Thyself,  her  most  inward  In¬ 
structor,  teaching  her  in  the  school  of  the  heart. 

22.  Finally,  her  own  husband,  towards  the 
very  end  of  his  earthly  life,  did  she  gain  unto 
Thee;  nor  had  she  to  complain  of  that  in  him  as 
a  believer  which  before  he  was  a  believer  she 
had  borne  from  him.  She  was  also  the  servant  of 
thy  servants;  whosoever  of  them  knew  her  did 
in  her  much  praise  and  honour  and  love  Thee ; 
for  that  through  the  witness  of  the  fruits  of  a 
holy  conversation  they  perceived  Thy  presence 
in  her  heart.  For  she  had  “been  the  wife  of  one 
man,”  had  requited  her  parents,  had  governed 
her  house  piously,  was  “well  reported  of  for 
good  works,”  had  “brought  up  children,”  2  so  of¬ 
ten  travailing  in  birth  of  them3  as  she  saw  them 
swerving  from  Thee.  Lastly,  of  all  of  us  Thy 
servants,  0  Lord  (whom  on  occasion  of  Thy  own 
gift  Thou  sufferest  to  speak) — us,  who  before 
her  sleeping  in  Thee4  lived  united  together,  hav¬ 
ing  received  the  grace  of  Thy  baptism,  did  she 
so  take  care  of,  as  though  she  had  been  mother 
of  us  all;  so  served  us,  as  though  she  had  been 
child  to  us  all. 

2I  Tim.  5. 4, 9, 10, 14.  3Gal.  4. 19.  4I  Thess.  4.  14. 


68  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


[X]  23.  The  day  now  approaching  whereon 
she  was  to  depart  this  life  (which  day  Thou  well 
knewest,  we  knew  not),  it  came  to  pass,  Thyself, 
as  I  believe,  by  Thy  secret  ways  so  ordering  it 
that  she  and  I  stood  alone,  leaning  in  a  certain 
window,  which  looked  into  the  garden  of  the 
house  where  we  now  lay,  at  Ostia;  where,  re¬ 
moved  from  the  din  of  men,  we  were  recruiting 
from  the  fatigues  of  a  long  journey,  for  the  voy¬ 
age.  We  were  discoursing  then  together,  alone, 
very  sweetly;  and  “forgetting  those  things 
which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those 
things  which  are  before,”  1  we  were  enquiring 
between  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  the  Truth, 
which  Thou  art,  of  what  sort  the  eternal  life  of 
the  saints  was  to  be,  which  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man.2  But  yet  we  gasped  with  the  mouth  of 
our  heart  after  those  heavenly  streams  of  Thy 
fountain,  “the  fountain  of  life,”  which  is  “with 
Thee”;3  that,  being  bedewed  thence  according 
to  our  capacity,  we  might  in  some  sort  meditate 
upon  so  high  a  mystery. 

24.  And  when  our  discourse  was  brought  to 
that  point,  that  the  very  highest  delight  61  the 
earthly  senses,  in  the  very  purest  material  light, 
was,  in  respect  of  the  sweetness  of  that  life,  not 
only  not  worthy  of  comparison,  but  not  even  of 
mention;  we,  raising  up  ourselves  with  a  more 
glowing  affection  towards  the  “Self-same,”4  did 
by  degrees  pass  through  all  things  bodily,  even 
the  very  heaven,  whence  sun  and  moon  and  stars 
shine  upon  the  earth;  yea,  we  were  soaring  high¬ 
er  yet,  by  inward  musing,  and  discourse,  and  ad¬ 
miring  of  Thy  works ;  and  we  came  to  our  own 
minds,  and  went  beyond  them,  that  we  might  ar¬ 
rive  at  that  region  of  never-failing  plenty,  where 
Thou  feedest  Israel5  for  ever  with  the  food  of 
truth,  and  where  life  is  the  Wisdom  by  whom  all 
these  things  are  made,  and  what  have  been,  and 
what  shall  be,  and  she  is  not  made,  but  is,  as  she 
hath  been,  and  so  shall  she  be  ever;  yea  rather, 
to  “have  been,”  and  “hereafter  to  be,”  are  not 
in  her,  but  only  “to  be,”  seeing  she  is  eternal. 
For  to  “have  been,”  and  to  “be  hereafter,”  are 
not  eternal.  And  while  we  were  discoursing  and 
panting  after  her,  we  slightly  touched  on  her 
with  the  whole  effort  of  our  heart;  and  we 
sighed,  and  there  we  leave  bound  “the  first  fruits 
of  the  Spirit”;6  and  returned  to  vocal  expres¬ 
sions  of  our  mouth,  where  the  word  spoken  has 
beginning  and  end.  And  what  is  like  unto  Thy 
Word,  our  Lord,  Who  endureth  in  Himself  with- 

1Phil.  3.  13.  2I  Cor.  2.  9;  Isa.  64.  4.  *Ps.  36.  9. 

4See  above  n.  and  Ps.  4.  8,  Vulg. 

BPs.  80.  5.  6Rom.  8.  23. 


out  becoming  old, and  “maketh  all  things  new”?7 

25.  We  were  saying  then :  If  to  any  the  tumult 
of  the  flesh  were  hushed,  hushed  the  images  of 
earth,  and  waters,  and  air,  hushed  also  the  poles 
of  heaven,  yea,  the  very  soul  be  hushed  to  her¬ 
self,  and  by  not  thinking  on  self  surmount  self, 
hushed  all  dreams  and  imaginary  revelations, 
every  tongue  and  every  sign,  and  whatsoever  ex¬ 
ists  only  in  transition ;  since,  if  any  could  hear, 
all  these  say,  “We  made  not  ourselves,  but  He 
made  us  that  abideth  for  ever”;  if  then,  having 
uttered  this,  they  too  should  be  hushed,  having 
roused  only  our  ears  to  Him  Who  made  them, 
and  He  alone  speak,  not  by  them,  but  by  Him¬ 
self,  that  we  may  hear  His  Word,  not  through 
any  tongue  of  flesh,  nor  Angel’s  voice,  nor  sound 
of  thunder,  nor  in  the  dark  riddle  of  a  similitude, 
but  might  hear  Whom  in  these  things  we  love, 
might  hear  His  Very  Self  without  these  (as  we 
two  now  strained  ourselves,  and  in  swift  thought 
touched  on  that  Eternal  Wisdom,  which  abideth 
over  all) — could  this  be  continued  on,  and  other 
visions  of  kind  far  unlike  be  withdrawn,  and  this 
one  ravish,  and  absorb,  and  wrap  up  its  beholder 
amid  these  inward  joys,  so  that  life  might  be  for 
ever  like  that  one  moment  of  understanding 
which  now  we  sighed  after ;  were  not  this,  “En¬ 
ter  into  thy  Master’s  joy”?8  And  when  shall  that 
be?  When  we  shall  all  rise  again,  though  we  shall 
not  all  be  changed?  9 

26.  Such  things  was  I  speaking,  and  even  if 
not  in  this  very  manner  and  these  same  words, 
yet,  Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  in  that  day  when 
we  were  speaking  of  these  things,  and  this  world 
with  all  its  delights  became,  as  we  spake,  con¬ 
temptible  to  us,  my  mother  said:  “Son,  for 
mine  own  part  I  have  no  further  delight  in  any¬ 
thing  in  this  life.  What  I  do  here  any  longer,  and 
to  what  end  I  am  here,  I  know  not,  now  that  my 
hopes  in  this  world  are  accomplished.  One  thing 
there  was,  for  which  I  desired  to  linger  for  a 
while  in  this  life,  that  I  might  see  thee  a  Catho¬ 
lic  Christian  before  I  died.  My  God  hath  done 
this  for  me  more  abundantly,  that  I  should  now 
see  thee  withall,  despising  earthly  happiness,  be¬ 
come  His  servant:  what  do  I  here?” 

[XI]  27.  What  answer  I  made  her  unto  these 
things,  I  remember  not.  For  scarce  five  days  af¬ 
ter,  or  not  much  more,  she  fell  sick  of  a  fever; 
and  in  that  sickness  one  day  she  fell  into  a 
swoon,  and  was  for  a  while  withdrawn  from 
these  visible  things.  We  hastened  round  her;  but 
she  was  soon  brought  back  to  her  senses;  and, 
looking  on  me  and  my  brother  standing  by  her, 
said  to  us  enquiringly,  “Where  was  I?”  And 
7Wisd.  7.  27.  8Matt.  25.  21.  9I  Cor.  15.  51. 


CONFESSIONS  IX.  23-31  69 


then  looking  fixedly  on  us,  with  grief  amazed: 
“Here,”  saith  she.  “shall  you  bury  your  mother.” 
I  held  my  peace  and  refrained  weeping;  but  my 
brother  spake  something,  wishing  for  her,  as  the 
happier  lot,  that  she  might  die,  not  in  a  strange 
place,  but  in  her  own  land.  Whereat,  she  with 
anxious  look,  checking  him  with  her  eyes,  for 
that  he  still  savoured  such  things,  and  then  look¬ 
ing  upon  me:  “Behold,”  saith  she,  “what  he 
saith.”  And  soon  after  to  us  both:  “Lay,”  she 
saith,  “this  body  anywhere;  let  not  the  care  for 
that  any  way  disquiet  you :  this  only  I  request, 
that  you  would  remember  me  at  the  Lord’s  al¬ 
tar,  wherever  you  be.”  And,  having  delivered 
this  sentiment  in  what  words  she  could,  she  held 
her  peace,  being  exercised  by  her  growing  sick¬ 
ness. 

28.  But  I.  considering  Thy  gifts,  Thou  unseen 
God.  which  Thou  instillest  into  the  hearts  of 
Thy  faithful  ones,  whence  wondrous  fruits  do 
spring,  did  rejoice  and  give  thanks  to  Thee,  re¬ 
calling  what  I  before  knew,  how  careful  and 
anxious  she  had  ever  been  as  to  her  place  of  bur¬ 
ial.  which  she  had  provided  and  prepared  for 
herself  by  the  body  of  her  husband.  For,  be¬ 
cause  they  had  lived  in  great  harmony  together, 
she  also  wished  (so  little  can  the  human  mind 
embrace  things  divine)  to  have  this  addition  to 
that  happiness,  and  to  have  it  remembered 
among  men  that,  after  her  pilgrimage  beyond 
the  seas,  what  was  earthly  of  this  united  pair  had 
been  permitted  to  be  united  beneath  the  same 
earth.  But  when  this  emptiness  had  through  the 
fulness  of  Thy  goodness  begun  to  cease  in  her 
heart,  I  knew  not,  and  rejoiced  admiring  what 
she  had  so  disclosed  to  me;  though  indeed  in 
that  our  discourse  also  in  the  window,  when  she 
said,  “What  do  I  here  any  longer?”  there  ap¬ 
peared  no  desire  of  dying  in  her  own  country.  I 
heard  afterwards  also  that,  when  we  were  now 
at  Ostia,  she  with  a  mother’s  confidence,  when  I 
was  absent,  one  day  discoursed  with  certain  of 
my  friends  about  the  contempt  of  this  life  and 
the  blessing  of  death;  and  when  they  were 
amazed  £t  such  courage  which  Thou  hadst  given 
to  a  woman,  and  asked,  “Whether  she  were  not 
afraid  to  leave  her  body  so  far  from  her  own 
city?”  she  replied,  “Nothing  is  far  to  God;  nor 
was  it  to  be  feared  lest,  at  the  end  of  the  world, 
He  should  not  recognize  whence  He  were  to 
raise  me  up.”  On  the  ninth  day  then  of  her  sick¬ 
ness,  and  the  fifty-sixth  year  of  her  age,  and  the 
three-and-thirtieth  of  mine,  was  that  religious 
and  holy  soul  freed  from  the  body. 

[XII]  29.  I  closed  her  eyes;  and  there  flowed 
withal  a  mighty  sorrow  into  my  heart,  which 


was  overflowing  into  tears;  mine  eyes  at  the 
same  time,  by  the  violent  command  of  my  mind, 
drank  up  their  fountain  wholly  dry;  and  woe 
was  me  in  such  a  strife!  But  when  she  breathed 
her  last,  the  boy  Adeodatus  burst  out  into  a  loud 
lament;  then,  checked  by  us  all,  held  his  peace. 
In  like  manner  also  a  childish  feeling  in  me, 
which  was,  through  my  heart’s  youthful  voice, 
finding  its  vent  in  weeping,  was  checked  and  si¬ 
lenced.  For  we  thought  it  not  fitting  to  solem¬ 
nize  that  funeral  with  tearful  lament  and  groan- 
ings:  for  thereby  do  they  for  the  most  part  ex¬ 
press  grief  for  the  departed,  as  though  unhappy, 
or  altogether  dead;  whereas  she  was  neither  un¬ 
happy  in  her  death,  nor  altogether  dead.  Of 
this,  we  were  assured  on  good  grounds,  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  her  good  conversation  and  her  “faith 
unfeigned.”1 

30.  What  then  was  it  which  did  grievously 
pain  me  within,  but  a  fresh  wound  wrought 
through  the  sudden  wrench  of  that  most  sweet 
and  dear  custom  of  living  together?  I  joyed  in¬ 
deed  in  her  testimony,  when,  in  that  her  last 
sickness,  mingling  her  endearments  with  my  acts 
of  duty,  she  called  me  “dutiful,”  and  mentioned, 
with  great  affection  of  love,  that  she  never  had 
heard  any  harsh  or  reproachful  sound  uttered  by 
my  mouth  against  her.  But  yet,  0  my  God,  Who 
madest  us,  what  comparison  is  there  betwixt 
that  honour  that  I  paid  to  her,  and  her  slavery 
for  me?  Being  then  forsaken  of  so  great  comfort 
in  her,  my  soul  was  wounded,  and  that  life  rent 
asunder  as  it  were,  which,  of  hers  and  mine  to¬ 
gether,  had  been  made  but  one. 

31.  The  boy  then  being  stilled  from  weeping, 
Euodius  took  up  the  Psalter,  and  began  to  sing, 
our  whole  house  answering  him,  the  Psalm,  “I 
will  sing  of  mercy  and  judgment  to  Thee,  0 
Lord.”2  But  hearing  what  we  were  doing,  many 
brethren  and  religious  women  came  together; 
and  whilst  they  (whose  office  it  was)  made 
ready  for  the  burial,  as  the  manner  is,  I  (in  a 
part  of  the  house  where  I  might  properly),  to¬ 
gether  with  those  who  thought  not  fit  to  leave 
me,  discoursed  upon  something  fitting  the  time; 
and  by  this  balm  of  truth  assuaged  that  torment 
known  to  Thee,  they  unknowing  and  listening 
intently,  and  conceiving  me  to  be  without  all 
sense  of  sorrow.  But  in  Thy  ears,  where  none  of 
them  heard,  I  blamed  the  weakness  of  my  feel¬ 
ings,  and  refrained  my  flood  of  grief,  which  gave 
way  a  little  unto  me;  but  again  came,  as  with  a 
tide,  yet  not  so  as  to  burst  out  into  tears,  nor  to 
a  change  of  countenance ;  still  I  knew  what  I  was 
keeping  down  in  my  heart.  And  being  very  much 

H  Tim.  1.  5.  2Ps.  101.  1. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


displeased  that  these  human  things  had  such 
power  over  me,  which  in  the  due  order  and 
appointment  of  our  natural  condition  must 
needs  come  to  pass,  with  a  new  grief  I  grieved 
for  my  grief,  and  was  thus  worn  by  a  double 
sorrow. 

3  2.  And  behold,  the  corpse  was  carried  to  the 
burial;  we  went  and  returned  without  tears.  For 
neither  in  those  prayers  which  we  poured  forth 
unto  Thee,  when  the  sacrifice  of  our  ransom1 
was  offered  for  her,  when  now  the  corpse  was  by 
the  grave’s  side,  as  the  manner  there  is,  previous 
to  its  being  laid  therein,  did  I  weep  even  during 
those  prayers ;  yet  was  I  the  whole  day  in  secret 
heavily  sad,  and  with  troubled  mind  prayed 
Thee,  as  I  could,  to  heal  my  sorrow,  yet  Thou 
didst  not;  impressing,  I  believe,  upon  my  mem¬ 
ory  by  this  one  instance  how  strong  is  the  bond 
of  all  habit,  even  upon  a  soul,  which  now  feeds 
upon  no  deceiving  Word.  It  seemed  also  good  to 
me  to  go  and  bathe,  having  heard  that  the  bath 
had  its  name  ( balneum )  from  the  Greek  fia\ av- 
elov,  for  that  it  drives  sadness  from  the  mind. 
And  this  also  I  confess  unto  Thy  mercy,  “Fa¬ 
ther  of  the  fatherless,”2  that  I  bathed,  ancl  was 
the  same  as  before  I  bathed.  For  the  bitterness 
of  sorrow  could  not  exude  out  of  my  heart.  Then 
I  slept,  and  woke  up  again,  and  found  my  grief 
not  a  little  softened;  and  as  I  was  alone  in  my 
bed,  I  remembered  those  true  verses  of  Thy 
Ambrose.  For  Thou  art  the 

Maker  of  all,  the  Lord , 

And  Ruler  of  the  height, 

Who,  robing  day  in  light,  hast  poured 
Soft  slumbers  o’er  the  night, 

That  to  our  limbs  the  power 
Of  toil  may  be  renew’d, 

And  hearts  be  rais’d  that  sink  and  cower , 

And  sorrows  be  subdu’d. 

33.  And  then  by  little  and  little  I  recovered 
my  former  thoughts  of  Thy  handmaid,  her  holy 
conversation  towards  Thee,  her  holy  tenderness 
and  observance  towards  us,  whereof  I  was  sud¬ 
denly  deprived:  and  I  was  minded  to  weep  in 
Thy  sight,  for  her  and  for  myself,  in  her  behalf 
and  in  my  own.  And  I  gave  way  to  the  tears 
which  I  before  restrained,  to  overflow  as  much 
as  they  desired;  reposing  my  heart  upon  them; 
and  it  found  rest  in  them,  for  it  was  in  Thy  ears, 
not  in  those  of  man,  who  would  have  scornfully 
interpreted  my  weeping.  And  now,  Lord,  in  writ¬ 
ing  I  confess  it  unto  Thee.  Read  it  who  will,  and 

xThe  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  offered  for  the  dead. 

2Ps.  68.  5. 


interpret  it  how  he  will;  and  if  he  finds  sin 
therein,  that  I  wept  my  mother  for  a  small  por¬ 
tion  of  an  hour  (the  mother  who  for  the  time 
was  dead  to  mine  eyes,  who  had  for  many  years 
wept  for  me,  that  I  might  live  in  Thine  eyes), 
let  him  not  deride  me;  but  rather,  if  he  be  one 
of  large  charity,  let  him  weep  himself  for  my 
sins  unto  Thee,  the  Father  of  all  the  brethren  of 
Thy  Christ. 

[XIII]  34.  But  now,  with  a  heart  cured  of 
that  wound,  wherein  it  might  seem  blameworthy 
for  an  earthly  feeling,3 1  pour  out  unto  Thee,  our 
God.  in  behalf  of  that  Thy  handmaid,  a  far  dif¬ 
ferent  kind  of  tears,  flowing  from  a  spirit  shaken 
by  the  thoughts  of  the  dangers  of  every  soul  that 
dieth  in  Adam.  And  although  she,  having  been 
“quickened”  in  Christ,4  even  before  her  release 
from  the  flesh,  had  lived  to  the  praise  of  Thy 
name  for  her  faith  and  conversation,  yet  dare  I 
not  say  that,  from  what  time  Thou  regeneratedst 
her  by  baptism,  no  word  issued  from  her  mouth 
against  Thy  Commandment.  Thy  Son,  the 
Truth,  hath  said,  “Whosoever  shall  say  unto  his 
brother,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell 
fire.”5  And  woe  be  even  unto  the  commendable 
life  of  men  if,  laying  aside  mercy,  Thou  should- 
est  examine  it.  But,  because  Thou  art  not  ex¬ 
treme  in  enquiring  after  sins,  we  confidently 
hope  to  find  some  place  with  Thee.  But  whoso¬ 
ever  reckons  up  his  real  merits  to  Thee,  what 
reckons  he  up  to  Thee  but6  Thine  own  gifts?  0 
that  men  would  know  themselves  to  be  men; 
and  that  “he  that  glorieth”  would  “glory  in  the 
Lord.”  7 

35. 1  therefore.  0  my  Praise  and  my  Life,  God 
of  my  heart,  laying  aside  for  a  while  her  good 
deeds,  for  which  I  give  thanks  to  Thee  with  joy, 
do  now  beseech  Thee  for  the  sins  of  my  mother. 
Hearken  unto  me,  I  entreat  Thee,  by  the  Medi¬ 
cine  of  our  wounds  Who  hung  upon  the  tree,  and 
now  sitting  at  Thy  right  hand  “maketh  interces¬ 
sion  to  Thee  for  us.” 8 1  know  that  she  dealt  mer¬ 
cifully,  and  from  her  heart9  forgave  her  debtors 
their  debts;  do  Thou  also  forgive  her  debts,10 
whatever  she  may  have  contracted  in  so  many 
years,  since  the  water  of  salvation.  Forgive  her, 
Lord,  forgive,  I  beseech  Thee;  “enter  not  into 
judgment”  with  her.11  Let  Thy  mercy  be  exalted 
above  Thy  justice,12  since  Thy  words  are  true, 
and  Thou  hast  promised  mercy  unto  “the  merci¬ 
ful”;13  which  Thou  gavest  them  to  be,  Who  wilt 
“have  mercy”  on  whom  Thou  wilt  have  mercy; 

^om.  8.  7.  4I  Cor.  15.  22.  BMatt.  12.  36. 

6See  above  17,  and  below  Bk.  xiii.  1.  7II  Cor.  10.  17. 

8Rom.  8.  34.  9Matt.  18.  35.  10Ibid.,  6.  12. 

llPs.  143.  2.  12James,  2.  13.  13Matt.  5.  7. 


7i 


CONFESSIONS  IX.  32-37,  X.  1-2 


and  wilt  “have  compassion”  on  whom  Thou  hast 
had  compassion.1 

36.  And  I  believe  Thou  hast  already  done 
what  I  ask;  but  “accept,  0  Lord,  the  free-will 
offerings  of  my  mouth.”2  For  she,  the  day  of  her 
dissolution  now  at  hand,  took  no  thought  to 
have  her  body  sumptuously  wound  up,  or  em¬ 
balmed  with  spices;  nor  desired  she  a  choice 
monument,  or  to  be  buried  in  her  own  land. 
These  things  she  enjoined  us  not;  but  desired 
only  to  have  her  name  commemorated  at  Thy 
Altar,  which  she  had  served  without  intermis¬ 
sion  of  one  day;  whence  she  knew  that  holy  sac¬ 
rifice  to  be  dispensed  by  which  the  hand-writing 
that  was  against  us  is  blotted  out;3  through 
which  the  enemy  was  triumphed  over,  who,  sum¬ 
ming  up  our  offences  and  seeking  what  to  lay  to 
our  charge,  found  nothing  in  Him4  in  Whom  we 
conquer.  Who  shall  restore  to  Him  the  innocent 
blood?  Who  repay  Him  the  price  wherewith  He 
bought  us,  and  so  take  us  from  Him?  Unto  the 
Sacrament  of  which  our  ransom,  Thy  handmaid 
bound  her  soul  by  the  bond  of  faith.  Let  none 
sever  her  from  Thy  protection;  let  neither  the 
“lion”  nor  the  “dragon”  5  interpose  himself  by 
force  or  fraud.  For  she  will  not  answer  that  she 
owes  nothing,  lest  she  be  convicted  and  seized 
by  the  crafty  accuser;  but  she  will  answer  that 
her  “sins  are  forgiven” 6  her  by  Him,  to  Whom 
none  can  repay  that  price,  which  He  Who  owed 
nothing  paid  for  us. 

37.  May  she  rest  then  in  peace  with  the  hus¬ 
band  before  and  after  whom  she  had  never  any; 
whom  she  obeyed,  with  patience  bringing  forth 
fruit7  unto  Thee,  that  she  might  win  him  also 
unto  Thee.  And  inspire,  0  Lord  my  God,  inspire 
Thy  servants  my  brethren,  Thy  sons  my  mas¬ 
ters,  whom  with  voice,  and  heart,  and  pen  I 
serve,  that  so  many  as  shall  read  these  Confes¬ 
sions  may  at  Thy  Altar  remember  Monica  Thy 
handmaid,  with  Patricius,  her  sometime  hus¬ 
band.  by  whose  bodies  Thou  broughtest  me  into 
this  life,  how  I  know  not.  May  they  with  devout 
affection  remember  my  parents  in  this  transitory 
light,  my  brethren  under  Thee  our  Father  in  our 
Catholic  Mother,  and  my  fellow-citizens  in  that 
eternal  Jerusalem,  which  Thy  pilgrim  people 
sigh  after  from  their  Exodus,  even  unto  their 
return  thither.  That  so,  my  mother’s  last  re¬ 
quest  of  me  may,  through  my  confessions 
more  than  through  my  prayers,  be,  through 
the  prayers  of  many,  more  abundantly  fulfilled 
to  her. 

^om.  9.  15.  2Ps.  119.  108.  3Col.  2.  14. 

4John,  14.  30.  5Ps.  91.  13. 

6Matt.  9.  2.  7Luke,  8.  15. 


BOOK  X.  Having  in  the  former  books  spoken  of 
himself  before  his  receiving  the  grace  of  Bap¬ 
tism,  in  this  Augustine  confesses  what  he  then 
was.  But  first,  he  enquires  by  what  faculty  we 
can  know  God  at  all,  whence  he  enlarges  on 
the  mysterious  character  of  the  memory , 
wherein  God,  being  made  known,  dwells,  but 
which  could  not  discover  Him.  Then  he  ex¬ 
amines  his  own  trials  under  the  triple  division 
of  temptation,  “lust  of  the  flesh,  lust  of  the 
eyes,  and  pride,y ;  what  Christian  continency 
prescribes  as  to  each.  On  Christ  the  Only  Me¬ 
diator,  who  heals  and  will  heal  all  infirmities. 
[I]  1.  Let  me  know  Thee,  0  Lord,  Who  knowest 
me :  let  me  know  Thee,  as  I  am  known.8  Power 
of  my  soul,  enter  into  it,  and  fit  it  for  Thee,  that 
Thou  mayest  have  and  hold  it  without  “spot  or 
wrinkle.”9  This  is  my  hope,  “therefore  do  I 
speak”;10  and  in  this  hope  do  I  rejoice,  when  I 
rejoice  healthfully.  Other  things  of  this  life  are 
the  less  to  be  sorrowed  for,  the  more  they  are 
sorrowed  for;  and  the  more  to  be  sorrowed  for, 
the  less  men  sorrow  for  them.  For  behold. 
“Thou  lovest  the  truth,”  11  and  he  that  doth  it 
“cometh  to  the  light.”  12  This  would  I  do  in  my 
heart  before  Thee  in  confession:  and  in  my 
writing,  before  many  witnesses. 

[II]  2.  And  from  Thee,  0  Lord,  unto  Whose 
eyes  the  abyss  of  man’s  conscience  is  naked,13 
what  could  be  hidden  in  me  though  I  would  not 
confess  it?  For  I  should  hide  Thee  from  me,  not 
me  from  Thee.  But  now,  for  that  my  groaning  is 
witness,  that  I  am  displeased  with  myself.  Thou 
shinest  out,  and  art  pleasing,  and  beloved,  and 
longed  for;  that  I  may  be  ashamed  of  myself, 
and  renounce  myself,  and  choose  Thee,  and  nei¬ 
ther  please  Thee,  nor  myself,  but  in  Thee.  To 
Thee  therefore,  0  Lord,  am  I  open,  whatever  I 
am;  and  with  what  fruit  I  confess  unto  Thee,  I 
have  said.  Nor  do  I  it  with  words  and  sounds  of 
the  flesh,  but  with  the  words  of  my  soul,  and  the 
cry  of  the  thought  which  Thy  ear  knoweth.  For 
when  I  am  evil,  then  to  confess  to  Thee  is  noth¬ 
ing  else  than  to  be  displeased  with  myself;  but, 
when  holy,  nothing  else  than  not  to  ascribe  it  to 
myself:  because  Thou,  0  Lord,  “blessest  the 
godly,”14  but  first  Thou  justifieth  him  when  “un¬ 
godly.”15  My  confession  then,  0  my  God.  in  Thy 
sight,  is  made  silently,  and  not  silently.  For  in 
sound,  it  is  silent;  in  affection,  it  cries  aloud.  For 
neither  do  I  utter  anything  right  unto  men, 
which  Thou  hast  not  before  heard  from  me;  nor 

8I  Cor.  13.  12.  9Eph.  5.  27.  10Ps.  116.  10. 

llIbid..  51.  6.  l2John,  3.  20.  13Heb.  4.  13. 

14Ps.  5.  12.  15Rom.  4.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


dost  Thou  hear  any  such  thing  from  me,  which 
Thou  hast  not  first  said  unto  me. 

[Ill]  3.  What  then  have  I  to  do  with  men, 
that  they  should  hear  my  confessions;  as  if  they 
could  heal  all  my  infirmities?  1  A  race  curious  to 
know  the  lives  of  others,  slothful  to  amend  their 
own.  Why  seek  they  to  hear  from  me  what  I  am, 
who  will  not  hear  from  Thee  what  themselves 
are?  And  how  know  they,  when  from  myself 
they  hear  of  myself,  whether  I  say  true ;  seeing 
no  man  knows  what  is  in  man,  “but  the  spirit  of 
man  which  is  in  him”?  2  But  if  they  hear  from 
Thee  of  themselves,  they  cannot  say,  “The  Lord 
lieth.”  For  what  is  it  to  hear  from  Thee  of  them¬ 
selves,  but  to  know  themselves?  And  who  know- 
eth  and  saith,  “It  is  false,”  unless  himself  lieth? 
But  because  “charity”  believeth  all  things3  (that 

is,  among  those  whom  knitting  unto  itself  it  mak- 
eth  one),  I  also,  0  Lord,  will  in  such  wise  confess 
unto  Thee ;  that  men  may  hear,  to  whom  I  cannot 
demonstrate  whether  I  confess  truly;  yet  they 
believe  me,  whose  ears  charity  openeth  unto  me. 

4.  But  do  Thou,  my  inmost  Physician,  make 
plain  unto  me  what  fruit  I  may  reap  by  doing  it. 
For  the  confessions  of  my  past  sins,  which  Thou 
hast  “forgiven”  and  “covered,” 4  that  Thou 
mightest  bless  me  in  Thee,  changing  my  soul  by 
Faith  and  Thy  Sacrament,  when  read  and  heard 
stirs  up  the  heart,  that  it  sleep  not  in  despair  and 
say,  “I  cannot,”  but  awake  in  the  love  of  Thy 
mercy  and  the  sweetness  of  Thy  grace,  whereby 
whoso  is  weak  is  strong,5  when  by  it  he  became 
conscious  of  his  own  weakness.  And  the  good  de¬ 
light  to  hear  of  the  past  evils  of  such  as  are  now 
freed  from  them,  not  because  they  are  evils,  but 
because  they  have  been  and  are  not.  With  what 
fruit  then,  0  Lord  my  God.  to  Whom  my  con¬ 
science  daily  confesseth,  trusting  more  in  the 
hope  of  Thy  mercy  than  in  their  own  innocency, 
with  what  fruit.  I  pray,  do  I  by  this  book  con¬ 
fess  to  men.  also  in  Thy  presence,  what  I  now 
am.  not  what  I  have  been?  For  that  other  fruit  I 
have  seen  and  spoken  of.  But  what  I  now  am, 
at  the  very  time  of  making  these  confessions, 
divers  desire  to  know,  who  have  or  have  not 
known  me,  who  have  heard  from  me  or  of  me; 
but  their  ear  is  not  at  my  heart,  where  I  am, 
whatever  I  am.  They  wish  then  to  hear  me  con¬ 
fess  what  I  am  within ;  whither  neither  their  eye, 
nor  ear,  nor  understanding,  can  reach ;  they  wish 

it,  as  ready  to  believe — but  will  they  know?  For 
charity,  whereby  they  are  good,  telleth  them 
that  in  my  confessions  I  lie  not;  and  she  in  them 
believeth  me. 

JPs.  113.  3.  2I  Cor.  2.  11.  zIbid.,  13.  7. 

4Ps.  32.  1.  5II  Cor.  12.  10. 


[IV]  5.  But  for  what  fruit  would  they  hear 
this?  do  they  desire  to  joy  with  me,  when  they 
hear  how  near,  by  Thy  gift,  I  approach  unto 
Thee?  and  to  pray  for  me,  when  they  shall  hear 
how  much  I  am  held  back  by  my  own  weight? 
To  such  will  I  discover  myself.  For  it  is  no  mean 
fruit.  0  Lord  my  God,  that  by  many  thanks 
should  be  given  to  Thee  on  our  behalf,6  and 
Thou  be  by  many  intreated  for  us.  Let  the  broth¬ 
erly  mind  love  in  me  what  Thou  teachest  is  to  be 
loved,  and  lament  in  me  what  Thou  teachest  is 
to  be  lamented.  Let  a  brotherly,  not  a  stranger, 
mind — not  that  “of  the  strange  children,  whose 
mouth  talketh  of  vanity,  and  their  right  hand  is 
a  right  hand  of  iniquity,”7 — but  that  brotherly 
mind  which,  when  it  approveth,  rejoiceth  for 
me,  and  when  it  disapproved  me,  is  sorry  for 
me ;  because  whether  it  approveth  or  disapprov-  I 
eth,  it  loveth  me.  To  such  will  I  discover  myself ; 
they  will  breathe  freely  at  my  good  deeds,  sigh 
for  my  ill.  My  good  deeds  are  Thine  appoint¬ 
ments,  and  Thy  gifts;  my  evil  ones  are  my  of¬ 
fences,  and  Thy  judgments.  Let  them  breathe 
freely  at  the  one,  sigh  at  the  other;  and  let 
hymns  and  weeping  go  up  into  Thy  sight,  out  of 
the  hearts  of  my  brethren.  Thy  censers.8  And  do 
Thou.  0  Lord,  be  pleased  with  the  incense  of 
Thy  holy  temple,  have  mercy  upon  me  accord¬ 
ing  to  Thy  great  mercy9  “for  Thine  own  name’s 
sake”;10  and  no  ways  forsaking  what  Thou  hast 
begun,  perfect  my  imperfections. 

6.  This  is  the  fruit  of  my  confessions  of  what 
I  am.  not  of  what  I  have  been,  to  confess  this, 
not  before  Thee  only,  in  a  secret  exultation  with 
trembling,11  and  a  secret  sorrow  with  hope;  but 
in  the  ears  also  of  the  believing  sons  of  men, 
sharers  of  my  joy  and  partners  in  my  mortality, 
my  fellow-citizens,  and  fellow-pilgrims,  who  are 
gone  before,  or  are  to  follow  on,  companions  of 
my  way.  These  are  Thy  servants,  my  brethren, 
whom  Thou  wiliest  to  be  Thy  sons ;  my  masters 
whom  Thou  commandest  me  to  serve,  if  I  would 
live  with  Thee,  of  Thee.  But  this  Thy  Word 
were  little  did  it  only  command  by  speaking,  and 
not  go  before  in  performing.  This  then  I  do  in 
deed  and  word,  this  I  do  under  Thy  wings ;  in 
over-great  peril,  were  not  my  soul  subdued  unto 
Thee  under  Thy  wings,  and  my  infirmity  known 
unto  Thee.  I  am  a  little  one,  but  my  Father  ever 
liveth,  and  my  Guardian  is  “sufficient”  for  me.12 
For  He  is  the  same  who  begat  me,  and  defends 
me;  and  Thou  Thyself  art  all  my  good;  Thou, 
Almighty,  Who  art  with  me,  yea,  before  I  am 

6II  Cor.  1.  11.  7Ps.  114.  11.  8Rev.  8.  3. 

9Ps.  51.  1.  10Ps.  25.  11.  nPs.  2.  11. 

12II  Cor.  12.  9. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  3-10  73 


with  Thee.  To  such  then  whom  Thou  command- 
est  me  to  serve  will  I  discover,  not  what  I  have 
been,  but  what  I  now  am,  and  what  I  yet  am. 
But  neither  do  I  judge  myself.1  Thus  therefore 
I  would  be  heard. 

[V]  7.  For  Thou,  Lord,  dost  judge  me;2  be¬ 
cause,  although  no  “man  knoweth  the  things  of 
a  man,  but  the  spirit  of  a  man  which  is  in  him,”  3 
yet  is  there  something  of  man  which  neither 
“the  spirit  of  man  that  is  in  him”  itself  knoweth. 
But  Thou,  Lord,  knowest  all  of  him.  Who  hast 
made  him.  Yet  I.  though  in  Thy  sight  I  despise 
myself  and  account  “myself  dust  and  ashes,”  4 
yet  know  I  something  of  Thee,  which  I  know  not 
of  myself.  And  truly,  “now  we  see  through  a 
glass  darkly,”  not  “face  to  face”  5  as  yet.  So 
long  therefore  as  I  be  “absent”  from  Thee,  I  am 
more  “present”  with  myself  than  with  Thee;6 
and  yet  know  I  Thee  that  Thou  are  in  no  ways 
passible;7  but  I,  what  temptations  I  can  resist, 
what  I  cannot,  I  know  not.  And  there  is  hope, 
because  Thou  art  faithful.  Who  wilt  not  suffer 
us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able;  but 
wilt  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  es¬ 
cape.  that  we  may  be  able  to  bear  it.8 1  will  con¬ 
fess  then  what  I  know  of  myself,  I  will  confess 
also  what  I  know  not  of  myself.  And  that  be¬ 
cause  what  I  do  know  of  myself,  I  know  by  Thy 
shining  upon  me;  and  what  I  know7  not  of  my¬ 
self,  so  long  know7 1  not  it.  until  my  “darkness  be 
made  as  the  noon-day” 9  in  Thy  countenance. 

[VI]  8.  Not  with  doubting,  but  with  assured 
consciousness,  do  I  love  Thee,  Lord.  Thou  hast 
stricken  my  heart  with  Thy  word,  and  I  loved 
Thee.  Yea,  also  heaven,  and  earth,  and  all  that 
therein  is,  behold,  on  every  side  they  bid  me 
love  Thee;  nor  cease  to  say  so  unto  all.  “that 
they  may  be  without  excuse.”10  But  more  deeply 
wilt  Thou  have  mercy  on  whom  Thou  wilt  have 
mercy,  and  wilt  have  compassion  on  whom  Thou 
hast  had  compassion:11  else  in  deaf  ears  do  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  speak  Thy  praises.  But 
w7hat  do  I  love  w7hen  I  love  Thee?  Not  beauty  of 
bodies,  nor  the  fair  harmony  of  time,  nor  the 
brightness  of  the  light,  so  gladsome  to  our  eyes, 
nor  sweet  melodies  of  varied  songs,  nor  the  fra¬ 
grant  smell  of  flowrers,and  ointments, and  spices, 
not  manna  and  honey,  not  limbs  acceptable  to 
embracements  of  flesh.  None  of  these  I  love, 
when  I  love  my  God;  and  yet  I  love  a  kind  of 
light,  and  melody,  and  fragrance,  and  meat,  and 
embra cement,  wflien  I  love  my  God,  the  light, 

XI  Cor.  4.  3.  2Ibid.,  ver.  4.  Hbid ..  2.  11. 

4Gen.  18.  27.  5I  Cor.  13.  12.  6II  Cor.  5.  6. 

7See  above  Bk.  vn.  3.  8I  Cor.  10.  13. 

9Isa.  58.  10.  10Rom.  1.  20.  nRom.  9.  15. 


melody,  fragrance,  meat,  embracement  of  my 
inner  man:  wfliere  there  shineth  unto  my  soul 
what  space  cannot  contain,  and  there  sound- 
ethwhat  time  beareth  not  aw7ay,and  there  smell- 
eth  what  breathing  disperseth  not,  and  there 
tasteth  what  eating  diminisheth  not,  and  there 
clingeth  wfliat  satiety  divorceth  not.  This  is  it 
which  I  love,  when  I  love  my  God. 

9.  And  wThat  is  this?  I  asked  the  earth,  and  it 
answered  me,  “I  am  not  He”;  and  whatsoever 
are  in  it  confessed  the  same.  I  asked  the  sea,  and 
the  deeps,  and  the  living  creeping  things,  and 
they  answered,  “We  are  not  thy  God.  seek  above 
us.”  I  asked  the  moving  air;  and  the  whole  air 
with  his  inhabitants  answered,  “Anaximenes 
w7as  deceived,  I  am  not  God.”  I  asked  the  heav¬ 
ens,  sun.  moon,  stars,  “Nor  [say  they]  are  we 
the  God  Whom  thou  seekest.”  And  I  replied  un¬ 
to  all  the  things  which  encompass  the  door  of 
my  flesh;  “Ye  have  told  me  of  my  God,  that  ye 
are  not  He;  tell  me  something  of  Him.”  And 
they  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  “He  made  us.” 
My  questioning  them  was  my  thoughts  on  them : 
and  their  form  of  beauty  gave  the  answer.  And 
I  turned  myself  unto  myself,  and  said  to  myself, 
“Who  art  thou?”  And  I  answered,  “A  man.” 
And  behold,  in  me  there  present  themselves  to 
me  soul  and  body,  one  without,  the  other  within. 
By  which  of  these  ought  I  to  seek  my  God?  I 
had  sought  Him  in  the  body  from  earth  to  heav¬ 
en,  so  far  as  I  could  send  messengers,  the  beams 
of  mine  eyes.  But  the  better  is  the  inner,  for  to 
it  as  presiding  and  judging,  all  the  bodily  mes¬ 
sengers  reported  the  answers  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  all  things  therein,  who  said,  “We  are 
not  God,  but  He  made  us.”  These  things  did  my 
inner  man  know  by  the  ministry  of  the  outer:  I, 
the  inner,  knew  them;  I,  the  mind,  through  the 
senses  of  my  body.  I  asked  the  whole  frame  of 
the  world  about  my  God;  and  it  answered  me, 
“I  am  not  He,  but  He  made  me.” 

10.  Is  not  this  corporeal  figure  apparent  to  all 
whose  senses  are  perfect?  Why  then  speaks  it 
not  the  same  to  all?  Animals  small  and  great  see 
it,  but  they  cannot  ask  it,  because  no  reason  is 
set  over  their  senses  to  judge  on  w7hat  they  re¬ 
port.  But  men  can  ask,  so  that  “the  invisible 
things  of  God  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
by  the  things  that  are  made”;12  but  by  love  of 
them,  they  are  made  subject  unto  them:  and 
subjects  cannot  judge.  Nor  yet  do  the  creatures 
answer  such  as  ask,  unless  they  can  judge :  nor 
yet  do  they  change  their  voice  (i.e.,  their  ap¬ 
pearance)  if  one  man  only  sees,  another  seeing 
asks,  so  as  to  appear  one  way  to  this  man,  an- 

^Rom.  1.  20. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


other  way  to  that ;  but  appearing  the  same  way 
to  both,  it  is  dumb  to  this,  speaks  to  that;  yea. 
rather  it  speaks  to  all ;  but  they  only  understand, 
who  compare  its  voice  received  from  without 
with  the  truth  within.  For  truth  saith  unto  me. 
“Neither  heaven,  nor  earth,  nor  any  other  body 
is  thy  God.”  This  their  very  nature  saith  to  him 
that  seeth  them;  “They  are  a  mass;  a  mass  is 
less  in  a  part  thereof,  than  in  the  whole.”  Now 
to  thee  I  speak,  0  my  soul,  thou  art  my  better 
part;  for  thou  quickenest  the  mass  of  my  body, 
giving  it  life,  which  no  body  can  give  to  a  body: 
but  thy  God  is  even  unto  thee  the  Life  of  thy 
life. 

[VII]  ii.  What  then  do  I  love,  when  I  love 
my  God?  Who  is  He  above  the  head  of  my  soul? 
By  my  very  soul  will  I  ascend  to  Him.  I  will  pass 
beyond  that  power  whereby  I  am  united  to  my 
body,  and  fill  its  whole  frame  with  life.  Nor  can 
I  by  that  power  find  my  God;  for  so  horse  and 
mule  “that  have  no  understanding”1  might  find 
Him,  seeing  it  is  the  same  power  whereby  even 
their  bodies  live.  But  another  power  there  is, 
not  that  only  whereby  I  animate,  but  that  too 
whereby  I  imbue  with  sense  my  flesh,  which  the 
Lord  hath  framed  for  me;  commanding  the  eye 
not  to  hear,  and  the  ear  not  to  see;  but  the  eye, 
that  through  it  I  should  see,  and  the  ear,  that 
through  it  I  should  hear;  and  to  the  other  senses 
severally,  what  is  to  each  their  own  peculiar 
seats  and  offices;  which,  being  divers,  I  the  one 
mind  do  through  them  enact.  I  will  pass  beyond 
this  power  of  mine  also;  for  this  also  have  the 
horse  and  mule,  for  they  also  perceive  through 
the  body. 

[VIII]  12. 1  will  pass  then  beyond  this  power 
of  my  nature  also,  rising  by  degrees  unto  Him 
Who  made  me.  And  I  come  to  the  fields  and  spa¬ 
cious  palaces  of  my  memory,  where  are  the 
treasures  of  innumerable  images,  brought  into 
it  from  things  of  all  sorts  perceived  by  the 
senses.  There  is  stored  up  whatsoever  besides  we 
think,  either  by  enlarging  or  diminishing,  or  any 
other  way  varying  those  things  which  the  sense 
hath  come  to ;  and  whatever  else  hath  been  com¬ 
mitted  and  laid  up,  which  forgetfulness  hath  not 
yet  swallowed  up  and  buried.  When  I  enter 
there,  I  require  what  I  will  to  be  brought  forth, 
and  something  instantly  comes;  others  must  be 
longer  sought  after,  which  are  fetched,  as  it 
were,  out  of  some  inner  receptacle;  others  rush 
out  in  troops,  and  while  one  thing  is  desired  and 
required,  they  start  forth,  as  who  should  say,  “Is 
it  perchance  I?”  These  I  drive  away  with  the 
hand  of  my  heart,  from  the  face  of  my  remem- 

JPs.  31-9- 


brance;  until  what  I  wished  for  be  unveiled,  and 
appear  in  sight,  out  of  its  secret  place.  Other 
things  come  up  readily,  in  unbroken  order,  as 
they  are  called  for;  those  in  front  making  way 
for  the  following;  and.  as  they  make  way,  they 
are  hidden  from  sight,  ready  to  come  when  I 
will.  All  which  takes  place  when  I  repeat  a  thing 
by  heart. 

13.  There  are  all  things  preserved  distinctly 
and  under  general  heads,  each  having  entered  by 
its  own  avenue:  as  light,  and  all  colours  and 
forms  of  bodies,  by  the  eyes;  by  the  ears  all 
sorts  of  sounds;  all  smells  by  the  avenue  of  the 
nostrils;  all  tastes  by  the  mouth;  and  by  the 
sensation  of  the  whole  body,  what  is  hard  or 
soft;  hot  or  cold;  smooth  or  rugged;  heavy  or 
light ;  either  outwardly  or  inwardly  to  the  body. 
All  these  doth  that  great  harbour  of  the  memory 
receive  in  her  numberless  secret  and  inexpressi¬ 
ble  windings,  to  be  forthcoming  and  brought  out 
at  need;  each  entering  in  by  his  own  gate,  and 
there  laid  up.  Nor  yet  do  the  things  themselves 
enter  in;  only  the  images  of  the  things  per¬ 
ceived  are  there  in  readiness,  for  thought  to  re¬ 
call.  Which  images,  how  they  are  formed,  who 
can  tell,  though  it  doth  plainly  appear  by  which 
sense  each  hath  been  brought  in  and  stored  up? 
For  even  while  I  dwell  in  darkness  and  silence, 
in  my  memory  I  can  produce  colours  if  I  will, 
and  discern  betwixt  black  and  white,  and  what 
others  I  will;  nor  yet  do  sounds  break  in  and 
disturb  the  image  drawn  in  by  my  eyes,  which  I 
am  reviewing,  though  they  also  are  there,  lying 
dormant,  and  laid  up.  as  it  were,  apart.  For  these 
too  I  call  for.  and  forthwith  they  appear.  And 
though  my  tongue  be  still,  and  my  throat  mute, 
so  can  I  sing  as  much  as  I  will;  nor  do  those 
images  of  colours,  which  notwithstanding  be 
there,  intrude  themselves  and  interrupt,  when 
another  store  is  called  for,  which  flowed  in  by 
the  ears.  So  the  other  things,  piled  in  and  up  by 
the  other  senses,  I  recall  at  my  pleasure.  Yea,  I 
discern  the  breath  of  lilies  from  violets,  though 
smelling  nothing;  and  I  prefer  honey  to  sweet 
wine,  smooth  before  rugged,  at  the  time  neither 
tasting  nor  handling,  but  remembering  only. 

14.  These  things  do  I  within,  in  that  vast 
court  of  my  memory.  For  there  are  present  with 
me  heaven,  earth,  sea,  and  whatever  I  could 
think  of  therein,  besides  what  I  have  forgotten. 
There  also  meet  I  with  myself,  and  recall  my¬ 
self,  and  when,  where,  and  what  I  have  done, 
and  under  what  feelings.  There  be  all  which  I 
remember,  either  on  my  own  experience,  or 
others’  credit.  Out  of  the  same  store  do  I  myself  ' 
with  the  past  continually  combine  fresh  and 


CONFESSIONS  X.  11-18  75 


fresh  likenesses  of  things  which  I  have  experi¬ 
enced,  or,  from  what  I  have  experienced,  have 
believed;  and  thence  again  infer  future  actions, 
events  and  hopes,  and  all  these  again  I  reflect  on, 
as  present.  “I  will  do  this  or  that,”  say  I  to  my¬ 
self,  in  that  great  receptacle  of  my  mind,  stored 
with  the  images  of  things  so  many  and  so  great, 
“and  this  or  that  will  follow.”  “0  that  this  or 
that  might  be!”  “God  avert  this  or  that!”  So 
speak  I  to  myself ;  and  when  I  speak,  the  images 
of  all  I  speak  of  are  present,  out  of  the  same 
treasury  of  memory;  nor  would  I  speak  of  any 
thereof,  were  the  images  wanting. 

15.  Great  is  this  force  of  memory,  excessive 
great,  0  my  God ;  a  large  and  boundless  cham¬ 
ber!  Who  ever  sounded  the  bottom  thereof?  Yet 
is  this  a  power  of  mine,  and  belongs  unto  my 
nature;  nor  do  I  myself  comprehend  all  that  I 
am.  Therefore  is  the  mind  too  strait  to  contain 
itself.  And  where  should  that  be,  which  it  con- 
taineth  not  of  itself?  Is  it  without  it,  and  not 
within?  how  then  doth  it  not  comprehend  itself? 
A  wonderful  admiration  surprises  me,  amaze¬ 
ment  seizes  me  upon  this.  And  men  go  abroad 
to  admire  the  heights  of  mountains,  the  mighty 
billows  of  the  sea,  the  broad  tides  of  rivers,  the 
compass  of  the  ocean,  and  the  circuits  of  the 
stars,  and  pass  themselves  by;  nor  wonder  that, 
when  I  spake  of  all  these  things,  I  did  not  see 
them  with  mine  eyes,  yet  could  not  have  spoken 
of  them  unless  I  then  actually  saw  the  moun¬ 
tains,  billows,  rivers,  stars,  which  I  had  seen, 
and  that  ocean  which  I  believe  to  be,  inwardly  in 
my  memory,  and  that,  with  the  same  vast  spaces 
between,  as  if  I  saw  them  abroad.  Yet  did  not  I 
by  seeing  draw  them  into  myself,  when  with 
mine  eyes  I  beheld  them;  nor  are  they  them¬ 
selves  with  me,  but  their  images  only.  And  I 
know  by  what  sense  of  the  body  each  was  im¬ 
pressed  upon  me. 

[IX]  16.  Yet  not  these  alone  does  the  un¬ 
measurable  capacity  of  my  memory  retain.  Here 
also  is  all  learnt  of  the  liberal  sciences  and  as  yet 
unforgotten;  removed  as  it  were  to  some  inner 
place,  which  is  yet  no  place:  nor  are  they  the 
images  thereof,  but  the  things  themselves.  For 
what  is  literature,  what  the  art  of  disputing,  how 
many  kinds  of  questions  there  be,  whatsoever 
of  these  I  know,  in  such  manner  exists  in  my 
memory  as  that  I  have  not  taken  in  the  image 
and  left  out  the  thing,  or  that  it  should  have 
sounded  and  passed  away  like  a  voice  fixed  on 
the  ear  by  that  impress,  whereby  it  might  be  re¬ 
called,  as  if  it  sounded  when  it  no  longer  sound¬ 
ed;  or  as  a  smell  while  it  passes,  and  evaporates 
into  air,  affects  the  sense  of  smell,  whence  it 


conveys  into  the  memory  an  image  of  itself, 
which  remembering  we  renew,  or  as  meat,  which 
verily  in  the  belly  hath  now  no  taste,  and  yet  in 
the  memory  still  in  a  manner  tasteth;  or  as  any¬ 
thing  which  the  body  by  touch  perceiveth,  and 
which,  when  removed  from  us,  the  memory  still 
conceives.  For  those  things  are  not  transmitted 
into  the  memory,  but  their  images  only  are  with 
an  admirable  swiftness  caught  up,  and  stored  as 
it  were  in  wondrous  cabinets,  and  thence  won¬ 
derfully,  by  the  act  of  remembering,  brought 
forth. 

[X]  17.  But  now  when  I  hear  that  there  be 
three  kinds  of  questions:  “Whether  the  thing 
be?  what  it  is?  of  what  kind  it  is?”  I  do  indeed 
hold  the  images  of  the  sounds,  of  which  those 
words  be  composed,  and  that  those  sounds,  with 
a  noise  passed  through  the  air,  and  now  are  not. 
But  the  things  themselves  which  are  signified  by 
those  sounds,  I  never  reached  with  any  sense  of 
my  body,  nor  ever  discerned  them  otherwise 
than  in  my  mind ;  yet  in  my  memory  have  I  laid 
up  not  their  images,  but  themselves.  Which  how 
they  entered  into  me,  let  them  say  if  they  can ; 
for  I  have  gone  over  all  the  avenues  of  my  flesh, 
but  cannot  find  by  which  they  entered.  For  the 
eyes  say,  “If  those  images  were  coloured,  we  re¬ 
ported  of  them.”  The  ears  say,  “If  they  sound, 
we  gave  knowledge  of  them.”  The  nostrils  says, 
“If  they  smell,  they  passed  by  us.”  The  taste 
says,  “Unless  they  have  a  savour,  ask  me  not.” 
The  touch  says,  “If  it  have  not  size,  I  handled  it 
not;  if  I  handled  it  not,  I  gave  no  notice  of  it.” 
Whence  and  how  entered  these  things  into  my 
memory?  I  know  not  how.  For  when  I  learned 
them,  I  gave  not  credit  to  another  man’s  mind, 
but  recognized  them  in  mine;  and,  approving 
them  for  true,  I  commended  them  to  it,  laying 
them  up  as  it  were,  whence  I  might  bring  them 
forth  when  I  willed.  In  my  heart  then  they  were, 
even  before  I  learned  them,  but  in  my  memory 
they  were  not.  Where  then?  or  wherefore,  when 
they  were  spoken,  did  I  acknowledge  them,  and 
said,  “So  is  it,  it  is  true,”  unless  that  they  were 
already  in  the  memory,  but  so  thrown  back  and 
buried  as  it  were  in  deeper  recesses,  that,  had 
not  the  suggestion  of  another  drawn  them  forth, 
I  had  perchance  been  unable  to  conceive  of 
them? 

[XI]  18.  Wherefore  we  find  that  to  learn 
these  things  whereof  we  imbibe  not  the  images 
by  our  senses,  but  perceive  within  by  them¬ 
selves,  without  images,  as  they  are,  is  nothing 
else  but  by  conception  to  receive,  and  by  making 
to  take  heed  that  those  things  which  the  mem¬ 
ory  did  before  contain  at  random  and  unar- 


76  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ranged,  be  laid  up  at  hand  as  it  were  in  that  same 
memory,  where  before  they  lay  unknown,  scat¬ 
tered  and  neglected,  and  so  readily  occur  to  the 
mind  familiarized  to  them.  And  how  many  things 
of  this  kind  does  my  memory  bear  which  have 
been  already  found  out  and,  as  I  said,  placed  as 
it  were  at  hand,  which  we  are  said  to  have 
learned  and  come  to  know;  which  were  I  for 
some  short  space  of  time  to  cease  to  call  to 
mind,  they  are  again  so  buried,  and  glide  back, 
as  it  were,  into  the  deeper  recesses,  that  they 
must  again,  as  if  new,  be  thought  out  thence,  for 
other  abode  they  have  none;  but  they  must  be 
drawn  together  again,  that  they  may  be  known ; 
that  is  to  say,  they  must  as  it  were  be  collected 
together  from  their  dispersion;  whence  the 
word  “cogitation”  is  derived.  For  cogo  (collect) 
and  cogito  (re-collect)  have  the  same  relation  to 
each  other  as  ago  and  agito,  facio  and  factito. 
But  the  mind  hath  appropriated  to  itself  this 
word  (cogitation),  so  that,  not  what  is  “collect¬ 
ed”  anyhow,  but  what  is  “recollected” — i.e., 
brought  together  in  the  mind — is  properly  said 
to  be  cogitated,  or  thought  upon. 

[XII]  19.  The  memory  containeth  also  rea¬ 
sons  and  laws  innumerable  of  numbers  and  di¬ 
mensions,  none  of  which  hath  any  bodily  sense 
impressed;  seeing  they  have  neither  colour,  nor 
sound,  nor  taste,  nor  smell,  nor  touch.  I  have 
heard  the  sound  of  the  words  whereby  when  dis¬ 
cussed  they  are  denoted;  but  the  sounds  are  oth¬ 
er  than  the  things.  For  the  sounds  are  other  in 
Greek  than  in  Latin ;  but  the  things  are  neither 
Greek,  nor  Latin,  nor  any  other  language.  I  have 
seen  the  lines  of  architects,  the  very  finest  like 
a  spider’s  thread;  but  those  are  still  different, 
they  are  not  the  images  of  those  lines  which  the 
eye  of  flesh  shewed  me ;  he  knoweth  them,  who¬ 
soever  without  any  conception  whatsoever  of  a 
body  recognizes  them  within  himself.  I  have 
perceived  also  the  numbers  of  the  things  with 
which  we  number  all  the  senses  of  my  body;  but 
those  numbers  wherewith  we  number  are  differ¬ 
ent.  nor  are  they  the  images  of  these,  and  there¬ 
fore  they  indeed  are.  Let  him  who  seeth  them 
not  deride  me  for  saying  these  things,  and  I  will 
pity  him  while  he  derides  me. 

[XIII]  20.  All  these  things  I  remember,  and 
how  I  learnt  them  I  remember.  Many  things 
also  most  falsely  objected  against  them  have  I 
heard,  and  remember;  which  though  they  be 
false,  yet  is  it  not  false  that  I  remember  them ; 
and  I  remember  also  that  I  have  discerned  be¬ 
twixt  those  truths  and  these  falsehoods  objected 
to  them.  And  I  perceive  that  the  present  dis¬ 
cerning  of  these  things  is  different  from  remem¬ 


bering  that  I  oftentimes  discerned  them  when  I 
often  thought  upon  them.  I  both  remember  then 
to  have  often  understood  these  things;  and  what 
I  now  discern  and  understand,  I  lay  up  in  my 
memory,  that  hereafter  I  may  remember  that  I 
understood  it  now.  So  then  I  remember  also  to 
have  remembered;  as,  if  hereafter  I  shall  call  to 
remembrance  that  I  have  now  been  able  to  re¬ 
member  these  things,  by  the  force  of  memory 
shall  I  call  it  to  remembrance. 

[XIV]  21.  The  same  memory  contains  also 
the  affections  of  my  mind,  not  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  that  my  mind  itself  contains  them  when  it 
feels  them;  but  far  otherwise,  according  to  a 
power  of  its  own.  For  without  rejoicing  I  re¬ 
member  myself  to  have  joyed;  and  without  sor¬ 
row  do  I  recollect  my  past  sorrow.  And  that  I 
once  feared,  I  review  without  fear;  and  without 
desire  call  to  mind  a  past  desire.  Sometimes,  on 
the  contrary,  with  joy  do  I  remember  my  fore¬ 
past  sorrow,  and  with  sorrow,  joy.  Which  is  not 
wonderful,  as  to  the  body;  for  mind  is  one  thing, 
body  another.  If  I  therefore  with  joy  remember 
some  past  pain  of  body,  it  is  not  so  wonderful. 
But  now  seeing  this  very  memory  itself  is  mind 
(for  when  we  give  a  thing  in  charge,  to  be  kept 
in  memory,  we  say,  “See  that  you  keep  it  in 
mind”;  and  when  we  forget,  we  say,  “It  did  not 
come  to  my  mind,”  and,  “It  slipped  out  of  my 
mind,”  calling  the  memory  itself  the  mind) — 
this  being  so,  how  is  it  that,  when  with  joy  I  re¬ 
member  my  past  sorrow,  the  mind  hath  joy,  the 
memory  hath  sorrow;  the  mind  upon  the  joyful¬ 
ness  which  is  in  it,  is  joyful,  yet  the  memory  up¬ 
on  the  sadness  which  is  in  it,  is  not  sad?  Does 
the  memory  perchance  not  belong  to  the  mind? 
Who  will  say  so?  The  memory  then  is,  as  it  were, 
the  belly  of  the  mind,  and  joy  and  sadness,  like 
sweet  and  bitter  food;  which,  when  committed 
to  the  memory,  are  as  it  were  passed  into  the 
belly,  where  they  may  be  stowed,  but  cannot 
taste.  Ridiculous  it  is  to  imagine  these  to  be 
alike ;  and  yet  are  they  not  utterly  unlike. 

22.  But  behold,  out  of  my  memory  I  bring  it, 
when  I  say  there  be  four  perturbations  of  the 
mind:  desire,  joy,  fear,  sorrow;  and  whatsoever 
I  can  dispute  thereon,  by  dividing  each  into  its 
subordinate  species,  and  by  defining  it,  in  my 
memory  find  I  what  to  say,  and  thence  do  I 
bring  it;  yet  am  I  not  disturbed  by  any  of  these 
perturbations,  when  by  calling  them  to  mind  I 
remember  them;  yea,  and  before  I  recalled  and 
brought  them  back,  they  were  there;  and  there¬ 
fore  could  they,  by  recollection,  thence  be 
brought.  Perchance,  then,  as  meat  is  by  chewing 
the  cud  brought  up  out  of  the  belly,  so  by  recol- 


CONFESSIONS  X.  19-25  77 


lection  these  out  of  the  memory.  Why  then  does 
not  the  disputer,  thus  recollecting,  taste  in  the 
mouth  of  his  musing  the  sweetness  of  joy,  or 
the  bitterness  of  sorrow?  Is  the  comparison  un¬ 
like  in  this,  because  not  in  all  repects  like?  For 
who  would  willingly  speak  thereof  if,  so  oft  as 
we  name  grief  or  fear,  we  should  be  compelled  to 
be  sad  or  fearful?  And  yet  could  we  not  speak 
of  them,  did  we  not  find  in  our  memory  not  only 
the  sounds  of  the  names  according  to  the  images 
impressed  by  the  senses  of  the  body,  but  notions 
of  the  very  things  themselves  which  we  never 
received  by  any  avenue  of  the  body,  but  which 
the  mind  itself  perceiving  by  the  experience  of 
its  own  passions,  committed  to  the  memory,  or 
the  memory  of  itself  retained,  without  being 
committed  unto  it. 

[XV]  23.  But  whether  by  images  or  no,  who 
can  readily  say?  Thus,  I  name  a  stone,  I  name 
the  sun,  the  things  themselves  not  being  present 
to  my  senses,  but  their  images  to  my  memory.  I 
name  a  bodily  pain,  yet  it  is  not  present  with 
me.  when  nothing  aches;  yet,  unless  its  image 
were  present  to  my  memory,  I  should  not  know 
what  to  say  thereof,  nor  in  discoursing  discern 
pain  from  pleasure.  I  name  bodily  health;  being 
sound  in  body,  the  thing  itself  is  present  with 
me;  yet,  unless  its  image  also  were  present  in 
my  memory,  I  could  by  no  means  recall  what 
the  sound  of  this  name  should  signify.  Nor 
would  the  sick,  when  health  were  named,  recog¬ 
nize  what  were  spoken,  unless  the  same  image 
were  by  the  force  of  memory  retained,  although 
the  thing  itself  were  absent  from  the  body.  I 
name  numbers  whereby  we  number;  and  not 
their  images,  but  themselves  are  present  in  my 
memory.  I  name  the  image  of  the  sun,  and  that 
image  is  present  in  my  memory.  For  I  recall  not 
the  image  of  its  image,  but  the  image  itself  is 
present  to  me,  calling  it  to  mind.  I  name  mem¬ 
ory,  and  I  recognize  what  I  name.  And  where  do 
I  recognize  it,  but  in  the  memory  itself?  Is  it  al¬ 
so  present  to  itself  by  its  image,  and  not  by  itself  ? 

[XVI]  24.  What,  when  I  name  forgetfulness, 
and  withal  recognize  what  I  name?  whence 
should  I  recognize  it,  did  I  not  remember  it?  I 
speak  not  of  the  sound  of  the  name,  but  of  the 
thing  which  it  signifies :  which  if  I  had  forgotten, 
I  could  not  recognize  what  that  sound  signifies. 
When  then  I  remember  memory,  memory  itself 
is,  through  itself,  present  with  itself ;  but  when 
I  remember  forgetfulness,  there  are  present 
both  memory  and  forgetfulness ;  memory  where¬ 
by  I  remember,  forgetfulness  which  I  remem¬ 
ber.  But  what  is  forgetfulness  but  the  privation 
of  memory?  How  then  is  it  present  that  I  re¬ 


member  it,  since  when  present  I  cannot  remem¬ 
ber?  But  if  what  we  remember  we  hold  it  in 
memory,  yet,  unless  we  did  remember  forgetful¬ 
ness,  we  could  never  at  the  hearing  of  the  name 
recognize  the  thing  thereby  signified,  then  for¬ 
getfulness  is  retained  by  memory.  Present  then 
it  is,  that  we  forget  not,  and  being  so,  we  forget. 
It  is  to  be  understood  from  this  that  forgetful¬ 
ness,  when  we  remember  it,  is  not  present  to  the 
memory  by  itself,  but  by  its  image:  because  if  it 
were  present  by  itself,  it  would  not  cause  us  to 
remember,  but  to  forget.  Who  now  shall  search 
out  this?  who  shall  comprehend  how  it  is? 

25.  Lord,  I  truly  toil  therein,  yea,  and  toil  in 
myself;  I  am  become  a  heavy  soil  requiring 
over-much  sweat  of  the  brow.  For  we  are  not 
now  searching  out  the  regions  of  heaven,  or 
measuring  the  distances  of  the  stars,  or  enquir¬ 
ing  the  balancings  of  the  earth.  It  is  I  myself 
who  remember,  I  the  mind.  It  is  not  so  wonder¬ 
ful,  if  what  I  myself  am  not  be  far  from  me.  But 
what  is  nearer  to  me  than  myself?  And  lo,  the 
force  of  mine  own  memory  is  not  understood  by 
me;  though  I  cannot  so  much  as  name  myself 
without  it.  For  what  shall  I  say  when  it  is  clear 
to  me  that  I  remember  forgetfulness?  Shall  I 
say  that  that  is  not  in  my  memory,  which  I  re¬ 
member?  or  shall  I  say  that  forgetfulness  is  for 
this  purpose  in  my  memory,  that  I  might  not 
forget?  Both  were  most  absurd.  What  third  way 
is  there?  How  can  I  say  that  the  image  of  for¬ 
getfulness  is  retained  by  my  memory,  not  for¬ 
getfulness  itself,  when  I  remember  it?  How 
could  I  say  this  either,  seeing  that  when  the  im¬ 
age  of  any  thing  is  impressed  on  the  memory, 
the  thing  itself  must  needs  be  first  present, 
whence  that  image  may  be  impressed?  For  thus 
do  I  remember  Carthage,  thus  all  places  where  I 
have  been,  thus  men’s  faces  whom  I  have  seen, 
and  things  reported  by  the  other  senses;  thus 
the  health  or  sickness  of  the  body.  For  when 
these  things  were  present,  my  memory  received 
from  them  images  which,  being  present  with  me, 
I  might  look  on  and  bring  back  in  my  mind, 
when  I  remembered  them  in  their  absence.  If 
then  this  forgetfulness  is  retained  in  the  mem¬ 
ory  through  its  image,  not  through  itself,  then 
plainly,  itself  was  once  present,  that  its  image 
might  be  taken.  But  when  it  was  present,  how 
did  it  write  its  image  in  the  memory,  seeing  that 
forgetfulness  by  its  presence  effaces  even  what 
it  finds  already  noted?  And  yet,  in  whatever 
way,  although  that  way  be  past  conceiving  and 
explaining,  yet  certain  am  I  that  I  remember 
forgetfulness  itself  also,  whereby  what  we  re¬ 
member  is  effaced. 


78  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


[XVII]  26.  Great  is  the  power  of  memory,  a 
fearful  thing,  0  my  God,  a  deep  and  boundless 
manifoldness;  and  this  thing  is  the  mind,  and 
this  am  I  myself.  What  am  I  then,  0  my  God? 
What  nature  am  I?  A  life  various  and  manifold, 
and  exceeding  immense.  Behold  in  the  plains, 
and  caves,  and  caverns  of  my  memory,  innum¬ 
erable  and  innumerably  full  of  innumerable 
kinds  of  things,  either  through  images,  as  all 
bodies;  or  by  actual  presence,  as  the  arts;  or  by 
certain  notions  or  impressions,  as  the  affections 
of  the  mind,  which,  even  when  the  mind  doth 
not  feel,  the  memory  retaineth,  while  yet  what¬ 
soever  is  in  the  memory  is  also  in  the  mind — 
over  all  these  do  I  run,  I  fly ;  I  dive  on  this  side 
and  on  that,  as  far  as  I  can,  and  there  is  no  end. 
So  great  is  the  force  of  memory,  so  great  the 
force  of  life,  even  in  the  mortal  life  of  man. 
What  shall  I  do  then,  0  Thou  my  true  life,  my 
God?  I  will  pass  even  beyond  this  power  of  mine 
which  is  called  memory;  yea,  I  will  pass  beyond 
it,  that  I  may  approach  unto  Thee,  0  sweet 
Light.  What  sayest  Thou  to  me?  See,  I  am 
mounting  up  through  my  mind  towards^ Thee 
who  abidest  above  me.  Yea,  I  now  will  pass  be¬ 
yond  this  power  of  mine  which  is  called  mem¬ 
ory,  desirous  to  arrive  at  Thee,  whence  Thou 
mayest  be  arrived  at;  and  to  cleave  unto  Thee, 
whence  one  may  cleave  unto  Thee.  For  even 
beasts  and  birds  have  memory;  else  could  they 
not  return  to  their  dens  and  nests,  nor  many  oth¬ 
er  things  they  are  used  unto;  nor  indeed  could 
they  be  used  to  anything,  but  by  memory.  I  will 
pass  then  beyond  memory  also,  that  I  may  ar¬ 
rive  at  Him  Who  hath  separated  me  from  the 
four-footed  beasts  and  made  me  wiser  than  the 
fowls  of  the  air,  I  will  pass  beyond  memory  also, 
and  where  shall  I  find  Thee,  Thou  truly  good 
and  certain  sweetness?  And  where  shall  I  find 
Thee?  If  I  find  Thee  without  my  memory,  then 
do  I  not  retain  Thee  in  my  memory.  And  how 
shall  I  find  Thee,  if  I  remember  Thee  not? 

[XVIII]  27.  For  the  woman  that  had  lost  her 
groat,  and  sought  it  with  a  light;1  unless  she  had 
remembered  it,  she  had  never  found  it.  For  when 
it  was  found,  whence  should  she  know  whether 
it  were  the  same,  unless  she  remembered  it?.  I 
remember  to  have  sought  and  found  many  a 
thing ;  and  this  I  thereby  know,  that  when  I  was 
seeking  any  of  them,  and  was  asked,  “Is  this  it?” 
“Is  that  it?”  so  long  said  I  “No,”  until  that  were 
offered  me  which  I  sought.  Which  had  I  not  re¬ 
membered  (whatever  it  were)  though  it  were  of¬ 
fered  me,  yet  should  I  not  find  it,  because  I 
could  not  recognize  it.  And  so  it  ever  is,  when  we 
^uke,  15.  8. 


seek  and  find  any  lost  thing.  Notwithstanding, 
when  anything  is  by  chance  lost  from  the  sight, 
not  from  the  memory  (as  any  visible  body),  yet 
its  image  is  still  retained  within,  and  it  is  sought 
until  it  be  restored  to  sight;  and  when  it  is 
found,  it  is  recognized  by  the  image  which  is 
within:  nor  do  we  say  that  we  have  found  what 
was  lost,  unless  we  recognize  it ;  nor  can  we  rec¬ 
ognize  it,  unless  we  remember  it.  But  this  was 
lost  to  the  eyes,  but  retained  in  the  memory. 

[XIX]  28.  But  what  when  the  memory  itself 
loses  anything,  as  falls  out  when  we  forget  and 
seek  that  we  may  recollect?  Where  in  the  end  do 
we  search,  but  in  the  memory  itself?  And  there, 
if  one  thing  be  perchance  offered  instead  of  an¬ 
other,  we  reject  it,  until  what  we  seek  meets  us; 
and  when  it  doth,  we  say,  “This  is  it” ;  which  we 
should  not  unless  we  recognized  it,  nor  recognize 
it  unless  we  remembered  it.  Certainly  then  we 
had  forgotten  it.  Or,  had  not  the  whole  escaped 
us,  but  by  the  part  whereof  we  had  hold  was  the 
lost  part  sought  for;  in  that  the  memory  felt 
that  it  did  not  carry  on  together  all  which  it  was 
wont,  and  maimed,  as  it  were,  by  the  curtailment 
of  its  ancient  habit,  demanded  the  restoration 
of  wThat  it  missed?  For  instance,  if  we  see  or 
think  of  someone  known  to  us  and,  having  for¬ 
gotten  his  name,  try  to  recover  it ;  whatever  else 
occurs  connects  itself  not  therewith;  because  it 
was  not  wont  to  be  thought  upon  together  with 
him,  and  therefore  is  rejected,  until  that  present 
itself  whereon  the  knowledge  reposes  equably  as 
its  wonted  object.  And  whence  does  that  present 
itself,  but  out  of  the  memory  itself?  For  even 
when  we  recognize  it,  on  being  reminded  by  an¬ 
other,  it  is  thence  it  comes.  For  we  do  not  be¬ 
lieve  it  as  something  new,  but,  upon  recollection, 
allow  what  was  named  to  be  right.  But  were  it 
utterly  blotted  out  of  the  mind,  we  should  not 
remember  it,  even  when  reminded.  For  we  have 
not  as  yet  utterly  forgotten  that  which  we  re¬ 
member  ourselves  to  have  forgotten.  What  then 
we  have  utterly  forgotten,  though  lost,  we  can¬ 
not  even  seek  after. 

[XX]  29.  How  then  do  I  seek  Thee,  0  Lord? 
For  when  I  seek  Thee,  my  God,  I  seek  a  happy 
life.  I  will  seek  Thee,  that  my  soul  may  live.2  For 
my  body  liveth  by  my  soul;  and  my  soul  by 
Thee.  How  then  do  I  seek  a  happy  life,  seeing  I 
have  it  not,  until  I  can  say,  where  I  ought  to  say 
it,  “It  is  enough?”  How  seek  I  it?  By  remem¬ 
brance,  as  though  I  had  forgotten  it,  remember¬ 
ing  that  I  had  forgotten  it?  Or,  desiring  to  learn 
it  as  a  thing  unknown,  either  never  having 
known,  or  so  forgotten  it  as  not  even  to  remem- 

2 Amos,  5.  4. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  26-33 


ber  that  I  had  forgotten  it?  Is  not  a  happy  life 
what  all  will,  and  no  one  altogether  wills  it  not? 
Where  have  they  known  it,  that  they  so  will  it? 
where  seen  it,  that  they  so  love  it?  Truly  we 
have  it,  how,  I  know  not.  Yea,  there  is  another 
way,  wherein  when  one  hath  it,  then  is  he  happy ; 
and  there  are,  who  are  blessed,  in  hope.  These 
have  it  in  a  lower  kind  than  they  who  have  it  in 
very  deed;  yet  are  they  better  off  than  such  as 
are  happy  neither  in  deed  nor  in  hope.  Yet  even 
these,  had  they  it  not  in  some  sort,  would  not  so 
will  to  be  happy,  which  that  they  do  will  is  most 
certain.  They  have  known  it  then,  I  know  not 
how,  and  so  have  it  by  some  sort  of  knowledge; 
what,  I  know  not,  and  am  perplexed  whether  it 
be  in  the  memory,  which  if  it  be,  then  we  have 
been  happy  once;  whether  all  severally,  or  in 
that  man  who  first  sinned,  in  whom  also  we  all 
died,1  and  from  whom  we  are  all  born  with  mis¬ 
ery,  I  now  enquire  not;  but  only,  whether  the 
happy  life  be  in  the  memory?  For  neither  should 
we  love  it,  did  we  not  know  it.  We  hear  the 
name,  and  we  all  confess  that  we  desire  the 
thing;  for  we  are  not  delighted  with  the  mere 
sound.  For  when  a  Greek  hears  it  in  Latin,  he  is 
not  delighted,  not  knowing  what  is  spoken ;  but 
we  Latins  are  delighted,  as  would  he  too  if  he 
heard  it  in  Greek;  because  the  thing  itself  is  nei¬ 
ther  Greek  nor  Latin,  which  Greeks  and  Latins, 
and  men  of  all  other  tongues,  long  for  so  earn¬ 
estly.  Known  therefore  it  is  to  all,  for  could  they 
with  one  voice  be  asked,  “Would  they  be  hap¬ 
py?”  they  would  answer  without  doubt,  “They 
would.”  And  this  could  not  be,  unless  the  thing 
itself  whereof  it  is  the  name  were  retained  in 
their  memory. 

[XXI]  30.  But  is  it  so,  as  one  remembers 
Carthage  who  hath  seen  it?  No.  For  a  happy  life 
is  not  seen  with  the  eye,  because  it  is  not  a  body. 
As  we  remember  numbers  then?  No.  For  these, 
he  that  hath  in  his  knowledge  seeks  not  further 
to  attain  unto;  but  a  happy  life  we  have  in  our 
knowledge,  and  therefore  love  it,  and  yet  still 
desire  to  attain  it,  that  we  may  be  happy.  As  we 
remember  eloquence  then?  No.  For  although 
upon  hearing  this  name  also,  some  call  to  mind 
the  thing,  who  still  are  not  yet  eloquent,  and 
many  who  desire  to  be  so,  whence  it  appears  that 
it  is  in  their  knowledge ;  yet  these  have  by  their 
bodily  senses  observed  others  to  be  eloquent, 
and  been  delighted,  and  desire  to  be  the  like 
(though  indeed  they  would  not  be  delighted  but 
for  some  inward  knowledge  thereof,  nor  wish  to 
be  the  like,  unless  they  were  thus  delighted) ; 
whereas  a  happy  life,  we  do  by  no  bodily  sense 
XI  Cor.  15. 22. 


79 

experience  in  others.  As  then  we  remember  joy? 
Perchance;  for  my  joy  I  remember,  even  when 
sad,  as  a  happy  life,  when  unhappy;  nor  did  I 
ever  with  bodily  sense  see,  hear,  smell,  taste,  or 
touch  my  joy;  but  I  experienced  it  in  my  mind, 
when  I  rejoiced;  and  the  knowledge  of  it  clave 
to  my  memory,  so  that  I  can  recall  it  with  dis¬ 
gust  sometimes,  at  others  with  longing,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  nature  of  the  things  wherein  I  remem¬ 
ber  myself  to  have  joyed.  For  even  from  foul 
things  have  I  been  immersed  in  a  sort  of  joy; 
which,  now  recalling,  I  detest  and  execrate; 
otherwhiles  in  good  and  honest  things,  which  I 
recall  with  longing,  although  perchance  no  long¬ 
er  present;  and  therefore  with  sadness  I  recall 
former  joy. 

31.  Where  then,  and  when,  did  I  experience 
my  happy  life,  that  I  should  remember,  and 
love,  and  long  for  it?  Nor  is  it  I  alone,  or  some 
few  besides,  but  we  all  would  fain  be  happy; 
which,  unless  by  some  certain  knowledge  we 
know,  we  should  not  with  so  certain  a  will  desire. 
But  how  is  this,  that  if  two  men  be  asked  wheth¬ 
er  they  would  go  to  the  wars,  one  perchance 
would  answer  that  he  would,  the  other,  that  he 
would  not ;  but  if  they  were  asked  whether  they 
would  be  happy,  both  would  instantly  without 
any  doubting  say  they  would;  and  for  no  other 
reason  would  the  one  go  to  the  wars,  and  the 
other  not,  but  to  be  happy.  Is  it  perchance  that, 
as  one  looks  for  his  joy  in  this  thing,  another  in 
that,  all  agree  in  their  desire  of  being  happy,  as 
they  would  (if  they  were  asked)  that  they 
wished  to  have  joy,  and  this  joy  they  call  a  hap¬ 
py  life?  Although  then  one  obtains  this  joy  by 
one  means,  another  by  another,  all  have  one  end 
which  they  strive  to  attain,  namely,  joy.  Which 
being  a  thing  which  all  must  say  they  have  ex¬ 
perienced,  it  is  therefore  found  in  the  memory, 
and  recognized  whenever  the  name  of  a  happy 
life  is  mentioned. 

[XXII]  32.  Far  be  it,  Lord,  far  be  it  from  the 
heart  of  Thy  servant  who  here  confesseth  unto 
Thee,  far  be  it  that,  be  the  joy  what  it  may,  I 
should  therefore  think  myself  happy.  For  there 
is  a  joy  which  is  not  given  to  the  ungodly,2  but 
to  those  who  love  Thee  for  Thine  own  sake, 
whose  joy  Thou  Thyself  art.  And  this  is  the 
happy  life,  to  rejoice  to  Thee,  of  Thee,  for  Thee; 
this  is  it,  and  there  is  no  other.3  For  they  who 
think  there  is  another  pursue  some  other  and 
not  the  true  joy.  Yet  is  not  their  will  turned 
away  from  some  semblance  of  joy. 

[XXIII]  33.  It  is  not  certain  then  that  all 
wish  to  be  happy,  inasmuch  as  they  who  wish 
2Isa.  48.  22.  3Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  vni.  9. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


80 

not  to  joy  in  Thee,  which  is  the  only  happy  life, 
do  not  truly  desire  the  happy  life.  Or  do  all  men 
desire  this,  but,  because  “the  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the 
flesh,”  that  they  “cannot  do  what  they  would,”  1 
they  fall  upon  that  which  they  can,  and  are  con¬ 
tent  therewith;  because  what  they  are  not  able 
to  do,  they  do  not  will  so  strongly,  as  would  suf¬ 
fice  to  make  them  able?  2  For  I  ask  anyone,  had 
he  rather  joy  in  truth,  or  in  falsehood?  They 
will  as  little  hesitate  to  say,  “in  the  truth,”  as  to 
say,  “that  they  desire  to  be  happy”;  for  a  hap¬ 
py  life  is  joy  in  the  truth:  for  this  a  joying  in 
Thee,  Who  art  “the  Truth,”3  0  God  “my  light,”4 
the  “health  of  my  countenance,  my  God.”5  This 
is  the  happy  life  which  all  desire;  this  life  which 
alone  is  happy,  all  desire;  to  joy  in  the  truth  all 
desire.6  I  have  met  with  many  that  would  de¬ 
ceive;  who  would  be  deceived,  no  one.  Where 
then  did  they  know  this  happy  life,  save  where 
they  knew  the  truth  also?  For  they  love  it  also, 
since  they  would  not  be  deceived.  And  when 
they  love  a  happy  life,  which  is  no  other  than 
joying  in  the  truth,  then  also  do  they  loye  the 
truth;  which  yet  they  would  not  love,  were 
there  not  some  notice  of  it  in  their  memory. 
Why  then  joy  they  not  in  it?  Why  are  they  not 
happy?  Because  they  are  more  strongly  taken 
up  with  other  things  which  have  more  power  to 
make  them  miserable,  than  that  which  they  so 
faintly  remember  to  make  them  happy.  For 
there  is  yet  a  little  light  in  men ;  let  them  walk, 
let  them  “walk,”  that  the  “darkness”  overtake 
them  not.7 

34.  But  why  doth  “truth  generate  hatred,” 8 
and  the  man  of  thine,9  preaching  the  truth,  be¬ 
come  an  enemy  to  them?  whereas  a  happy  life  is 
loved,  which  is  nothing  else  but  joying  in  the 
truth;  unless  that  truth  is  in  that  kind  loved, 
that  they  who  love  anything  else  would  gladly 
have  that  which  they  love  to  be  the  truth ;  and, 
because  they  would  not  be  deceived,  would  not 
be  convinced  that  they  are  so?  Therefore  do 
they  hate  the  truth,  for  that  thing’s  sake  which 
they  love  instead  of  the  truth.  They  love  truth 
when  she  enlightens,  they  hate  her  when  she  re¬ 
proves.  For  since  they  would  not  be  deceived, 
and  would  deceive,  they  love  her  when  she  dis¬ 
covers  herself  unto  them,  and  hate  her  when  she 
discovers  them.  Whence  she  shall  so  repay  them, 
that  they  who  would  not  be  made  manifest  by 
her,  she  both  against  their  will  makes  manifest, 

1Gal.  5.  17.  2See  above,  Bk.  vm.  10,  n,  20. 

3John,  14.  6.  4Ps.  27.  1.  5Ps.  42.  11. 

6See  above,  29.  7 John,  12.  35. 

Terence,  Andria,  1.  40.  9John,  8.  40. 


and  herself  becometh  not  manifest  unto  them. 
Thus,  thus,  yea,  thus  doth  the  mind  of  man,  thus 
blind  and  sick,  foul  and  ill-favoured,  wish  to  be 
hidden;  but  that  aught  should  be  hidden  from  it, 
it  wills  not.  But  the  contrary  is  requited  it,  that 
itself  should  not  be  hidden  from  the  Truth;  but 
the  Truth  is  hid  from  it.  Yet  even  thus  misera¬ 
ble,  it  had  rather  joy  in  truths  than  in  false¬ 
hoods.  Happy  then  will  it  be  when,  no  distrac¬ 
tion  interposing,  it  shall  joy  in  that  only  Truth 
by  Whom  all  things  are  true. 

[XXIV]  35.  See  what  a  space  I  have  gone 
over  in  my  memory  seeking  Thee,  0  Lord;  and 
I  have  not  found  Thee,  without  it.  Nor  have  I 
found  anything  concerning  Thee,  but  what  I 
have  kept  in  memory,  ever  since  I  learnt  Thee. 
For  since  I  learnt  Thee,  I  have  not  forgotten 
Thee.  For  where  I  found  Truth,  there  found  I 
my  God,  the  Truth  Itself;10  which  since  I  learnt, 
I  have  not  forgotten.  Since  then  I  learned  Thee, 
Thou  residest  in  my  memory;  and  there  do  I 
find  Thee,  when  I  call  Thee  to  remembrance, 
and  delight  in  Thee.  These  be  my  holy  delights, 
which  Thou  hast  given  me  in  Thy  mercy,  hav¬ 
ing  regard  to  my  poverty. 

[XXV]  36.  But  where  in  my  memory  residest 
Thou,  0  Lord,  where  residest  Thou  there?  What 
manner  of  lodging  hast  Thou  framed  for  Thee? 
What  manner  of  sanctuary  hast  Thou  builded 
for  Thee?  Thou  hast  given  this  honour  to  my 
memory,  to  reside  in  it;  but  in  what  quarter  of 
it  Thou  residest,  that  am  I  considering.  For  in 
thinking  on  Thee,  I  passed11  beyond  such  parts 
of  it  as  the  beasts  also  have,  for  I  found  Thee 
not  there  among  the  images  of  corporeal  things; 
and  I  came  to  those  parts  to  which  I  committed 
the  affections  of  my  mind,  nor  found  Thee  there. 
And  I  entered  into  the  very  seat  of  my  mind 
(which  it  hath  in  my  memory,  inasmuch  as  the 
mind  remembers  itself  also),  neither  wert  Thou 
there;  for  as  Thou  art  not  a  corporeal  image, 
nor  the  affection  of  a  living  being  (as  when  we 
rejoice,  condole,  desire,  fear,  remember,  forget, 
or  the  like)  ;  so  neither  art  Thou  the  mind  itself; 
because  Thou  art  the  Lord  God  of  the  mind;  and 
all  these  are  changed,  but  Thou  remainest  un¬ 
changeable  over  all,  and  yet  hast  vouchsafed  to 
dwell  in  my  memory,  since  I  learnt  Thee.  And 
why  seek  I  now,  in  what  place  thereof  Thou 
dwellest,  as  if  there  were  places  therein?  Sure  I 
am  that  in  it  Thou  dwellest,  since  I  have  re¬ 
membered  Thee,  ever  since  I  learnt  Thee,  and 
there  I  find  Thee  when  I  call  Thee  to  remem¬ 
brance. 

10See  above,  Bk.  iv.  18,  19;  Bk.  vn.  16. 

nSee  above,  26. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  34-41  81 


[XXVI]  37.  Where  then  did  I  find  Thee,  that 
I  might  learn  Thee?  For  in  my  memory  Thou 
wert  not,  before  I  learned  Thee.  Where  then  did 
I  find  Thee,  that  I  might  learn  Thee,  but  in  Thee 
above  me?  Place  there  is  none;  we  go  “back¬ 
ward”  and  “forward,”1  and  there  is  no  place. 
Everywhere,  0  Truth,  dost  Thou  give  audience 
to  all  who  ask  counsel  of  Thee,  and  at  once  an- 
swerest  all,  though  on  manifold  matters  they 
ask  Thy  counsel.  Clearly  dost  Thou  answer, 
though  all  do  not  clearly  hear.  All  consult  Thee 
on  what  they  will,  though  they  hear  not  always 
what  they  will.  He  is  thy  best  servant  who  looks 
not  so  much  to  hear  that  from  Thee  which  him¬ 
self  willeth;  as  rather  to  will  that  which  from 
Thee  he  heareth. 

[XXVII]  38.  Too  late  loved  I  Thee,  0  Thou 
Beauty  of  ancient  days,  yet  ever  new!  too  late  I 
loved  Thee!  And  behold,  Thou  wert  within,  and 
I  abroad,  and  there  I  searched  for  Thee;  de¬ 
formed  I,  plunging  amid  those  fair  forms  which 
Thou  hadst  made.  Thou  wert  with  me,  but  I  was 
not  with  Thee.  Things  held  me  far  from  Thee, 
which,  unless  they  were  in  Thee,  were  not  at  all. 
Thou  calledst,  and  shoutedst,  and  burstest  my 
deafness.  Thou  flashedst,  shonest,  and  scatter- 
edst  my  blindness.  Thou  breathedst  odours,  and 
I  drew  in  breath  and  pant  for  Thee.  I  tasted,  and 
hunger  and  thirst.  Thou  touchedst  me,  and  I 
burned  for  Thy  peace. 

[XXVIII]  39.  When  I  shall  with  my  whole 
self  cleave  to  Thee,  I  shall  nowhere  have  sor¬ 
row,  or  labour ;  and  my  life  shall  wholly  live,  as 
wholly  full  of  Thee.  But  now,  since  whom  Thou 
fillest  Thou  liftest  up,  because  I  am  not  full  of 
Thee  I  am  a  burthen  to  myself.  Lamentable  joys 
strive  with  joyous  sorrows;  and  on  which  side  is 
the  victory,  I  know  not.  Woe  is  me!  Lord,  have 
pity  on  me.  My  evil  sorrows  strive  with  my  good 
joys;  and  on  which  side  is  the  victory,  I  know 
not.  Woe  is  me!  Lord,  have  pity  on  me.  Woe  is 
me!  lo!  I  hide  not  my  wounds;  Thou  art  the 
Physician,  I  the  sick;  Thou  merciful,  I  miser¬ 
able.  Is  not  the  life  of  man  upon  earth  all  trial?2 
Who  wishes  for  troubles  and  difficulties?  Thou 
commandest  them  to  be  endured,  not  to  be 
loved.  No  man  loves  what  he  endures,  though  he 
love  to  endure.  For  though  he  rejoices  that  he 
endures,  he  had  rather  there  were  nothing  for 
him  to  endure.  In  adversity  I  long  for  prosper¬ 
ity,  in  prosperity  I  fear  adversity.  What  middle 
place  is  there  betwixt  these  two,  where  the  life 
of  man  is  not  all  trial?  Woe  to  the  prosperities 
of  the  world,  once  and  again,  through  fear  of 
adversity,  and  corruption  of  joy!  Woe  to  the 
Tob,  23.  8.  2Job,  7.  1. 


adversities  of  the  world,  once  and  again,  and  the 
third  time,  from  the  longing  for  prosperity,  and 
because  adversity  itself  is  a  hard  thing,  and  lest 
it  shatter  endurance.  Is  not  the  life  of  man  upon 
earth  all  trial,  without  any  interval? 

[XXIX]  40.  And  all  my  hope  is  nowhere  but 
in  Thy  exceeding  great  mercy.  Give  what  Thou 
enjoinest,  and  enjoin  what  Thou  wilt.  Thou  en- 
joinest  us  continency;  and,  “When  I  knew 
[saith  one]  that  no  man  can  be  continent  unless 
God  give  it,  this  also  was  a  part  of  wisdom  to 
know  whose  gift  she  is.”  3  By  continency,  verily, 
are  we  bound  up  and  brought  back  into  One, 
whence  we  were  dissipated  into  many.  For  too 
little  doth  he  love  Thee  who  loves  anything  with 
Thee,  which  he  loveth  not  for  Thee.  0  love,  who 
ever  burnest  and  never  consumest!  0  charity, 
my  God!  kindle  me.  Thou  enjoinest  continency: 
give  me  what  Thou  enjoinest,  and  enjoin  what 
Thou  wilt. 

[XXX]  41.  Verily  Thou  enjoinest  me  con¬ 
tinency  from  the  “lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of 
the  eyes,  and  the  ambition  of  the  world.”4  Thou 
enjoinest  continency  from  concubinage;  and, 
for  wedlock  itself,  Thou  has  counselled  some¬ 
thing  better  than  what  Thou  hast  permitted. 
And  since  Thou  gavest  it,  it  was  done,  even  be¬ 
fore  I  became  a  dispenser  of  Thy  Sacrament. 
But  there  yet  live  in  my  memory  (whereof  I 
have  much  spoken)  the  images  of  such  things  as 
my  ill  custom  there  fixed;  which  haunt  me, 
strengthless  when  I  am  awake ;  but  in  sleep,  not 
only  so  as  to  give  pleasure,  but  even  to  obtain 
assent,  and  what  is  very  like  reality.  Yea,  so  far 
prevails  the  illusion  of  the  image,  in  my  soul  and 
in  my  flesh,  that,  when  asleep,  false  visions  per¬ 
suade  to  that  which,  when  waking,  the  true  can¬ 
not.  Am  I  not  then  myself,  0  Lord  my  God? 
And  yet  there  is  so  much  difference  betwixt  my¬ 
self  and  myself,  within  that  moment  wherein  I 
pass  from  waking  to  sleeping,  or  return  from 
sleeping  to  waking!  Where  is  reason  then,  which, 
awake,  resisteth  such  suggestions?  And  should 
the  things  themselves  be  urged  on  it,  it  remain- 
eth  unshaken.  Is  it  clasped  up  with  the  eyes?  is 
it  lulled  asleep  with  the  senses  of  the  body? 
And  whence  is  it  that  often  even  in  sleep  we  re¬ 
sist,  and  mindful  of  our  purpose,  and  abiding 
most  chastely  in  it,  yield  no  assent  to  such  en¬ 
ticements?  And  yet  so  much  difference  there  is 
that,  when  it  happeneth  otherwise,  upon  waking 
we  return  to  peace  of  conscience:  and  by  this 
very  difference  discover  that  we  did  not  what 
yet  we  be  sorry  that  in  some  way  it  was  done  in 
us. 

3Wisd.  8.  21. 


4I  John,  2.  16. 


82  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


42.  Art  Thou  not  mighty,  God  Almighty,  so  as 
to  heal  all  the  diseases  of  my  soul,1  and  by  Thy 
more  abundant  grace  to  quench  even  the  impure 
motions  of  my  sleep?  Thou  wilt  increase,  Lord, 
Thy  gifts  more  and  more  in  me,  that  my  soul 
may  follow  me  to  Thee,  disentangled  from  the 
bird-lime  of  concupiscence;  that  it  rebel  not 
against  itself,  and  even  in  dreams  not  only  not, 
through  images  of  sense,  commit  those  debasing 
corruptions,  even  to  pollution  of  the  flesh,  but 
not  even  to  consent  unto  them.  For  that  nothing 
of  this  sort  should  have,  over  the  pure  affections 
even  of  a  sleeper,  the  very  least  influence,  not 
even  such  as  a  thought  would  restrain — to  work 
this,  not  only  during  life,  but  even  at  my  present 
age,  is  not  hard  for  the  Almighty,  Who  art  “able 
to  do  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think.”2  But  what 
I  yet  am  in  this  kind  of  my  evil,  have  I  con¬ 
fessed  unto  my  good  Lord;  rejoicing  with  trem¬ 
bling,3  in  that  which  Thou  hast  given  me,  and 
bemoaning  that  wherein  I  am  still  imperfect; 
hoping  that  Thou  wilt  perfect  Thy  mercies  in 
me.  even  to  perfect  peace,  which  my  outward 
and  inward  man  shall  have  with  Thee,  jtvhen 
death  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory.4 

[XXXI]  43.  There  is  another  evil  of  the  day, 
which  I  would  were  “sufficient”  for  it.5  For  by 
eating  and  drinking  we  repair  the  daily  decays 
of  our  body,  until  Thou  destroy  both  belly  and 
meat,  when  Thou  shalt  slay  my  emptiness  with 
a  wonderful  fulness,  and  clothe  this  incorrupti¬ 
ble  with  an  eternal  incorruption.6  But  now  the 
necessity  is  sweet  unto  me,  against  which  sweet¬ 
ness  I  fight,  that  I  be  not  taken  captive;  and 
carry  on  a  daily  war  by  fastings,  often  “bring¬ 
ing  my  body  into  subjection”;7  and  my  pains 
are  removed  by  pleasure.  For  hunger  and  thirst 
are  in  a  manner  pains :  they  burn  and  kill  like  a 
fever,  unless  the  medicine  of  nourishments  come 
to  our  aid.  Which  since  it  is  at  hand  through  the 
consolations  of  Thy  gifts,  with  which  land,  and 
water,  and  air  serve  our  weakness,  our  calamity 
is  termed  gratification. 

44.  This  hast  Thou  taught  me,  that  I  should 
set  myself  to  take  food  as  physic.  But  while  I 
am  passing  from  the  discomfort  of  emptiness  to 
the  content  of  replenishing,  in  the  very  passage 
the  snare  of  concupiscence  besets  me.  For  that 
passing  is  pleasure,  nor  is  there  any  other  way 
to  pass  thither,  whither  we  needs  must  pass.  And 
health  being  the  cause  of  eating  and  drinking, 
there  joineth  itself  as  an  attendant  a  dangerous 
pleasure,  which  mostly  endeavours  to  go  before 

Ts.  103.  3.  2Eph.  13.  20. 

3Ps.  2.  11.  4I  Cor.  15.  54.  6Matt.  6.  34. 

6I  Cor.  15.  54.  7I  Cor.  9.  27. 


it,  so  that  I  may  for  her  sake  do  what  I  say  I 
do,  or  wish  to  do,  for  health’s  sake.  Nor  has  each 
the  same  measure;  for  what  is  enough  for  health 
is  too  little  for  pleasure.  And  oft  it  is  uncertain 
whether  it  be  the  necessary  care  of  the  body 
which  is  yet  asking  for  sustenance,  or  whether  a 
voluptuous  deceivableness  of  greediness  is  prof¬ 
fering  its  services.  In  this  uncertainty  the  un¬ 
happy  soul  rejoiceth,  and  therein  prepares  an 
excuse  to  shield  itself,  glad  that  it  appeareth  not 
what  sufficeth  for  the  moderation  of  health,  that 
under  the  cloak  of  health  it  may  disguise  the 
matter  of  gratification.  These  temptations  I 
daily  endeavour  to  resist,  and  I  call  on  Thy 
right  hand,  and  to  Thee  do  I  refer  my  perplex¬ 
ities;  because  I  have  as  yet  no  settled  counsel 
herein. 

45.  I  hear  the  voice  of  my  God  commanding, 
Let  not  “your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  sur¬ 
feiting  and  drunkenness.”8  “Drunkenness”  is 
far  from  me;  Thou  wilt  have  mercy  that  it  come 
not  near  me.  But  full-feeding  sometimes  creep- 
eth  upon  Thy  servant;  Thou  wilt  have  mercy 
that  it  may  be  far  from  me.  For  no  one  can  be 
continent  unless  Thou  give  it.9  Many  things 
Thou  givest  us,  praying  for  them;  and  what 
good  soever  we  have  received  before  we  prayed, 
from  Thee  we  received  it;  yea,  to  the  end  we 
might  afterwards  know  this,  did  we  before  re¬ 
ceive  it.  Drunkard  was  I  never,  but  drunkards 
have  I  known  made  sober  by  Thee.  From  Thee 
then  it  was  that  they  who  never  were  such 
should  not  so  be,  as  from  Thee  it  was  that  they 
who  have  been  should  not  ever  so  be;  and  from 
Thee  it  was  that  both  might  know  from  Whom 
it  was.  I  heard  another  voice  of  Thine,  “Go  not 
after  thy  lusts,  and  from  thy  pleasure  turn 
away.”10  Yea,  by  Thy  favour  have  I  heard  that 
which  I  have  much  loved;  “neither  if  we  eat, 
shall  we  abound;  neither  if  we  eat  not,  shall  we 
lack”;11  which  is  to  say,  neither  shall  the  one 
make  me  plenteous,  nor  the  other  miserable.  I 
heard  also  another,  “For  I  have  learned  in  what¬ 
soever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content;  I 
know  how  to  abound,  and  how  to  suffer  need.  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strength¬ 
ened  me.”  12  Behold  a  soldier  of  the  heavenly 
camp,  not  the  dust  which  we  are.  But  remember, 
Lord,  “that  we  are  dust,”13  and  that  of  dust  thou 
hast  made  man;14  and  he  “was  lost  and  is  ■ 
found.”  15  Nor  could  he  of  himself  do  this,  be¬ 
cause  he  whom  I  so  loved,  saying  this  through 
the  in-breathing  of  Thy  inspiration,  was  of 

8Luke,  21.  34.  9Wisd.  8.  21.  10Ecclus.  18.  30. 

nI  Cor.  8.  8.  12Phil.  4.  11-14.  13Ps.  103.  14. 

14Gen.  3.  19.  16Luke,  15.  32. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  42-50  83 


the  same  dust.  “I  can  do  all  things,”  saith 
he.  “through  Him  that  strengtheneth  me.” 1 
Strengthen  me,  that  I  can.  Give  what  Thou  en- 
joinest,  and  enjoin  what  Thou  wilt.  He  con¬ 
fesses  to  have  received,  and.  when  he  glorieth,  in 
the  Lord  he  glorieth.2  Another  have  I  heard 
begging  that  he  might  receive,  “Take  from  me,” 
saith  he,  “the  desires  of  the  belly”;3  whence  it 
appeareth.  0  my  holy  God,  that  Thou  givest. 
when  that  is  done  which  Thou  commandest  to 
be  done. 

46.  Thou  hast  taught  me,  good  Father,  that 
“to  the  pure,  all  things  are  pure”;4  but  that  “it 
is  evil  unto  the  man  that  eateth  with  offence”;5 
and  that  “every  creature  of  Thine  is  good,  and 
nothing  to  be  refused,  which  is  received  with 
thanksgiving”;6  and  that  “meat  commendeth  us 
not  to  God”;7  and  that  “no  man  should  judge  us 
in  meat  or  drink”;8  and  that  he  which  eateth,  let 
him  not  despise  him  that  eateth  not ;  and  let  not 
him  that  eateth  not,  judge  him  that  eateth.9 
These  things  have  I  learned,  thanks  be  to  Thee, 
praise  to  Thee,  my  God,  my  Master,  knocking 
at  my  ears,  enlightening  my  heart;  deliver  me 
out  of  all  temptation.  I  fear  not  uncleanness  of 
meat,  but  the  uncleanness  of  lusting.  I  know 
that  Noah  was  permitted  to  eat  all  kind  of  flesh10 
that  was  good  for  food;11  that  Elijah  was  fed 
with  flesh;12  that  John,  endued  with  an  admira¬ 
ble  abstinence,  was  not  polluted  by  feeding  on 
living  creatures,  locusts.13 1  know  also  that  Esau 
was  deceived  by  lusting  for  lentils;14  and  that 
David  blamed  himself  for  desiring  a  draught  of 
water;15  and  that  our  King  was  tempted,  not 
concerning  flesh,  but  bread.16  And  therefore  the 
people  in  the  wilderness  also  deserved  to  be  re¬ 
proved.  not  for  desiring  flesh,  but  because,  in 
the  desire  of  food,  they  murmured  against  the 
Lord.17 

47.  Placed  then  amid  these  temptations,  I 
strive  daily  against  concupiscence  in  eating  and 
drinking.  For  it  is  not  of  such  nature  that  I  can 
settle  on  cutting  it  off  once  for  all,  and  never 
touching  it  afterward,  as  I  could  of  concubinage. 
The  bridle  of  the  throat  then  is  to  be  held  attem¬ 
pered  between  slackness  and  stiffness.  And  who 
is  he,  0  Lord,  who  is  not  somewhit  transported 
beyond  the  limits  of  necessity?  Whoever  he  is, 
he  is  a  great  one;  let  him  make  Thy  Name 

1Phil.  4.  13.  2I  Cor.  1.  31.  3Ecclus.  23.  6. 

4Titus,  1.  15.  5Rom.  14.  20.  6I  Tim.  4.  4. 

7I  Cor.  8.  8.  8Col.  2.  16.  9Rom.  13.  23. 

10 Against  the  Manichees  who  forbad  to  eat  flesh. 

uGen.  9.  13.  12I  Kings,  17.  6. 

^According  to  the  Manichees  the  most  impure  food  of 
all,  as  being  insects.  Matt.  13.  4.  14Gen.  25.  34. 

15II  Sam.  23.  15-17.  16Matt.  4.  3.  17Num.  1. 


great.  But  I  am  not  such,  “for  I  am  a  sinful 
man.”  18  Yet  do  I  too  magnify  Thy  name;  and 
He  maketh  intercession  to  Thee19  for  my  sins. 
Who  hath  “overcome  the  world,”20  numbering 
me  among  the  “weak  members”  of  His  body;21 
because  thine  eyes  have  seen  that  of  Him  which 
is  imperfect,  and  in  Thy  book  shall  all  be  writ¬ 
ten.22 

[XXXII]  48.  With  the  allurements  of  smells, 
I  am  not  much  concerned.  When  absent,  I  do 
not  miss  them;  when  present,  I  do  not  refuse 
them;  yet  ever  ready  to  be  without  them.  So  I 
seem  to  myself ;  perchance  I  am  deceived.  For 
that  also  is  a  mournful  darkness,  whereby  my 
abilities  within  me  are  hidden  from  me;  so  that 
my  mind,  making  enquiry  into  herself  of  her 
own  powers,  ventures  not  readily  to  believe  her¬ 
self ;  because  even  what  is  in  it  is  mostly  hidden, 
unless  experience  reveal  it.  And  no  one  ought  to 
be  secure  in  that  life,  the  whole  whereof  is  called 
a  trial,23  that  he,  who  hath  been  capable  of  worse 
to  be  made  better  may  not  likewise  of  better  be 
made  worse.  Our  only  hope,  only  confidence, 
only  assured  promise,  is  Thy  mercy. 

[XXXIII]  49.  The  delights  of  the  ear  had 
more  firmly  entangled  and  subdued  me;  but 
Thou  didst  loosen  and  free  me.  Now,  in  those 
melodies  which  Thy  words  breathe  soul  into, 
when  sung  with  a  sweet  and  attuned  voice,  I  do 
a  little  repose;  yet  not  so  as  to  be  held  thereby, 
but  that  I  can  disengage  myself  when  I  will.  But 
with  the  words  which  are  their  life  and  whereby 
they  find  admission  into  me,  themselves  seek  in 
my  affections  a  place  of  some  estimation,  and  I 
can  scarcely  assign  them  one  suitable.  For  at 
one  time  I  seem  to  myself  to  give  them  more 
honour  than  is  seemly,  feeling  our  minds  to  be 
more  holily  and  fervently  raised  unto  a  flame  of 
devotion  by  the  holy  words  themselves  when 
thus  sung,  than  when  not;  and  that  the  several 
affections  of  our  spirit,  by  a  sweet  variety,  have 
their  own  proper  measures  in  the  voice  and 
singing,  by  some  hidden  correspondence  where¬ 
with  they  are  stirred  up.  But  this  contentment 
of  the  flesh,  to  which  the  soul  must  not  be  given 
over  to  be  enervated,  doth  oft  beguile  me,  the 
sense  not  so  waiting  upon  reason  as  patiently  to 
follow  her;  but,  having  been  admitted  merely 
for  her  sake,  it  strives  even  to  run  before  her, 
and  lead  her.  Thus  in  these  things  I  unawares 
sin,  but  afterwards  am  aware  of  it. 

50.  At  other  times,  shunning  over-anxiously 
this  very  deception,  I  err  in  too  great  strictness; 

18Luke,  5.  8.  19Rom.  8.  34.  20John,  16.  33. 

21I  Cor.  12.  22.  22Ps.  139.  16. 

23Job,  7.  1,  old  version. 


84  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  sometimes  to  that  degree  as  to  wish  the 
whole  melody  of  sweet  music  which  is  used  to 
David’s  Psalter  banished  from  my  ears,  and  the 
Church’s  too;  and  that  mode  seems  to  me  safer, 
which  I  remember  to  have  been  often  told  me 
of  Athanasius  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  who  made 
the  reader  of  the  psalm  utter  it  with  so  slight  in¬ 
flection  of  voice  that  it  was  nearer  speaking  than 
singing.  Yet  again,  when  I  remember  the  tears  I 
shed  at  the  Psalmody  of  Thy  Church,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  my  recovered  faith;  and  how  at  this 
time  I  am  moved,  not  with  the  singing,  but  with 
the  things  sung,  when  they  are  sung  with  a  clear 
voice  and  modulation  most  suitable,  I  acknowl¬ 
edge  the  great  use  of  this  institution.  Thus  I 
fluctuate  between  peril  of  pleasure,  and  ap¬ 
proved  wholesomeness ;  inclined  the  rather 
(though  not  as  pronouncing  an  irrevocable  opin¬ 
ion)  to  approve  of  the  usage  of  singing  in  the 
church;  that  so,  by  the  delight  of  the  ears,  the 
weaker  minds  may  rise  to  the  feeling  of  devo¬ 
tion.  Yet  when  it  befalls  me  to  be  more  moved 
with  the  voice  than  the  words  sung,  I  confess  to 
have  sinned  penally,  and  then  had  rather  not 
hear  music.  See  now  my  state;  weep  with  me, 
and  weep  for  me,  ye  who  so  regulate  your  feel¬ 
ings  within  as  that  good  action  ensues.  For  you 
who  do  not  act,  these  things  touch  not  you.  But 
Thou.  0  Lord  my  God.  hearken;  behold,  and 
see,  and  have  mercy,  and  heal  me,1  Thou,  in 
Whose  presence  I  have  become  a  problem  to 
myself;  and  “that  is  my  infirmity.”2 

[XXXIV]  51.  There  remains  the  pleasure  of 
these  eyes  of  my  flesh,  on  which  to  make  my 
confessions  in  the  hearing  of  the  ears  of  Thy 
temple,  those  brotherly  and  devout  ears;  and 
so  to  conclude  the  temptations  of  “the  lust  of 
the  flesh,”3  which  yet  assail  me.  groaning  ear¬ 
nestly.  and  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with  my 
house  from  heaven.4  The  eyes  love  fair  and  var¬ 
ied  forms,  and  bright  and  soft  colours.  Let  not 
these  occupy  my  soul;  let  God  rather  occupy  it, 
Who  made  these  things,  “very  good”5  indeed, 
yet  is  He  my  good,  not  they.  And  these  affect 
me.  waking  the  whole  day,  nor  is  any  rest  given 
me  from  them,  as  there  is  from  music,  some¬ 
times  in  silence,  from  all  voices.  For  this  queen 
of  colours,  the  light,  bathing  all  which  we  be¬ 
hold,  wherever  I  am  through  the  day.  gliding  by 
me  in  varied  forms,  soothes  me  when  engaged 
on  other  things  and  not  observing  it.  And  so 
strongly  doth  it  entwine  itself  that,  if  it  be  sud¬ 
denly  withdrawn,  it  is  with  longing  sought  for, 
and,  if  absent  long,  saddeneth  the  mind. 

Ts.  6.  2.  2Ps.  77.  10.  3I  John,  2.  16. 

4II  Cor.  5.  2.  6Gen.  1.  31. 


52.  0  Thou  Light,  which  Tobias  saw6  when,  • 
these  eyes  closed,  he  taught  his  son  the  way  of 
life;  and  himself  went  before  with  the  feet  of 
charity,  never  swerving.  Or  which  Isaac  saw, 
when  his  fleshy  “eyes  being  heavy”7  and  closed 
by  old  age,  it  was  vouchsafed  him,  not  know¬ 
ingly  to  bless  his  sons,  but  by  blessing  to  know 
them.  Or  which  Jacob  saw,  when  he  also,  blind 
through  great  age,  with  illumined  heart,  in  the 
persons  of  his  sons  shed  light  on  the  different 
races  of  the  future  people,  in  them  foresignified; 
and  laid  his  hands,  mystically  crossed,  upon  his 
grandchildren  by  Joseph,  not  as  their  father  by 
his  outward  eye  corrected  them,  but  as  himself 
inwardly  discerned.8  This  is  the  light,  it  is  one, 
and  all  are  one,  who  see  and  love  it.  But  that 
corporeal  light  whereof  I  spake,  it  seasoneth  the 
life  of  this  world  for  her  blind  lovers,  with  an  en¬ 
ticing  and  dangerous  sweetness.  But  they  who 
know  how  to  praise  Thee  for  it,  0  “Maker  of  all, 
the  Lord,” 9  take  it  up  in  Thy  hymns,  and  are 
not  taken  up  with  it  in  their  sleep.  Such  would  I 
be.  These  seductions  of  the  eyes  I  resist,  lest  my 
feet  wherewith  I  walk  upon  Thy  way  be  en¬ 
snared  ;  and  I  lift  up  mine  invisible  eyes  to  Thee, 
that  Thou  wouldest  “pluck  my  feet  out  of  the 
snare.”  10  Thou  dost  ever  and  anon  pluck  them 
out,  for  they  are  ensnared.  Thou  ceasest  not  to 
pluck  them  out,  while  I  often  entangle  myself 
in  the  snares  on  all  sides  laid;  because  Thou 
“that  keepest  Israel  shalt  neither  slumber  nor 
sleep.”  11 

53.  What  innumerable  toys,  made  by  divers 
arts  and  manufactures,  in  our  apparel,  shoes, 
utensils  and  all  sorts  of  works,  in  pictures  also 
and  divers  images,  and  these  far  exceeding  all 
necessary  and  moderate  use  and  all  pious  mean¬ 
ing,  have  men  added  to  tempt  their  own  eyes 
withal;  outwardly  following  what  themselves 
make,  inwardly  forsaking  Him  by  Whom  them¬ 
selves  were  made,  and  destroying  that  which 
themselves  have  been  made !  But  I,  my  God  and 
my  Glory,  do  hence  also  sing  a  hymn  to  Thee, 
and  do  consecrate  praise  to  Him  Who  conse- 
crateth  me.  because  those  beautiful  patterns, 
which  through  men’s  souls,  are  conveyed  into 
their  cunning  hands,12  come  from  that  Beauty 
Which  is  above  our  souls.  Which  my  soul  day 
and  night  sigheth  after.  But  the  framers  and 
followers  of  the  outward  beauties  derive  thence 
the  rule  of  judging  of  them,  but  not  of  using 
them.  And  He  is  there,  though  they  perceive 
Him  not,  that  so  they  might  not  wander,  but 

6Tobit,  4.  7Gen.  27.  1.  sIbid.,  48.  13-19. 

9See  Bk.  ix.  32.  10Ps.  25.  15. 

nPs.  1 21.  4.  12See  below,  Bk.  xi.  7. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  51-57  85 


keep  their  strength  for  Thee,1  and  not  scatter  it 
abroad  upon  pleasurable  wearinesses.  And  I, 
though  I  speak  and  see  this,  entangle  my  steps 
with  these  outward  beauties;  but  Thou  pluckest 
me  out,  0  Lord,  Thou  pluckest  me  out;  “be¬ 
cause  Thy  loving-kindness  is  before  my  eyes,”2 
For  I  am  taken  miserably,  and  Thou  pluckest 
me  out  mercifully;  sometimes  not  perceiving  it, 
when  I  had  but  lightly  lighted  upon  them ;  other- 
whiles  with  pain,  because  I  had  stuck  fast  in 
them. 

[XXXV]  54.  To  this  is  added  another  form 
of  temptation  more  manifoldly  dangerous.  For, 
besides  that  concupiscence  of  the  flesh  which 
consisteth  in  the  delight  of  all  senses  and  pleas¬ 
ures,  wherein  its  slaves,  who  “go  far  from 
Thee,”  waste  and  “perish,”3  the  soul  hath, 
through  the  same  senses  of  the  body,  a  certain 
vain  and  curious  desire,  veiled  under  the  title  of 
knowledge  and  learning,  not  of  delighting  in  the 
flesh,  but  of  making  experiments  through  the 
flesh.  The  seat  whereof  being  in  the  appetite  of 
knowledge,  and  sight  being  the  sense  chiefly  used 
for  attaining  knowledge,  it  is  in  Divine  lan¬ 
guage  called  “the  lust  of  the  eyes.”4  For  to  see 
belongeth  properly  to  the  eyes ;  yet  we  use  this 
word  of  the  other  senses  also,  when  we  employ 
them  in  seeking  knowledge.  For  we  do  not  say, 
hark  how  it  flashes,  or  smell  how  it  glows,  or 
taste  how  it  shines,  or  feel  how  it  gleams;  for 
all  these  are  said  to  be  seen.  And  yet  we  say  not 
only,  see  how  it  shineth,  which  the  eyes  alone 
can  perceive;  but  also,  see  how  it  soundeth,  see 
how  it  smelleth,  see  how  it  tasteth,  see  how  hard 
it  is.  And  so  the  general  experience  of  the  senses, 
as  was  said,  is  called  “the  lust  of  the  eyes,”  be¬ 
cause  the  office  of  seeing,  wherein  the  eyes  hold 
the  prerogative,  the  other  senses  by  way  of  si¬ 
militude  take  to  themselves  when  they  make 
search  after  any  knowledge. 

55.  But  by  this  may  more  evidently  be  dis¬ 
cerned  wherein  pleasure  and  wherein  curiosity 
is  the  object  of  the  senses;  for  pleasure  seeketh 
objects  beautiful,  melodious,  fragrant,  savoury, 
soft;  but  curiosity,  for  trial’s  sake,  the  con¬ 
trary  as  well,  not  for  the  sake  of  suffering  an¬ 
noyance,  but  out  of  the  lust  of  making  trial  and 
knowing  them.  For  what  pleasure  hath  it  to  see, 
in  a  mangled  carcase,  what  will  make  you  shud¬ 
der?  And  yet  if  it  be  lying  near,  they  flock 
thither,  to  be  made  sad,  and  to  turn  pale.  Even 
in  sleep  they  are  afraid  to  see  it.  As  if  when 
awake,  anyone  forced  them  to  see  it,  or  any  re¬ 
port  of  its  beauty  drew  them  thither!  Thus  also 

*Ps.  58.  10,  Vulg.  2Ps.  26.  3. 

3Ps.  63.  27.  4I  John,  2.  16. 


in  the  other  senses,  which  it  were  long  to  go 
through.  From  this  disease  of  curiosity  are  all 
those  strange  sights  exhibited  in  the  theatre. 
Hence  men  go  on  to  search  out  the  hidden  pow¬ 
ers  of  nature  (which  is  beside  our  end),  which 
to  know  profits  not,  and  wherein  men  desire 
nothing  but  to  know.  Hence  also,  if  with  that 
same  end  of  perverted  knowledge  magical  arts 
be  enquired  by.  Hence  also  in  religion  itself  is 
God  tempted,  when  signs  and  wonders  are  de¬ 
manded  of  Him,  not  desired  for  any  good  end. 
but  merely  to  make  trial  of. 

56.  In  this  so  vast  wilderness,  full  of  snares 
and  dangers,  behold  many  of  them  I  have  cut 
off,  and  thrust  out  of  my  heart,  as  Thou  hast 
given  me,  0  God  of  my  salvation.  And  yet  when 
dare  I  say,  since  so  many  things  of  this  kind 
buzz  on  all  sides  about  our  daily  life — when 
dare  I  say  that  nothing  of  this  sort  engages  my 
attention,  or  causes  in  me  an  idle  interest?  True, 
the  theatres  do  not  now  carry  me  away,  nor  care 
I  to  know  the  courses  of  the  stars,  nor  did  my 
soul  ever  consult  ghosts  departed;  all  sacrile¬ 
gious  mysteries  I  detest.  From  Thee,  0  Lord  my 
God,  to  whom  I  owe  humble  and  single-hearted 
service,  by  what  artifices  and  suggestions  doth 
the  enemy  deal  with  me  to  desire  some  sign!  But 
I  beseech  thee  by  our  King,  and  by  our  pure  and 
holy  country,  Jerusalem,  that,  as  any  consenting 
thereto  is  far  from  me,  so  may  it  ever  be  further 
and  further.  But  when  I  pray  Thee  for  the  salva¬ 
tion  of  any,  my  end  and  intention  is  far  differ¬ 
ent.  Thou  givest  and  wilt  give  me  to  “follow 
Thee”  willingly,  doing  what  Thou  wilt.5 

57.  Notwithstanding,  in  how  many  most  petty 
and  contemptible  things  is  our  curiosity  daily 
tempted,  and  how  often  we  give  way,  who  can 
recount?  How  often  do  we  begin,  as  if  we  were 
tolerating  people  telling  vain  stories,  lest  we  of¬ 
fend  the  weak;  then  by  degrees  we  take  interest 
therein!  I  go  not  now  to  the  circus  to  see  a  dog 
coursing  a  hare;  but  in  the  field,  if  passing,  that 
coursing  peradventure  will  distract  me  even  from 
some  weighty  thought,  and  draw  me  after  it; 
not  that  I  turn  aside  the  body  of  my  beast,  yet 
still  incline  my  mind  thither.  And  unless  Thou, 
having  made  me  see  my  infirmity,  didst  speedily 
admonish  me  either  through  the  sight  itself,  by 
some  contemplation  to  rise  towards  Thee,  or  al¬ 
together  to  despise  and  pass  it  by,  I  dully  stand 
fixed  therein.  What,  when  sitting  at  home,  a  liz¬ 
ard  catching  flies,  or  a  spider  entangling  them 
rushing  into  her  nets,  oft-times  takes  my  atten¬ 
tion?  Is  the  thing  different  because  they  are  but 
small  creatures?  I  go  on  from  them  to  praise 

5John,  21.  22. 


86  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Thee  the  wonderful  Creator  and  Orderer  of  all, 
but  this  does  not  first  draw  my  attention.  It  is 
one  thing  to  rise  quickly,  another  not  to  fall. 
And  of  such  things  is  my  life  full;  and  my  one 
hope  is  Thy  wonderful  great  mercy.  For  when 
our  heart  becomes  the  receptacle  of  such  things, 
and  is  over-charged  with  throngs  of  this  abun¬ 
dant  vanity,  then  are  our  prayers  also  thereby 
often  interrupted  and  distracted,  and  whilst  in 
Thy  presence  we  direct  the  voice  of  our  heart  to 
Thine  ears,  this  so  great  concern  is  broken  off 
by  the  rushing  in  of  I  know  not  what  idle 
thoughts.  Shall  we  then  account  this  also  among 
things  of  slight  concernment,  or  shall  aught 
bring  us  back  to  hope,  save  Thy  complete  mercy, 
since  Thou  hast  begun  to  change  us? 

[XXXVI]  58.  And  Thou  knowest  how  far 
Thou  hast  already  changed  me,  Who  first  heal- 
edst  me  of  the  lust  of  vindicating  myself,  that 
so  Thou  mightest  forgive  all  the  rest  of  my  “in¬ 
iquities,”  and  heal  all  my  “infirmities,”  and  re¬ 
deem  my  life  from  corruption,  and  crown  me 
with  “mercy  and  pity,”  and  satisfy  my  desire 
with  “good  things”;1  Who  didst  curb  my^pride 
with  Thy  fear,  and  tame  my  neck  to  Thy 
“yoke.”  And  now  I  bear  it  and  it  is  “light”2  unto 
me,  because  so  hast  Thou  promised,  and  hast 
made  it ;  and  verily  so  it  was,  and  I  knew  it  not, 
when  I  feared  to  take  it. 

59.  But,  0  Lord,  Thou  alone  Lord  without 
pride,  because  Thou  art  the  only  true  Lord,  Who 
hast  no  lord,  hath  this  third  kind  of  temptation 
also  ceased  from  me,  or  can  it  cease  through 
this  whole  life?  To  wish,  namely,  to  be  feared 
and  loved  of  men,  for  no  other  end  but  that  we 
may  have  a  joy  therein  which  is  no  joy?  A  mis¬ 
erable  life  this,  and  a  foul  boastfulness!  Hence 
especially  it  comes  that  men  do  neither  purely 
love  nor  fear  Thee.  And  therefore  dost  Thou  re¬ 
sist  the  proud,  and  givest  grace  to  the  humble;3 
yea,  Thou  thunderest  down  upon  the  ambitions 
of  the  world,  and  “the  foundations  of  the  moun¬ 
tains”  tremble.4  Because  now  certain  offices  of 
human  society  make  it  necessary  to  be  loved  and 
feared  of  men,  the  adversary  of  our  true  bless¬ 
edness  layeth  hard  at  us,  everywhere  spread¬ 
ing  his  snares  of  “well-done,  well-done”;  that, 
greedily  catching  at  them,  we  may  be  taken  un¬ 
awares,  and  sever  our  joy  from  Thy  truth,  and 
set  it  in  the  deceivingness  of  men;  and  be 
pleased  at  being  loved  and  feared,  not  for  Thy 
sake,  but  in  Thy  stead:  and  thus  having  been 
made  like  him,  he  may  have  them  for  his  own, 
not  in  the  bands  of  charity,  but  in  the  bonds  of 

Ts.  103.  3-5.  2Matt.  2.  30. 

3James,  4.  6.  4Ps.  18.  7. 


punishment ;  who  purposed  to  set  his  throne  in 
the  north,5  that  dark  and  chilled  they  might 
serve  him,  pervertedly  and  crookedly  imitating 
Thee.  But  we,  0  Lord,  behold  we  are  Thy  “little 
flock”;6  possess  us  as  Thine,  stretch  Thy  wings 
over  us,  and  let  us  fly  under  them.  Be  Thou  our 
glory;  let  us  be  loved  for  Thee,  and  Thy  word 
feared  in  us.  Who  would  be  praised  of  men, 
when  Thou  blamest,  will  not  be  defended  of 
men,  when  Thou  judgest;  nor  delivered,  when 
Thou  condemnest.  But  when  not  the  sinner  is 
praised  in  the  desires  of  his  soul,  nor  he  blessed 
who  doth  ungodlily,7  but  a  man  is  praised  for 
some  gift  which  Thou  hast  given  him,  and  he 
rejoices  more  at  the  praise  for  himself  than  that 
he  hath  the  gift  for  which  he  is  praised,  he  also 
is  praised,  while  Thou  dispraisest ;  and  better  is 
he  who  praised  than  he  who  is  praised.  For  the 
one  took  pleasure  in  the  gift  of  God  in  man;  the 
other  was  better  pleased  with  the  gift  of  man 
than  of  God. 

[XXXVII]  60.  By  these  temptations  we  are 
assailed  daily,  0  Lord;  without  ceasing  are  we 
assailed.  Our  daily  “furnace” 8  is  the  tongue  of 
men.  And  in  this  way  also  Thou  commandest  us 
continence.  Give  what  Thou  enjoinest,  and  en¬ 
join  what  Thou  wilt.  Thou  knowest  on  this  mat¬ 
ter  the  groans  of  my  heart,  and  the  floods9  of 
mine  eyes.  For  I  cannot  learn  how  far  I  am  more 
cleansed  from  this  plague,  and  I  much  fear  my 
“secret  sins,”  10  which  Thine  eyes  know,  mine  do 
not.  For  in  other  kinds  of  temptations  I  have 
some  sort  of  means  of  examining  myself ;  in  this, 
scarce  any.  For,  in  refraining  my  mind  from  the 
pleasures  of  the  flesh,  and  idle  curiosity,  I  see 
how  much  I  have  attained  to  when  I  do  without 
them;  foregoing  or  not  having  them.  For  then  I 
ask  myself  how  much  more  or  less  troublesome 
it  is  to  me  not  to  have  them?  Then  riches,  which 
are  desired  that  they  may  serve  to  some  one  or 
two  or  all  of  the  three  concupiscences,11  if  the 
soul  cannot  discern  whether,  when  it  hath  them, 
it  despiseth  them,  they  may  be  cast  aside,  that  so 
it  may  prove  itself.  But  to  be  without  praise, 
and  therein  essay  our  powers,  must  we  live  ill, 
yea,  so  abandonedly  and  atrociously  that  no  one 
should  know  without  detesting  us?  What  greater 
madness  can  be  said,  or  thought  of?  But  if 
praise  useth  and  ought  to  accompany  a  good  life 
and  good  works,  we  ought  as  little  to  forgo  its 
company  as  good  life  itself.  Yet  I  know  not 
whether  I  can  well  or  ill  be  without  anything, 
unless  it  be  absent. 

6Isa.  14.  13,  14.  6Luke,  13.  32. 

7Ps.  10.  3.,  Vulg.  and  lxx.  8Isa.  48.  10;  Prov.  27.  21. 

9Lam.  3.  48.  10Ps.  19.  12.  nI  John,  2.  16,  see  41  above. 


CONFESSIONS  X.  58-65  87 


61.  What  then  do  I  confess  unto  Thee  in  this 
kind  of  temptation,  0  Lord?  What,  but  that  I 
am  delighted  with  praise,  but  with  truth  itself 
more  than  with  praise?  For  were  it  proposed  to 
me  whether  I  would,  being  phrenzied  in  error  on 
all  things,  be  praised  by  all  men,  or  being  con¬ 
sistent  and  most  settled  in  the  truth  be  blamed 
by  all,  I  see  which  I  should  choose.  Yet  fain 
would  I  that  the  approbation  of  another  should 
not  even  increase  my  joy  for  any  good  in  me. 
Yet  I  own,  it  doth  increase  it,  and  not  so  only, 
but  dispraise  doth  diminish  it.  And  when  I  am 
troubled  at  this  my  misery,  an  excuse  occurs  to 
me,  which  of  what  value  it  is,  Thou  God  know- 
est,  for  it  leaves  me  uncertain.  For  since  Thou 
hast  commanded  us  not  continency  alone,  that 

is,  from  what  things  to  refrain  our  love,  but 
righteousness  also,  that  is,  whereon  to  bestow 

it,  and  hast  willed  us  to  love  not  Thee  only,  but 
our  neighbour1  also;  often,  when  pleased  with 
intelligent  praise,  I  seem  to  myself  to  be  pleased 
with  the  proficiency  or  towardliness  of  my 
neighbour,  or  to  be  grieved  for  evil  in  him,  when 
I  hear  him  dispraise  either  what  he  understands 
not,  or  is  good.  For  sometimes  I  am  grieved  at 
my  own  praise,  either  when  those  things  be 
praised  in  me  in  which  I  mislike  myself,  or  even 
lesser  and  slight  goods  are  more  esteemed  than 
they  ought.  But  again,  how  know  I  whether  I 
am  therefore  thus  affected  because  I  would  not 
have  him  who  praiseth  me  differ  from  me  about 
myself;  not  as  being  influenced  by  concern  for 
him,  but  because  those  same  good  things  which 
please  me  in  myself  please  me  more  when  they 
please  another  also?  For  somehow  I  am  not 
praised  when  my  judgment  of  myself  is  not 
praised;  forasmuch  as  either  those  things  are 
praised  which  displease  me;  or  those  more, 
which  please  me  less.  Am  I  then  doubtful  of 
myself  in  this  matter? 

62.  Behold,  in  Thee,  0  Truth,  I  see  that  I 
ought  not  to  be  moved  at  my  own  praises  for 
my  own  sake,  but  for  the  good  of  my  neighbour. 
And  whether  it  be  so  with  me,  I  know  not.  For 
herein  I  know  less  of  myself  than  of  Thee.2  I 
beseech  now,  0  my  God,  discover  to  me  myself 
also,  that  I  may  confess  unto  my  brethren,  who 
are  to  pray  for  me,  wherein  I  find  myself 
maimed.  Let  me  examine  myself  again  more  dil¬ 
igently.  If  in  my  praise  I  am  moved  with  the 
good  of  my  neighbour,  why  am  I  less  moved  if 
another  be  unjustly  dispraised  than  if  it  be  my¬ 
self?  Why  am  I  more  stung  by  reproach  cast  up¬ 
on  myself  than  at  that  cast  upon  another,  with 
the  same  injustice,  before  me?  Know  I  not  this 

^ev.  19.  18.  See  below,  xn.  35,  41.  2See  above,  7. 


also?  or  is  it  at  last  that  I  deceive  myself,3  and 
do  not  the  “truth”  before  Thee  in  my  heart  and 
tongue?  This  madness  put  far  from  me,  0  Lord, 
lest  mine  own  mouth  be  to  me  the  sinner’s  oil  to 
make  fat  my  head.4  “I  am  poor  and  needy”;5 
yet  best,  while  in  hidden  groanings  I  displease 
myself,  and  seek  Thy  mercy,  until  what  is  lack¬ 
ing  in  my  defective  state  be  renewed  and  per¬ 
fected,  on  to  that  peace  which  the  eye  of  the 
proud  knoweth  not. 

[XXXVIII]  63.  Yet  the  word  which  cometh 
out  of  the  mouth,  and  deeds  known  to  men, 
bring  with  them  a  most  dangerous  temptation 
through  the  love  of  praise :  which,  to  establish  a 
certain  excellency  of  our  own,  solicits  and  col¬ 
lects  men’s  suffrages.  It  tempts,  even  when  it  is 
reproved  by  myself  in  myself,  on  the  very 
ground  that  it  is  reproved;  and  often  glories 
more  vainly  of  the  very  contempt  of  vain-glory ; 
and  so  it  is  no  longer  contempt  of  vain-glory 
whereof  it  glories,  for  it  doth  not  contemn  when 
it  glorieth. 

[XXXIX]  64.  Within  also,  within  is  another 
evil,  arising  out  of  a  like  temptation;  whereby 
men  become  vain,  pleasing  themselves  in  them¬ 
selves,  though  they  please  not,  or  displease,  or 
care  not  to  please  others.  But,  pleasing  them¬ 
selves,  they  much  displease  Thee,  not  only  tak¬ 
ing  pleasure  in  things  not  good,  as  if  good,  but 
in  Thy  good  things,  as  though  their  own;6  or 
even  if  as  Thine,  yet  as  though  for  their  own 
merits ;  or  even  if  as  though  from  Thy  grace,  yet 
not  with  brotherly  rejoicing,  but  envying  that 
grace  to  others.  In  all  these  and  the  like  perils 
and  travails,  Thou  seest  the  trembling  of  my 
heart;  and  I  rather  feel  my  wounds  to  be  cured 
by  Thee  than  not  inflicted  by  me. 

[XL]  65.  Where  hast  Thou  not  walked  with 
me,  0  Truth,  teaching  me  what  to  beware,  and 
what  to  desire,  when  I  referred  to  Thee  what  I 
could  discover  here  below,  and  consulted  Thee? 
With  my  outward  senses,  as  I  might,  I  surveyed 
the  world,  and  observed  the  life  which  my  body 
hath  from  me,  and  these  my  senses.  Thence  en¬ 
tered  I  the  recesses  of  my  memory,  those  mani¬ 
fold  and  spacious  chambers,  wonderfully  fur¬ 
nished  with  innumerable  stores;  and  I  consid¬ 
ered,  and  stood  aghast;  being  able  to  discern 
nothing  of  these  things  without  Thee,  and  find¬ 
ing  none  of  them  to  be  Thee.  Nor  was  I  myself, 
who  found  out  these  things,  who  went  over  them 
all,,  and  laboured  to  distinguish  and  to  value 
everything  according  to  its  dignity,  taking  some 
things  upon  the  report  of  my  senses,  question- 

3Gal.  6.  3.  4Ps.  141.  5,  Vulg.  and  lxx. 

6Ps.  109.  22.  6Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  v.  20. 


88  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ing  about  others  which  I  felt  to  be  mingled  with 
myself,  numbering  and  distinguishing  the  re¬ 
porters  themselves,  and  in  the  large  treasure- 
house  of  my  memory  revolving  some  things, 
storing  up  others,  drawing  out  others.  Nor  yet 
was  I  myself  when  I  did  this,  i.e.,  that  my  power 
whereby  I  did  it,  neither  was  it  Thou,  for  Thou 
art  the  abiding  light,  which  I  consulted  concern¬ 
ing  all  these,  whether  they  were,  what  they  were, 
and  how  to  be  valued;  and  I  heard  Thee  direct¬ 
ing  and  commanding  me;  and  this  I  often  do, 
this  delights  me,  and,  as  far  as  I  may  be  freed 
from  necessary  duties,  unto  this  pleasure  have  I 
recourse.  Nor  in  all  these  which  I  run  over  con¬ 
sulting  Thee,  can  I  find  any  safe  place  for  my 
soul,  but  in  Thee;  whither  my  scattered1  mem¬ 
bers  may  be  gathered,  and  nothing  of  me  depart 
from  Thee.  And  sometimes  Thou  admittest  me 
to  an  affection,  very  unusual,  in  my  inmost  soul ; 
rising  to  a  strange  sweetness,  which  if  it  were 
perfected  in  me,  I  know  not  what  in  it  would 
not  belong  to  the  life  to  come.  But  through  my 
miserable  encumbrances2 1  sink  down  again  into 
these  lower  things,  and  am  swept  back  by  for¬ 
mer  custom,  and  am  held,  and  greatly  weep,  but 
am  greatly  held.  So  much  doth  the  burthen  of  a 
bad  custom  weigh  us  down.  Here  I  can  stay,  but 
would  not;  there  I  would,  but  cannot;  both 
ways,  miserable. 

[XLI]  66.  Thus  then  have  I  considered  the 
sicknesses  of  my  sins  in  that  threefold  concup¬ 
iscence,3  and  have  called  Thy  right  hand  to  my 
help.  For  with  a  wounded  heart  have  I  beheld 
Thy  brightness,  and  stricken  back  I  said,  “Who 
can  attain  thither?”  “I  am  cast  away  from  the 
sight  of  Thine  eyes.”  4  Thou  art  the  Truth  Who 
presidest  over  all,  but  I  through  my  covetous¬ 
ness  would  not  indeed  forgo  Thee,  but  would 
with  Thee  possess  a  lie ;  as  no  man  would  in  such 
wise  speak  falsely,  as  himself  to  be  ignorant  of 
the  truth.  So  then  I  lost  Thee,  because  Thou 
vouchsafest  not  to  be  possessed  with  a  lie. 

[XLII]  67.  Whom  could  I  find  to  reconcile 
me  to  Thee?  was  I  to  have  recourse  to  Angels? 
by  what  prayers?  by  what  sacraments?  Many 
endeavouring  to  return  unto  Thee,  and  of  them¬ 
selves  unable,  have,  as  I  hear,  tried  this,  and  fal¬ 
len  into  the  desire  of  curious  visions,  and  been 
accounted  worthy  to  be  deluded.  For  they,  being 
high  minded,  sought  Thee  by  the  pride  of  learn¬ 
ing,  swelling  out  rather,  than  smiting  upon,  their 
breasts,  and  so  by  the  agreement  of  their  heart 
drew  unto  themselves  the  princes  of  the  air,5  the 
fellow-conspirators  of  their  pride,  by  whom, 

1See  above,  Bk.  ix.  10;  below,  Bk.  xi.  39.  2Heb.  12.  1. 

3See  above,  41.  4Ps.  31.  24.  6Eph.  2.  2. 


through  magical  influences,  they  were  deceived, 
seeking  a  mediator  by  whom  they  might  be 
purged,  and  there  was  none.  For  the  Devil  it 
was,  transforming  himself  into  an  Angel  of 
light.6  And  it  much  enticed  proud  flesh,  that  he 
had  no  body  of  flesh.  For  they  were  mortal,  and 
sinners;  but  Thou,  Lord,  to  Whom  they  proudly 
sought  to  be  reconciled,  art  immortal  and  with¬ 
out  sin.  But  a  mediator  between  God  and  man 
must  have  something  like  to  God,  something 
like  to  men :  lest  being  in  both  like  to  man,  he 
should  be  far  from  God;  or  if  in  both  like  God, 
too  unlike  man;  and  so  not  be  a  mediator.  That 
deceitful  mediator  then,  by  whom  in  Thy  secret 
judgments  pride  deserved  to  be  deluded,  hath 
one  thing  in  common  with  man,  that  is,  sin;  an¬ 
other,  he  would  seem  to  have  in  common  with 
God;  and,  not  being  clothed  with  the  mortality 
of  flesh,7  would  vaunt  himself  to  be  immortal. 
But  since  “the  wages  of  sin  is  death,” 8  this  hath 
he  in  common  with  men,  that  with  them  he 
should  be  condemned  to  death. 

[XLIII]  68.  But  the  true  Mediator,  Whom 
in  Thy  secret  mercy  Thou  hast  shewed  to  the 
humble,  and  sentest  that  by  His  example  also 
they  might  learn  that  same  humility,  that  “Me¬ 
diator  between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,9  appeared  betwixt  mortal  sinners  and  the 
immortal  Just  One;  mortal  with  men,  just  with 
God :  that  because  the  wages  of  righteousness  is 
life  and  peace,  He  might,  by  a  righteousness 
conjoined  with  God,  make  void  that  death  of 
sinners,  now  made  righteous,  which  He  willed  to 
have  in  common  with  them.  Hence  He  was 
shewed  forth  to  holy  men  of  old;  that  so  they, 
through  faith  in  His  Passion  to  come,  as  we 
through  faith  of  it  passed,  might  be  saved.  For 
as  Man,  He  was  a  Mediator;  but  as  the  Word, 
not  in  the  middle  between  God  and  man,  because 
equal  to  God,  and  God  with  God,  and  together 
one  God. 

69.  How  hast  Thou  loved  us,  good  Father, 
who  sparedst  not  Thine  only  Son,  but  deliver- 
edst  Him  up  for  us  ungodly!  10  How  hast  Thou 
loved  us,  for  whom  He  that  thought  it  no  rob¬ 
bery  to  be  equal  with  Thee,”  was  made  subject 
even  to  the  death  of  the  cross,”  11  He  alone  “free 
among  the  dead,”  12  having  power  to  lay  down 
His  life,  and  power  to  take  it  again:13  for  us  to 
Thee  both  Victor  and  Victim,  and  therefore  Vic¬ 
tor  because  the  Victim;  for  us  to  Thee  Priest 
and  Sacrifice,  and  therefore  Priest  because  the 
Sacrifice;  making  us  to  Thee,  of  servants,  sons, 

6II  Cor.  11.  13.  7Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  x.  24. 

8Rom.  6.  23.  9I  Tim.  2.  5.  10Rom.  8.  34. 

nPhil.  2.  6,  8.  12Ps.  88.  5.  13John,  10.  18. 


CONFESSIONS 

by  being  born  of  Thee,  and  serving  us.  Well  then 
is  my  hope  strong  in  Him,  that  Thou  wilt  heal 
all  my  infirmities,1  by  Him  Who  sitteth  at  Thy 
right  hand  and  maketh  intercession  for  us;2  else 
should  I  despair.  For  many  and  great  are  my  in¬ 
firmities,  many  they  are  and  great;  but  Thy 
medicine  is  mightier.  We  might  imagine  that 
Thy  Word  was  far  from  any  union  with  man, 
and  despair  of  ourselves,  unless  He  had  been 
“made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.” 3 

70.  Affrighted  with  my  sins  and  the  burthen 
of  my  misery,  I  had  cast  in  my  heart,  and  had 
purposed  to  flee  to  the  wilderness:4  but  Thou 
forbadest  me  and  strengthenedst  me,  saying, 
therefore  Christ  “died  for  all,  that  they  which 
live  may  now  no  longer  live  unto  themselves, 
but  unto  Him  that  died  for  them.” 5  See,  Lord,  I 
cast  my  care  upon  Thee,6  that  I  may  live,  and 
“consider  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law.”  7 
Thou  knowest  my  unskilfulness  and  my  infirm¬ 
ities  ;  teach  me,  and  heal  me.  He  Thine  only  Son, 
“in  Whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge,” 8  hath  redeemed  me  with  His 
blood.  Let  not  the  proud  speak  evil  of  me9;  be¬ 
cause  I  meditate  on  my  ransom,  and  eat  and 
drink,  and  communicate  it;  and  poor,  desired  to 
be  satisfied  from  Him,  amongst  those  that  eat 
and  are  satisfied,  and  they  shall  praise  the  Lord 
who  seek  Him.10 

BOOK  XI.  Augustine  breaks  off  the  history  of 
the  mode  whereby  God  led  him  to  Holy  Or¬ 
ders,  in  order  to  “confess”  God’s  mercies  in 
opening  to  him  the  Scripture.  Moses  is  not  to 
be  understood  but  in  Christ,  not  even  the  first 
words  “In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heaven  and  the  earth”  Answer  to  cavillers 
who  asked  what  did  God  before  He  created 
the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  whence  willed 
He  at  length  to  make  them,  whereas  He  did 
not  make  them  before.  Inquiry  into  the  na¬ 
ture  of  Time. 

[I]  1.  Lord,  since  eternity  is  Thine,  art  Thou 
ignorant  of  what  I  say  to  Thee?  or  dost  Thou 
see  in  time  what  passeth  in  time?  Why  then  do 
I  lay  in  order  before  Thee  so  many  relations? 
Not,  of  a  truth,  that  Thou  mightest  learn  them 
through  me,  but  to  stir  up  mine  own  and  my 
readers’  devotions  towards  Thee,  that  we  may 
all  say,  “Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be 
praised.”  11  I  have  said  already,  and  again  will 
say,  for  love  of  Thy  love  do  I  this.  For  we  pray 

1Ps.  103.  3.  2Rom.  8.  34.  3John,  1.  14. 

4Ps.  ss.  7-  6H  Cor.  5.  15.  6Ps.  55-  22. 

7Ps.  119.  18.  8Col.  2.  3.  9Ps.  119.  122,  old  version. 
10Ps.  22.  26.  nPs.  96.  4. 


X.  66-70,  XI.  1-3  89 

also,  and  yet  Truth  hath  said,  “Your  Father 
knoweth  what  you  have  need  of,  before  you 
ask.”  12  It  is  then  our  affections  which  we  lay 
open  unto  Thee,  confessing  our  own  miseries, 
and  Thy  mercies  upon  us,  that  Thou  mayest 
free  us  wholly,  since  Thou  hast  begun,  that  we 
may  cease  to  be  wretched  in  ourselves,  and  be 
blessed  in  Thee;  seeing  Thou  hast  called  us  to 
become  poor  in  spirit,  and  meek,  and  mourners, 
and  hungering  and  athirst  after  righteousness, 
and  merciful,  and  pure  in  heart,  and  peace-mak¬ 
ers.13  See,  I  have  told  Thee  many  things,  as  I 
could  and  as  I  would,  because  Thou  first 
wouldest  that  I  should  confess  unto  Thee,  my 
Lord  God.  For  Thou  art  good,  for  Thy  “mercy 
endureth  for  ever.”  14 

[II]  2.  But  how  shall  I  suffice  with  the  tongue 
of  my  pen  to  utter  all  Thy  exhortations,  and 
all  Thy  terrors,  and  comforts,  and  guidances, 
whereby  Thou  broughtest  me  to  preach  Thy 
Word,  and  dispense  Thy  Sacrament  to  Thy  peo¬ 
ple?  And  if  I  suffice  to  utter  them  in  order,  the 
drops  of  time  are  precious  with  me;  and  long 
have  I  burned  to  meditate  in  Thy  law,  and  there¬ 
in  to  confess  to  Thee  my  skill  and  unskilfulness, 
the  day-break  of  Thy  enlightening,  and  the 
remnants  of  my  darkness,  until  infirmity  be 
swallowed  up  by  strength.  And  I  would  not  have 
aught  besides  steal  away  those  hours  which  I 
find  free  from  the  necessities  of  refreshing  my 
body  and  the  powers  of  my  mind,  and  of  the 
service  which  we  owe  to  men,15  or  which  though 
we  owe  not,  we  yet  pay. 

3.  0  Lord  my  God,  give  ear  unto  my  prayer, 
and  let  Thy  mercy  hearken  unto  my  desire;  be¬ 
cause  it  is  anxious  not  for  myself  alone,  but 
would  serve  brotherly  charity;  and  Thou  seest 
my  heart,  that  so  it  is.  I  would  sacrifice  to  Thee 
the  service  of  my  thought  and  tongue;  do  Thou 
give  me  what  I  may  offer  Thee.  For  “I  am  poor 
and  needy,”  16  Thou  rich  to  all  that  call  upon 
Thee;17  Who,  inaccessible  to  care,  carest  for  us. 
Circumcise  from  all  rashness  and  all  lying  both 
my  inward  and  outward  lips;18  let  Thy  Scrip¬ 
tures  be  my  pure  delights;  let  me  not  be  de¬ 
ceived  in  them,  nor  deceive  out  of  them.  Lord, 
hearken  and  pity,  0  Lord  my  God,  Light  of  the 
blind  and  Strength  of  the  weak;  yea  also,  Light 
of  those  that  see  and  Strength  of  the  strong; 
hearken  unto  my  soul,  and  hear  it  crying  “out  of 
the  depths.”  19  For  if  thine  ears  be  not  with  us  in 
the  depths  also,  whither  shall  we  go?  whither 
cry?  “The  day  is  Thine,  and  the  night  is 

12Matt.  6.  8.  13Matt.  5.  3-9.  14Ps.  98.  1. 

16See  above,  Bk.  vi.  3.  16Ps.  96. 1.  l7Rom.  10. 12. 

18Ex.  6.  12.  19Ps.  130.  i. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Thine”1;  at  Thy  beck  the  moments  flee  by. 
Grant  thereof  a  space  for  our  meditations  in  the 
hidden  things  of  Thy  law,  and  close  it  not 
against  us  who  knock.  For  not  in  vain  wouldest 
Thou  have  the  darksome  secrets  of  so  many 
pages  written;  nor  are  those  forests  without 
their  harts2  which  retire  therein  and  range  and 
walk;  feed,  lie  down,  and  ruminate.3  Perfect  me, 
0  Lord,  and  reveal  them  unto  me.  Behold,  Thy 
voice  is  my  joy ;  Thy  voice  exceedeth  the  abun¬ 
dance  of  pleasures.  Give  what  I  love;  for  I  do 
love;  and  this  hast  Thou  given;  forsake  not  Thy 
own  gifts,  nor  despise  Thy  green  herb  that  thirs- 
teth.  Let  me  confess  unto  Thee  whatsoever  I 
shall  find  in  Thy  books,  and  hear  the  voice  of 
praise,  and  drink-in  Thee,  and  meditate  on  the 
wonderful  things  out  of  Thy  law;4  even  from 
the  beginning,  wherein  Thou  madest  the  heaven 
and  the  earth,  unto  the  everlasting  reigning  of 
Thy  holy  city  with  Thee. 

4.  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me,  and  hear  my  de¬ 
sire.  For  it  is  not,  I  deem,  of  the  earth,  not  of 
gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  or  gorgeous 
apparel,  or  honours  and  offices,  or  the  pleasures 
of  the  flesh,  or  necessaries  for  the  body  and  for 
this  life  of  our  pilgrimage:  all  which  shall  be 
added  unto  those  that  seek  Thy  kingdom  and 
Thy  righteousness.5  Behold,  0  Lord  my  God. 
wherein  is  my  desire.  The  wicked  have  told  me 
of  delights,  but  not  such  as  Thy  law,  0  Lord.6 
Behold,  wherein  is  my  desire.  Behold,  Father, 
behold,  and  see  and  approve;  and  be  it  pleasing 
in  the  sight  of  Thy  mercy,  that  I  may  find  grace 
before  Thee,  that  the  inward  parts  of  Thy  words 
be  opened  to  me  knocking.  I  beseech  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Thy  Son,  “the  Man  of  Thy  right 
hand,  the  Son  of  man,  Whom  Thou  hast  estab¬ 
lished  for  Thyself,”  7  as  Thy  Mediator  and  ours, 
through  Whom  Thou  soughtest  us,  not  seeking 
Thee,  but  soughtest  us,  that  we  might  seek  Thee 
— Thy  Word,  through  Whom  Thou  madest  all 
things,8  and  among  them,  me  also — Thy  Only- 
Begotten,  through  Whom  Thou  calledst  to  adop¬ 
tion  the  believing  people,  and  therein  me  also; 
I  beseech  Thee  by  Him  Who  sitteth  at  Thy  right 
hand,  and  “intercedeth  with  Thee  for  us,9  “in 
Whom  are  hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge.”10  These  do  I  seek  in  Thy  books. 
Of  Him  did  Moses  write;11  this  saith  Himself; 
this  saith  the  Truth. 

[Ill]  5.  I  would  hear  and  understand  how  in 
the  beginning  Thou  madest  the  heaven  and 

Ts.  74.  16.  2Ps.  79.  9.  3See  Bk.  vi.  3. 

4Ps.  26.  7.  5Matt.  6.  33.  6Ps.  119.  35. 

7Ps.  80.  17.  8John,  1.3.  9Rom.  8.  34. 

10Col.  2.  3.  11  John,  5.  4-6. 


earth.12  Moses  wrote  this,  wrote  and  departed, 
passed  hence  from  Thee  to  Thee;  nor  is  he  now 
before  me.  For,  if  he  were,  I  would  hold  him  and 
ask  him  and  beseech  him  by  Thee  to  open  these 
things  unto  me,  and  would  lay  the  ears  of  my 
body  to  the  sounds  bursting  out  of  his  mouth. 
And  should  he  speak  Hebrew,  in  vain  will  it 
strike  on  my  senses,  nor  would  aught  of  it  touch 
my  mind;  but  if  Latin,  I  should  know  what  he 
said.  But  whence  should  I  know  whether  he 
spake  truth?  Yea,  and  if  I  knew  this  also,  should 
I  know  it  from  him?  Truly  within  me,  within,  in 
the  chamber  of  my  thoughts,  Truth,  neither  He¬ 
brew,  nor  Greek,  nor  Latin,  nor  barbarian,  with¬ 
out  organs  of  voice  or  tongue,  or  sound  of  syl¬ 
lables,  would  say,  “It  is  truth,”  and  I  forthwith 
should  say  confidently  to  that  man  of  Thine, 
“Thou  sayest  truly.”  Whereas  then  I  cannot  en¬ 
quire  of  him,  Thee,  Thee  I  beseech,  0  Truth, 
full  of  Whom  he  spake  truth,  Thee,  my  God,  I 
beseech,  forgive  my  sins;  and  Thou,  who  gavest 
him  Thy  servant  to  speak  these  things,  give  to 
me  also  to  understand  them. 

[IV]  6.  Behold,  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
are;  they  proclaim  that  they  were  created;  for 
they  change  and  vary.13  Whereas  whatsoever 
hath  not  been  made,  and  yet  is,  hath  nothing  in 
it  which  before  it  had  not;  and  that  it  is,  to 
change  and  vary.  They  proclaim  also,  that  they 
made  not  themselves;  “therefore  we  are,  be¬ 
cause  we  have  been  made;  we  were  not  there¬ 
for,  before  we  were,  so  as  to  make  ourselves.” 
Now  the  evidence  of  the  thing  is  the  voice  of  the 
speakers.  Thou,  therefore,  Lord,  madest  them; 
Who  art  beautiful,  for  they  are  beautiful;  Who 
art  good,  for  they  are  good;  Who  Art,  for  they 
are;  yet  are  they  not  beautiful  nor  good  nor  are 
they,  as  Thou  their  Creator  art;  compared  with 
Whom  they  are  neither  beautiful,  nor  good,  nor 
are.  This  we  know,  thanks  be  to  Thee.  And  our 
knowledge,  compared  with  Thy  knowledge,  is 
ignorance. 

[V]  7.  But  how  didst  Thou  make  the  heaven 
and  the  earth?  And  what  the  engine  of  Thy  so 
mighty  fabric?  For  it  was  not  as  a  human  arti¬ 
ficer,  forming  one  body  from  another  according 
to  the  discretion  of  his  mind,  which  can  in  some 
way  invest  with  such  a  form  as  it  seeth  in  itself 
by  its  inward  eye.14  And  whence  should  he  be 
able  to  do  this,  unless  Thou  hadst  made  that 
mind?  And  he  invests  with  a  form  what  already 
existeth  and  hath  a  being,  as  clay,  or  stone,  or 
wood,  or  gold,  or  the  like.  And  whence  should 
they  be,  hadst  not  Thou  appointed  them  ?  Thou 

^Gen.  1.  1.  13See  above,  Bk.  vn.  17. 

14See  Bk.  x.  53. 


CONFESSIONS  XI.  4-10  91 


madest  the  artificer  his  body,  Thou  the  mind 
commanding  the  limbs,  Thou  the  matter  where¬ 
of  he  makes  any  thing;  Thou  the  apprehension 
whereby  to  take  in  his  art,  and  see  within  what 
he  doth  without;  Thou  the  sense  of  his  body, 
whereby,  as  by  an  interpreter,  he  may  from 
mind  to  matter  convey  that  which  he  doth,  and 
report  to  his  mind  what  is  done;  that  it  within 
may  consult  the  truth,  which  presideth  over  it¬ 
self,  whether  it  be  well  done  or  no.  All  these 
praise  Thee,  the  Creator  of  all.  But  how  dost 
Thou  make  them?  How,  0  God,  didst  Thou 
make  heaven  and  earth?  Verily,  neither  in  the 
heaven,  nor  in  the  earth,  didst  Thou  make  heav¬ 
en  and  earth;  nor  in  the  air,  or  waters,  seeing 
these  also  belong  to  the  heaven  and  the  earth; 
nor  in  the  whole  world  didst  Thou  make  the 
whole  world;  because  there  was  no  place  where 
to  make  it,  before  it  was  made,  that  it  might  be. 
Nor  didst  Thou  hold  anything  in  Thy  hand, 
whereof  to  make  heaven  and  earth.  For  whence 
shouldest  Thou  have  this,  which  Thou  hadst  not 
made,  thereof  to  make  anything?  For  what  is, 
but  because  Thou  art?  Therefore  Thou  spakest, 
and  they  were  made,1  and  in  Thy  Word  Thou 
madest  them.2 

[VI]  8.  But  how  didst  Thou  speak?  In  the  way 
that  the  voice  came  out  of  the  cloud,  saying, 
“This  is  my  beloved  Son”?3  For  that  voice 
passed  by  and  passed  away,  began  and  ended; 
the  syllables  sounded  and  passed  away,  the  sec¬ 
ond  after  the  first,  the  third  after  the  second, 
and  so  forth  in  order,  until  the  last  after  the 
rest,  and  silence  after  the  last.  Whence  it  is 
abundantly  clear  and  plain  that  the  motion  of  a 
creature  expressed  it,  itself  temporal,  serving 
Thy  eternal  will.  And  these  Thy  words,  created 
for  a  time,  the  outward  ear  reported  to  the  in¬ 
telligent  soul,  whose  inward  ear  lay  listening  to 
Thy  Eternal  Word.  But  she  compared  these 
words  sounding  in  time,  with  that  Thy  Eternal 
Word  in  silence,  and  said,  “It  is  different,  far 
different.  These  words  are  far  beneath  me,  nor 
are  they,  because  they  flee  and  pass  away;  but 
the  Word  of  my  Lord  abideth  above  me  for 
ever.”  If  then  in  sounding  and  passing  words 
Thou  saidst  that  heaven  and  earth  should  be 
made,  and  so  madest  heaven  and  earth,  there 
was  a  corporeal  creature  before  heaven  and 
earth,  by  whose  motions  in  time  that  voice 
might  take  his  course  in  time.  But  there  was 
naught  corporeal  before  heaven  and  earth;  or,  if 
there  were,  surely  thou  hadst,  without  such  a 
passing  voice,  created  that,  whereof  to  make 
this  passing  voice,  by  which  to  say,  Let  the 

T’s.  33.  9.  2Ibid.,  ver.  6.  3Matt.  17.  5. 


heaven  and  the  earth  be  made.  For  whatsoever 
that  were,  whereof  such  a  voice  were  made,  un¬ 
less  by  Thee  it  were  made  it  could  not  be  at  all. 
By  what  Word  then  didst  Thou  speak,  that  a 
body  might  be  made,  whereby  these  words  again 
might  be  made? 

[VII]  9.  Thou  callest  us  then  to  understand 
the  Word,  God,  with  Thee  God,4  Which  is  spok¬ 
en  eternally,  and  by  It  are  all  things  spoken 
eternally.  For  what  was  spoken  and  was  not 
spoken  successively,  one  thing  concluded  that 
the  next  might  be  spoken,  but  all  things  together 
and  eternally.  Else  have  we  time  and  change; 
and  not  a  true  eternity  nor  true  immortality. 
This  I  know,  0  my  God,  and  give  thanks.  I 
know,  I  confess  to  Thee,  0  Lord,  and  with  me 
there  knows  and  blesses  Thee  whoso  is  not  un¬ 
thankful  to  assured  Truth.  We  know,  Lord,  we 
know;  since  inasmuch  as  anything  is  not  which 
was,  and  is,  what  was  not,  so  far  forth  it  dieth 
and  ariseth.  Nothing  then  of  Thy  Word  doth 
give  place  or  replace,  because  It  is  truly  immor¬ 
tal  and  eternal.  And  therefore  unto  the  Word 
coeternal  with  Thee  Thou  dost  at  once  and  eter¬ 
nally  say  all  that  Thou  dost  say;  and  whatever 
Thou  sayest  shall  be  made  is  made;  nor  dost 
Thou  make,  otherwise  than  by  saying;  and  yet 
are  not  all  things  made  together,  or  everlasting, 
which  Thou  makest  by  saying. 

[VIII]  10.  Why,  I  beseech  Thee,  0  Lord  my 
God?  I  see  it  in  a  way;  but  how  to  express  it,  I 
know  not,  unless  it  be  that  whatsoever  begins  to 
be,  and  leaves  off  to  be,  begins  then,  and  leaves 
off  then,  when  in  Thy  eternal  Reason  it  is  known 
that  it  ought  to  begin  or  leave  off ;  in  which  Rea¬ 
son  nothing  beginneth  or  leaveth  off.  This  is  Thy 
Word,  which  is  also  “the  Beginning,”  because 
also  It  speaketh  unto  us.5  Thus  in  the  Gospel  He 
speaketh  through  the  flesh;  and  this  sounded 
outwardly  in  the  ears  of  men,  that  it  might  be 
believed  and  sought  inwardly,  and  found  in  the 
eternal  Verity;  where  the  good  and  only  Master 
teacheth  all  His  disciples.  There,  Lord,  hear  I 
Thy  voice  speaking  unto  me;  because  He  speak¬ 
eth  unto  us,  who  teacheth  us;  but  He  that  teach¬ 
eth  us  not,  though  He  speaketh,  to  us  He  speak¬ 
eth  not.  Who  now  teacheth  us,  but  the  un¬ 
changeable  Truth?  For,  even  when  we  are 
admonished  through  a  changeable  creature,  we 
are  but  led  to  the  unchangeable  Truth;  where 
we  learn  truly,  while  we  stand  and  hear  Him, 
and  rejoice  greatly  “because  of  the  Bride¬ 
groom’s  voice,”6  restoring  us  to  Him,  from 
Whom  we  are.  And  therefore  the  Beginning,  be¬ 
cause  unless  It  abided,  there  should  not,  when 
4John,  1. 1.  6John,  8.  25,  old  version.  6John,  3.  29. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


we  went  astray,  be  whither  to  return.  But  when 
we  return  from  error,  it  is  through  knowing  that 
we  return;  and  that  we  may  know,  He  teacheth 
us,  because  He  is  the  Beginning,  and  speaking 
unto  us. 

[IX]  n.  In  this  Beginning,  0  God,  hast  Thou 
made  heaven  and  earth,  in  Thy  Word,  in  Thy 
Son,  in  Thy  Power,  in  Thy  Wisdom,  in  Thy 
Truth;  wondrously  speaking,  and  wondrously 
making.  Who  shall  comprehend?  Who  declare 
it?  What  is  that  which  gleams  through  me,  and 
strikes  my  heart  without  hurting  it ;  and  I  shud¬ 
der  and  kindle?  I  shudder,  inasmuch  as  I  am  un¬ 
like  it;  I  kindle,  inasmuch  as  I  am  like  it.  It  is 
Wisdom,  Wisdom’s  self  which  gleameth  through 
me;  severing  my  cloudiness  which  yet  again 
mantles  over  me,  fainting  from  it,  through  the 
darkness  which  for  my  punishment  gathers  upon 
me.  For  my  strength  is  brought  down  in  need,1 
so  that  I  cannot  support  my  blessings,  till  Thou, 
Lord,  Who  hast  been  gracious  to  all  mine  in¬ 
iquities,  shalt  heal  all  my  infirmities.  For  Thou 
shalt  also  redeem  my  life  from  corruption,  and 
crown  me  with  loving  kindness  and  tender  mer¬ 
cies.  and  shalt  satisfy  my  desire  with  good 
things,  because  my  youth  shall  be  renewed  like 
an  eagle’s.2  For  in  hope  we  are  saved,  wherefore 
we  through  patience  wait  for  Thy  promises.3  Let 
him  that  is  able  hear  Thee  inwardly  discoursing 
out  of  Thy  oracle :  I  will  boldly  cry  out,  How 
wonderful  are  Thy  works,  0  Lord,  in  Wisdom 
hast  Thou  made  them  all4;  and  this  Wisdom  is 
the  Beginning,  and  in  that  Beginning  didst  Thou 
make  heaven  and  earth. 

[X]  12.  Lo,  are  they  not  full  of  their  old  leav¬ 
en  who  say  to  us,  “What  was  God  doing  before 
He  made  heaven  and  earth?”  “For  if  (say  t^hey) 
He  were  unemployed  and  wrought  not,  why  does 
He  not  also  henceforth,  and  for  ever,  as  He  did 
heretofore?  For  did  any  new  motion  arise  in 
God,  and  a  new  will  to  make  a  creature  which 
He  had  never  before  made,  how  then  would  that 
be  a  true  eternity,  where  there  ariseth  a  will 
which  was  not?  For  the  will  of  God  is  not  a  crea¬ 
ture,  but  before  the  creature;  seeing  nothing 
could  be  created,  unless  the  will  of  the  Creator 
had  preceded.  The  will  of  God  then  belongeth 
to  His  very  Substance.  And  if  aught  have  arisen 
in  God’s  Substance  which  before  was  not,  that 
Substance  cannot  be  truly  called  eternal.  But  if 
the  will  of  God  has  been  from  eternity  that  the 
creature  should  be,  why  was  not  the  creature  al¬ 
so  from  eternity? 

[XI]  13.  Who  speak  thus,  do  not  yet  under- 

*Ps.  31.  10.  2Ps.  103.  3-5.  3Rom.  8.  24,  25. 

4Ps.  104.  24. 


stand  Thee,  0  Wisdom  of  God.  Light  of  souls, 
understand  not  yet  how  the  things  be  made, 
which  by  Thee  and  in  Thee  are  made ;  yet  they 
strive  to  comprehend  things  eternal,  whilst  their 
heart  fluttereth  between  the  motions  of  things 
past  and  to  come,  and  is  still  unstable.  Who 
shall  hold  it,  and  fix  it,  that  it  be  settled  awhile, 
and  awhile  catch  the  glory  of  that  ever-fixed 
Eternity,  and  compare  it  with  the  times  which 
are  never  fixed,  and  see  that  it  cannot  be  com¬ 
pared;  and  that  a  long  time  cannot  become  long, 
but  out  of  many  motions  passing  by,  which  can¬ 
not  be  prolonged  altogether;  but  that  in  the 
Eternal  nothing  passeth,  but  the  whole  is  pres¬ 
ent;  whereas  no  time  is  all  at  once  present;  and 
that  all  time  past  is  driven  on  by  time  to  come, 
and  all  to  come  followeth  upon  the  past;  and  all 
past  and  to  come  is  created,  and  flows  out  of 
that  which  is  ever  present?  Who  shall  hold  the 
heart  of  man,  that  it  may  stand  still,  and  see 
how  eternity,  ever  still-standing,  neither  past 
nor  to  come,  uttereth  the  times  past  and  to 
come?  Can  my  hand  do  this,  or  the  hand  of  my 
mouth  by  speech  bring  about  a  thing  so  great? 

[XII]  14.  See,  I  answer  him  that  asketh, 
“What  did  God  before  He  made  heaven  and 
earth?”  I  answer  not  as  one  is  said  to  have  done 
merrily  (eluding  the  pressure  of  the  question) : 
“He  was  preparing  hell  (saith  he)  for  pryers  into 
mysteries.”  It  is  one  thing  to  answer  enquiries, 
another  to  make  sport  of  enquirers.  So  I  answer 
not;  for  rather  had  I  answer,  “I  know  not”  what 
I  know  not,  than  so  as  to  raise  a  laugh  at  him 
who  asketh  deep  things  and  gain  praise  for  one 
who  answereth  false  things.  But  I  say  that  Thou, 
our  God,  art  the  Creator  of  every  creature ;  and, 
if  by  the  name  “heaven  and  earth”  every  crea¬ 
ture  be  understood,  I  boldly  say,  “that  before 
God  made  heaven  and  earth,  He  did  not  make 
anything.  For  if  He  made,  what  did  He  make 
but  a  creature?”  And  would  I  knew  whatsoever 
I  desire  to  know  to  my  profit,  as  I  know  that  no 
creature  was  made  before  there  was  made  any 
creature. 

[XIII]  15.  But  if  any  excursive  brain  rove 
over  the  images  of  forepassed  times,  and  won¬ 
der  that  Thou  the  God  Almighty  and  All-creat¬ 
ing  and  All-supporting,  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,  didst  for  innumerable  ages  forbear  from 
so  great  a  work,  before  Thou  wouldest  make  it; 
let  him  awake  and  consider  that  he  wonders  at 
false  conceits.  For  whence  could  innumerable 
ages  pass  by,  which  Thou  madest  not,  Thou  the 
Author  and  Creator  of  all  ages?  or  what  times 
should  there  be,  which  were  not  made  by  Thee?5 

5See  above,  Bk.  vn.  21. 


CONFESSIONS  XI.  11-19  93 


or  how  should  they  pass  by,  if  they  never  were? 
Seeing  then  Thou  are  the  Creator  of  all  times,  if 
any  time  was  before  Thou  madest  heaven  and 
earth,  why  say  they  that  Thou  didst  forego 
working?  For  that  very  time  didst  Thou  make, 
nor  could  times  pass  by  before  thou  madest 
those  times.  But  if  before  heaven  and  earth 
there  was  no  time,  why  is  it  demanded  what 
Thou  then  didst?  For  there  was  no  “then,”  when 
there  was  no  time. 

16.  Nor  dost  Thou  by  time  precede  time;  else 
shouldest  Thou  not  precede  all  times.  But  Thou 
precedest  all  things  past,  by  the  sublimity  of  an 
ever-present  eternity;  and  surpassest  all  future 
because  they  are  future,  and  when  they  come, 
they  shall  be  past;  but  “Thou  art  the  Same,  and 
Thy  years  fail  not.”  1  Thy  years  neither  come 
nor  go;  whereas  ours  both  come  and  go,  that 
they  all  may  come.  Thy  years  stand  together, 
because  they  do  stand;  nor  are  departing  thrust 
out  by  coming  years,  for  they  pass  not  away; 
but  ours  shall  all  be,  when  they  shall  no  more  be. 
Thy  years  are  one  day;  and  Thy  day  is  not 
daily,  but  Today,  seeing  Thy  Today  gives  not 
place  unto  tomorrow,  for  neither  doth  it  replace 
yesterday.  Thy  Today  is  Eternity;  therefore 
didst  Thou  beget  the  Coeternal,  to  whom  Thou 
saidst,  “This  day  have  I  begotten  Thee.”  2  Thou 
hast  made  all  things ;  and  before  all  times  Thou 
art;  neither  in  any  time  was  time  not. 

[XIV]  17.  At  no  time,  then,  hadst  Thou  not 
made  anything,  because  time  itself  Thou  mad¬ 
est.  And  no  times  are  coeternal  with  Thee,  be¬ 
cause  Thou  abidest;  but  if  they  abode,  they 
should  not  be  times.  For  what  is  time?  Who  can 
readily  and  briefly  explain  this?  Who  can  even 
in  thought  comprehend  it,  so  as  to  utter  a  word 
about  it?  But  what  in  discourse  do  we  mention 
more  familiarly  and  knowingly  than  time?  And 
we  understand,  when  we  speak  of  it;  we  under¬ 
stand  also  when  we  hear  it  spoken  of  by  another. 
What  then  is  time?  If  no  one  asks  me,  I  know; 
if  I  wish  to  explain  it  to  one  that  asketh,  I  know 
not;  yet  I  say  boldly  that  I  know  that,  if  noth¬ 
ing  passed  away,  time  past  were  not;  and  if 
nothing  were  coming,  a  time  to  come  were  not; 
and  if  nothing  were,  time  present  were  not. 
Those  two  times  then,  past  and  to  come,  how 
are  they,  seeing  the  past  now  is  not,  and  that  to 
come  is  not  yet?  But  the  present,  should  it  al¬ 
ways  be  present  and  never  pass  into  time  past, 
verily  it  should  not  be  time,  but  eternity.  If 
time  present  (if  it  is  to  be  time)  only  cometh 
into  existence  because  it  passeth  into  time  past, 
how  can  we  say  that  either  this  is,  whose  cause 
JPs.  102.  27.  2Ps.  2.  7;  Heb.  5.  5. 


of  being  is  that  it  shall  not  be;  so,  namely,  that 
we  cannot  truly  say  that  time  is,  but  because  it 
is  tending  not  to  be? 

[XV]  18.  And  yet  we  say,  “a  long  time”  and 
“a  short  time”;  still,  only  of  time  past  or  to 
come.  A  long  time  past  (for  example)  we  call  an 
hundred  years  since;  and  a  long  time  to  come, 
an  hundred  years  hence.  But  a  short  time  past, 
we  call  (suppose)  ten  days  since;  and  a  short 
time  to  come,  ten  days  hence.  But  in  what  sense 
is  that  long  or  short,  which  is  not?  For  the  past 
is  not  now;  and  the  future  is  not  yet.  Let  us  not 
then  say,  “It  is  long”;  but  of  the  past,  “It  hath 
been  long”;  and  of  the  future,  “It  will  be  long.” 
0  my  Lord,  my  Light,  shall  not  here  also  Thy 
Truth  mock  at  man?  For  that  past  time  which 
was  long,  was  it  long  when  it  was  now  past,  or 
when  it  was  yet  present?  For  then  might  it  be 
long,  when  there  was  what  could  be  long;  but 
when  past,  it  was  no  longer;  wherefore  neither 
could  that  be  long,  which  was  not  at  all.  Let  us 
not  then  say,  “Time  past  hath  been  long”;  for 
we  shall  not  find  what  hath  been  long,  seeing 
that  since  it  was  past  it  is  no  more;  but  let  us 
say,  “That  present  time  was  long”;  because, 
when  it  was  present,  it  was  long.  For  it  had  not 
yet  passed  away,  so  as  not  to  be;  and  therefore 
there  was  what  could  be  long;  but  after  it  was 
past,  that  ceased  also  to  be  long,  which  ceased  to 
be. 

19.  Let  us  see  then,  thou  soul  of  man,  whether 
present  time  can  be  long;  for  to  thee  it  is  given 
to  feel  and  to  measure  length  of  time.  What  wilt 
thou  answer  me?  Are  an  hundred  years,  when 
present,  a  long  time?  See  first,  whether  an  hun¬ 
dred  years  can  be  present.  For  if  the  first  of 
these  years  be  now  current,  it  is  present,  but  the 
other  ninety  and  nine  are  to  come,  and  therefore 
are  not  yet;  but  if  the  second  year  be  current, 
one  is  now  past,  another  present,  the  rest  to 
come.  And  so  if  we  assume  any  middle  year  of 
this  hundred  to  be  present,  all  before  it  are  past ; 
all  after  it,  to  come;  wherefore  an  hundred 
years  cannot  be  present.  But  see  at  least  wheth¬ 
er  that  one  which  is  now  current,  itself  is  pres¬ 
ent;  for  if  the  current  month  be  its  first,  the  rest 
are  to  come;  if  the  second,  the  first  is  already 
past,  and  the  rest  are  not  yet.  Therefore,  neither 
is  the  year  now  current  present;  and,  if  not 
present  as  a  whole,  then  is  not  the  year  present. 
For  twelve  months  are  a  year;  of  which  what¬ 
ever  be  the  current  month  is  present;  the  rest 
past,  or  to  come.  Although  neither  is  that  current 
month  present;  but  one  day  only;  the  rest  being 
to  come,  if  it  be  the  first;  past,  if  the  last;  if  any 
of  the  middle,  then  amid  past  and  to  come. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


20.  See  how  the  present  time,  which  alone  we 
found  could  be  called  long,  is  abridged  to  the 
length  scarce  of  one  day.  But  let  us  examine 
that  also ;  because  neither  is  one  day  present  as 
a  whole.  For  it  is  made  up  of  four  and  twenty 
hours  of  night  and  day:  of  which  the  first  hath 
the  rest  to  come;  the  last  hath  them  past;  and 
any  of  the  middle  hath  those  before  it  past, 
those  behind  it  to  come.  Yea,  that  one  hour  pas- 
seth  away  in  flying  particles.  Whatsoever  of  it 
hath  flown  away  is  past ;  whatsoever  remaineth 
is  to  come.  If  an  instant  of  time  be  conceived 
which  cannot  be  divided  into  the  smallest  par¬ 
ticles  of  moments,  that  alone  is  it,  which  may 
be  called  present.  Which  yet  flies  with  such 
speed  from  future  to  past,  as  not  to  be  length¬ 
ened  out  with  the  least  stay.  For  if  it  be,  it  is 
divided  into  past  and  future.  The  present  hath 
no  space.  Where  then  is  the  time,  which  we  may 
call  long?  Is  it  to  come?  Of  it  we  do  not  say,  “It 
is  long”;  because  it  is  not  yet,  so  as  to  be  long; 
but  we  say,  “It  will  be  long.”  When  therefore 
will  it  be?  For  if  even  then,  when  it  is  yet  to 
come,  it  shall  not  be  long  (because  what  can  be 
long  as  yet  is  not)  and  so  it  shall  then  be  long 
when,  from  future  which  as  yet  is  not,  it  shall 
begin  now  to  be,  and  have  become  present,  that 
so  there  should  exist  what  may  be  long;  then 
does  time  present  cry  out  in  the  words  above, 
that  it  cannot  be  long. 

[XVI]  21.  And  yet,  Lord,  we  perceive  inter¬ 
vals  of  times,  and  compare  them,  and  say,  some 
are  shorter,  and  others  longer.  We  measure  also, 
how  much  longer  or  shorter  this  time  is  than 
that;  and  we  answer,  “This  is  double,  or  treble; 
and  that,  but  once,  or  only  just  so  much  as 
that.”  But  we  measure  times  as  they  are  passing, 
by  perceiving  them;  but  past,  which  now  are 
not,  or  the  future,  which  are  not  yet,  who  can 
measure?  unless  a  man  shall  presume  to  say, 
that  can  be  measured  which  is  not.  When  then 
time  is  passing,  it  may  be  perceived  and  meas¬ 
ured;  but  when  it  is  past,  it  cannot,  because  it 
is  not. 

[XVII]  22.  I  ask.  Father,  I  affirm  not.  0  my 
God,  rule  and  guide  me.  “Who  will  tell  me  that 
there  are  not  three  times  (as  we  learned  when 
boys,  and  taught  boys) :  past,  present,  and  fu¬ 
ture;  but  present  only,  because  those  two  are 
not?  Or  are  they  also;  and  when  from  future  it 
becometh  present,  doth  it  come  out  of  some  se¬ 
cret  place;  and  so,  when  retiring,  from  present 
it  becometh  past?  For  where  did  they  who  fore¬ 
told  things  to  come  see  them,  if  as  yet  they  be 
not?  For  that  which  is  not  cannot  be  seen.  And 
they  who  relate  things  past  could  not  relate 


them,  if  in  mind  they  did  not  discern  them;  and 
if  they  were  not,  they  could  no  way  be  discerned. 
Things  then  past  and  to  come  are.” 

[XVIII]  23.  Permit  me,  Lord,  to  seek  fur¬ 
ther.  0  my  hope,  let  not  my  purpose  be  con¬ 
founded.  For  if  times  past  and  to  come  be,  I 
would  know  where  they  be.  Which  yet  if  I  can¬ 
not,  yet  I  know  that,  wherever  they  be,  they  are 
not  there  as  future,  or  past,  but  present.  For  if 
there  also  they  be  future,  they  are  not  yet  there ; 
if  there  also  they  be  past,  they  are  no  longer 
there.  Wheresoever  then  is  whatsoever  is,  it  is 
only  as  present.  Although  when  past  facts  are 
related,  there  are  drawn  out  of  the  memory,  not 
the  things  themselves  which  are  past,  but  words 
which,  conceived  by  the  images  of  the  things, 
they,  in  passing,  have  through  the  senses  left  as 
traces  in  the  mind.  Thus  my  childhood,  which 
now  is  not,  is  in  time  past,  which  now  is  not;  but 
now  when  I  recall  its  image,  and  tell  of  it,  I  be¬ 
hold  it  in  the  present,  because  it  is  still  in  my 
memory.  Whether  there  be  a  like  cause  of  fore¬ 
telling  things  to  come  also;  that  of  things  which 
as  yet  are  not,  the  images  may  be  perceived  be¬ 
fore,  already  existing — I  confess,  0  my  God,  I 
know  not.  This  indeed  I  know,  that  we  generally 
think  before  on  our  future  actions,  and  that  that 
fore-thinking  is  present,  but  the  action  whereof 
we  forethink  is  not  yet,  because  it  is  to  come. 
Which,  when  we  have  set  upon,  and  have  begun 
to  do  what  we  were  forethinking,  then  shall  that 
action  be;  because  then  it  is  no  longer  future, 
but  present. 

24.  Which  way  soever  then  this  secret  fore¬ 
perceiving  of  things  to  come  be,  that  only  can  be 
seen  which  is.  But  what  now  is,  is  not  future,  but 
present.  When  then  things  to  come  are  said  to  be 
seen,  it  is  not  themselves  which  as  yet  are  not 
(that  is,  which  are  to  be),  but  their  causes  per¬ 
chance  or  signs  are  seen,  which  already  are. 
Therefore  they  are  not  future  but  present  to 
those  who  now  see  that,  from  which  the  future, 
being  fore-conceived  in  the  mind,  is  foretold. 
Which  fore-conceptions  again  now  are;  and 
those  who  foretell  those  things  do  behold  the 
conceptions  present  before  them.  Let  now  the 
numerous  variety  of  things  furnish  me  some  ex¬ 
ample.  I  behold  the  day-break,  I  foreshew  that 
the  sun  is  about  to  rise.  What  I  behold  is  pres¬ 
ent;  what  I  fore-signify,  to  come:  not  the  sun, 
which  already  is;  but  the  sun-rising,  which  is 
not  yet.  And  yet  did  I  not  in  my  mind  imagine 
the  sun-rising  itself  (as  now  while  I  speak  of  it), 
I  could  not  foretell  it.  But  neither  is  that  day¬ 
break  which  I  discern  in  the  sky  the  sun-rising, 
although  it  goes  before  it;  nor  that  imagination 


CONFESSIONS  XI.  20-29  95 


of  my  mind;  which  two  are  seen  now  present, 
that  the  other  which  is  to  be  may  be  foretold. 
Future  things  then  are  not  yet;  and  if  they  be 
not  yet,  they  are  not:  and  if  they  are  not,  they 
cannot  be  seen;  yet  foretold  they  may  be  from 
things  present,  which  are  already,  and  are  seen. 

[XIX]  25.  Thou  then.  Ruler  of  Thy  creation, 
by  what  way  dost  Thou  teach  souls  things  to 
come?  For  Thou  didst  teach  Thy  Prophets.  By 
what  way  dost  Thou,  to  Whom  nothing  is  to 
come,  teach  things  to  come;  or  rather  of  the  fu¬ 
ture,  dost  teach  things  present?  For  what  is  not, 
neither  can  it  be  taught.  Too  far  is  this  way  out 
of  my  ken:  it  is  too  mighty  for  me,  I  cannot  at¬ 
tain  unto  it1;  but  from  Thee  I  can,  when  Thou 
shalt  vouchsafe  it,  0  sweet  light  of  my  hidden 
eyes. 

[XX]  26.  What  now  is  clear  and  plain  is  that 
neither  things  to  come  nor  past  are.  Nor  is  it 
properly  said,  “There  be  three  times :  past,  pres¬ 
ent,  and  to  come”;  yet  perchance  it  might  be 
properly  said:  “There  be  three  times:  a  present 
of  things  past,  a  present  of  things  present,  and  a 
present  of  things  future.”  For  these  three  do 
exist  in  some  sort,  in  the  soul,  but  otherwhere  do 
I  not  see  them :  present  of  things  past,  memory ; 
present  of  things  present,  sight;  present  of 
things  future,  expectation.  If  thus  we  be  permit¬ 
ted  to  speak,  I  see  three  times,  and  I  confess 
there  are  three.  Let  it  be  said  too,  “There  be 
three  times,  past,  present,  and  to  come”;  in  our 
incorrect  way.  See,  I  object  not,  nor  gainsay, 
nor  find  fault,  if  what  is  so  said  be  but  under¬ 
stood,  that  neither  what  is  to  be  now  is,  nor 
what  is  past.  For  but  few  things  are  there,  which 
we  speak  properly,  most  things  improperly;  still 
the  things  intended  are  understood. 

[XXI]  27.  I  said  then  even  now,  we  measure 
times  as  they  pass,  in  order  to  be  able  to  say, 
this  time  is  twice  so  much  as  that  one;  or,  this 
is  just  so  much  as  that;  and  so  of  any  other 
parts  of  time  which  be  measurable.  Wherefore, 
as  I  said,  we  measure  times  as  they  pass.  And  if 
any  should  ask  me,  “How  knowest  thou?”  I 
might  answer,  “I  know  that  we  do  measure,  nor 
can  we  measure,  things  that  are  not;  and  things 
past  and  to  come  are  not.”  But  time  present  how 
do  we  measure,  seeing  it  hath  no  space?  It  is 
measured  while  passing;  but  when  it  shall  have 
passed,  it  is  not  measured;  for  there  will  be 
nothing  to  be  measured.  But  whence,  by  what 
way,  and  whither  passes  it  while  it  is  a  measur¬ 
ing?  Whence,  but  from  the  future?  Which  way, 
but  through  the  present?  whither,  but  into  the 
past?  From  that,  therefore,  which  is  not  yet, 

4Ps.  139.  6. 


through  that  which  hath  no  space,  into  that 
which  now  is  not.  Yet  what  do  we  measure,  if 
not  time  in  some  space?  For  we  do  not  say,  sin¬ 
gle,  and  double,  and  triple,  and  equal,  or  any 
other  like  way  that  we  speak  of  time,  except  of 
spaces  of  times.  In  what  space  then  do  we  meas¬ 
ure  time  passing?  In  the  future,  whence  it  pass- 
eth  through?  But  what  is  not  yet,  we  measure 
not.  Or  in  the  present,  by  which  it  passes?  But 
no  space,  we  do  not  measure.  Or  in  the  past,  to 
which  it  passes?  But  neither  do  we  measure  that 
which  now  is  not. 

[XXII]  28.  My  soul  is  on  fire  to  know  this 
most  intricate  enigma.  Shut  it  not  up,  0  Lord 
my  God,  good  Father;  through  Christ  I  beseech 
Thee,  do  not  shut  up  these  usual,  yet  hidden, 
things  from  my  desire,  that  it  be  hindered  from 
piercing  into  them;  but  let  them  dawn  through 
Thy  enlightening  mercy,  0  Lord.  Whom  shall 
I  enquire  of  concerning  these  things?  And  to 
whom  shall  I  more  fruitfully  confess  my  igno¬ 
rance  than  to  Thee,  to  Whom  these  my  studies, 
so  vehemently  kindled  toward  Thy  Scriptures, 
are  not  troublesome?  Give  what  I  love;  for  I  do 
love,  and  this  hast  Thou  given  me.  Give,  Father, 
Who  truly  knowest  to  give  good  gifts  unto  Thy 
children.2  Give,  because  I  have  taken  upon  me 
to  know,  and  trouble  is  before  me  until  Thou 
openest  it.3  By  Christ  I  beseech  Thee,  in  His 
Name,  Holy  of  holies,  let  no  man  disturb  me. 
For  I  believed,  and  therefore  do  I  speak.4  This 
is  my  hope,  for  this  do  I  live,  that  I  may  con¬ 
template  the  delights  of  the  Lord.5  Behold,  Thou 
hast  made  my  days  old,6  and  they  pass  away, 
and  how,  I  know  not.  And  we  talk  of  time,  and 
time,  and  times,  and  times:  “How  long  time  is 
it  since  he  said  this?”  “How  long  time  since  he 
did  this?”  And  “How  long  time  since  I  saw 
that?”  And  “This  syllable  hath  double  time  to 
that  single  short  syllable.”  These  words  we 
speak,  and  these  we  hear,  and  are  understood, 
and  understand.  Most  manifest  and  ordinary 
they  are,  and  the  self-same  things  again  are  but 
too  deeply  hidden,  and  the  discovery  of  them 
were  new. 

[XXIII]  29. 1  heard  once  from  a  learned  man 
that  the  motions  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars 
constituted  time,  and  I  assented  not.  For  why 
should  not  the  motions  of  all  bodies  rather  be 
times?  Or,  if  the  lights  of  heaven  should  cease, 
and  a  potter’s  wheel  run  round,  should  there  be 
no  time  by  which  we  might  measure  those  whirl¬ 
ings,  and  say  that  either  it  moved  with  equal 
pauses,  or  if  it  turned  sometimes  slower,  other- 

2Matt.  7.  11.  3Ps.  73.  16.  4Ps.  116.  10. 

5Ps.  27.  4.  6Ps.  39.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


whiles  quicker,  that  some  rounds  were  longer, 
other  shorter?  Or,  while  we  were  saying  this, 
should  we  not  also  be  speaking  in  time?  Or 
should  there  in  our  words  be  some  syllables 
short,  others  long,  but  because  those  sounded  in 
a  shorter  time,  these  in  a  longer?  God,  grant  to 
men  to  see  in  a  small  thing  notices  common  to 
things  great  and  small.  The  stars  and  lights  of 
heaven  are  also  “for  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and 
for  years,  and  for  days”;1  they  are;  yet  neither 
should  I  say  that  the  going  round  of  that  wooden 
w7heel  was  a  day,  nor  yet  he,  that  it  was  there¬ 
fore  no  time. 

30.  I  desire  to  know  the  force  and  nature  of 
time,  by  which  we  measure  the  motions  of 
bodies,  and  say  (for  example)  this  motion  is 
twice  as  long  as  that.  For  I  ask:  seeing  “day” 
denotes  not  the  stay  only  of  the  sun  upon  the 
earth  (according  to  which  day  is  one  thing,  night 
another),  but  also  its  whole  circuit  from  east  to 
east  again;  according  to  which  we  say,  “There 
passed  so  many  days,”  the  night  being  included 
when  we  say,  “so  many  days,”  and  the  nights 
not  reckoned  apart;  seeing  then  a  day  is  com¬ 
pleted  by  the  motion  of  the  sun  and  by  his  cir¬ 
cuit  from  east  to  east  again,  I  ask,  does  the  mo¬ 
tion  alone  make  the  day,  or  the  stay  in  which 
that  motion  is  completed,  or  both?  For  if  the 
first  be  the  day,  then  should  we  have  a  day,  al¬ 
though  the  sun  should  finish  that  course  in  so 
small  a  space  of  time  as  one  hour  comes  to.  If 
the  second,  then  should  not  that  make  a  day,  if 
between  one  sun-rise  and  another  there  were  but 
so  short  a  stay  as  one  hour  comes  to;  but  the 
sun  must  go  four  and  twenty  times  about  to 
complete  one  day.  If  both,  then  neither  could 
that  be  called  a  day,  if  the  sun  should  run  his 
whole  round  in  the  space  of  one  hour ;  nor  that, 
if,  while  the  sun  stood  still,  so  much  time  should 
overpass  as  the  sun  usually  makes  his  whole 
course  in,  from  morning  to  morning.  I  will  not 
therefore  now  ask  w7hat  that  is  w7hich  is  called 
day;  but  what  time  is,  whereby  we,  measuring 
the  circuit  of  the  sun,  should  say  that  it  was  fin¬ 
ished  in  half  the  time  it  was  wont,  if  so  be  it  was 
finished  in  so  small  a  space  as  twelve  hours ;  and, 
comparing  both  times,  should  call  this  a  single 
time,  that  a  double  time;  even  supposing  the 
sun  to  run  his  round  from  east  to  east  sometimes 
in  that  single,  sometimes  in  that  double  time. 
Let  no  man  then  tell  me  that  the  motions  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  constitute  times,  because,  when 
at  the  prayer  of  one,  the  sun  had  stood  still,  till 
he  could  achieve  his  victorious  battle,  the  sun 
stood  still,  but  time  went  on.  For  in  its  own  al- 

^en.  1.  14. 


lotted  space  of  time  was  that  battle  waged  and 
ended.2  I  perceive  time  then  to  be  a  certain  ex¬ 
tension.  But  do  I  perceive  it,  or  seem  to  perceive 
it?  Thou,  Light  and  Truth,  wilt  shew  me. 

[XXIV]  31.  Dost  Thou  bid  me  assent,  if  any 
define  time  to  be  “motion  of  a  body”?  Thou  dost 
not  bid  me.  For  that  no  body  is  moved,  but  in 
time,  I  hear;  this  Thou  sayest;  but  that  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  a  body  is  time,  I  hear  not;  Thou  sayest 
it  not.  For  when  a  body  is  moved,  I  by  time  mea¬ 
sure  how  long  it  moveth,  from  the  time  it  began 
to  move  until  it  left  off.  And  if  I  did  not  see 
whence  it  began;  and  it  continue  to  move  so 
that  I  see  not  when  it  ends,  I  cannot  measure 
save  perchance  from  the  time  I  began  until  I 
cease  to  see.  And  if  I  look  long,  I  can  only  pro¬ 
nounce  it  to  be  a  long  time,  but  not  how  long; 
because  when  we  say  “how  long,”  we  do  it  by 
comparison;  as,  “This  is  as  long  as  that,”  or 
“twice  so  long  as  that,”  or  the  like.  But  w7hen  we 
can  mark  the  distances  of  the  places  whence  and 
whither  goeth  the  body  moved,  or  his  parts,  if  it 
moved  as  in  a  lathe,  then  can  we  say  precisely  in 
how  much  time  the  motion  of  that  body  or  his 
part,  from  this  place  unto  that,  was  finished. 
Seeing  therefore  the  motion  of  a  body  is  one 
thing,  that  by  which  we  measure  how  long  it  is, 
another;  who  sees  not  which  of  the  two  is  rather 
to  be  called  time?  For  and  if  a  body  be  some¬ 
times  moved,  sometimes  stands  still,  then  we 
measure  not  his  motion  only,  but  his  standing 
still  too  by  time;  and  we  say,  “It  stood  still,  as 
much  as  it  moved”;  or  “It  stood  still  twice  or 
thrice  so  long  as  it  moved”;  or  any  other  space 
which  our  measuring  hath  either  ascertained  or 
guessed;  more  or  less,  as  w7e  use  to  say.  Time 
then  is  not  the  motion  of  a  body. 

[XXV]  32.  And  I  confess  to  Thee,  0  Lord, 
that  I  yet  know  not  what  time  is,  and  again  I 
confess  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  that  I  know  that  I 
speak  this  in  time,  and  that  having  long  spoken 
of  time,  that  very  “long”  is  not  long,  but  by  the 
pause  of  time.  How7  then  know  I  this,  seeing  I 
know7  not  w7hat  time  is?  Or  is  it  perchance  that  I 
know7  not  how  to  express  w7hat  I  know?  Woe  is 
me  that  do  not  even  know  what  I  know7  not.  Be¬ 
hold,  0  my  God,  before  Thee  I  lie  not;  but  as  I 
speak,  so  is  my  heart.  Thou  shalt  light  my  can¬ 
dle;  Thou,  0  Lord  my  God,  wilt  enlighten  my 
darkness.3 

[XXVI]  33.  Does  not  my  soul  most  truly 
confess  unto  Thee  that  I  do  measure  times?  Do 
I  then  measure,  0  my  God,  and  know7  not  w7hat  I 
measure?  I  measure  the  motion  of  a  body  in 
time;  and  the  time  itself  do  I  not  measure?  Or 
2Josh.  10.  12-14.  3Ps.  118.  28. 


CONFESSIONS  XI.  30-36  97 


could  I  indeed  measure  the  motion  of  a  body 
how  long  it  were,  and  in  how  long  space  it  could 
come  from  this  place  to  that,  without  measuring 
the  time  in  which  it  is  moved?  This  same  time 
then,  how  do  I  measure?  Do  we  by  a  shorter 
time  measure  a  longer,  as  by  the  space  of  a  cu¬ 
bit,  the  space  of  a  rood?  For  so  indeed  we  seem 
by  the  space  of  a  short  syllable  to  measure  the 
space  of  a  long  syllable,  and  to  say  that  this  is 
double  the  other.  Thus  measure  we  the  spaces 
of  stanzas,  by  the  spaces  of  the  verses;  and  the 
spaces  of  the  verses,  by  the  spaces  of  the  feet; 
and  the  spaces  of  the  feet,  by  the  spaces  of  the 
syllables ;  and  the  spaces  of  long,  by  the  spaces 
of  short  syllables;  not  measuring  by  pages  (for 
then  we  measure  spaces,  not  times),  but  when 
we  utter  the  words  and  they  pass  by,  and  we  say, 
“It  is  a  long  stanza,  because  composed  of  so 
many  verses;  long  verses,  because  consisting  of 
so  many  feet;  long  feet,  because  prolonged  by  so 
many  syllables ;  a  long  syllable  because  double 
to  a  short  one.”  But  neither  do  we  this  way  ob¬ 
tain  any  certain  measure  of  time ;  because  it  may 
be  that  a  shorter  verse,  pronounced  more  fully, 
may  take  up  more  time  than  a  longer,  pro¬ 
nounced  hurriedly.  And  so  for  a  verse,  a  foot,  a 
syllable.  Whence  it  seemed  to  me  that  time  is 
nothing  else  than  protraction;  but  of  what,  I 
know  not;  and  I  marvel  if  it  be  not  of  the  mind 
itself?  For  what,  I  beseech  Thee,  0  my  God,  do 
I  measure,  when  I  say,  either  indefinitely,  “This 
is  a  longer  time  than  that,”  or  definitely,  “This  is 
double  that”?  That  I  measure  time,  I  know; 
and  yet  I  measure  not  time  to  come,  for  it  is  not 
yet;  nor  present,  because  it  is  not  protracted  by 
any  space ;  nor  past,  because  it  now  is  not.  What 
then  do  I  measure?  Times  passing,  not  past?  for 
so  I  said. 

[XXVII]  34.  Courage,  my  mind,  and  press 
on  mightily.  God  is  our  helper,  He  made  us,  and 
not  we  ourselves.1  Press  on  where  truth  begins  to 
dawn.  Suppose,  now,  the  voice  of  a  body  begins 
to  sound,  and  does  sound,  and  sounds  on,  and 
now,  it  ceases ;  it  is  silence  now,  and  that  voice 
is  past,  and  is  no  more  a  voice.  Before  it  sounded, 
it  was  to  come,  and  could  not  be  measured,  be¬ 
cause  as  yet  it  was  not,  and  now  it  cannot,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  no  longer.  Then  therefore  while  it 
sounded,  it  might;  because  there  then  was  what 
might  be  measured.  But  yet  even  then  it  was  not 
at  a  stay;  for  it  was  passing  on,  and  passing 
away.  Could  it  be  measured  the  rather,  for  that? 
For  while  passing,  it  was  being  extended  into 
some  space  of  time,  so  that  it  might  be  mea¬ 
sured,  since  the  present  hath  no  space.  If  there- 

^s.  100.  3. 


fore  then  it  might,  then,  lo,  suppose  another 
voice  hath  begun  to  sound,  and  still  soundeth  in 
one  continued  tenor  without  any  interruption; 
let  us  measure  it  while  it  sounds ;  seeing,  when 
it  hath  left  sounding,  it  will  then  be  past,  and 
nothing  left  to  be  measured;  let  us  measure  it 
verily,  and  tell  how  much  it  is.  But  it  sounds 
still,  nor  can  it  be  measured  but  from  the  in¬ 
stant  it  began  in,  unto  the  end  it  left  in.  For  the 
very  space  between  is  the  thing  we  measure, 
namely,  from  some  beginning  unto  some  end. 
Wherefore,  a  voice  that  is  not  yet  ended,  cannot 
be  measured,  so  that  it  may  be  said  how  long,  or 
short  it  is ;  nor  can  it  be  called  equal  to  another, 
or  double  to  a  single,  or  the  like.  But  when  end¬ 
ed,  it  no  longer  is.  How  may  it  then  be  mea¬ 
sured?  And  yet  we  measure  times;  but  yet 
neither  those  which  are  not  yet,  nor  those  which 
no  longer  are,  nor  those  which  are  not  length¬ 
ened  out  by  some  pause,  nor  those  which  have 
no  bounds.  We  measure  neither  times  to  come, 
nor  past,  nor  present,  nor  passing ;  and  yet  we  do 
measure  times. 

35.  “Deas  Creator  omnium ” — this  verse  of 
eight  syllables  alternates  between  short  and  long 
syllables.  The  four  short  then:  the  first,  third, 
fifth,  and  seventh,  are  but  single,  in  respect  of 
the  four  long:  the  second,  fourth,  sixth,  and 
eighth.  Every  one  of  these,  to  every  one  of 
those,  hath  a  double  time:  I  pronounce  them, 
report  on  them,  and  find  it  so,  as  one’s  plain 
sense  perceives.  By  plain  sense,  then,  I  measure 
a  long  syllable  by  a  short,  and  I  sensibly  find  it 
to  have  twice  so  much;  but  when  one  sounds 
after  the  other,  if  the  former  be  short,  the  latter 
long,  how  shall  I  detain  the  short  one,  and  how, 
measuring,  shall  I  apply  it  to  the  long,  that  I 
may  find  this  to  have  twice  so  much;  seeing  the 
long  does  not  begin  to  sound,  unless  the  short 
leaves  sounding?  And  that  very  long  one  do  I 
measure  as  present,  seeing  I  measure  it  not  till 
it  be  ended?  Now  his  ending  is  his  passing  away. 
What  then  is  it  I  measure?  Where  is  the  short 
syllable  by  which  I  measure?  Where  the  long 
which  I  measure?  Both  have  sounded,  have 
flown,  passed  away,  are  no  more ;  and  yet  I  mea¬ 
sure,  and  confidently  answer  (so  far  as  is  pre¬ 
sumed  on  a  practised  sense)  that  as  to  space  of 
time  this  syllable  is  but  single,  that  double.  And 
yet  I  could  not  do  this,  unless  they  were  already 
past  and  ended.  It  is  not  them  themselves,  which 
now  are  not,  that  I  measure,  but  something  in 
my  memory,  which  there  remains  fixed. 

36.  It  is  in  thee,  my  mind,  that  I  measure 
times.  Interrupt  me  not,  that  is,  interrupt  not 
thyself  with  the  tumults  of  thy  impressions.  In 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


thee  I  measure  times;  the  impression,  which 
things  as  they  pass  by  cause  in  thee,  remains 
even  when  they  are  gone;  this  it  is  which,  still 
present,  I  measure,  not  the  things  which  pass  by 
to  make  this  impression.  This  I  measure,  when 
I  measure  times.  Either  then  this  is  time,  or  I 
do  not  measure  times.  What  when  we  measure 
silence,  and  say  that  this  silence  hath  held  as 
long  time  as  did  that  voice?  Do  we  not  stretch 
out  our  thought  to  the  measure  of  a  voice,  as  if 
it  sounded,  that  so  we  may  be  able  to  report  of 
the  intervals  of  silence  in  a  given  space  of  time? 
For  though  both  voice  and  tongue  be  still,  yet 
in  thought  we  go  over  poems,  and  verses,  and 
any  other  discourse,  or  dimensions  of  motions, 
and  report  as  to  the  spaces  of  times,  how  much 
this  is  in  respect  of  that,  no  otherwise  than  if 
vocally  we  did  pronounce  them.  If  a  man  would 
utter  a  lengthened  sound,  and  had  settled  in 
thought  how  long  it  should  be,  he  hath  in  silence 
already  gone  through  a  space  of  time  and,  com¬ 
mitting  it  to  memory,  begins  to  utter  that 
speech,  which  sounds  on  until  it  be  brought  un¬ 
to  the  end  proposed.  Yea  it  hath  sounded,  and 
will  sound;  for  so  much  of  it  as  is  finishechhath 
sounded  already,  and  the  rest  will  sound.  And 
thus  passeth  it  on,  until  the  present  intent  con¬ 
veys  over  the  future  into  the  past;  the  past  in¬ 
creasing  by  the  diminution  of  the  future,  until, 
by  the  consumption  of  the  future,  all  is  past. 

[XXVIII]  37.  But  how  is  that  future  dimin¬ 
ished  or  consumed,  which  as  yet  is  not?  Or  how 
that  past  increased,  which  is  now  no  longer, 
save  that  in  the  mind  which  enacteth  this  there 
be  three  things  done?  For  it  expects,  it  consid¬ 
ers,  it  remembers;  that  so  that  which  it  expect- 
eth,  through  that  wThich  it  considereth,  passeth 
into  that  which  it  remembereth.  Who  therefore 
denieth  that  things  to  come  are  not  as  yet?  and 
yet  there  is  in  the  mind  an  expectation  of  things 
to  come.  And  who  denies  past  things  to  be  now 
no  longer?  and  yet  is  there  still  in  the  mind  a 
memory  of  things  past.  And  who  denieth  that 
the  present  time  hath  no  space,  because  it  pas¬ 
seth  away  in  a  moment?  and  yet  our  considera¬ 
tion  continueth,  through  which  that  w’hich  shall 
be  present  proceedeth  to  become  absent.  It  is 
not  then  future  time  that  is  long,  for  as  yet  it  is 
not;  but  a  “long  future”  is  “a  long  expectation 
of  the  future”;  nor  is  it  time  past,  wdiich  now  is 
not,  that  is  long;  but  a  long  past  is  “a  long  mem¬ 
ory  of  the  past.” 

38. 1  am  about  to  repeat  a  Psalm  that  I  know. 
Before  I  begin,  my  expectation  is  extended  over 
the  whole;  but  when  I  have  begun,  how  much 
soever  of  it  I  shall  separate  off  into  the  past  is 


extended  along  my  memory;  thus  the  life  of  this 
action  of  mine  is  divided  between  my  memory  as 
to  what  I  have  repeated,  and  expectation  as  to 
what  I  am  about  to  repeat;  but  “consideration” 
is  present  with  me,  that  through  it  what  was  fu¬ 
ture  may  be  conveyed  over,  so  as  to  become 
past.  Which  the  more  it  is  done  again  and  again, 
so  much  the  more  the  expectation  being  short¬ 
ened,  is  the  memory  enlarged;  till  the  whole  ex¬ 
pectation  be  at  length  exhausted,  when  that 
whole  action,  being  ended,  shall  have  passed  in¬ 
to  memory.  And  this  which  takes  place  in  the 
whole  Psalm,  the  same  takes  place  in  each  sev¬ 
eral  portion  of  it,  and  each  several  syllable;  the 
same  holds  in  that  longer  action,  whereof  this 
Psalm  may  be  a  part;  the  same  holds  in  the 
whole  life  of  man,  whereof  all  the  actions  of  man 
are  parts ;  the  same  holds  through  the  whole  age 
of  the  sons  of  men,  whereof  all  the  lives  of  men 
are  parts. 

[XXIX]  39.  But  “because  Thy  loving  kind¬ 
ness  is  better  than  all  lives,”1  behold,  my  life  is 
but  a  distraction,  and  Thy  right  hand  upheld 
me,2  in  my  Lord  the  Son  of  man,  the  Mediator 
betwixt  Thee,3  The  One,  and  us  many,  many 
also  through  our  manifold  distractions  amid 
many  things,  that  by  Him  I  may  apprehend  in 
Whom  I  have  been  apprehended,  and  may  be  re¬ 
collected  from  my  old  conversation,  to  follow 
The  One,  forgetting  what  is  behind,  and  not  dis¬ 
tended  but  extended,  not  to  things  which  shall 
be  and  shall  pass  away,  but  to  those  things 
which  are  before,4  not  distractedly  but  intently, 
I  follow  on  for  the  prize  of  my  heavenly  calling,5 
where  I  may  hear  the  voice  of  Thy  praise,  and 
contemplate  Thy  delights,6  neither  to  come,  nor 
to  pass  away.  But  now  are  my  years  spent  in 
mourning.7  And  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  my  comfort, 
my  Father  everlasting,  but  I  have  been  severed 
amid  times  whose  order  I  know  not;  and  my 
thoughts,  even  the  inmost  bowels  of  my  soul,  are 
rent  and  mangled  with  tumultuous  varieties,  un¬ 
til  I  flow  together  into  Thee,  purified  and  molten 
by  the  fire  of  Thy  love.8 

[XXX]  40.  And  now  will  I  stand,  and  become 
firm  in  Thee,  in  my  mould,  Thy  truth ;  nor  will 
I  endure  the  questions  of  men,  who  by  a  penal 
disease  thirst  for  more  than  they  can  contain, 
and  say,  “What  did  God  before  He  made  heaven 
and  earth?”  Or,  How  came  it  into  His  mind  to 
make  anything,  having  never  before  made  any¬ 
thing?”  Give  them,  0  Lord,  well  to  bethink 
themselves  what  they  say,  and  to  find  that 
“never”  cannot  be  predicated,  when  “time”  is 

^s.  63.  3.  8.  3I  Tim.  2.  5.  4Phil.  3.  13. 

bIbid.f  14.  6Ps.  26.  7.  7Ps.  27.  4.  8Ps.  31.  10. 


CONFESSIONS  XI. 

not.  This  then  that  He  is  said  “never  to  have 
made,”  what  else  is  it  to  say  than  “in  *no  time’ 
to  have  made”?  Let  them  see,  therefore,  that 
time  cannot  be  without  created  being,1  and 
cease  to  speak  that  vanity.  May  they  also  be  ex¬ 
tended  towards  those  things  which  are  before;2 
and  understand  Thee  before  all  times,  the  eter¬ 
nal  Creator  of  all  times,  and  that  no  times  be 
coeternal  with  Thee,  nor  any  creature,  even  if 
there  be  any  creature  before  all  times. 

[XXXI]  41.  0  Lord  my  God,  what  a  depth  is 
that  recess  of  Thy  mysteries,  and  how  far  from 
it  have  the  consequences  of  my  transgressions 
cast  me!  Heal  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  share  the 
joy  of  Thy  light.  Certainly,  if  there  be  a  mind 
gifted  with  such  vast  knowledge  and  fore¬ 
knowledge  as  to  know  all  things  past  and  to 
come,  as  I  know  one  well-known  Psalm,  truly 
that  mind  is  passing  wonderful,  and  fearfully 
amazing;  in  that  nothing  past,  nothing  to  come 
in  after-ages,  is  any  more  hidden  from  him  than, 
when  I  sung  that  Psalm,  was  hidden  from  me 
what  and  how  much  of  it  passed  away  from  the 
beginning,  what  and  how  much  there  remained 
unto  the  end.  But  far  be  it  that  Thou  the  Cre¬ 
ator  of  the  Universe,  the  Creator  of  souls  and 
bodies,  far  be  it  that  Thou  shouldest  in  such  wise 
know  all  things  past  and  to  come.  Far,  far  more 
wonderfully,  and  far  more  mysteriously,  dost 
thou  know  them.  For  not  as’  the  feelings  of  one 
who  singeth  what  he  knoweth,  or  heareth  some 
well-known  song,  are  through  expectation  of  the 
words  to  come,  and  the  remembering  of  those 
that  are  past,  varied,  and  his  senses  divided — 
not  so  doth  anything  happen  unto  Thee,  un¬ 
changeably  eternal,  that  is,  the  eternal  Creator 
of  minds.  Like  then  as  Thou  in  the  Beginning 
knewest  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  without  any 
variety  of  Thy  knowledge,  so  madest  Thou  in  the 
Beginning  heaven  and  earth,  without  any  dis¬ 
traction  of  Thy  action.  Whoso  understandeth 
let  him  confess  unto  Thee;  and  whoso  under¬ 
standeth  not,  let  him  confess  unto  Thee.  Oh  how 
high  art  Thou,  and  yet  the  humble  in  heart  are 
Thy  dwelling-place;  for  Thou  raisest  up  those 
that  are  Dowed  down,3  and  they  fall  not,  whose 
elevation  Thou  art. 

BOOK  XII.  Augustine  proceeds  to  comment  on 
Genesis ,  1.  1,  and  explains  the  “heaven”  to 
mean  that  spiritual  and  incorporeal  creation , 
which  cleaves  to  God  unintermit tingly,  al¬ 
ways  beholding  His  countenance ;  “earth”  the 
formless  matter  whereof  the  corporeal  crea- 

1Cf.  City  of  God,  Bk.  xi.  6;  see  Bk.  xii.  44. 

2Phil.  3.13.  3Ps.  146.8. 


37-41,  XII.  1-3  99 

tion  was  afterwards  formed.  He  does  not  re¬ 
ject,  however,  other  interpretations,  which  he 
adduces,  but  rather  confesses  that  such  is  the 
depth  of  Holy  Scripture,  that  manifold  senses 
may  and  ought  to  be  extracted  from  it,  and 
that  whatever  truth  can  be  obtained  from  its 
words,  does,  in  fact,  lie  concealed  in  them. 

[I]  1.  My  heart,  0  Lord,  touched  with  the  words 
of  Thy  Holy  Scripture  is  much  busied  amid 
this  poverty  of  my  life.  And  therefore  most- 
times  is  the  poverty  of  human  understanding 
copious  in  words,  because  enquiring  hath  more 
to  say  than  discovering,  and  demanding  is  longer 
than  obtaining,  and  our  hand  that  knocks  hath 
more  work  to  do  than  our  hand  that  receives.  We 
hold  the  promise,  who  shall  make  it  null?  “If 
God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?”4  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  have;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find;  knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.  For  everyone 
that  asketh,  receiveth;  and  he  that  seeketh, 
findeth;  and  to  him  that  knocketh,  shall  it  be 
opened.”5  These  be  Thine  own  promises;  and 
who  need  fear  to  be  deceived,  when  the  Truth 
promiseth? 

[II]  2.  The  lowliness  of  my  tongue  confesseth 
unto  Thy  Highness  that  Thou  madest  heaven 
and  earth;  this  heaven  which  I  see,  and  this 
earth  that  I  tread  upon,  whence  is  this  earth  that 
I  bear  about  me;  Thou  madest  it.  But  where  is 
that  heaven  of  heavens,  0  Lord,  which  we  hear 
of  in  the  words  of  the  Psalm,  The  heaven  of 
heavens  are  the  Lord’s;  but  the  earth  hath  He 
given  to  the  children  of  men?  6  Where  is  that 
heaven  which  we  see  not,  to  which  all  this  which 
we  see  is  earth?  For  this  corporeal  whole,  not 
being  wholly  everywhere,  hath  in  such  wise  re¬ 
ceived  its  portion  of  beauty  in  these  lower  parts, 
whereof  the  lowest  is  this  our  earth ;  but  to  that 
heaven  of  heavens,  even  the  heaven  of  our  earth 
is  but  earth;  yea,  both  these  great  bodies  may 
not  absurdly  be  called  earth,  to  that  unknown 
heaven,  which  is  the  Lord’s,  not  the  sons’  of 
men. 

[III]  3.  And  now  this  earth  was  invisible  and 
without  form,7  and  there  was  I  know  not  what 
depth  of  abyss,  upon  which  there  was  no  light, 
because  it  had  no  shape.  Therefore  didst  Thou 
command  it  to  be  written,  that  darkness  was  up¬ 
on  the  face  of  the  deep ;  what  else  than  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  light?  For  had  there  been  light,  where 
should  it  have  been  but  by  being  over  all,  aloft, 
and  enlightening?  Where  then  light  was  not, 
what  was  the  presence  of  darkness,  but  the  ab- 

4Rom.  8.31.  6Matt.  7.7,  8. 

6Ps.  1 15.  16,  in  lxx,  Vulgate,  and  Syriac. 

7Gen.  1.2,  lxx. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ioo 

sence  of  light?1  Darkness  therefore  was  upon  it, 
because  light  was  not  upon  it;  as  where  sound  is 
not,  there  is  silence.  And  what  is  it  to  have  si¬ 
lence  there,  but  to  have  no  sound  there?  Hast 
not  Thou,  O  Lord,  taught  this  soul,  which  con¬ 
fessed  unto  Thee?  Hast  not  Thou  taught  me, 
Lord,  that  before  Thou  formedst  and  diversi- 
fiedst  this  formless  matter,  there  was  nothing, 
neither  colour,  nor  figure,  nor  body,  nor  spirit? 
and  yet  not  altogether  nothing;  for  there  was  a 
certain  formlessness,  without  any  beauty. 

[IV]  4.  How  then  should  it  be  called,  that  it 
might  be  in  some  measure  conveyed  to  those  of 
duller  mind,  but  by  some  ordinary  word?  And 
what,  among  all  parts  of  the  world  can  be  found 
nearer  to  an  absolute  formlessness  than  earth 
and  deep?  For,  occupying  the  lowest  stage,  they 
are  less  beautiful  than  the  other  higher  parts 
are,  transparent  all  and  shining.  Wherefore  then 
may  I  not  conceive  the  formlessness  of  matter 
(which  Thou  hadst  created  without  beauty, 
whereof  to  make  this  beautiful  world)  to  be 
suitably  intimated  unto  men  by  the  name  of 
earth  invisible  and  without  form? 

[V]  5.  So  that  when  thought  seeketh  what  the 
sense  may  conceive  under  this,  and  saith  to  it¬ 
self,  “It  is  no  intellectual  form,  as  life,  or  jus¬ 
tice;  because  it  is  the  matter  of  bodies;  nor  ob¬ 
ject  of  sense,  because  being  invisible,  and  with¬ 
out  form,  there  was  in  it  no  object  of  sight  or 
sense” — while  man’s  thought  thus  saith  to  itself, 
it  may  endeavour  either  to  know  it,  by  being  ig¬ 
norant  of  it ;  or  to  be  ignorant,  by  knowing  it. 

[VI]  6.  But  I,  Lord,  if  I  would,  by  my 
tongue  and  my  pen,  confess  unto  Thee  the 
whole,  whatever  Thyself  hath  taught  me  of  that 
matter — the  name  whereof  hearing  before,  and 
not  understanding,  when  they  who  understood 
it  not  told  me  of  it,  so  I  conceived2  of  it  as  hav¬ 
ing  innumerable  forms  and  diverse,  and  there¬ 
fore  did  not  conceive  it  at  all,  my  mind  tossed  up 
and  down  foul  and  horrible  “forms”  out  of  all 
order,  but  yet  “forms”;  and  I  called  it  “without 
form”  not  that  it  wanted  all  form,  but  because 
it  had  such  as  my  mind  would,  if  presented  to  it, 
turn  from,  as  unwonted  and  jarring,  and  human 
frailness  would  be  troubled  at.  And  still  that 
which  I  conceived  was  without  form,  not  as  be¬ 
ing  deprived  of  all  form,  but  in  comparison  of 
more  beautiful  forms ;  and  true  reason  did  per¬ 
suade  me  that  I  must  utterly  uncase  it  of  all 
remnants  of  form  whatsoever,  if  I  would  con¬ 
ceive  matter  absolutely  without  form;  and  I 
could  not;  for  sooner  could  I  imagine  that  not  to 

1Cf.  City  of  God ,  bk.  xi.  9,  10. 

2See  above,  Bk.  in.  11. 


be  at  all,  which  should  be  deprived  of  all  form, 
than  conceive  a  thing  betwixt  form  and  nothing, 
neither  formed,  nor  nothing,  a  formless  almost  1 
nothing.  So  my  mind  gave  over  to  question 
thereupon  with  my  spirit,  it  being  filled  with  the 
images  of  formed  bodies,  and  changing  and 
varying  them,  as  it  willed;  and  I  bent  myself  to 
the  bodies  themselves,  and  looked  more  deeply 
into  their  changeableness,  by  which  they  cease 
to  be  what  they  have  been,  and  begin  to  be  what 
they  were  not;  and  this  same  shifting  from 
form  to  form,  I  suspected  to  be  through  a  cer¬ 
tain  formless  state,3  not  through  a  mere  noth¬ 
ing;  yet  this  I  longed  to  know,  not  to  suspect 
only.  If  then  my  voice  and  pen  would  confess 
unto  Thee  the  whole,  whatsoever  knots  Thou 
didst  open  for  me  in  this  question,  what  reader 
would  hold  out  to  take  in  the  whole?  Nor  shall 
my  heart  for  all  this  cease  to  give  Thee  honour, 
and  a  song  of  praise,  for  those  things  which  it  is 
not  able  to  express.  For  the  changeableness  of 
changeable  things  is  itself  capable  of  all  those 
forms  into  which  these  changeable  things  are 
changed.  And  this  changeableness,  what  is  it? 

Is  it  soul?  Is  it  body?  Is  it  that  which  consti¬ 
tuted  soul  or  body?  Might  one  say,  “a  nothing 
something,”  an  “is,  is  not,”  I  would  say,  this  b 
were  it :  and  yet  in  some  way  was  it  even  then, 
as  being  capable  of  receiving  these  visible  and 
compound  figures. 

[VII]  7.  But  whence  had  it  this  degree  of  be¬ 
ing,  but  from  Thee,  from  Whom  are  all  things, 
so  far  forth  as  they  are?  But  so  much  the  fur¬ 
ther  from  Thee,  as  the  unliker  Thee;  for  it  is 
not  farness  of  place.  Thou  therefore,  Lord,  Who 
are  not  one  in  one  place,  and  otherwise  in  an¬ 
other,  but  the  Self-same,4  and  the  Self-same, 
and  the  Self-same,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God 
Almighty,  didst  in  the  Beginning,  which  is  of 
Thee,  in  Thy  Wisdom,  which  was  born  of  Thine 
own  Substance,  create  something,  and  that  out 
of  nothing.  For  thou  createdst  heaven  and 
earth;  not  out  of  Thyself;5  for  so  should  they 
have  been  equal  to  Thine  Only  Begotten  Son, 
and  thereby  to  Thee  also ;  whereas  no  way  were 
it  right  that  aught  should  be  equal  to  Thee, 
whis  was  not  of  Thee.  And  aught  else  besides 
Thee  was  there  not,  whereof  Thou  mightest  cre¬ 
ate  them,  0  God,  One  Trinity,  and  Trine  Unity; 
and  therefore  out  of  nothing  didst  Thou  create 
heaven  and  earth;  a  great  thing,  and  a  small 
thing ;  for  Thou  art  Almighty  and  Good,  to  make 
all  things  good,  even  the  great  heaven,  and  the 
petty  earth.  Thou  wert,  and  nothing  was  there 

3See  below,  8,  end.  4See  above,  Bk.  rx.  11. 

5See  above,  Bk.  ni.  10;  Bk.  iv.  26. 


IOI 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  4-12 


besides,  out  of  which  Thou  createdst  heaven 
and  earth ;  things  of  two  sorts :  one  near  Thee, 
the  other  near  to  nothing ;  one,  to  which  Thou 
alone  shouldest  be  superior;  the  other,  to  which 
nothing  should  be  inferior. 

[VIII]  8.  But  that  heaven  of  heavens  was  for 
Thyself,  0  Lord;  but  the  earth  which  Thou  gav- 
est  to  the  sons  of  men,1  to  be  seen  and  felt,  was 
not  such  as  we  now  see  and  feel.  For  it  was  in¬ 
visible,  “without  form,”2  and  there  was  a  deep, 
upon  which  there  was  no  light;  or  darkness  was 
above  the  deep,  that  is,  more  than  in  the  deep. 
Because  this  deep  of  waters,  visible  now,  hath 
even  in  his  depths  a  light  proper  for  its  nature; 
perceivable  in  whatever  degree  unto  the  fishes 
and  creeping  things  in  the  bottom  of  it.  But  that 
whole  deep  was  almost  nothing,  because  hither¬ 
to  it  was  altogether  without  form ;  yet  there  was 
already  that  which  could  be  formed.  For  Thou, 
Lord,  madest  the  world  of  a  matter  without 
form,  which,  out  of  nothing,  Thou  madest  next 
to  nothing,  thereof  to  make  those  great  things 
which  we  sons  of  men  wonder  at.  For  very  won¬ 
derful  is  this  corporeal  heaven;  of  which  firma¬ 
ment  between  water  and  water,  the  second  day, 
after  the  creation  of  light,  Thou  saidst,  Let  it  be 
made,  and  it  was  made.3  Which  firmament  Thou 
calledst  heaven;  the  heaven,  that  is,  to  this 
earth  and  sea,  which  Thou  madest  the  third  day, 
by  giving  a  visible  figure  to  the  formless  matter, 
which  Thou  madest  before  all  days.  For  already 
hadst  Thou  made  both  an  heaven,  before  all 
days ;  but  that  was  the  heaven  of  this  heaven ; 
because  In  the  beginning  Thou  hadst  made 
heaven  and  earth.  But  this  same  earth  which 
Thou  madest  was  formless  matter,  because  it 
was  invisible  and  without  form,  and  darkness 
was  upon  the  deep,  of  which  invisible  earth  and 
without  form,  of  which  formlessness,  of  which 
almost  nothing,  Thou  mightest  make  all  these 
things  of  which  this  changeable  world  consists, 
but  subsists  not;  whose  very  changeableness  ap¬ 
pears  therein,  that  times  can  be  observed  and 
numbered  in  it.  For  times  are  made  by  the  alter¬ 
ations  of  things,  while  the  figures,  the  matter 
whereof  is  the  invisible  earth  aforesaid,  are 
varied  and  turned. 

[IX]  9.  And  therefore  the  Spirit,  the  Teacher 
of  Thy  servant,4  when  It  recounts  Thee  to  have 
in  the  Beginning  created  heaven  and  earth, 
speaks  nothing  of  times,  nothing  of  days.  For 
verily  that  heaven  of  heavens  which  Thou  cre¬ 
atedst  in  the  Beginning  is  some  intellectual  crea¬ 
ture,  which  although  no  ways  coeternal  unto 
Thee,  the  Trinity,  yet  partaketh  of  Thy  eternity, 
*Ps.  115.16.  2Gen.  1.2.  8Gen.  1.6-8.  4Moses. 


and  doth  through  the  sweetness  of  that  most 
happy  contemplation  of  Thyself  strongly  re¬ 
strain  its  own  changeableness ;  and  without  any 
fall  since  its  first  creation,  cleaving  close  unto 
Thee,  is  placed  beyond  all  the  rolling  vicissitude 
of  times.  Yea,  neither  is  this  very  formlessness  of 
the  earth  invisible,  and  without  form,  numbered 
among  the  days.  For  where  no  figure  nor  order 
is,  there  does  nothing  come  or  go;  and  where 
this  is  not,  there  plainly  are  no  days,  nor  any 
vicissitude  of  spaces  of  times. 

[X]  10.  0  let  the  Light,  the  Truth,  the  Light 
of  my  heart,  not  mine  own  darkness,  speak  unto 
me.  I  fell  off  into  that,  and  became  darkened; 
but  even  thence,  even  thence  I  loved  Thee.  I 
went  astray,  and  remembered  Thee.  I  heard  Thy 
voice  behind  me,  calling  to  me  to  return,  and 
scarcely  heard  it,  through  the  tumultuousness 
of  the  enemies  of  peace.  And  now,  behold,  I  re¬ 
turn  in  distress  and  panting  after  Thy  fountain. 
Let  no  man  forbid  me!  of  this  will  I  drink,  and 
so  live.  Let  me  not  be  mine  own  life;  from  my¬ 
self  I  lived  ill,  death  was  I  to  myself ;  and  I  re¬ 
vive  in  Thee.  Do  Thou  speak  unto  me,  do  Thou 
discourse  unto  me.  I  have  believed  Thy  Books 
and  their  words  be  most  full  of  mystery. 

[XI]  11.  Already  Thou  hast  told  me  with  a 
strong  voice,  0  Lord,  in  my  inner  ear,  that  Thou 
art  eternal,  Who  only  hast  immortality5:  since 
Thou  canst  not  be  changed  as  to  figure  or  mo¬ 
tion,  nor  is  Thy  will  altered  by  times;  seeing  no 
will  which  varies  is  immortal.  This  is  in  Thy 
sight  clear  to  me,  and  let  it  be  more  and  more 
cleared  to  me,  I  beseech  Thee;  and  in  the  mani¬ 
festation  thereof,  let  me  with  sobriety  abide  un¬ 
der  Thy  wings.  Thou  hast  told  me  also  with  a 
strong  voice,  0  Lord,  in  my  inner  ear,  that  Thou 
hast  made  all  natures  and  substances,  which  are 
not  what  Thyself  is,  and  yet  are;  and  that  only 
is  not  from  Thee,  which  is  not,  and  the  motion 
of  the  will  from  Thee  Who  Art  unto  that  which 
in  a  less  degree  is,  because  such  motion  is  trans¬ 
gression  and  sin6;  and  that  no  man’s  sin  doth 
either  hurt  Thee  or  disturb  the  order  of  Thy 
government,  first  or  last.7  This  is  in  Thy  sight 
clear  unto  me,  and  let  it  be  more  and  more 
cleared  to  me,  I  beseech  Thee :  and  in  the  mani¬ 
festation  thereof,  let  me  with  sobriety  abide 
under  Thy  wings. 

12.  Thou  hast  told  me  also  with  a  strong 
voice,  in  my  inner  ear,  that  neither  is  that  crea¬ 
ture  coeternal  unto  Thyself,  whose  happiness 
Thou  only  art,  and  which  with  a  most  persever¬ 
ing  purity,  drawing  its  nourishment  from  Thee, 

6I  Tim.  6.16. 

6See  above,  Bk.  vn.  22.  7See  above,  Bk.  v.  2. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


doth  in  no  place  and  at  no  time  put  forth  its  na¬ 
tural  mutability;  and.  Thyself  being  ever  pres¬ 
ent  with  it,  unto  Whom  with  its  whole  affection 
it  keeps  itself,  having  neither  future  to  expect, 
nor  conveying1  into  the  past  what  it  remem- 
bereth,  is  neither  altered  by  any  change,  nor  dis¬ 
tracted  into  any  times.  0  blessed  creature,  if 
such  there  be,  for  cleaving  unto  Thy  Blessed¬ 
ness;  blest  in  Thee,  its  eternal  Inhabitant  and 
its  Enlightener!  Nor  do  I  find  by  what  name  I 
may  the  rather  call  the  heaven  of  heavens  which 
is  the  Lord’s,  than  Thine  house,  which  contem- 
plateth  Thy  delights  without  any  defection  of 
going  forth  to  another;  one  pure  mind,  most 
harmoniously  one,  by  that  settled  estate  of 
peace  of  holy  spirits,2  the  citizens  of  Thy  city  in 
“heavenly  places”  far  above  those  heavenly 
places  that  we  see.3 

13.  By  this  may  the  soul  whose  pilgrimage  is 
made  long  and  far  away,  by  this  may  she  under¬ 
stand.  if  she  now  thirsts  for  Thee,  if  her  tears  be 
now  become  her  bread,  while  they  daily  say  un¬ 
to  her,  “Where  is  thy  God”?  4  if  she  now  seeks 
of  Thee  one  thing,  and  desireth  it,  that  she  may 
dwell  in  Thy  house  all  the  days  of  her  life5  '(and 
what  is  her  life,  but  Thou?  and  what  Thy  days, 
but  Thy  eternity,  as  Thy  years  which  fail  not, 
because  Thou  art  ever  the  same?)  ;  by  this  then 
may  the  soul  that  is  able,  understand  how  far 
Thou  art,  above  all  times,  eternal;  seeing  Thy 
house  which  at  no  time  went  into  a  far  country, 
although  it  be  not  coeternal  with  Thee,  yet  by 
continually  and  unfailingly  cleaving  unto  Thee 
suffers  no  changeableness  of  times.  This  is  in 
Thy  sight  clear  unto  me,  and  let  it  be  more  and 
more  cleared  unto  me,  I  beseech  Thee,  and  in 
the  manifestation  thereof,  let  me  with  sobriety 
abide  under  Thy  wings. 

14.  There  is,  behold,  I  know  not  what  form¬ 
lessness  in  those  changes  of  these  last  and  low¬ 
est  creatures;  and  who  shall  tell  me  (unless  such 
a  one  as  through  the  emptiness  of  his  own  heart 
wanders  and  tosses  himself  up  and  down  amid 
his  own  fancies),  who  but  such  a  one  would  tell 
me  that,  if  all  figure  be  so  wasted  and  consumed 
awray,  there  should  only  remain  that  formless¬ 
ness  through  which  the  thing  was  changed  and 
turned  from  one  figure  to  another,  that  that 
could  exhibit  the  vicissitudes  of  times?  For 
plainly  it  could  not,  because,  without  the  variety 
of  motions,  there  are  no  times;  and  no  variety, 
where  there  is  no  figure. 

[XII]  15.  These  things  considered,  as  much 
as  Thou  givest,  0  my  God,  as  much  as  Thou 

k^bove,  Bk.  xi.  38;  below,  18.  2See  below,  Bk.  xiii.  50. 

3Eph.  1.20,  etc.  4Ps.  42.2,  3,  10.  6Ps.  27.4. 


stirrest  me  up  to  “knock,”  and  as  much  as  Thou 
openest  to  me  knocking,6  two  things  I  find  that 
Thou  hast  made,  not  within  the  compass  of  time, 
neither  of  which  is  coeternal  with  Thee.  One 
which  is  so  formed  that,  without  any  ceasing  of 
contemplation,  without  any  interval  of  change, 
though  changeable,  yet  not  changed,  it  may 
thoroughly  enjoy  Thy  eternity  and  unchange¬ 
ableness;  the  other  which  was  so  formless  that 
it  had  not  that  which  could  be  changed  from  one 
form  into  another,  whether  of  motion,  or  of  re¬ 
pose,  so  as  to  become  subject  unto  time.  But 
this  Thou  didst  not  leave  thus  formless,  because 
before  all  days  Thou  in  the  Beginning  didst  cre¬ 
ate  Heaven  and  Earth;  the  two  things  that  I 
spake  of.  But  the  Earth  was  invisible  and  with¬ 
out  form,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  deep.7  In 
which  words  is  the  formlessness  conveyed  unto 
us  (that  such  capacities  may  hereby  be  drawn 
on  by  degrees,  as  are  not  able  to  conceive  an  ut¬ 
ter  privation  of  all  form,  without  yet  coming  to 
nothing)  out  of  which  another  Heaven  might  be 
created,  together  with  a  visible  and  well-formed 
earth:  and  the  waters  diversly  ordered,  and 
whatsoever  further  is  in  the  formation  of  the 
world,  recorded  to  have  been,  not  without  days, 
created;  and  that,  as  being  of  such  nature,  the 
successive  changes  of  times  may  take  place  in 
them,  as  being  subject  to  appointed  alterations 
of  motions  and  of  forms.8 

[XIII]  16.  This  then  is  what  I  conceive,  0  my 
God,  when  I  hear  Thy  Scripture  saying,  In  the 
beginning  God  made  Heaven  and  Earth:  and 
the  Earth  was  invisible  and  without  form,  and 
darkness  was  upon  the  deep,  and  not  mentioning 
what  day  Thou  createdst  them;  this  is  what  I 
conceive,  that,  because  of  the  Heaven  of  heav¬ 
ens — that  intellectual  Heaven  whose  Intelli¬ 
gences  know  all  at  once,  not  “in  part,”  not 
“darkly,”  not  “through  a  glass,”9  but  as  a  whole, 
in  manifestation,  “face  to  face”;  not  this  thing 
now,  and  that  thing  anon;  but  (as  I  said)  know 
all  at  once,  without  any  succession  of  times — 
and  because  of  the  earth  invisible  and  without 
form,  without  any  succession  of  times,  which 
succession  presents  “this  thing  now,  that  thing 
anon”;  because  where  is  no  form  there  is  no 
distinction  of  things — it  is,  then,  on  account  of 
these  two,  a  primitive  formed,  and  a  primitive 
formless;  the  one,  heaven  but  the  Heaven  of 
heaven,  the  other  earth  but  the  earth  invisible 
and  without  form — because  of  these  two,  do  I 
conceive,  did  Thy  Scripture  say  without  men¬ 
tion  of  days,  “In  the  Beginning  God  created 

6Matt.  7.7.  7Gen.  1.2. 

8See  below,  40,  end.  9I  Cor.  13.12. 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  13-21  103 


Heaven  and  Earth.”  For  forthwith  it  subjoined 
what  earth  it  spake  of;  and  also,  in  that  the 
Firmament  is  recorded  to  be  created  the  second 
day,  and  called  Heaven,  it  conveys  to  us  of 
which  Heaven  He  before  spake,  without  men¬ 
tion  of  days. 

[XIV]  17.  Wondrous  depth  of  Thy  words! 
whose  surface,  behold!  is  before  us,  inviting  to 
little  ones;  yet  are  they  a  wondrous  depth,  0  my 
God,  a  wondrous  depth!  It  is  awful  to  look 
therein;  an  awfulness  of  honour,  and  a  trem¬ 
bling  of  love.  The  enemies  thereof  I  hate  ve¬ 
hemently;1  oh,  that  Thou  wouldest  slay  them 
with  Thy  two-edged  sword,2  that  they  might  no 
longer  be  enemies  unto  it;  for  so  do  I  love  to 
have  them  slain  unto  themselves,  that  they  may 
live  unto  Thee.  But  behold  others  not  fault¬ 
finders,  but  extollers  of  the  Book  of  Genesis. 
“The  Spirit  of  God,”  say  they,  “Who  by  His 
servant  Moses  wrote  these  things,  would  not 
have  those  words  thus  understood;  He  would 
not  have  it  understood,  as  thou  sayest,  but  oth¬ 
erwise,  as  we  say.”  Unto  Whom  Thyself,  0 
Thou  God  of  us  all,  being  Judge,  do  I  thus  an¬ 
swer. 

[XV] )  18.  “Will  you  affirm  that  to  be  false, 
which  with  a  strong  voice  Truth  tells  me  in  my 
inner  ear,  concerning  the  Eternity  of  the  Crea¬ 
tor,  that  His  substance  is  no  ways  changed  by 
time,  nor  His  will  separate  from  His  substance? 
Wherefore  He  willeth  not  one  thing  now,  an¬ 
other  anon,  but  once,  and  at  once,  and  always, 
He  willeth  all  things  that  He  willeth;  not  again 
and  again,  nor  now  this,  now  that;  nor  willeth 
afterwards  what  before  He  willed  not,  nor  will¬ 
eth  not  what  before  He  willed;  because  such  a 
will  is  mutable;  and  no  mutable  thing  is  eternal; 
but  our  God  is  eternal.  Again,  what  He  tells  me 
in  my  inner  ear,  the  expectation  of  things  to 
come  becomes  sight  when  they  are  come,  and 
this  same  sight  becomes  memory  when  they  be 
past.  Now  all  thought  which  thus  varies  is  mut¬ 
able  ;  and  no  mutable  is  eternal :  but  our  God  is 
eternal.”  These  things  I  infer,  and  put  together, 
and  find  that  my  God,  the  eternal  God,  hath  not 
upon  arly  new  will  made  any  creature,  nor  doth 
His  knowledge  admit  of  anything  transitory. 

“What  will  ye  say  then,  0  ye  gainsayers?  Are 
these  things  false?”  “No,”  they  say.  “What 
then?  Is  it  false  that  every  nature  already 
formed,  or  matter  capable  of  form,  is  not,  but 
from  Him  Who  is  supremely  good,  because  He  is 
supremely?”  “Neither  do  we  deny  this,”  say 
they.  “What  then?  do  you  deny  this,  that  there 
is  a  certain  sublime  creature,  with  so  chaste  a 

1Ps.  139.21.  2Ps.  149.6. 


love  cleaving  unto  the  true  and  truly  eternal  God 
that,  although  not  coeternal  with  Him,  yet  is  it 
not  detached  from  Him,  nor  dissolved  into  the 
variety  and  vicissitude  of  times,  but  reposeth  in 
the  most  true  contemplation  of  Him  only?”  Be¬ 
cause  Thou,  0  God,  unto  him  that  loveth  Thee 
so  much  as  Thou  commandest,  dost  shew  Thy¬ 
self,  and  sufficest  him ;  and  therefore  doth  he  not 
decline  from  Thee,  nor  toward  himself.  This  is  the 
house  of  God,  not  of  earthly  mould,  nor  of  any 
celestial  bulk  corporeal,  but  spiritual,  and  par¬ 
taker  of  Thy  eternity,  because  without  defection 
for  ever.  For  Thou  hast  made  it  fast  for  ever 
and  ever,  Thou  hast  given  it  a  law  which  it  shall 
not  pass.3  Nor  yet  is  it  coeternal  with  Thee,  0 
God,  because  not  without  beginning;  for  it  was 
made. 

20.  For  although  we  find  no  time  before  it,  for 
wisdom  was  created  before  all  things;4  not  that 
Wisdom  which  is  altogether  equal  and  coeternal 
unto  Thee,  our  God,  His  Father,  and  by  Whom 
all  things  were  created,  and  in  Whom,  as  the  Be¬ 
ginning,  Thou  createdst  heaven  and  earth ;  but 
that  wisdom  which  is  created,  that  is,  the  intel¬ 
lectual  nature  which,  by  contemplating  the  light, 
is  light.  For  this,  though  created,  is  also  called 
wisdom.  But  what  difference  there  is  betwixt  the 
Light  which  enlighteneth,  and  which  is  enlight¬ 
ened,  so  much  is  there  betwixt  the  Wisdom  that 
createth,  and  that  created,  as  betwixt  the  Right¬ 
eousness  which  justifieth,  and  the  righteousness 
which  is  made  by  justification.  For  we  also  are 
called  Thy  righteousness :  for  so  saith  a  certain 
servant  of  Thine,  “That  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him.” 5  Therefore  since 
a  certain  created  wisdom  was  created  before  all 
things,  the  rational  and  intellectual  mind  of  that 
chaste  city  of  Thine,  our  mother  which  is  above, 
and  is  free6  and  “eternal  in  the  heavens” 7  (in 
what  heavens,  if  not  in  those  that  praise  Thee, 
the  “Heaven  of  heavens”?  Because  this  is  also 
the  “Heaven  of  heavens” 8  for  the  Lord) ; 
though  we  find  no  time  before  it  (because  that 
which  hath  been  created  before  all  things,  pre- 
cedeth  also  the  creature  of  time),  yet  is  the 
Eternity  of  the  Creator  Himself  before  it,  from 
Whom,  being  created  it  took  the  beginning,  not 
indeed  of  time  (for  time  itself  was  not  yet),  but 
of  its  creation. 

21.  Hence  it  is  so  of  Thee,  our  God,  as  to  be 
altogether  other  than  Thou,  and  not  the  Self¬ 
same;  because  though  we  find  time  neither  be¬ 
fore  it,  nor  even  in  it  (it  being  meet  ever  to  be¬ 
hold  Thy  face,  nor  is  ever  drawn  away  from  it, 

3Ps.  148.6.  4Ecclus.  1.4.  6II  Cor.  5.21. 

6Gal.  4.26.  7II  Cor.  5.1.  8Ps.  148.4. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


wherefore  it  is  not  varied  by  any  change),  yet  is 
there  in  it  a  liability  to  change,  whence  it  would 
wax  dark,  and  chill,  but  that  by  a  strong  affec¬ 
tion  cleaving  unto  Thee,  like  perpetual  noon,  it 
shineth  and  gloweth  from  Thee.  0  house  most 
lightsome  and  delightsome!  I  have  loved  thy 
beauty,  and  the  place  of  the  habitation  of  the 
glory  of  my  Lord,1  thy  builder  and  possessor. 
Let  my  wayfaring  sigh  after  thee;  and  I  say  to 
Him  that  made  thee,  let  Him  take  possession  of 
me  also  in  thee,  seeing  He  hath  made  me  like¬ 
wise.  “I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep”;2 
yet  upon  the  shoulders  of  my  Shepherd,3  thy 
builder,  hope  I  to  be  brought  back  to  thee. 

22.  “What  say  ye  to  me,  0  ye  gainsayers  that  I 
was  speaking  unto,  who  yet  believe  Moses  to 
have  been  the  holy  servant  of  God,  and  his  books 
the  oracles  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  Is  not  this  house 
of  God  not  coeternal  indeed  with  God,  yet,  after 
its  measure,  eternal  in  the  heavens,4  when  you 
seek  for  changes  of  times  in  vain,  because  you 
will  not  find  them?  For  that,  to  which  it  is  ever 
good  to  cleave  fast  to  God,5  surpasses  all  exten¬ 
sion,  and  all  revolving  periods  of  time.”  “It  is,” 
say  they.  “What  then  of  all  that  which  my  heart 
loudly  uttered  unto  my  God,  when  inwardly  it 
heard  the  voice  of  His  praise,  what  part  thereof 
do  you  affirm  to  be  false?  Is  it  that  the  matter 
was  without  form,  in  which  because  there  was 
no  form,  there  was  no  order.  But  where  no  order 
was,  there  could  be  no  vicissitude  of  times;  and 
yet  this  ‘almost  nothing,’  inasmuch  as  it  was 
not  altogether  nothing,  was  from  Him  certainly, 
from  Whom  is  whatsoever  is,  in  what  degree  so¬ 
ever  it  is.”  “This  also,”  say  they,  “do  we  not 
deny.” 

[XVI]  23.  With  these  would  I  now  parley  a 
little  in  Thy  presence,  0  my  God.  who  grant  all 
these  things  to  be  true,  which  Thy  Truth  whis¬ 
pers  unto  my  soul.  For  those  who  deny  these 
things,  let  them  bark  and  deafen  themselves  as 
much  as  they  please;  I  will  essay  to  persuade 
them  to  quiet,  and  to  open  in  them  a  way  for 
Thy  word.  But  if  they  refuse  and  repel  me,  I  be¬ 
seech,  0  my  God,  “be  not  Thou  silent  to  me.”  6 
Speak  Thou  truly  in  my  heart ;  for  only  Thou  so 
speakest:  and  I  will  let  them  alone  blowing  upon 
the  dust  without,  and  raising  it  up  into  their  own 
eyes;  and  myself  will  enter  my  chamber,7  and 
sing  there  a  song  of  loves  unto  Thee ;  groaning 
with  groanings  unutterable,8  in  my  wayfaring, 
and  remembering  Jerusalem,  with  heart  lifted 
up  towards  it,  Jerusalem  my  country,  Jerusalem 
my  mother,  and  Thyself  that  rulest  over  it,  the 

*Ps.  26.8.  2Ps.  119.176.  3Luke,  15.5  4II  Cor.  5.1. 

BPs.  73.28.  6Ps.  28.1.  7Isa.  26.20.  8Rom.  8.26. 


Enlightener,  Father,  Guardian,  Husband,  the 
pure  and  strong  delight,  and  solid  joy,  and  all 
good  things  unspeakable,  yea,  all  at  once,  be¬ 
cause  the  One  Sovereign  and  true  Good.  Nor  will 
I  be  turned  away  until  Thou  gather  all  that  I 
am,  from  this  dispersed9  and  disordered  estate, 
into  the  peace  of  that  our  most  dear  mother, 
where  the  first-fruits  of  my  spirit10  be  already 
(whence  I  am  ascertained  of  these  things),  and 
Thou  conform  and  confirm  it  for  ever,  0  my 
God.  my  Mercy.  But  those  who  do  not  affirm  all 
these  truths  to  be  false,  who  honour  Thy  holy 
Scripture,  set  forth  by  holy  Moses,  placing  it,  as 
we,  on  the  summit  of  authority  to  be  followed, 
and  do  yet  contradict  me  in  something,  I  answer 
thus;  Be  Thyself  Judge,  0  our  God,  between  my 
Confessions  and  these  men’s  contradictions. 

[XVII]  24.  For  they  say:  “Though  these 
things  be  true,  yet  did  not  Moses  intend  those 
two,  when,  by  revelation  of  the  Spirit,  he  said, 
‘In  the  beginning  God  created  heaven  and 
earth.’ 11  He  did  not  under  the  name  of  heaven 
signify  that  spiritual  or  intellectual  creature 
which  always  beholds  the  face  of  God;  nor  un¬ 
der  the  name  of  earth,  that  formless  matter.” 
“What  then?”  “That  man  of  God,”  say  they, 
“meant  as  we  say,  this  declared  he  by  those 
words.”  “What?”  “By  the  name  of  heaven  and 
earth  would  he  first  signify,”  say  they,  “uni¬ 
versally  and  compendiously,  all  this  visible 
world;  so  as  afterwards  by  the  enumeration  of 
the  several  days,  to  arrange  in  detail,  and,  as  it 
were,  piece  by  piece,  all  those  things  which  it 
pleased  the  Holy  Ghost  thus  to  enounce.  For 
such  were  that  rude  and  carnal  people  to  which 
he  spake,  that  he  thought  them  fit  to  be  entrust¬ 
ed  with  the  knowledge  of  such  works  of  God 
only  as  were  visible.”  They  agree,  however,  that 
under  the  words  “earth  invisible  and  without 
form,”  and  that  darksome  “deep”  (out  of  which 
it  is  subsequently  shewn  that  all  these  visible 
things  which  we  all  know  were  made  and  ar¬ 
ranged  during  those  “days”)  may,  not  incon¬ 
gruously,  be  understood  of  this  formless  (first) 
matter. 

25.  What  now  if  another  should  say,  “That 
this  same  formlessness  and  confusedness  of  mat¬ 
ter  was  for  this  reason  first  conveyed  under  the 
name  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  out  of  it  was 
this  visible  world  with  all  those  natures  which 
most  manifestly  appear  in  it,  which  is  oft-times 
called  by  the  name  of  heaven  and  earth,  created 
and  perfected”?  What  again  if  another  say, 

9See  above,  Bk.  11. 1;  Bk.  ix.  10. 

10See  above,  Bk.  ix.  24,  end;  see  below,  Bk.  xm.  14. 

uGen.  1. 1. 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  22-29  io5 


“That  invisible  and  visible  nature  is  not  indeed 
inappropriately  called  heaven  and  earth;  and  so, 
that  the  universal  creation,  which  God  made  in 
His  Wisdom,  that  is,  ‘in  the  Beginning,’  was 
comprehended  under  those  two  words?  Notwith¬ 
standing,  since  all  things  be  made  not  of  the 
substance  of  God,  but  out  of  nothing  (because 
they  are  not  the  same  that  God  is,  and  there  is  a 
mutable  nature  in  them  all,  whether  they  abide, 
as  doth  the  eternal  house  of  God,  or  be  changed, 
as  the  soul  and  body  of  man  are)  ;  therefore  the 
common  matter  of  all  things  visible  and  invisible 
(as  yet  unformed  though  capable  of  form)  out 
of  which  was  to  be  created  both  heaven  and 
earth  (i.e.,  the  invisible  and  visible  creature 
when  formed)  was  entitled  by  the  same  names 
given  to  the  earth  invisible  and  without  form 
and  the  darkness  upon  the  deep,  but  with  this 
distinction,  that  by  the  earth  invisible  and  with¬ 
out  form  is  understood  corporeal  matter,  ante¬ 
cedent  to  its  being  qualified  by  any  form;  and 
by  the  darkness  upon  the  deep,  spiritual  matter, 
before  it  underwent  any  restraint  of  its  unlim¬ 
ited  fluidness,  or  received  any  light  from  Wis¬ 
dom”? 

26.  It  yet  remains  for  a  man  to  say,  if  he  will, 
“That  the  already  perfected  and  formed  natures, 
visible  and  invisible,  are  not  signified  under  the 
name  of  heaven  and  earth,  when  we  read,  ‘In 
the  beginning  God  made  heaven  and  earth,’  but 
that  the  yet  unformed  commencement  of  things, 
the  stuff  apt  to  receive  form  and  making,  was 
called  by  these  names,  because  therein  were  con¬ 
fusedly  contained,  not  as  yet  distinguished  by 
their  qualities  and  forms,  all  those  things  which, 
being  now  digested  into  order,  are  called  Heaven 
and  Earth,  the  one  being  the  spiritual,  the  other 
the  corporeal,  creation.” 

[XVIII]  27.  All  which  things  being  heard  and 
well  considered,  I  will  not  strive  about  words; 
for  that  is  profitable  to  nothing,  but  the  subver¬ 
sion  of  the  hearers.1  But  the  law  is  good  to  edify, 
if  a  man  use  it  lawfully;2  for  that  the  end  of  it 
“is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart  and  good  con¬ 
science,  and  faith  unfeigned.”3  And  well  did  our 
Master  know,  upon  which  two  commandments 
He  hung  all  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.4  And 
what  doth  it  prejudice  me,  0  my  God,  Thou 
light  of  my  eyes  in  secret,  zealously  confessing 
these  things,  since  divers  things  may  be  under¬ 
stood  under  these  words  which  yet  are  all  true — 
what,  I  say,  doth  it  prejudice  me,  if  I  think  oth¬ 
erwise  than  another  thinketh  the  writer  thought? 
All  we  readers  verily  strive  to  trace  out  and  to 

1II.  Tim.  2.14  2I  Tim.  1.8. 

Hbid .,  ver.  5.  4Matt.  22.40. 


understand  his  meaning  whom  we  read;  and  see¬ 
ing  we  believe  him  to  speak  truly,  we  dare  not 
imagine  him  to  have  said  anything  which  our¬ 
selves  either  know  or  think  to  be  false.  While  ev¬ 
ery  man  endeavours  then  to  understand  in  the 
holy  Scriptures  the  same  as  the  writer  under¬ 
stood,  what  hurt  is  it,  if  a  man  understand  what 
Thou,  the  light  of  all  true-speaking  minds,  dost 
shew  him  to  be  true,  although  he  whom  he  reads 
understood  not  this,  seeing  he  also  understood  a 
Truth,  though  not  this  truth? 

[XIX]  28.  For  true  it  is,  0  Lord,  that  Thou 
madest  heaven  and  earth;  and  it  is  true,  too, 
that  the  Beginning  is  Thy  Wisdom,  in  Which 
Thou  createdst  all5;  and  true  again, that  this  vis¬ 
ible  world  hath  for  its  greater  parts  the  heaven 
and  the  earth,  which  briefly  comprise  all  made 
and  created  natures.  And  true,  too,  that  whatso¬ 
ever  is  mutable  gives  us  to  understand  a  certain 
want  of  form,  whereby  it  receiveth  a  form,  or  is 
changed,  or  turned.  It  is  true  that  that  is  subject 
to  no  times,  which  so  cleaveth  to  the  unchange¬ 
able  Form  as,  though  subject  to  change,  never  to 
be  changed.  It  is  true  that  that  formlessness 
which  is  almost  nothing  cannot  be  subject  to  the 
alteration  of  times.  It  is  true  that  that  whereof 
a  thing  is  made  may,  by  a  certain  mode  of 
speech,  be  called  by  the  name  of  the  thing  made 
of  it;  whence  that  formlessness,  whereof  heav¬ 
en  and  earth  were  made,  might  be  called  “heav¬ 
en  and  earth.”  It  is  true  that,  of  things  having 
form,  there  is  not  any  nearer  to  having  no  form 
than  the  earth  and  the  deep.  It  is  true  that  not 
only  every  created  and  formed  thing,  but  what¬ 
soever  is  capable  of  being  created  and  formed, 
Thou  madest,  “of  whom  are  all  things.” 6  It  is 
true  that  whatsoever  is  formed  out  of  that  which 
had  no  form  was  unformed  before  it  was  formed. 

[XX]  29.  Out  of  these  truths,  of  which  they 
doubt  not  whose  inward  eye  Thou  hast  enabled 
to  see  such  things,  and  who  unshakenly  believe 
Thy  servant  Moses  to  have  spoken  in  the  Spirit 
of  truth;  of  all  these  then,  he  taketh  one,  who 
saith,  “In  the  Beginning  God  made  the  heaven 
and  the  earth,”  that  is,  “In  His  word  coeternal 
with  Himself,  God  made  the  intelligible  and  the 
sensible,  or  the  spiritual  and  the  corporeal  crea¬ 
ture.”  He  another,  that  saith,  “In  the  Beginning 
God  made  heaven  and  earth”;  that  is,  “in  His 
Word  coeternal  with  Himself,  did  God  make  the 
universal  bulk  of  this  corporeal  world,  together 
with  all  those  apparent  and  known  creatures, 
which  it  containeth.”  He  another,  that  saith,  “In 
the  Beginning  God  made  heaven  and  earth”; 
that  is,  “In  His  Word  coeternal  with  Himself, 

6Ps.  104.24.  6I.  Cor.  8.6. 


io6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


did  God  make  the  formless  matter  of  creatures 
spiritual  and  corporeal.”  He  another,  that  saith, 
'‘In  the  Beginning  God  created  heaven  and 
earth”;  that  is,  “In  His  Word  coeternal  with 
Himself,  did  God  create  the  formless  matter  of 
the  creature  corporeal,  wherein  heaven  and  earth 
lay  as  yet  confused,  which,  being  now  distin¬ 
guished  and  formed,  we  at  this  day  see  in  the 
bulk  of  this  world.”  He  another,  who  saith,  “In 
the  Beginning  God  made  heaven  and  earth,” 
that  is,  “In  the  very  beginning  of  creating  and 
working,  did  God  make  that  formless  matter, 
confusedly  containing  in  itself  both  heaven  and 
earth;  out  of  which,  being  formed,  do  they  now 
stand  out,  and  are  apparent,  with  all  that  is  in 
them.” 

[XXI]  30.  And,  with  regard  to  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  words  following  out  of  all  those 
truths,  he  chooses  one  to  himself,  who  saith, 
“But  the  earth  was  invisible,  and  without  form, 
and  darkness  was  upon  the  deep” ;  that  is,  “That 
corporeal  thing  that  God  made  was  as  yet  a 
formless  matter  of  corporeal  things,  without  or¬ 
der,  without  light.”  Another  he  who  says,  “The 
earth  was  invisible  and  without  form,  and  dark¬ 
ness  was  upon  the  deep”;  that  is,  “This  all, 
which  is  called  heaven  and  earth,  was  still  a 
formless  and  darksome  matter,  of  which  the  cor¬ 
poreal  heaven  and  the  corporeal  earth  were  to  be 
made,  with  all  things  in  them,  which  are  known 
to  our  corporeal  senses.”  Another  he  who  says, 
“The  earth  was  invisible  and  without  form,  and 
darkness  was  upon  the  deep”;  that  is,  “This  all, 
which  is  called  heaven  and  earth,  was  still  a 
formless  and  a  darksome  matter;  out  of  which 
was  to  be  made  both  that  intelligible  heaven, 
otherwhere  called  the  Heaven  of  heavens,  and 
the  earth,  that  is,  the  whole  corporeal  nature, 
under  which  name  is  comprised  this  corporeal 
heaven  also;  in  a  word,  out  of  which  every  visi¬ 
ble  and  invisible  creature  was  to  be  created.” 
Another  he  who  says,  “The  earth  was  invisible 
and  without  form,  and  darkness  was  upon  the 
deep,”  “The  Scripture  did  not  call  that  formless¬ 
ness  by  the  name  of  heaven  and  earth ;  but  that 
formlessness,  saith  he,  already  was,  which  he 
called  the  earth  invisible  without  form,  and 
darkness  upon  the  deep ;  of  which  he  had  before 
said  that  God  had  made  heaven  and  earth, 
namely,  the  spiritual  and  corporeal  creature.” 
Another  he  who  says,  “The  earth  was  invisible 
and  without  form,  and  darkness  was  upon  the 
deep”;  that  is,  “There  already  was  a  certain 
formless  matter,  of  which  the  Scripture  said  be¬ 
fore,  that  God  made  heaven  and  earth ;  namely, 
the  whole  corporeal  bulk  of  the  world,  divided 


into  two  great  parts,  upper  and  lower,  with  all 
the  common  and  known  creatures  in  them.” 

[XXII]  31.  For  should  any  attempt  to  dis¬ 
pute  against  these  two  last  opinions,  thus,  “If 
you  will  not  allow  that  this  formlessness  of  mat¬ 
ter  seems  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  heaven 
and  earth;  ergo,  there  was  something  which  God 
had  not  made,  out  of  which  to  make  heaven  and 
earth;  for  neither  hath  Scripture  told  us  that 
God  made  this  matter,  unless  we  understand  it 
to  be  signified  by  the  name  of  heaven  and  earth, 
or  of  earth  alone,  when  it  is  said,  ‘In  the  Begin¬ 
ning  God  made  the  heaven  and  earth’ ;  that  so  in 
what  follows,  and  the  earth  was  invisible  and 
without  form  (although  it  pleased  Him  so  to  call 
the  formless  matter),  we  are  to  understand  no 
other  matter,  but  that  which  God  made,  where¬ 
of  is  written  above,  ‘God  made  heaven  and 
earth.’  ”  The  maintainers  of  either  of  those  two 
latter  opinions  will,  upon  hearing  this,  return  for 
answer,  “We  do  not  deny  this  formless  matter 
to  be  indeed  created  by  God,  that  God  of  Whom 
are  all  things,  very  good;  for  as  we  affirm  that  to 
be  a  greater  good  which  is  created  and  formed, 
so  we  confess  that  to  be  a  lesser  good  which  is 
made  capable  of  creation  and  form,  yet  still 
good.  We  say  however  that  Scripture  hath  not 
set  down  that  God  made  this  formlessness,  as 
also  it  hath  not  many  others;  as  the  ‘Cherubim,’ 
and  ‘Seraphim,’1  and  those  which  the  Apostle 
distinctly  speaks  of,  ‘Thrones,’  ‘Dominions,’ 
‘Principalities,’  ‘Powers.’2  All  which  that  God 
made  is  most  apparent.  Or  if  in  that  which  is 
said,  ‘He  made  heaven  and  earth,’  all  things  be 
comprehended,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  waters 
upon  which  the  Spirit  of  God  moved?  For  if 
they  be  comprised  in  this  word  earth,  how  then 
can  formless  matter  be  meant  in  that  name  of 
earth,  when  we  see  the  waters  so  beautiful?  Or 
if  it  be  so  taken,  why  then  is  it  written  that  out 
of  the  same  formlessness  the  firmament  was 
made,  and  called  heaven;  and  that  the  waters 
were  made  is  not  written?  For  the  waters  remain 
not  formless  and  invisible,  seeing  we  behold 
them  flowing  in  so  comely  a  manner.  But  if  they 
then  received  that  beauty,  when  God  said,  ‘Let 
the  water  which  is  under  the  firmament  be  gath¬ 
ered  together,’  that  so  the  gathering  together  be 
itself  the  forming  of  them;  what  will  be  an¬ 
swered  as  to  those  waters  which  be  above  the 
firmament?  Seeing  neither  if  formless  would 
they  have  been  worthy  of  so  honourable  a  seat, 
nor  is  it  written  by  what  word  they  were  formed. 
If  then  Genesis  is  silent  as  to  God’s  making  of 
any  thing,  which  yet  that  God  did  make  neither 
^sa.  6.2;  37.16.  2Col.  1. 16. 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  30-34  107 


sound  faith  nor  well-grounded  understanding 
doubteth.  nor  again  will  any  sober  teaching  dare 
to  affirm  these  waters  to  be  coeternal  with  God. 
on  the  ground  that  we  find  them  to  be  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  but  when  they 
were  created  we  do  not  find;  why  (seeing  truth 
teaches  us)  should  we  not  understand  that  form¬ 
less  matter  (which  this  Scripture  calls  the  earth 
invisible  and  without  form,  and  darksome  deep) 
to  have  been  created  of  God  out  of  nothing,  and 
therefore  not  to  be  coeternal  to  Him;  notwith¬ 
standing  this  history  hath  omitted  to  shew  when 
it  was  created?” 

[XXIII]  32.  These  things  then  being  heard 
and  perceived,  according  to  the  weakness  of  my 
capacity  (which  I  confess  unto  Thee,  0  Lord, 
that  knowest  it),  two  sorts  of  disagreements  I 
see  may  arise,  when  a  thing  is  in  words  related 
by  true  reporters:  one,  concerning  the  truth  of 
the  things,  the  other,  concerning  the  meaning  of 
the  relater.  For  we  enquire  one  way  about  the 
making  of  the  creature,  what  is  true;  another 
way,  what  Moses,  that  excellent  minister  of  Thy 
Faith,  would  have  his  reader  and  hearer  under¬ 
stand  by  those  words.  For  the  first  sort,  away 
with  all  those  who  imagine  themselves  to  know 
as  a  truth  what  is  false;  and  for  this  other,  away 
with  all  them  too,  which  imagine  Moses  to  have 
written  things  that  be  false.  But  let  me  be  united 
in  Thee,  0  Lord,  with  those,  and  delight  myself 
in  Thee,  with  them  that  feed  on  Thy  truth,  in 
the  largeness  of  charity,  and  let  us  approach  to¬ 
gether  unto  the  words  of  Thy  book,  and  seek  in 
them  for  Thy  meaning,  through  the  meaning  of 
Thy  servant,  by  whose  pen  Thou  hast  dispensed 
them. 

[XXIV]  33.  But  which  of  us  shall,  among 
those  so  many  truths  which  occur  to  enquirers 
in  those  words,  as  they  are  differently  under¬ 
stood,  so  discover  that  one  meaning,  as  to  af¬ 
firm,  “This  Moses  thought,”  and  “This  would 
he  have  understood  in  that  history”;  with  the 
same  confidence  as  he  would,  “This  is  true,” 
whether  Moses  thought  this  or  that?  For  behold, 
0  my  Gqd,  I  Thy  servant,  who  have  in  this  book 
vowed  a  sacrifice  of  confession  unto  Thee,  and 
pray  that  by  Thy  mercy  I  may  pay  my  vows  un¬ 
to  Thee,1  can  I,  with  the  same  confidence  where¬ 
with  I  affirm  that  in  Thy  incommutable  world 
Thou  createdst  all  things  visible  and  invisible, 
affirm  also  that  Moses  meant  no  other  than  this 
when  he  wrote,  “In  the  Beginning  God  made 
heaven  and  earth”?  No.  Because  I  see  not  in  his 
mind  that  he  thought  of  this  when  he  wrote 
these  things,  as  I  do  see  it  in  Thy  truth  to  be 
1Ps.  22.25. 


certain.  For  he  might  have  his  thoughts  upon 
God’s  commencement  of  creating,  when  he  said 
“In  the  beginning”;  and  by  “heaven  and  earth,” 
in  this  place  he  might  intend  no  formed  and  per¬ 
fected  nature  whether  spiritual  or  corporeal,  but 
both  of  them  inchoate  and  as  yet  formless.  For  I 
perceive  that  whichsoever  of  the  two  had  been 
said,  it  might  have  been  truly  said;  but  which  of 
the  two  he  thought  of  in  these  words.  I  do  not  so 
perceive.  Although,  whether  it  were  either  of 
these,  or  any  sense  beside  (that  I  have  not  here 
mentioned),  which  this  so  great  man  saw  in  his 
mind  when  he  uttered  these  words,  I  doubt  not 
but  that  he  saw  it  truly,  and  expressed  it  aptly. 

[XXV]  34.  Let  no  man  harass  me  then,  by 
saying,  “Moses  thought  not  as  you  say,  but  as  I 
say”;  for  if  he  should  ask  me,  “How  know  you 
that  Moses  thought  that  which  you  infer  out  of 
his  words?”  I  ought  to  take  it  in  good  part,  and 
would  answer  perchance  as  I  have  above,  or 
something  more  at  large,  if  he  were  unyielding. 
But  when  he  saith,  “Moses  meant  not  what  you 
say,  but  what  I  say,”  yet  denieth  not  that  what 
each  of  us  say  may  both  be  true,  0  my  God,  life 
of  the  poor,  in  Whose  bosom  is  no  contradiction, 
pour  down  a  softening  dew  into  my  heart,  that  I 
may  patiently  bear  with  such  as  say  this  to  me, 
not  because  they  have  a  divine  Spirit,  and  have 
seen  in  the  heart  of  Thy  servant  what  they 
speak,  but  because  they  be  proud;  not  knowing 
Moses’  opinion,  but  loving  their  own.  not  be¬ 
cause  it  is  truth  but  because  it  is  theirs.  Other¬ 
wise  they  would  equally  love  another  true  opin¬ 
ion,  as  I  love  what  they  say  when  they  say  true : 
not  because  it  is  theirs,  but  because  it  is  true; 
and  on  that  very  ground  not  theirs  because  it  is 
true.  But  if  they  therefore  love  it  because  it  is 
true,  then  is  it  both  theirs  and  mine;  as  being  in 
common  to  all  lovers  of  truth.  But  whereas  they 
contend  that  Moses  did  not  mean  what  I  say, 
but  what  they  say.  this  I  like  not,  love  not ;  for 
though  it  were  so,  yet  that  their  rashness  belongs 
not  to  knowledge,  but  to  overboldness,  and  not 
insight  but  vanity  was  its  parent.  And  therefore, 
0  Lord,  are  Thy  judgments  terrible ;  seeing  Thy 
truth  is  neither  mine,  nor  his,  nor  another’s;  but 
belonging  to  us  all,  whom  Thou  callest  publicly 
to  partake  of  it,  warning  us  terribly  not  to  ac¬ 
count  it  private  to  ourselves,  lest  we  be  deprived 
of  it.  For  whosoever  challenges  that  as  proper 
to  himself,  which  Thou  propoundest  to  all  to 
enjoy,  and  would  have  that  his  own  which  be¬ 
longs  to  all,  is  driven  from  what  is  in  common  to 
his  own;  that  is,  from  truth,  to  a  lie.  For  he  that 
“speaketh  a  lie,  speaketh  it  of  his  own.”  2 
2John,  8.44. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


108 

35.  Hearken,  0  God,  Thou  best  Judge;  Truth 
Itself,  hearken  to  what  I  shall  say  to  this  gain- 
sayer.  hearken,  for  before  Thee  do  I  speak,  and 
before  my  brethren,  who  employ  Thy  law  law¬ 
fully,  to  the  end  of  charity ; 1  hearken  and  behold, 
if  it  please  Thee,  wThat  I  shall  say  to  him.  For 
this  brotherly  and  peaceful  word  do  I  return  un¬ 
to  Him:  “If  we  both  see  that  to  be  true  that 
Thou  sayest,  and  both  see  that  to  be  true  that  I 
say,  where,  I  pray  Thee,  do  we  see  it?  Neither  I 
in  thee,  nor  thou  in  me;  but  both  in  the  un¬ 
changeable  Truth  itself,  which  is  above  our 
souls.”  Seeing  then  we  strive  not  about  the  very 
light  of  the  Lord  our  God,  why  strive  we  about 
the  thoughts  of  our  neighbour  which  we  cannot 
so  see,  as  the  unchangeable  Truth  is  seen;  for 
that,  if  Moses  himself  had  appeared  to  us  and 
said,  “This  I  meant”;  neither  so  should  we  see 
it,  but  should  believe  it.  Let  us  not  then  “be 
puffed  up  for  one  against  another,”2  above  that 
which  is  written :  “Let  us  love  the  Lord  our  God 
with  all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  and  with  all 
our  mind;  and  our  neighbour  as  ourself.”3  With 
a  view  to  which  two  precepts  of  charity,  unless 
we  believe  that  Moses  meant,  whatsoever  in 
those  books  he  did  mean,  we  shall  make  God  a 
liar,  imagining  otherwise  of  our  fellow  servant’s 
mind  than  He  hath  taught  us.  Behold  now  how 
foolish  it  is,  in  such  abundance  of  most  true 
meanings,  as  may  be  extracted  out  of  those 
words,  rashly  to  affirm  which  of  them  Moses 
principally  meant ;  and  with  pernicious  conten¬ 
tions  to  offend  charity  itself,  for  whose  sake  he 
spake  everything,  whose  words  we  go  about  to 
expound. 

[XXVI]  36.  And  yet  I,  0  my  God,  Thou 
lifter  up  of  my  humility,  and  rest  of  my  labour, 
Who  hearest  my  confessions,  and  forgivest  my 
sins;  seeing  Thou  commandest  me  to  love  my 
neighbour  as  myself,  I  cannot  believe  that  Thou 
gavest  a  less  gift  unto  Moses  Thy  faithful  ser¬ 
vant,  than  I  would  wish  or  desire  Thee  to  have 
given  me,  had  I  been  born  in  the  time  he  was, 
and  hadst  Thou  set  me  in  that  office,  that  by  the 
service  of  my  heart  and  tongue  those  books 
might  be  dispensed  which  for  so  long  after  were 
to  profit  all  nations,  and  through  the  whole 
world,  from  such  an  eminence  of  authority, 
were  to  surmount  all  sayings  of  false  and  proud 
teachings.  I  should  have  desired  verily,  had  I 
then  been  Moses  (for  we  all  come  from  the 
same  lump,  and  what  is  man,  saving  that  Thou 
art  mindful  of  him?  4),  I  would  then,  had  I  been 
then  what  he  was,  and  been  enjoined  by  Thee 

H  Tim.  1.8.  2I  Cor.  4.6.  3Mark,  12.30,  31. 

4Ps.  8.8. 


to  write  the  book  of  Genesis,  have  desired  such 
a  power  of  expression  and  such  style  to  be  giv¬ 
en  me,  that  neither  they  who  cannot  yet  under¬ 
stand  how  God  created  might  reject  the  sayings 
as  beyond  their  capacity;  and  they  who  had  at¬ 
tained  thereto  might  find  what  true  opinion  so¬ 
ever  they  had  by  thought  arrived  at,  not  passed 
over  in  those  few  words  of  that  Thy  servant; 
and  should  another  man  by  the  light  of  truth 
have  discovered  another,  neither  should  that  fail 
of  being  discoverable  in  those  same  words. 

[XXVII]  37.  For  as  a  fountain  within  a  nar¬ 
row  compass  is  more  plentiful,  and  supplies  a 
tide  for  more  streams  over  larger  spaces,  than 
any  one  of  those  streams  which,  after  a  wide  in¬ 
terval,  is  derived  from  the  same  fountain;  so 
the  relation  of  that  dispenser  of  Thine,  which 
was  to  benefit  many  who  were  to  discourse 
thereon,  does  out  of  a  narrow  scantling  of  lan¬ 
guage  overflow  into  streams  of  clearest  truth, 
whence  every  man  may  draw  out  for  himself 
such  truth  as  he  can  upon  these  subjects,  one,  one 
truth,  another,  another,  by  larger  circumlocu¬ 
tions  of  discourse.  For  some,  when  they  read  or 
hear  these  words,  conceive  that  God  like  a  man 
or  some  mass  endued  with  unbounded  power,  by 
some  new  and  sudden  resolution  did,  exterior  to 
itself,  as  it  were  at  a  certain  distance,  create 
heaven  and  earth,  two  great  bodies  above  and 
below,  wherein  all  things  were  to  be  contained. 
And  when  they  hear,  “God  said,  Let  it  be  made, 
and  it  was  made,”  they  conceive  of  words  begun 
and  ended,  sounding  in  time,  and  passing  away; 
after  whose  departure,  that  came  into  being 
which  was  commanded  so  to  do;  and  whatever 
of  the  like  sort,  men’s  acquaintance  with  the 
material  world  would  suggest.  In  whom,  being 
yet  little  ones  and  carnal,  while  their  weakness 
is  by  this  humble  kind  of  speech  carried  on,  as 
in  a  mother’s  bosom,  their  faith  is  wholesomely 
built  up,  whereby  they  hold  assured  that  God 
made  all  natures,  which  in  admirable  variety 
their  eye  beholdeth  around.  Which  words,  if  any 
despising  as  too  simple,  with  a  proud  weakness, 
shall  stretch  himself  beyond  the  guardian  nest, 
he  will,  alas,  fall  miserably.  Have  pity,  0  Lord 
God,  lest  they  who  go  by  the  way  trample  on 
the  unfledged  bird,  and  send  Thine  angel  to  re¬ 
place  it  into  the  nest,  that  it  may  live,  till  it  can 
fly. 

[XXVIII]  38.  But  others,  unto  whom  these 
words  are  no  longer  a  nest,  but  deep  shady  fruit- 
bowers,  see  the  fruits  concealed  therein,  fly  joy¬ 
ously  around,  and  with  cheerful  notes  seek  out 
and  pluck  them.  For,  reading  or  hearing  these 
words,  they  see  that  all  times  past  and  to  come 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  35-40  109 


are  surpassed  by  Thy  eternal  and  stable  abid¬ 
ing;  and  yet  that  there  is  no  creature  formed  in 
time,  not  of  Thy  making.  Whose  will,  because  it 
is  the  same  that  Thou  art,  Thou  madest  all 
things,  not  by  any  change  of  will,  nor  by  a  will 
which  before  was  not,  and  that  these  things  were 
not  out  of  Thyself,  in  Thine  own  likeness,  which 
is  the  form  of  all  things,  but  out  of  nothing,  a 
formless  unlikeness,  which  should  be  formed  by 
Thy  likeness  (recurring  to  Thy  Unity,  according 
to  their  appointed  capacity,  so  far  as  is  given  to 
each  thing  in  his  kind ) ,  and  might  all  be  made 
very  good;  whether  they  abide  around  Thee,  or, 
being  in  gradation  removed  in  time  and  place, 
make  or  undergo  the  beautiful  variations  of  the 
Universe.  These  things  they  see,  and  rejoice,  in 
the  little  degree  they  here  may,  in  the  light  of 
Thy  truth. 

39.  Another  bends  his  mind  on  that  which  is 
said,  “In  the  Beginning  God  made  heaven  and 
earth”;  and  beholdeth  therein  Wisdom,  the  Be¬ 
ginning  because  It  also  speaketh  unto  us.1  An¬ 
other  likewise  bends  his  mind  on  the  same  words, 
and  by  “Beginning”  understands  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  things  created;  In  the  beginning  He 
made,  as  if  it  were  said,  He  at  first  made.  And 
among  them  that  understand  “In  the  Begin¬ 
ning”  to  mean,  “In  Thy  Wisdom  Thou  createdst 
heaven  and  earth,”  one  believes  the  matter  out 
of  which  the  heaven  and  earth  were  to  be  creat¬ 
ed,  to  be  there  called  “heaven  and  earth” ;  an¬ 
other,  natures  already  formed  and  distinguished ; 
another,  one  formed  nature,  and  that  a  spiritual, 
under  the  name  Heaven,  the  other  formless,  of 
corporeal  matter,  under  the  name  Earth.  They 
again  who,  by  the  names  “heaven  and  earth,” 
understand  matter  as  yet  formless,  out  of  which 
heaven  and  earth  were  to  be  formed,  neither  do 
they  understand  it  in  one  way;  but  the  one,  that 
matter  out  of  which  both  the  intelligible  and  the 
sensible  creature  were  to  be  perfected;  another, 
that  only  out  of  which  this  sensible  corporeal 
mass  was  to  be  made,  containing  in  its  vast  bos¬ 
om  these  visible  and  ordinary  natures.  Neither 
do  theyf  who  believe  the  creatures  already  or¬ 
dered  and  arranged,  to  be  in  this  place  called 
heaven  and  earth,  understand  the  same ;  but  the 
one,  both  the  invisible  and  visible,  the  other,  the 
visible  only,  in  which  we  behold  this  lightsome 
heaven  and  darksome  earth,  with  the  things  in 
them  contained. 

[XXIX]  40.  But  he  that  no  otherwise  under¬ 
stands  “In  the  Beginning  He  made,”  than  if  it 
were  said,  “At  first  He  made,”  can  only  truly  un¬ 
derstand  heaven  and  earth  of  the  matter  of 

John,  8.23. 


heaven  and  earth,  that  is,  of  the  universal  intel¬ 
ligible  and  corporeal  creation.  For  if  he  would 
understand  thereby  the  universe,  as  already 
formed,  it  may  be  rightly  demanded  of  him,  “If 
God  made  this  first,  what  made  He  afterwards?” 
And  after  the  universe,  he  will  find  nothing; 
whereupon  must  he  against  his  will  hear  another 
question;  “How  this  first,  if  nothing  after?”  But 
when  he  says,  God  made  matter  first  formless, 
then  formed,  there  is  no  absurdity,  if  he  be  but 
qualified  to  discern  what  precedes  by  eternity, 
what  by  time,  what  by  choice,  and  what  in  origi¬ 
nal.  By  eternity,  as  God  is  before  all  things;  by 
time,  as  the  flower  before  the  fruit;  by  choice, 
as  the  fruit  before  the  flower;  by  original,  as  the 
sound  before  the  tune.  Of  these  four,  the  first 
and  last  mentioned  are  with  extreme  difficulty 
understood,  the  two  middle,  easily.  For  a  rare 
and  too  lofty  a  vision  is  it,  to  behold  Thy  Etern¬ 
ity,  0  Lord,  unchangeably  making  things 
changeable;  and  thereby  before  them.  And  who, 
again,  is  of  so  sharp-sighted  understanding  as  to 
be  able  without  great  pains  to  discern  how  the 
sound  is  therefore  before  the  tune;  because  a 
tune  is  a  formed  sound;  and  a  thing  not  formed 
may  exist ;  whereas  that  which  existeth  not  can¬ 
not  be  formed.  Thus  is  the  matter  before  the 
thing  made;  not  because  it  maketh  it,  seeing  it¬ 
self  is  rather  made;  nor  is  it  before  by  interval 
of  time;  for  we  do  not  first  in  time  utter  form¬ 
less  sounds  without  singing,  and  subsequently 
adapt  or  fashion  them  into  the  form  of  a  chant, 
as  wood  or  silver  whereof  a  chest  or  vessel  is 
fashioned.  For  such  materials  do  by  time  also 
precede  the  forms  of  the  things  made  of  them, 
but  in  singing  it  is  not  so ;  for  when  it  is  sung,  its 
sound  is  heard;  for  there  is  not  first  a  formless 
sound,  which  is  afterwards  formed  into  a  chant. 
For  each  sound,  so  soon  as  made,  passeth  away, 
nor  canst  thou  find  ought  to  recall  and  by  art  to 
compose.  So  then  the  chant  is  concentrated  in 
its  sound,  which  sound  of  his  is  his  matter.  And 
this  indeed  is  formed,  that  it  may  be  a  tune;  and 
therefore  (as  I  said)  the  matter  of  the  sound  is 
before  the  form  of  the  tune;  not  before,  through 
any  power  it  hath  to  make  it  a  tune;  for  a  sound 
is  no  way  the  workmaster  of  the  tune;  but  is 
something  corporeal,  subjected  to  the  soul  which 
singeth,  whereof  to  make  a  tune.  Nor  is  it  first 
in  time,  for  it  is  given  forth  together  with  the 
tune;  nor  first  in  choice,  for  a  sound  is  not  bet¬ 
ter  than  a  tune,  a  tune  being  not  only  a  sound, 
but  a  beautiful  sound.  But  it  is  first  in  original, 
because  a  tune  receives  not  form  to  become  a 
sound,  but  a  sound  receives  a  form  to  become  a 
tune.  By  this  example,  let  him  that  is  able,  un- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


derstand  how  the  matter  of  things  was  first 
made,  and  called  heaven  and  earth,  because 
heaven  and  earth  were  made  out  of  it.  Yet  was 
it  not  made  first  in  time;  because  the  forms  of 
things  give  rise  to  time;  but  that  wras  without 
form;  but  now  is,  in  time,  an  object  of  sense  to¬ 
gether  with  its  form.  And  yet  nothing  can  be  re¬ 
lated  of  that  matter,  but  as  though  prior  in  time, 
whereas  in  value  it  is  last  (because  things  formed 
are  superior  to  things  without  form)  and  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  the  Eternity  of  the  Creator:  that  so 
there  might  be  out  of  nothing,  whereof  some¬ 
what  might  be  created. 

[XXX]  41.  In  this  diversity  of  the  true  opin¬ 
ions,  let  Truth  herself  produce  concord.  And  our 
God  have  mercy  upon  us,  that  we  may  use  the 
law  lawfully,1  the  end  of  the  commandment, 
pure  charity.  By  this  if  a  man  demands  of  me, 
“which  of  these  was  the  meaning  of  Thy  serv¬ 
ant  Moses” ;  this  were  not  the  language  of  my 
Confessions  should  I  not  confess  unto  Thee,  “I 
know  not” ;  and  yet  I  know  that  those  senses  are 
true,  those  carnal  ones  excepted,  of  wdiich  I 
have  spoken  what  seemed  necessary.  And  even 
those  hopeful  little  ones  who  so  think  the  words 
of  Thy  Book  affright  them  not,  delivering  high 
things  lowlily,  and  with  few  words  a  copious 
meaning.  And  all  we  who,  I  confess,  see  and  ex¬ 
press  the  truth  delivered  in  those  words,  let  us 
love  one  another,  and  jointly  love  Thee  our  God, 
the  fountain  of  truth,  if  we  are  athirst  for  it,  and 
not  for  vanities;  yea,  let  us  so  honor  this  Thy 
servant,  the  dispenser  of  this  Scripture,  full  of 
Thy  Spirit,  as  to  believe  that,  when  by  Thy  rev¬ 
elation  he  wrote  these  things,  he  intended  that 
which  among  them  chiefly  excels  both  for  light 
of  truth,  and  fruitfulness  of  profit. 

[XXXI]  42.  So  when  one  says,  “Moses  meant 
as  I  do”;  and  another,  “Nay,  but  as  I  do”;  I 
suppose  that  I  speak  more  reverently:  “Why  not 
rather  as  both,  if  both  be  true?”  And  if  there  be 
a  third,  or  a  fourth,  yea,  if  any  other  seeth  any 
other  truth  in  those  words,  why  may  not  he  be 
believed  to  have  seen  all  these,  through  whom 
the  One  God  hath  tempered  the  holy  Scriptures 
to  the  senses  of  many,  who  should  see  therein 
things  true  but  divers?  For  I  certainly  (and 
fearlessly  I  speak  it  from  my  heart)  that  were  I 
to  indite  anything  to  have  supreme  authority,  I 
should  prefer  so  to  write  that  whatever  truth 
any  could  apprehend  on  those  matters  might  be 
conveyed  in  my  words,  rather  than  set  down  my 
own  meaning  so  clearly  as  to  exclude  the  rest, 
which,  not  being  false,  could  not  offend  me.  I 
will  not  therefore,  0  my  God,  be  so  rash  as  not 
Tim.  1. 18. 


to  believe  that  Thou  vouchsafedst  as  much  to 
that  great  man.  He  without  doubt,  when  he 
wrote  those  words,  perceived  and  thought  on 
w7hat  truth  soever  we  have  been  able  to  find,  yea, 
and  whatsoever  we  have  not  been  able,  nor  yet 
are,  but  which  may  be  found  in  them. 

[XXXII]  43.  Lastly,  0  Lord,  Who  are  God 
and  not  flesh  and  blood,  if  man  did  see  less, 
could  anything  be  concealed  from  “Thy  good 
Spirit”  (who  shall  “lead  me  into  the  land  of  up¬ 
rightness”)2  which  Thou  Thyself  by  those  words 
wert  about  to  reveal  to  readers  in  times  to  come, 
though  he  through  whom  they  were  spoken,  per¬ 
haps  among  many  true  meanings,  thought  on 
some  one?  which  if  so  it  be,  let  that  which  he 
thought  on  be  of  all  the  highest.  But  to  us,  O 
Lord,  do  Thou  either  reveal  that  same,  or  any 
other  true  one  which  Thou  pleasest;  that  so, 
whether  Thou  discoverest  the  same  to  us  as  to 
that  Thy  servant,  or  some  other  by  occasion  of 
those  words,  yet  Thou  mayest  feed  us,  not  error 
deceive  us.  Behold,  0  Lord  my  God,  how  much 
we  have  written  upon  a  few  words,  how  much  I 
beseech  Thee!  What  strength  of  ours,  yea,  what 
ages  would  suffice  for  all  Thy  books  in  this  man¬ 
ner?  Permit  me  then  in  these  more  briefly  to 
confess  unto  Thee,  and  to  choose  some  one  true, 
certain,  and  good  sense  that  Thou  shalt  inspire 
me,  although  many  should  occur,  where  many 
may  occur;  this  being  the  law  of  my  confession, 
that  if  I  should  say  that  which  Thy  minister  in¬ 
tended,  that  is  right  and  best;  for  this  should  I 
endeavour,  which  if  I  should  not  attain,  yet  I 
should  say  that,  which  Thy  Truth  willed  by  his 
words  to  tell  me,  which  revealed  also  unto  him, 
what  It  willed. 

BOOK  XIII.  Continuation  of  the  exposition  of 
Genesis ,  1 ;  it  contains  the  mystery  of  the 
Trinity ,  and  a  type  of  the  formation,  exten¬ 
sion,  and  support  of  the  Church. 

[I]  1.  I  call  upon  Thee,  0  my  God,  my  mercy, 
Who  createdst  me,  and  forgottest  not  me,  for¬ 
getting  Thee.  I  call  Thee  into3  my  soul,  which, 
by  the  longing  Thyself  inspirest  into  her,  Thou 
preparest  for  Thee.  Forsake  me  not  now  calling 
upon  Thee,  whom  Thou  preventedst  before  I 
called,  and  urgedst  me  with  much  variety  of  re¬ 
peated  calls  that  I  would  hear  Thee  from  afar,  and 
be  converted,  and  call  upon  Thee,  that  calledst 
after  me;  for  Thou,  Lord,  blottedst  out  all 
my  evil  deservings,  so  as  not  to  repay  into  my 
hands  wherewith  I  fell  from  Thee;  and  Thou 
hast  prevented  all  my  well  deservings,  so  as  to 
repay  the  work  of  Thy  hands  wherewith  Thou 
2Ps.  143.10.  3See  Bk.  1.2. 


Ill 


CONFESSIONS  XII.  41-43,  XIII.  1-5 


madest  me;  because  before  I  was,  Thou  wert; 
nor  was  I  anything,  to  which  Thou  mightest 
grant  to  be;  and  yet  behold,  I  am,  out  of  Thy 
goodness,  preventing  all  this  which  Thou  hast 
made  me,  and  whereof  Thou  has  made  me.  For 
neither  hadst  Thou  need  of  me,  nor  am  I  any 
such  good  as  to  be  helpful  unto  Thee,  my  Lord 
and  God;  not  in  serving  Thee,  as  though  Thou 
wouldest  tire  in  working;  or  lest  Thy  power 
might  be  less,  if  lacking  my  service:  nor  culti¬ 
vating  Thy  service,  as  a  land  that  must  remain 
uncultivated  unless  I  cultivated  Thee :  but  serv¬ 
ing  and  worshipping  Thee,  that  I  might  receive 
a  well-being  from  Thee,  from  whom  it  comes 
that  I  have  a  being  capable  of  well-being. 

[II]  2.  For  of  the  fulness  of  Thy  goodness 
doth  Thy  creature  subsist,  that  so  a  good,  which 
could  no  ways  profit  Thee,  nor  was  of  Thee  (lest 
so  it  should  be  equal  to  Thee),  might  yet  be 
since  it  could  be  made  of  Thee.  For  what  did 
heaven  and  earth,  which  Thou  madest  in  the 
Beginning,  deserve  of  Thee?  Let  those  spiritual 
and  corporeal  natures  which  Thou  madest  in 
Thy  Wisdom  say  wherein  they  deserved  of  Thee, 
to  depend  thereon  (even  in  that  their  several 
inchoate  and  formless  state,  whether  spiritual  or 
corporeal,  ready  to  fall  away  into  an  immoderate 
liberty  and  far-distant  unlikeliness  unto  Thee; 
the  spiritual,  though  without  form,  superior  to 
the  corporeal  though  formed,  and  the  corporeal 
though  without  form,  better  than  were  it  alto¬ 
gether  nothing),  and  so  to  depend  upon  Thy 
Word,  as  formless,  unless  by  the  same  Word 
they  were  brought  back  to  Thy  Unity,  indued 
with  form,  and  from  Thee  the  One  Sovereign 
Good  were  made  all  very  good.  How  did  they  de¬ 
serve  of  Thee  to  be  even  without  form,  since 
they  had  not  been  even  this,  but  from  Thee? 

3.  How  did  corporeal  matter  deserve  of  Thee 
to  be  even  invisible  and  without  form?1  seeing  it 
were  not  even  this,  but  that  Thou  madest  it,  and 
therefore,  because  it  was  not,  could  not  deserve 
of  Thee  to  be  made.  Or  how  could  the  inchoate 
spiritual  creature  deserve  of  Thee,  even  to  ebb 
and  flow  darksomely  like  the  deep,  unlike  Thee, 
unless  it  had  been  by  the  same  Word  turned  to 
that  by  Whom  it  was  created,  and  by  Him  so  en¬ 
lightened,  become  light ;  though  not  equally,  yet 
conformably  to  that  Form  which  is  equal  unto 
Thee?  For  as  in  a  body,  to  be  is  not  one  with  be¬ 
ing  beautiful,  else  could  it  not  be  deformed;  so 
likewise,  to  a  created  spirit,  to  live  is  not  one 
with  living  wisely;  else  should  it  be  wise  un¬ 
changeably.  But  good  it  is2  for  it  always  to  hold 
fast  to  Thee3;  lest  what  light  it  hath  obtained  by 

1Gen.  1.2.  2Ps.  73.28.  8Cf.  City  of  God,  Bk.  xn.  1. 


turning  to  Thee,  it  lose  by  turning  from  Thee, 
and  relapse  into  life  resembling  the  darksome 
deep.  For  we  ourselves  also,  who  as  to  the  soul 
are  a  spiritual  creature,  turned  away  from  Thee 
our  light,  were  in  that  life  “sometimes  dark¬ 
ness”;  and  still  labour  amidst  the  relics  of  our 
darkness,  until  in  Thy  Only  One  we  become  Thy 
righteousness,  like  the  mountains  of  God.  For 
we  have  been  Thy  judgments,  which  are  like  the 
great  deep.4 

[III]  4.  That  which  Thou  saidst  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  creation,  “Let  there  be  light,  and 
there  was  light”5;  I  do,  not  unsuitably,  under¬ 
stand  of  the  spiritual  creature:  because  there 
was  already  a  sort  of  life,  which  Thou  mightest 
illuminate.  But  as  it  had  no  claim  on  Thee  for  a 
life,  which  could  be  enlightened,  so  neither  now 
that  it  was,  had  it  any,  to  be  enlightened.  For 
neither  could  its  formless  estate  be  pleasing  unto 
Thee,  unless  it  became  light,  and  that  not  by  ex¬ 
isting  simply,  but  by  beholding  the  illuminating 
light,  and  cleaving  to  it;  so  that,  that  it  lived, 
and  lived  happily,6  it  owes  to  nothing  but  Thy 
grace,  being  turned  by  a  better  change  unto 
That  which  cannot  be  changed  into  worse  or  bet¬ 
ter;  which  Thou  alone  art,  because  Thou  alone 
simply  art;  unto  Thee  it  being  not  one  thing  to 
live,  another  to  live  blessedly,  seeing  Thyself 
art  Thine  own  Blessedness.7 

[IV]  5.  What  then  could  be  wanting  unto  Thy 
good,  which  Thou  Thyself  art,  although  these 
things  had  either  never  been,  or  remained  with¬ 
out  form;  which  thou  madest,  not  out  of  any 
want,  but  out  of  the  fulness  of  Thy  goodness,  re¬ 
straining  them  and  converting  them  to  form,  not 
as  though  Thy  joy  were  fulfilled  by  them?  For 
to  Thee,  being  perfect,  is  their  imperfection  dis¬ 
pleasing,  and  hence  were  they  perfected  by  Thee, 
and  please  Thee,  not  as  wert  Thou  imperfect,  and 
by  their  perfecting  wert  also  to  be  perfected.  For 
Thy  good  Spirit  indeed  was  borne  over  the  wa¬ 
ters,8  not  borne  up  by  them,  as  if  He  rested  upon 
them.  For  those  on  whom  Thy  good  Spirit  is  said 
to  rest,9  He  causes  to  rest  in  Himself.  But  Thy 
incorruptible  and  unchangeable  will,  in  itself  all- 
sufficient  for  itself,  was  borne  upon  that  life 
which  Thou  hadst  created;  to  which,  living  is 
not  one  with  happy  living,  seeing  it  liveth  also, 
ebbing  and  flowing  in  its  own  darkness;  for 
which  it  remaineth  to  be  converted  unto  Him  by 
Whom  it  was  made,  and  to  live  more  and  more 
by  “the  fountain  of  life,”  and  in  His  light  to  “see 
light,”  10  and  to  be  perfected,  and  enlightened, 
and  beautified. 

4Ps.  36.  6.  6Gen.  1.3.  6Cf.  City  of  God,  Bk.  xi.  24. 

7Ibid.,  Bk.  xn.  1.  8Gen.  1.  2.  eNum.  11.25.  10Ps.  36.  9. 


1 1 2 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


[V]  6.  Lo,  now  the  Trinity  appears  unto  me 
in  a  glass  darkly,  which  is  Thou  my  God,  be¬ 
cause  Thou,  0  Father,  in  Him  Who  is  the  Be¬ 
ginning  of  our  wisdom,  Which  is  Thy  Wisdom, 
born  of  Thyself,  equal  unto  Thee  and  coeternal, 
that  is,  in  Thy  Son,  createdst  heaven  and  earth. 
Much  now  have  we  said  of  the  Heaven  of  heav¬ 
ens,  and  of  the  earth  invisible  and  without  form, 
and  of  the  darksome  deep,  in  reference  to  the 
wandering  instability  of  its  spiritual  deformity, 
unless  it  had  been  converted  unto  Him  from 
Whom  it  had  its  then  degree  of  life,  and  by  His 
enlightening  became  a  beauteous  life,  and  the 
heaven  of  that  heaven,  which  was  afterwards  set 
between  water  and  water.  And  under  the  name 
of  God,  I  now  held  the  Father,  Who  made  these 
things,  and  under  the  name  of  Beginning,  the 
Son,  in  Whom  He  made  these  things ;  and  believ¬ 
ing,  as  I  did,  my  God  as  the  Trinity,  I  searched 
further  in  His  holy  words,  and  lo,  Thy  Spirit 
moved  upon  the  waters.  Behold  the  Trinity,  my 
God:  Father,  and  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  Creator 
of  all  creation. 

[VI]  7.  But  what  was  the  cause,  0  true¬ 
speaking  Light?  Unto  Thee  lift  I  up  my  Heart, 
let  it  not  teach  me  vanities,  dispel  its  darkness; 
and  tell  me,  I  beseech  Thee,  by  our  mother  char¬ 
ity,  tell  me  the  reason,  I  beseech  Thee,  why  after 
the  mention  of  heaven,  and  of  the  earth  invisi¬ 
ble  and  without  form,  and  darkness  upon  the 
deep,  Thy  Scripture  should  then  at  length  men¬ 
tion  Thy  Spirit?  Was  it  because  it  was  meet 
that  the  knowledge  of  Him  should  be  conveyed, 
as  being  “borne  above”;  and  this  could  not  be 
said  unless  that  were  first  mentioned,  “over” 
which  Thy  Spirit  may  be  understood  to  have 
been  “borne.”  For  neither  was  He  “borne  above” 
the  Father,  nor  the  Son,  nor  could  He  rightly  be 
said  to  be  “borne  above,”  if  He  were  “borne 
over”  nothing.  First  then  was  that  to  be  spoken 
of,  “over”  which  He  might  be  “borne”;  and 
then  He,  whom  it  was  meet  not  otherwise  to  be 
spoken  of  than  as  being  “borne.”  But  wherefore 
was  it  not  meet  that  the  knowledge  of  Him 
should  be  conveyed  otherwise  than  as  being 
“borne  above”? 

[VII]  8.  Hence  let  him  that  is  able  follow 
with  his  understanding  Thy  Apostle,  where  he 
thus  speaks,  Because  Thy  “love  is  shed  abroad 
in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given 
unto  us”1;  and  where  “concerning  spiritual 
gifts”  he  teacheth  and  sheweth  unto  us  a  more 
excellent  way  of  charity2;  and  where  he  bows 
his  knee,  unto  Thee  for  us,  that  we  may  know 
the  super-eminent  knowledge  of  the  love  of 

^om.  5.  5.  2II  Cor.  12.  1,  31. 


Christ.3  And  therefore  from  the  beginning  was 
He  “borne”  super-eminent  “above  the  waters.” 
To  whom  shall  I  speak  this?  How  speak  of  the 
weight  of  evil  desires,  downwards  to  the  steep 
abyss ;  and  how  charity  raises  up  again  by  Thy 
Spirit  which  was  “borne  above  the  waters”?  to 
whom  shall  I  speak  it?  how  speak  it?  For  it  is 
not  in  space  that  we  are  merged  and  emerge. 
What  can  be  more,  and  yet  what  less  like?  They 
be  affections,  they  be  loves;  the  uncleanness  of 
our  spirit  flowing  away  downwards  with  the  love 
of  cares,  and  the  holiness  of  Thine  raising  us  up¬ 
ward  by  love  of  unanxious  repose;  that  we  may 
lift  our  hearts  unto  Thee,  where  Thy  Spirit  is 
“borne  above  the  waters”;  and  come  to  that  su¬ 
per-eminent  repose,  when  our  soul  shall  have 
passed  through  the  waters  which  yield  no  sup¬ 
port. 

[VIII]  9.  Angels  fell  away,  man’s  soul  fell 
away,  and  thereby  pointed  out  the  abyss  in  that 
dark  depth,  ready  for  the  whole  spiritual  crea¬ 
tion,  hadst  not  Thou  said  from  the  beginning, 
“Let  there  be  light,”  and  there  had  been  light, 
and  every  obedient  intelligence  of  Thy  heavenly 
City  had  cleaved  to  Thee,  and  rested  in  Thy 
Spirit,  Which  is  “borne”  unchangeably  “over” 
everything  changeable.  Otherwise,  had  even  the 
heaven  of  heavens  been  in  itself  a  darksome 
deep ;  but  now  it  is  light  in  the  Lord.  For  even  in 
that  miserable  restlessness  of  the  spirits,  who 
fell  away  and  discovered  their  own  darkness 
when  bared  of  the  clothing  of  Thy  light,  dost 
Thou  sufficiently  reveal  how  noble  Thou  madest 
the  reasonable  creature;  to  which  nothing  will 
suffice  to  yield  a  happy  rest,  less  than  Thee4; 
and  so  not  even  herself.  For  Thou,  0  our  God, 
shalt  lighten  our  darkness5;  from  Thee  riseth 
our  garment  of  light6 ;  and  then  shall  our  dark¬ 
ness  be  as  the  noon  day.7  Give  Thyself  unto  me, 
0  my  God,  restore  Thyself  unto  me;  behold  I 
love,  and  if  it  be  too  little,  I  would  love  more 
strongly.  I  cannot  measure  so  as  to  know  how 
much  love  there  yet  lacketh  to  me,  ere  my  life 
may  run  into  Thy  embracements,  nor  turn  away, 
until  it  be  hidden  in  the  hidden  place  of  Thy 
Presence.8  This  only  I  know,  that  woe  is  me  ex¬ 
cept  in  Thee ;  not  only  without  but  within  my¬ 
self  also;  and  all  abundance,  which  is  not  my 
God,  is  emptiness  to  me. 

[IX]  10.  But  was  not  either  the  Father,  or 
the  Son,  “borne  above  the  water”?  If  this  means, 
in  space,  like  a  body,  then  neither  was  the  Holy 
Spirit;  but,  if  the  unchangeable  super-eminence 

3Eph.  3.  14-19.  4Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xxii.  1. 

6Ps.  18.  28.  6Ps.  104.  2.  7Ps.  139.  12. 

8Ps.  31.  20. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  6-13  113 


of  Divinity  above  all  things  changeable,  then 
were  both  Father,  and  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
borne  “upon  the  waters.”  Why  then  is  this  said 
of  Thy  Spirit  only,  why  is  it  said  only  of  Him? 
As  if  He  had  been  in  place,  Who  is  not  in  place, 
of  Whom  only  it  is  written,  that  He  is  Thy  gift? 
In  Thy  Gift  we  rest;  there  we  enjoy  Thee.  Our 
rest  is  our  place.  Love  lifts  us  up  thither,  and 
Thy  good  Spirit  lifts  up  our  lowliness  from  the 
gates  of  death.1  In  Thy  good  pleasure  is  our 
peace.2  The  body  by  its  own  weight  strives  to¬ 
wards  its  own  place.  Weight  makes  not  down¬ 
ward  only,  but  to  his  own  place.  Fire  tends  up¬ 
ward,  a  stone  downward.  They  are  urged  by 
their  own  weight,  they  seek  their  own  places.  Oil 
poured  below  water  is  raised  above  the  water; 
water  poured  upon  oil  sinks  below  the  oil.  They 
are  urged  by  their  own  weights  to  seek  their  own 
places.  When  out  of  their  order,  they  are  rest¬ 
less;  restored  to  order,  they  are  at  rest.  My 
weight  is  my  love3;  thereby  am  I  borne  whith¬ 
ersoever  I  am  borne.  We  are  inflamed,  by  Thy 
Gift  we  are  kindled,  and  are  carried  upwards; 
we  glow  inwardly,  and  go  forwards.  We  ascend 
Thy  ways  that  be  in  our  heart,4  and  sing  a  song 
of  degrees ;  we  glow  inwardly  with  Thy  fire,  with 
Thy  good  fire,  and  we  go;  because  we  go  up¬ 
wards  to  the  peace  of  Jerusalem :  for  gladdened 
was  I  in  those  who  said  unto  me,  “We  will  go  up 
to  the  house  of  the  Lord.”5  There  hath  Thy  good 
pleasure  placed  us,  that  we  may  desire  nothing 
else  but  to  abide  there  for  ever. 

[X]  11.  Blessed  creature  which,  being  itself 
other  than  Thou,  has  known  no  other  condition 
that  that,  so  soon  as  it  was  made,  it  was,  with¬ 
out  any  interval,  by  Thy  Gift.  Which  is  borne 
above  everything  changeable,  borne  aloft  by 
that  calling  whereby  Thou  saidst,  “Let  there  be 
light,  and  there  was  light.”  Whereas  in  us  this 
took  place  at  different  times,  in  that  we  were 
darkness,  and  are  made  light6:  but  of  that  is 
only  said,  what  it  would  have  been,  had  it  not 
been  enlightened.  And  this  is  so  spoken,  as  if  it 
had  been  unsettled  and  darksome  before;  that 
so  the  9ause  whereby  it  was  made  otherwise 
might  appear,  namely,  that  being  turned  to  the 
Light  unfailing  it  became  light.  Whoso  can,  let 
him  understand  this ;  let  him  ask  of  Thee.  Why 
should  he  trouble  me,  as  if  I  could  enlighten 
“any  man  that  cometh  into  this  world”?  7 

[XI]  12.  Which  of  us  comprehendeth  the  Al¬ 
mighty  Trinity?  and  yet  which  speaks  not  of  It, 
if  indeed  it  be  It?  Rare  is  the  soul  which,  while 

^s.  9.  13.  2Luke,  2.  14,  Vulg. 

3Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xi.  28.  4Ps.  84.  5. 

6Ps.  122.  1.  6Eph.  5.  8.  7John,  1.  9. 


it  speaks  of  It,  knows  what  it  speaks  of.  And 
they  contend  and  strive,  yet,  without  peace,  no 
man  sees  that  vision.  I  would  that  men  would 
consider  these  three,  that  are  in  themselves.8 
These  three  be  indeed  far  other  than  the  Trin¬ 
ity  ;  I  do  but  tell  where  they  may  practise  them¬ 
selves,  and  there  prove  and  feel  how  far  they 
be.  Now  the  three  I  spake  of  are,  to  Be,  to 
Know,  and  to  Will.  For  I  Am,  and  Know,  and 
Will:  I  Am  Knowing  and  Willing:  and  I  Know 
myself  to  Be,  and  to  Will:  and  I  Will  to  Be,  and 
to  Know.  In  these  three,  then,  let  him  discern 
that  can,  how  inseparable  a  life  there  is,  yea,  one 
life,  one  mind,  and  one  essence ;  yea,  lastly  how 
inseparable  a  distinction  there  is,  and  yet  a  dis¬ 
tinction.  Surely  a  man  hath  it  before  him;  let 
him  look  into  himself,  and  see,  and  tell  me.  But 
when  he  discovers  and  can  say  anything  of  these, 
let  him  not  therefore  think  that  he  has  found 
that  which  is  above  these  Unchangeable,  which 
Is  unchangeably,  and  Knows  unchangeably,  and 
Wills  unchangeably;  and  whether  because  of 
these  three,  there  is  in  God  also  a  Trinity,  or 
whether  all  three  be  in  Each,  so  that  the  three 
belong  to  Each;  or  whether  both  ways  at  once, 
wondrously,  simply  and  yet  manifoldly,  Itself  a 
bound  unto  Itself  within  Itself,  yet  unbounded; 
whereby  It  is,  and  is  Known  unto  Itself,  and  suf- 
ficeth  to  Itself,  unchangeably  the  Self-same,  by 
the  abundant  greatness  of  its  Unity — who  can 
readily  conceive  this? who  could  anyway  express 
it?  who  would,  any  way,  pronounce  thereon 
rashly? 

[XII]  13.  Proceed  in  thy  confession,  say  to 
the  Lord  thy  God,  0  my  faith,  Holy,  Holy, 
Holy,  0  Lord  my  God,  in  Thy  Name  have  we 
been  baptized,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost;  in 
Thy  Name  do  we  baptize,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,9  because  among  us  also,  in  His  Christ  did 
God  make  heaven  and  earth,  namely,  the  spiritu¬ 
al  and  carnal  people  of  His  Church.  Yea,  and 
our  earth,  before  it  received  the  “form  of  doc¬ 
trine,”10  was  invisible  and  without  form;  and  we 
were  covered  with  the  darkness  of  ignorance. 
For  Thou  chastenedst  man  for  iniquity,11  and 
“Thy  judgments  were  like  the  great  deep”  unto 
him.12  But  because  Thy  “Spirit  was  borne  above 
the  waters,”  13  Thy  mercy  forsook  not  our  mis¬ 
ery,  and  Thou  saidst,  “Let  there  be  light,”  “Re¬ 
pent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.”14 
Repent  ye,  let  there  be  light.15  And  because  our 

8See  also  City  of  God,  Bk.  xi.  24,  26,  27. 

9Matt.  28.  19.  10Rom.  6,  17.  llPs.  39.  11. 

12Ps.  36.  6.  13Gen.  1.  3.  14Matt.  3.  2. 

16Baptism  was  anciently  called  illumination,  as  Heb.  6. 
4;  Ps.  42.2. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


soul  was  troubled  within  us,1  we  remembered 
Thee,  0  Lord,  from  the  land  of  Jordan,  and  that 
mountain2  equal  unto  Thyself,  but  little  for  our 
sakes;  and  our  darkness  displeased  us,  we  turned 
unto  Thee  “and  there  was  light.”  And,  behold, 
we  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  light  in 
the  Lord.3 

[XIII]  14.  But  as  yet  “by  faith  and  not  by 
sight,”4  for  “by  hope  we  are  saved”;  but 
hope  that  is  seen,  is  not  hope.”5  As  yet  doth 
deep  call  unto  deep,  but  now  “in  the  voice  of 
Thy  waterspouts.”6  As  yet  doth  he  that  saith, 
“I  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual, 
but  as  unto  carnal,”7  even  he  as  yet  doth  not 
think  himself  to  have  apprehended,  and 
forgetteth  those  things  which  are  behind, 
and  reacheth  forth  to  those  which  are  be¬ 
fore,8  and  groaneth  being  burthened,9  and  his 
soul  thirsteth  after  the  Living  God,  as  the 
hart  after  the  water-brooks,  and  saith,  “When 
shall  I  come?”10  “desiring  to  be  clothed  upon 
with  his  house  which  is  from  heaven,”  11  and 
calleth  upon  this  lower  deep,  saying,  “And  be 
not  conformed  to  this  world;  but  be  ye  trans¬ 
formed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind.”  lT  And 
“Be  not  children  in  understanding,  but  in  mal¬ 
ice,  be  ye  children,”  that  in  “understanding  ye 
may  be  perfect”13;  and  “0  foolish  Galatians, 
who  hath  bewitched  you?”  14  But  now  no  longer 
in  his  own  voice ;  but  in  Thine  who  sentest  Thy 
Spirit  from  above15;  through  Him  “wrho  ascend¬ 
ed  up  on  high,”  16  and  set  open  the  flood-gates  of 
His  gifts,17  that  the  force  of  His  streams  might 
make  glad  the  city  of  God.18  Him  doth  this 
“friend  of  the  bridegroom”  19  sigh  after,  having 
now  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  laid  up  with 
Him,  yet  still  groaning  within  himself,  waiting 
for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  his 
body20;  to  Him  he  sighs, a  member  of  the  Bride ; 
for  Him  he  is  jealous,  as  being  a  friend  of  the 
Bridegroom19;  for  Him  he  is  jealous,  not  for 
himself;  because  in  the  voice  of  Thy  “water¬ 
spouts,”  not  in  his  own  voice,  doth  he  call  to 
that  other  depth,  over  whom  being  jealous  he 
feareth,  lest  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through 
his  subtilty,  so  their  minds  should  be  corrupted 
from  the  purity  that  is  in  our  Bridegroom  Thy 
only  Son.21  0  what  a  light  of  beauty  will  that  be, 
when  we  shall  “see  Him  as  He  is,”22  and  those 

xPs.  42.  6.  2Christ.  3Eph.  5.  8.  4II  Cor.  5.  7. 

5Rom.  8.  24.  6Ps.  42.  7.  7I  Cor.  3.  1. 

8Phil.  3.  13.  9II  Cor.  5.  2,  4.  10Ps.  42.  20. 

11II  Cor.  5.  2.  12Rom.  12.  2. 

13I  Cor.  14.  20  (margin).  14GaI.  3. 1.  16Acts,  2. 19. 

16Eph.  4.  8.  17Mal.  3.  10.  18Ps.  46.  4. 

19John,  3.  29.  20Rom.  8.  23. 

21II  Cor.  11.  3;  I  John,  3.  3.  22 Ibid ver.  2. 


tears  be  passed  away,  which  “have  been  my 
meat  day  and  night,  whilst  they  daily  say  unto 
me,  ‘Where  is  now  Thy  God?’  ”23 

[XIV]  15.  Behold,  I  too  say,  0  my  God, 
Where  art  Thou?  see,  where  Thou  art !  in  Thee  I 
breathe  a  little,  when  I  pour  out  my  soul  by  my¬ 
self  in  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  the  sound  of 
him  that  keeps  holy-day.24  And  yet  again  “it  is 
sad,”  because  it  relapseth,  and  becomes  a  deep, 
or  rather  perceives  itself  still  to  be  a  deep.  Unto 
it  speaks  my  faith  which  Thou  hast  kindled  to  en¬ 
lighten  my  feet  in  the  night,  “Why  art  thou  sad, 
0  my  soul,  and  why  dost  thou  trouble  me?  Hope 
in  the  Lord”25;  His  “word  is  a  lamp  unto  thy 
feet”26:  hope  and  endure,  until  the  night,  the 
mother  of  the  wicked,  until  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord,  be  overpast,27  whereof  we  also  were  once 
children,  who  were  sometimes  darkness,28  relics 
whereof  we  bear  about  us  in  our  body,  dead  be¬ 
cause  of  sin29;  “until  the  day  break,  and  the 
shadows  fly  away.”  30  “Hope  thou  in  the  Lord”; 
in  the  morning  I  shall  stand  in  Thy  presence, 
and  contemplate  Thee31 ;  I  shall  for  ever  confess 
unto  Thee.32  In  the  morning  I  shall  stand  in  Thy 
presence,  and  shall  see  “the  health  of  my  coun¬ 
tenance,”33  my  God,  Who  also  shall  quicken  our 
mortal  bodies,  by  the  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us,34 
because  He  hath  in  mercy  been  borne  over  our 
inner  darksome  and  floating  deep;  from  Whom 
we  have  in  this  pilgrimage  received  “an  ear¬ 
nest,”  35  that  we  should  now  be  light;  whilst  we 
“are  saved  by  hope,”  36  and  are  the  children  of 
light,  and  the  children  of  the  day,  not  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  the  night,  nor  of  the  darkness,  which  yet 
sometimes  we  were.37  Betwixt  whom  and  us,  in 
this  uncertainty  of  human  knowledge,  Thou  only 
dividest;  Thou,  Who  provest  our  hearts,38  and 
callest  the  light,  day,  and  the  darkness,  night.39 
For  who  discerneth  us,  but  Thou?  And  what 
have  we,  that  we  have  not  received  of  Thee?  40 
out  of  the  same  lump  vessels  unto  honour, 
whereof  others  also  are  made  unto  dishonour.41 

[XV]  16.  Or  who,  except  Thou,  our  God, 
made  for  us  that  firmament42  of  authority  over 
us  in  Thy  Divine  Scripture?  As  it  is  said,  for 
heaven  shall  be  folded  up  like  a  scroll43;  and 
now  is  it  stretched  over  us  like  a  skin.44  For  Thy 
Divine  Scripture  is  of  more  eminent  authority, 

23Ps.  42.  3.  2iIbid.t  ver.  4.  25 Ibid ver.  5. 

26Ps.  119.  105.  27Job,  14.  13.  MEph.  2.  3,  8. 

29Rom.  8.  10.  ^Cant.  2,  17.  31Ps.  10.  3. 

^Ps.  30.  12.  ^Ps.  43.  5.  ^Rom.  8.  11. 

^II  Cor.  1.  22.  36Rom.  8.  24. 

^Eph.  5.  8;  I  Thess.  5.  5.  ^Ps.  7.  9. 

39Gen.  1.  5.  40I  Cor.  4.  7.  ^Rom.  9.  21. 

^Gen.  1.  6.  43Isa.  34.  4;  Rev.  6.  14. 

“Ps.  104.  2. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  14-20  115 


since  those  mortals  by  whom  Thou  dispensest  it 
unto  us  underwent  mortality.  And  Thou  know¬ 
est,  Lord,  Thou  knowest,  how  Thou  with  skins 
didst  clothe  men,1  when  they  by  sin  became 
mortal.  Whence  Thou  hast  like  a  skin  stretched 
out  the  firmament  of  Thy  book,  that  is,  Thy 
harmonizing  words,  which  by  the  ministry  of 
mortal  men  Thou  spreadest  over  us.  For  by  their 
very  death  was  that  solid  firmament  of  author¬ 
ity,  in  Thy  discourses  set  forth  by  them,  more 
eminently  extended  over  all  that  be  under  it; 
which,  whilst  they  lived  here,  was  not  so  emi¬ 
nently  extended.  Thou  hadst  not  as  yet  spread 
abroad  the  heaven  like  a  skin ;  Thou  hadst  not 
as  yet  enlarged  in  all  directions  the  glory  of 
their  deaths. 

17.  Let  us  look,  0  Lord,  “upon  the  heavens, 
the  work  of  Thy  fingers”2;  clear  from  our  eyes 
that  cloud  which  Thou  hast  spread  under  them. 
There  is  Thy  testimony,  which  giveth  wisdom 
unto  the  little  ones3;  perfect,  0  my  God,  Thy 
praise  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings.4 
For  we  know  no  other  books  which  so  destroy 
pride,  which  so  destroy  the  enemy  and  the  de¬ 
fender,5  who  resisteth  Thy  reconciliation  by  de¬ 
fending  his  own  sins.  I  know  not,  Lord,  I  know 
not  any  other  such  “pure” 6  words,  which  so  per¬ 
suade  me  to  confess,  and  make  my  neck  pliant 
to  Thy  yoke,  and  invite  me  to  serve  Thee  for 
nought.  Let  me  understand  them,  good  Father; 
grant  this  to  me,  who  am  placed  under  them ;  be¬ 
cause  for  those  placed  under  them,  hast  Thou 
established  them. 

18.  Other  “waters”  there  be  “above”  this 
“firmament,”  I  believe  immortal,  and  separated 
from  earthly  corruption.  Let  them  praise  Thy 
Name,  let  them  praise  Thee,  the  super-celestial 
people,  Thine  angels,  who  have  no  need  to  gaze 
up  at  this  firmament,  or  by  reading  to  know  of 
Thy  Word.  For  they  always  behold  Thy  face,7 
and  there  read  without  any  syllables  in  time 
what  willeth  Thy  eternal  will;  they  read,  they 
choose,  they  love.  They  are  ever  reading;  and 
that  never  passes  away  which  they  read;  for  by 
choosing,  and  by  loving,  they  read  the  very  un¬ 
changeableness  of  Thy  counsel.  Their  book  is 
never  closed,  nor  their  scroll  folded  up;8  seeing 
Thou  Thyself  art  this  to  them,  and  art  eternally; 
because  Thou  hast  ordained  them  above  this 
firmament,  which  Thou  hast  firmly  settled  over 
the  infirmity  of  the  lower  people,  where  they 
might  gaze  up  and  learn  Thy  mercy,  announcing 
in  time  Thee  Who  madest  times.  “For  Thy  mer¬ 
men.  3.  21.  2Ps.  8.  3.  3Ps.  19.  7. 

4Ps.  8.  2.  5See  above,  Bk.  iv.  26. 

6Ps.  19.  8.  7Matt.  18.  10.  8Isa.  24.  4. 


cy,  0  Lord,  is  in  the  heavens,  and  Thy  truth 
reacheth  unto  the  clouds.” 9  The  clouds  pass 
away,  but  the  heaven  abideth.  The  preachers  of 
Thy  word  pass  out  of  this  life  into  another;  but 
Thy  Scripture  is  spread  abroad  over  the  people, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Yet  heaven  and 
earth  also  shall  pass  away,  but  Thy  words  shall 
not  pass  away.10  Because  the  scroll  shall  be 
rolled  together;  and  the  grass  over  which  it  was 
spread  shall  with  the  goodliness  of  it  pass  away; 
but  Thy  Word  remaineth  for  ever,11  which  now 
appeareth  unto  us  under  the  dark  image  of  the 
clouds,  and  through  the  glass  of  the  heavens,  not 
as  it  is12;  because  we  also,  though  the  well-be¬ 
loved  of  Thy  Son,  yet  it  hath  not  yet  appeared 
what  we  shall  be.13  He  looketh  through  the  lat¬ 
tice14  of  our  flesh,  and  He  spake  us  tenderly,  and 
kindled  us,  and  we  ran  after  His  odours.15  But 
“when  He  shall  appear,  then  shall  we  be  like 
Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.”  As  He  is, 
Lord,  will  our  sight  be. 

[XVI]  19.  For  altogether,  as  Thou  art,  Thou 
only  knowest;  Who  art  unchangeably,  and 
knowest  unchangeably,  and  wiliest  unchange¬ 
ably.  And  Thy  Essence  Knoweth  and  Willeth 
unchangeably;  and  Thy  Knowledge  Is  and  Wil¬ 
leth  unchangeably;  and  Thy  Will  Is  and  Know¬ 
eth  unchangeably.  Nor  seemeth  it  right  in 
Thine  eyes  that,  as  the  Unchangeable  Light 
knoweth  Itself,  so  should  it  be  known  by  the 
thing  enlightened,  and  changeable.  Therefore  is 
my  soul  like  a  “land  where  no  water  is,”  16  be¬ 
cause  as  it  cannot  of  itself  enlighten  itself,  so 
can  it  not  of  itself  satisfy  itself.  For  so  is  the 
fountain  of  life  with  Thee,  like  as  in  Thy  light 
we  shall  see  light.17 

[XVII]  20.  Who  gathered  the  embittered  to¬ 
gether  into  one  society?  For  they  have  all  one 
end,  a  temporal  and  earthly  felicity,  for  attain¬ 
ing  whereof  they  do  all  things,  though  they  wa¬ 
ver  up  and  down  with  an  innumerable  variety 
of  cares.  Who,  Lord,  but  Thou,  saidst,  “Let  the 
waters  be  gathered  together  into  one  place,  and 
let  the  dry  land  appear,”  18  which  thirsteth  after 
Thee?19  For  the  sea  also  is  Thine,  and  Thou  hast 
made  it,  and  Thy  hands  prepared  the  dry  land.20 
Nor  is  the  bitterness  of  men’s  wills,  but  the 
gathering  together  of  the  waters,  called  sea;  for 
Thou  restrainest  the  wicked  desires  of  men’s 
souls,  and  settest  them  their  bounds,  how  far 
they  may  be  allowed  to  pass,21  that  their  waves 

9Ps.  36.  5.  10Matt.  24.  35.  nIsa.  40.  6-8. 

12I  Cor.  13.  12.  13I  John,  3.  2.  14Cant.  2.  9. 

15Cant.  1.  3  16Ps.  63.  1.  17Ps.  36.  9. 

18Gen.  1.  9.  19Ps.  143.  6;  63.  1.  20Ps.  95.  5. 

21Ps.  104.  9;  Job,  38.  11,  12. 


n6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


may  break  one  against  another ;  and  thus  makest 
Thou  it  a  sea,  by  the  order  of  Thy  dominion 
over  all  things. 

21.  But  the  souls  that  thirst  after  Thee,  and 
that  appear  before  Thee  (being  by  other  bounds 
divided  from  the  society  of  the  sea),  Thou  wa- 
terest  by  a  sweet  spring,  that  the  earth  may 
bring  forth  her  fruit,  and  Thou.  Lord  God,  so 
commanding,  our  soul  may  bud  forth  works  of 
mercy  according  to  their  kind,  loving  our  neigh¬ 
bour  in  the  relief  of  his  bodily  necessities,  having 
seed  in  itself  according  to  its  likeness1;  when, 
from  feeling  of  our  infirmity,  we  compassionate 
so  as  to  relieve  the  needy;  helping  them  as  we 
would  be  helped  if  we  were  in  like  need ;  not  only 
in  things  easy,  as  in  “herb  yielding  seed,”  but 
also  in  the  protection  of  our  assistance,  with  our 
best  strength,  like  the  tree  yielding  fruit:  that 
is,  well-doing  in  rescuing  him  that  suffers  wrong, 
from  the  hand  of  the  powerful,  and  giving  him 
the  shelter  of  protection,  by  the  mighty  strength 
of  just  judgment. 

[XVIII]  22.  So,  Lord,  so,  I  beseech  Thee,  let 
there  spring  up,  as  Thou  doest,  as  Thou  givest 
cheerfulness  and  ability,  let  “truth  spring  out  of 
the  earth,  and  righteousness  look  down  from 
heaven,”  2  and  let  there  be  “lights  in  the  firma¬ 
ment.”  3  Let  us  break  our  bread  to  the  hungry, 
and  bring  the  houseless  poor  to  our  house.  Let 
us  clothe  the  naked,  and  despise  not  those  of 
our  own  flesh.4  Which  fruits  having  sprung  out 
of  the  earth,  see  it  is  good5;  and  let  our  tem¬ 
porary  light  break  forth6;  and  ourselves,  from 
this  lower  fruitfulness  of  action,  arriving  at  the 
delightfulness  of  contemplation,  obtaining  the 
Word  of  Life  above,  appear  like  lights  in  the 
world,7  cleaving  to  the  firmament  of  Thy  Scrip¬ 
ture.  For  there  Thou  instructest  us,  to  divide 
between  the  things  intellectual  and  things  of 
sense,  as  betwixt  the  day  and  the  night ;  or  be¬ 
tween  souls,  given  either  to  things  intellectual 
or  things  of  sense,  so  that  now  not  Thou  only  in 
the  secret  of  Thy  judgment,  as  before  the  firma¬ 
ment  was  made,  dividest  between  the  light  and 
the  darkness,  but  Thy  spiritual  children  also  set 
and  ranked  in  the  same  firmament  (now  that 
Thy  grace  is  laid  open  throughout  the  world) 
may  give  light  upon  the  earth,  and  divide  be¬ 
twixt  the  day  and  the  night,  and  be  for  signs  of 
times,  that  “old  things  are  passed  away,”  and, 
“behold,  all  things  are  become  new”;8  and  “that 
our  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  we  believed” : 9 
and  “that  the  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is 

^en.  i.  12.  2Ps.  85.  11.  3Gen.  1.  14. 

4Isa.  58.  7.  6Gen.  1.  12.  6Isa.  58.  8. 

7Phil.  2.  15.  8II  Cor.  5.  17.  9Rom.  13.  11,  12. 


at  hand”:9  and  that  Thou  wilt  crown  Thy  year 
with  blessing,10  sending  the  labourers  of  Thy 
goodness  into  Thy  harvest,11  in  sowing  whereof 
others  have  laboured,  sending  also  into  another 
field,  whose  harvest  shall  be  in  the  end.12  Thus 
grantest  Thou  the  prayers  of  him  that  asketh, 
and  blessest  the  years  of  the  just ; 13  but  Thou  art 
the  same,  and  in  Thy  years  which  fail  not,14 
Thou  preparest  a  garner  for  our  passing  years. 
For  Thou  by  an  eternal  counsel  dost  in  their 
proper  seasons  bestow  heavenly  blessings  upon 
the  earth. 

23.  For  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word 
of  wisdom,  as  it  were  the  greater  light,  for  their 
sakes  who  are  delighted  with  the  light  of  per¬ 
spicuous  truth,  as  it  were  for  the  rule  of  the 
day.  To  another  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the 
same  Spirit,  as  it  were  the  lesser  light;  to  an¬ 
other  faith;  to  another  the  gift  of  healing;  to 
another  the  working  of  miracles;  to  another 
prophecy;  to  another  discerning  of  spirits;  to 
another  divers  kinds  of  tongues.  And  all  these  as 
it  were  stars.  For  all  these  worketh  the  one  and 
self-same  spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  his  own 
as  He  will;15  and  causing  stars  to  appear  mani¬ 
festly,  to  profit  withal.16  But  the  word  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  wherein  are  contained  all  Sacraments,17 
which  are  varied  in  their  seasons  as  it  were  the 
moon,  and  those  other  notices  of  gifts,  which 
are  reckoned  up  in  order,  as  it  were  stars,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  come  short  of  that  brightness  of 
wisdom,  which  gladdens  the  forementioned  day, 
are  only  for  the  rule  of  the  night.  For  they  are 
necessary  to  such,  as  that  Thy  most  prudent 
servant  could  not  speak  unto  as  unto  spiritual, 
but  as. unto  carnal;18  even  he,  who  speaketh  wis¬ 
dom  among  those  that  are  perfect.19  But  the  nat¬ 
ural  man,  as  it  were  a  babe  in  Christ  and  fed  on 
milk,  until  he  be  strengthened  for  solid  meat20 
and  his  eye  be  enabled  to  behold  the  Sun,  let 
him  not  dwell  in  a  night  forsaken  of  all  light,  but 
be  content  with  the  light  of  the  moon  and  the 
stars.  So  dost  Thou  speak  to  us,  our  All-wise 
God,  in  Thy  Book,  Thy  firmament ;  that  we  may 
discern  all  things,  in  an  admirable  contempla¬ 
tion;  though  as  yet  in  signs,  and  in  times,  and  in 
days,  and  in  years. 

[XIX]  24.  But  first,  “wash  you,  make  you 
clean”;  put  away  evil  from  your  souls,  and  from 
before  mine  eyes,  that  the  dry  land  may  appear. 
Learn  to  do  good,  “judge  the  fatherless,  plead 
for  the  widow,”  21  that  the  earth  may  bring  forth 

10Ps.  65.  11.  uMatt.  9.  38.  12Matt.  13.  39. 

13Prov.  10.  6.  14Ps.  102.  27.  16I  Cor.  12.  8-1 1. 

ieIbid.,  ver.  7.  17I  Cor.  13.  2.  l8I  Cor.  3.  1. 

19I  Cor.  2.  6.  20I  Cor.  3.  2;  Heb.  5.  12. 

21Isa.  1.  16,  17. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  21-28  117 


the  green  herb  for  meat,  and  the  tree  bearing 
fruit;1  and  come,  let  us  reason  together,  saith 
the  Lord,2  that  there  may  be  lights  in  the  firma¬ 
ment  of  the  heaven,  and  they  may  shine  upon 
the  earth.3  That  rich  man  asked  of  the  good 
Master,  what  he  should  do  to  attain  eternal  life.4 
Let  the  good  Master  tell  him  (whom  he  thought 
no  more  than  man;  but  He  is  “good”  because 
He  is  God),  let  Him  tell  him,  if  he  would  “enter 
into  life,”  he  must  “keep  the  commandments”:5 
let  him  put  away  from  him  the  bitterness  of  mal¬ 
ice  and  wickedness;6  not  kill,  not  commit  adul¬ 
tery,  not  steal,  not  bear  false  witness;  that  the 
dry  land  may  appear,  and  bring  forth  the  hon¬ 
ouring  of  father  and  mother,  and  the  love  of  our 
neighbour.7  All  these,  saith  he,  have  I  kept.8 
Whence  then  so  many  thorns,  if  the  earth  be 
fruitful?  Go,  root  up  the  spreading  thickets  of 
covetousness;  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  be  filled 
with  fruit,  by  giving  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt 
have  treasure  in  heaven;  and  follow  the  Lord 
“if  thou  wilt  be  perfect,”  9  associated  with  them, 
among  whom  He  speaketh  wisdom.  Who  know- 
eth  what  to  distribute  to  the  day  and  to  the 
night,  that  thou  also  mayest  know  it,  and  for 
thee  there  may  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of 
heaven;  which  will  not  be.  unless  thy  heart  be 
there:10  nor  will  that  either  be.  unless  there  thy 
treasure  be ;  as  thou  hast  heard  of  the  good  Mas¬ 
ter.  But  that  barren  earth  was  grieved;11  and  the 
thorns  choked  the  word.12 

25.  But  you,  “chosen  generation,”13  you  weak 
things  of  the  world,  who  have  forsaken  all  that 
ye  may  “follow  the  Lord”;  go  after  Him,  and 
“confound  the  mighty”;14  go  after  Him,  ye 
beautiful  feet,15  and  shine  ye  in  the  firmament,16 
that  the  heavens  may  declare  His  glory,  dividing 
between  the  light  of  the  perfect,  though  not  as 
the  angels,  and  the  darkness  of  the  little  ones, 
though  not  despised.  Shine  over  the  earth ;  and 
let  the  day,  lightened  by  the  sun,  utter  unto  day, 
speech  of  wisdom;  and  night,  shining  with  the 
moon,  shew  unto  night  the  word  of  knowledge.17 
The  moon  and  stars  shine  for  the  night ;  yet  doth 
not  the  ^night  obscure  them,  seeing  they  give  it 
light  in  its  degree.  For  behold  God  saying,  as  it 
were,  “Let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of 
heaven”;  there  came  suddenly  a  sound  from 
heaven,  as  it  had  been  the  rushing  of  a  mighty 
wind,  and  there  appeared  cloven  tongues  like  as 
of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them.18  And  there 

4Gen.  1.  11,  30.  2Isa.  i.  18.  3Gen.  i.  15. 

4Matt.  19.  16.  bIbid.,  ver.  17.  6I  Cor.  5.  8. 

7Matt.  19.  16-19.  sIbid.,  ver.  20.  9Ibid.,  ver.  21. 

10Matt.  6.  21.  nMatt.  19.  22.  12Matt.  13.  7,  22. 

13I  Pet.  2.  9.  14I  Cor.  1.  27.  i6Isa.  52.  7. 

16Dan.  12.  3.  17Ps.  19.  18Acts,  2.  3. 


were  made  lights  in  the  firmament  of  heaven, 
having  the  word  of  life.19  Run  ye  to  and  fro 
everywhere,  ye  holy  fires,  ye  beauteous  fires; 
for  ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,  nor  are  ye  put 
under  a  bushel;20  He  whom  you  cleave  unto  is 
exalted,  and  hath  exalted  you.  Run  ye  to  and 
fro,  and  be  known  unto  all  nations. 

[XX]  26.  Let  the  sea  also  conceive  and  bring 
forth  your  works;  and  let  the  waters  bring  forth 
the  moving  creature  that  hath  life.21  For  ye, 
“separating  the  precious  from  the  vile,”  22  are 
made  the  mouth  of  God.  by  whom  He  saith, 
“Let  the  waters  bring  forth,”  not  the  living  crea¬ 
ture  which  the  earth  brings  forth,  but  the  mov¬ 
ing  creature  having  life,  and  the  fowls  that  fly 
above  the  earth.  For  Thy  Sacraments,  0  God, 
by  the  ministry  of  Thy  holy  ones,  have  moved 
amid  the  waves  of  temptations  of  the  world,  to 
hallow  the  Gentiles  in  Thy  Name,  in  Thy  Bap¬ 
tism.  And  amid  these  things,  many  great  won¬ 
ders  were  wrought,  as  it  were  great  whales;  and 
the  voices  of  Thy  messengers  flying  above  the 
earth,  in  the  open  firmament  of  Thy  Book;  that 
being  set  over  them,  as  their  authority  under 
which  they  were  to  fly,  whithersoever  they  went. 
For  “there  is  no  speech  nor  language,  where 
their  voice  is  not  heard”;  seeing  their  sound  23 
“is  gone  through  all  the  earth,  and  their  words  to 
the  end  of  the  world,”  because  Thou,  Lord, 
multipliedst  them  by  blessing.24 

27.  Speak  I  untruly,  or  do  I  mingle  and  con¬ 
found,  and  not  distinguish  between  the  lucid 
knowledge  of  these  things  in  the  firmament  of 
heaven,  and  the  material  works  in  the  wavy  sea, 
and  under  the  firmament  of  heaven?  For  of 
those  things  whereof  the  knowledge  is  substan¬ 
tial  and  defined,  without  any  increase  by  genera¬ 
tion,  as  it  were  lights  of  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
yet  even  of  them,  the  material  operations  are 
many  and  divers;  and,  one  thing  growing  out  of 
another,  they  are  multiplied  by  Thy  blessing,  0 
God,  who  hast  refreshed  the  fastidiousness  of 
mortal  senses;  that  so  one  thing  in  the  under¬ 
standing  of  our  mind  may,  by  the  motions  of  the 
body,  be  many  ways  set  out  and  expressed. 
These  Sacraments  have  the  waters  brought 
forth,  but  in  Thy  word.  The  necessities  of  the 
people  estranged  from  the  eternity  of  Thy  truth 
have  brought  them  forth,  but  in  Thy  Gospel; 
because  the  waters  themselves  cast  them  forth, 
the  diseased  bitterness  whereof  was  the  cause, 
why  they  were  sent  forth  in  Thy  Word. 

28.  Now  are  all  things  fair  that  Thou  hast 
made;  but  behold,  Thyself  art  unutterably 

19I  John,  1.  1.  20Matt.  5.  14.  21Gen.  1.  20. 

“Jer.  15.  19.  23Ps.  19.  3,  4.  24Gen.  1.  4. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


118 

fairer,  That  madest  all;  from  whom  had  not 
Adam  fallen,  the  brackishness  of  the  sea  had 
never  flowed  out  of  him,  that  is,  the  human  race 
so  profoundly  curious,  and  tempestuously  swell¬ 
ing,  and  restlessly  tumbling  up  and  down;  and 
then  had  there  been  no  need  of  Thy  dispensers 
to  work  in  many  waters,  after  a  corporeal  and 
sensible  manner,  mysterious  doings  and  sayings. 
For  such  those  moving  and  flying  creatures  now 
seem  to  me  to  mean,  whereby  people  being  in¬ 
itiated  and  consecrated  by  corporeal  Sacra¬ 
ments  should  not  further  profit,  unless  their  soul 
had  a  spiritual  life,  and  unless  after  the  word  of 
admission  it  looked  forwards  to  perfection. 

[XXI]  29.  And  hereby,  in  Thy  Word,  not  the 
deepness  of  the  sea,  but  the  earth  separated 
from  the  bitterness  of  the  waters,  brings  forth, 
not  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,1  but  the 
living  soul.2  For  now  hath  it  no  more  need  of 
baptism,  as  the  heathen  have,  and  as  itself  had, 
when  it  was  covered  with  the  waters  (for  no 
other  entrance  is  there  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,3  since  Thou  hast  appointed  that  this 
should  be  the  entrance) ;  nor  does  it  seek  after 
wonderfulness  of  miracles  to  work  belief ;  for  it 
is  not  such  that,  unless  it  sees  signs  and  won¬ 
ders,  it  will  not  believe,4  now  that  the  faithful 
earth  is  separated  from  the  waters  that  were 
bitter  with  infidelity;  and  “tongues  are  for  a 
sign,  not  to  them  that  believe,  but  to  them  that 
believe  not.”5  Neither  then  does  that  earth 
which  Thou  hast  founded  upon  the  waters  need 
that  flying  kind,  which  at  Thy  word  the  waters 
brought  forth.  Send  Thou  Thy  word  into  it  by 
Thy  messengers :  for  we  speak  of  their  working, 
yet  it  is  Thou  that  workest  in  them  that  they 
may  work  out  a  living  soul  in  it.  The  earth  brings 
it  forth,  because  the  earth  is  the  cause  that  they 
work  this  in  the  soul ;  as  the  sea  was  the  cause 
that  they  wrought  upon  the  moving  creatures 
that  have  life,  and  the  fowls  that  fly  under  the 
firmament  of  heaven,  of  whom  the  earth  hath 
no  need;  although  it  feeds  upon  that  fish  which 
was  taken  out  of  the  deep,  upon  that  table  which 
Thou  hast  prepared  in  the  presence  of  them  that 
believe.6  For  therefore  was  He  taken  out  of  the 
deep,  that  He  might  feed  the  dry  land;  and  the 
fowl,  though  bred  in  the  sea,  is  yet  multiplied 
upon  the  earth.  For  of  the  first  preachings  of 
the  Evangelists,  man’s  infidelity  was  the  cause; 
yet  are  the  faithful  also  exhorted  and  blessed  by 
them  manifoldly,  from  day  to  day.  But  the  liv¬ 
ing  soul  takes  his  beginning  from  the  earth ;  for 
it  profits  only  those  already  among  the  Faithful, 

'Gen.  1.  20.  2Gen.  2.  7.  3John,  3.  5. 

4John,  4.  48.  5I  Cor.  14.  22.  6Ps.  23.  5. 


to  contain  themselves  from  the  love  of  this 
world,  that  so  their  soul  may  live  unto  Thee, 
which  was  dead  while  it  lived  in  pleasures;7  in 
death-bringing  pleasures,  Lord,  for  Thou.  Lord, 
art  the  life-giving  delight  of  the  pure  heart. 

30.  Now  then  let  Thy  ministers  work  upon 
the  earth,  not  as  upon  the  waters  of  infidelity, 
by  preaching  and  speaking  by  miracles,  and  Sac¬ 
raments,  and  mystic  words;  wherein  ignorance, 
the  mother  of  admiration,  might  be  intent  upon 
them,  out  of  a  reverence  towards  those  secret 
signs.  For  such  is  the  entrance  unto  the  Faith 
for  the  sons  of  Adam  forgetful  of  Thee,  while 
they  hide  themselves  from  Thy  face,8  and  be¬ 
come  a  darksome  deep.  But  let  Thy  ministers 
work  now  as  on  the  dry  land,  separated  from 
the  whirlpools  of  the  great  deep;  and  let  them 
be  a  pattern  unto  the  Faithful,  by  living  before 
them,  and  stirring  them  up  to  imitation.  For 
thus  do  men  hear,  so  as  not  to  hear  only,  but  to 
do  so  also.  Seek  the  Lord,  and  your  soul  shall 
live,9  that  the  earth  may  bring  forth  the  living 
soul.  “Be  not  conformed  to  the  world.”  10  Con¬ 
tain  yourselves  from  it;  the  soul  lives  by  avoid¬ 
ing  what  it  dies  by  affecting.  Contain  yourselves 
from  the  ungoverned  wilderness  of  pride,  the 
sluggish  voluptuousness  of  luxury,  and  the  false 
name  of  knowledge:11  that  so  the  wild  beasts 
may  be  tamed,  the  cattle  broken  to  the  yoke,  the 
serpents,  harmless.  For  these  be  the  motions  of 
our  mind  under  an  allegory;  that  is  to  say,  the 
haughtiness  of  pride,  the  delight  of  lust,  and  the 
poison  of  curiosity  are  the  motions  of  a  dead 
soul;  for  the  soul  dies  not  so  as  to  lose  all  mo¬ 
tion;  because  it  dies  by  forsaking  the  fountain 
of  life,12  and  so  is  taken  up  by  this  transitory 
world,  and  is  conformed  unto  it. 

31.  But  Thy  word.  0  God,  is  the  fountain  of 
life  eternal;  and  passeth  not  away;  wherefore 
this  departure  of  the  soul  is  restrained  by  Thy 
word,  when  it  is  said  unto  us,  “Be  not  con¬ 
formed  unto  this  world”  ;13  that  so  the  earth  may 
in  the  fountain  of  life  bring  forth  a  living  soul; 
that  is,  a  soul  made  continent  in  Thy  Word,  by 
Thy  Evangelists,  by  following  the  followers  of 
Thy  Christ.14  For  this  is  after  his  kind;  because 
a  man  is  wont  to  imitate  his  friend.  “Be  ye,” 
saith  he,  “as  I  am,  for  I  also  am  as  you  are.”  15 
Thus  in  this  living  soul  shall  there  be  good 
beasts,  in  meekness  of  action  (for  Thou  hast 
commanded,  Go  on  with  thy  business  in  meek¬ 
ness,  so  shalt  thou  be  beloved  by  all  men)  ;16  and 
good  cattle,  which  neither  if  they  eat,  shall  they 

7I  Tim.  5.6.  8Gen.  3.8.  9Ps.  6g.  32.  10Rom.  12.  2. 

nI  Tim.  6.  20.  12Jer.  2.  13.  13Rom.  12.  2. 

14I  Cor.  11.  1.  15Gal.  4.  12.  16Ecclus.  3.  17,  etc. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  29-34 


over-abound,  nor,  if  they  eat  not.  have  any 
lack;1  and  good  serpents,  not  dangerous  to  do 
hurt,  but  “wise”2  to  take  heed;  and  only  making 
so  much  search  into  this  temporal  nature  as  may 
suffice  that  eternity  be  clearly  seen,  being  under¬ 
stood  by  the  things  that  are  made.”  3  For  these 
creatures  are  obedient  unto  reason,  when,  being 
restrained  from  deadly  prevailing  upon  us,  they 
live,  and  are  good. 

32.  For  behold.  0  Lord,  our  God.  our  Cre¬ 
ator,  when  our  affections  have  been  restrained 
from  the  love  of  the  world,  by  which  we  died 
through  evil-living:  and  begun  to  be  a  “living 
soul.”  through  good  living;  and  Thy  word  which 
Thou  spakest  by  Thy  apostle  is  made  good  in  us, 
“Be  not  conformed  to  this  world”;  there  fol¬ 
lows  that  also,  which  Thou  presently  subjoin- 
edst,  saying,  “But  be  ye  transformed  by  the  re¬ 
newing  of  your  mind”  ;4  not  now  after  your  kind, 
as  though  following  your  neighbour  who  went 
before  you,  nor  as  living  after  the  example  of 
some  better  man  (for  Thou  saidst  not,  “Let  man 
be  made  after  his  kind.”  but.  Let  us  make  man 
after  our  own  image  and  similitude)5  that  we 
might  prove  what  Thy  will  is.  For  to  this  purpose 
said  that  dispenser  of  Thine  (who  begat  chil¬ 
dren  by  the  Gospel)6  that  he  might  not  for  ever 
have  them  “babes,”  whom  he  must  be  fain  to 
feed  with  milk,  and  cherish  as  a  nurse;7  “be  ye 
transformed,”  saith  he  “by ‘the  renewing  of  your 
mind,  that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good  and 
acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God.”8  Wherefore 
Thou  sayest  not,  “Let  man  be  made,”  but  “Let 
us  make  man.”  Nor  saidst  Thou,  “according  to 
his  kind,”  but  “after  our  image  and  likeness.” 
For  man,  being  renewed  in  his  mind,  and  behold¬ 
ing  and  understanding  Thy  truth,  needs  not  man 
as  his  director,9  so  as  to  follow  after  his  kind; 
but  by  Thy  direction  proveth  what  is  that  good, 
that  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  Thine;  yea, 
Thou  teachest  him,  now  made  capable,  to  dis¬ 
cern  the  Trinity  of  the  Unity,  and  the  Unity  of 
the  Trinity.  Wherefore  to  that  said  in  the  plural, 
“Let  us  make  man,”  is  yet  subjoined  in  the  sin¬ 
gular,  “^.nd  God  made  man”;  and  to  that  said 
in  the  plural,  “After  our  likeness,”  is  subjoined 
in  the  singular,  “After  the  image  of  God.”  10 
Thus  is  man  renewed  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
after  the  image  of  Him  that  created  him;11  and 
being  made  spiritual,  he  judgeth  all  things  (all 
things  which  are  to  be  judged),  “yet  himself  is 
judged  of  no  man.”  12 

XI  Cor.  8.  8.  2Matt.  10.  16.  3Rom.  i.  20. 

4Rom.  12.  2.  5Gen.  1.  26.  6I  Cor.  4.  15. 

7I  Thess.  2.  7.  8Rom.  12.  2.  9Jer.  31.  34. 

10Gen.  1.  27.  uCol.  3.  10.  12I  Cor.  2.  15. 


[XXIII]  33.  But  that  he  judgeth  all  things, 
this  answers  to  his  having  dominion  over  the  fish 
of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and 
over  all  cattle  and  wild  beasts,  and  over  all  the 
earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that  creep- 
eth  upon  the  earth.  For  this  he  doth  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding  of  his  mind,  whereby  he  perceiveth 
the  things  “of  the  Spirit  of  God”;13  whereas 
otherwise,  man  being  placed  in  honour,  had  no 
understanding,  and  is  compared  unto  the  brute 
beasts,  and  is  become  like  unto  them.14  In  Thy 
Church  therefore,  0  our  God,  according  to  Thy 
grace  which  Thou  hast  bestowed  upon  it  (for 
we  are  Thy  workmanship  created  unto  good 
works),15  not  those  only  who  are  spiritually  set 
over,  but  they  also  who  spiritually  are  subject  to 
those  that  are  set  over  them,  for  in  this  way 
didst  Thou  make  man  male  and  female,10  in  Thy 
grace  spiritual,  where,  according  to  the  sex  of 
body,  there  is  neither  male  nor  female,  because 
neither  Jew  nor  Grecian,  neither  bond  nor  free.16 
— Spiritual  persons  (whether  such  as  are  set 
over,  or  such  as  obey)  do  judge  spiritually;  not 
of  that  spiritual  knowledge  which  shines  in  the 
firmament  (for  they  ought  not  to  judge  as  to  so 
supreme  authority),  nor  may  they  judge  of  Thy 
Book  itself,  even  though  something  there  shin- 
eth  not  clearly;  for  we  submit  our  understand¬ 
ing  unto  it,  and  hold  for  certain  that  even  what 
is  closed  to  our  sight  is  yet  rightly  and  truly 
spoken.17  For  so  man,  though  now  spiritual  and 
renewed  in  the  knowledge  of  God  after  His  im¬ 
age  that  created  him,  ought  to  be  “a  doer  of  the 
law,  not  a  judge.”  18  Neither  doth  he  judge  of 
that  distinction  of  spiritual  and  carnal  men,  who 
are  known  unto  Thine  eyes,  0  our  God,  and 
have  not  as  yet  discovered  themselves  unto  us 
by  works,  that  by  their  fruits  we  might  know 
them;19  but  Thou,  Lord,  dost  even  now  know 
them,  and  hast  divided  and  called  them  in  secret, 
or  ever  the  firmament  was  made.  Nor  doth  he, 
though  spiritual,  judge  the  unquiet  people  of 
this  world;  for  what  hath  he  to  do,  to  judge 
them  are  without,20  knowing  not  which  of  them 
shall  hereafter  come  into  the  sweetness  of  Thy 
grace,  and  which  continue  in  the  perpetual  bit¬ 
terness  of  ungodliness? 

34.  Man  therefore,  whom  Thou  hast  made  af¬ 
ter  Thine  own  image,  received  not  dominion 
over  the  lights  of  heaven,  nor  over  that  hidden 
heaven  itself,  nor  over  the  day  and  the  night, 
which  Thou  calledst  before  the  foundation  of 
the  heaven,  nor  over  the  gathering  together  of 

13I  Cor.  2.  14.  l4Ps.  49.  20.  15Eph.  2.  10. 

16Gal.  3.  28.  17See  City  of  God ,  Bk.  xi.  3. 

18Jas.  4.  2.  l9Matt.  8.  20.  20I  Cor.  5.  12. 


120 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  waters,  which  is  the  sea;  but  He  received 
dominion  over  the  fishes  of  the  sea.  and  the 
fowls  of  the  air.  and  over  all  cattle,  and  over  all 
the  earth,  and  over  all  creeping  things  which 
creep  upon  the  earth.  For  He  judgeth  and  ap¬ 
proved  what  He  findeth  right,  and  He  disal¬ 
lowed  what  He  findeth  amiss,  whether  in  the 
celebration  of  those  Sacraments  by  which  such 
are  initiated,  as  Thy  mercy  searches  out  in 
many  waters;  or  in  that  in  which  that  Fish  is 
set  forth  which,  taken  out  of  the  deep,  the  de¬ 
vout  earth  feedeth  upon;  or  in  the  expressions 
and  signs  of  words,  subject  to  the  authority  of 
Thy  Book — such  signs  as  proceed  out  of  the 
mouth,  and  sound  forth,  flying  as  it  were  under 
the  firmament,  by  interpreting,  expounding,  dis¬ 
coursing,  disputing,  consecrating,  or  praying  un¬ 
to  Thee,  so  that  the  people  may  answer, 
“Amen.”  The  vocal  pronouncing  of  all  which 
words  is  occasioned  by  the  deep  of  this  world, 
and  the  blindness  of  the  flesh,  which  cannot  see 
thoughts;  so  that  there  is  need  to  speak  aloud 
into  the  ears;  so  that,  although  flying  fowls  be 
multiplied  upon  the  earth,  yet  they  derive  their 
beginning  from  the  waters.  The  spiritual^man 
judgeth  also  by  allowing  of  what  is  right,  and 
disallowing  what  he  finds  amiss  in  the  works 
and  lives  of  the  faithful;  their  alms,  as  it  were 
“the  earth  bringing  forth  fruit,”  and  of  the  “liv¬ 
ing  soul,”  living  by  the  taming  of  the  affections, 
in  chastity,  in  fasting,  in  holy  meditations;  and 
of  those  things  which  are  perceived  by  the  senses 
of  the  body.  Upon  all  these  is  he  now  said  to 
judge,  wherein  he  hath  also  power  of  correction. 

35.  But  what  is  this,  and  what  kind  of  mys¬ 
tery?  Behold,  Thou  blessest  mankind.  0  Lord, 
that  they  may  “increase  and  multiply,  and  re¬ 
plenish  the  earth”1;  dost  Thou  not  thereby  give 
us  a  hint  to  understand  something?  Why  didst 
Thou  not  as  well  bless  the  light,  which  Thou 
calledst  day;  nor  the  firmament  of  heaven,  nor 
the  lights,  nor  the  stars,  nor  the  earth,  nor  the 
sea?  I  might  say  that  Thou,  0  God,  Who  created 
us  after  Thine  Image,  I  might  say  that  it  had 
been  Thy  good  pleasure  to  bestow  this  blessing 
peculiarly  upon  man,  hadst  Thou  not  in  like 
manner  blessed  the  fishes  and  the  whales,  that 
they  should  increase  and  multiply,  and  replen¬ 
ish  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  that  the  fowls 
should  be  multiplied  upon  the  earth.  I  might  say 
likewise  that  this  blessing  pertained  properly  un¬ 
to  such  creatures  as  are  bred  of  their  own  kind, 
had  I  found  it  given  to  the  fruit-trees,  and 
plants,  and  beasts  of  the  earth.  But  now  neither 
unto  the  herbs,  nor  the  trees,  nor  the  beasts,  nor 
^en.  1.  28. 


serpents  is  it  said,  “Increase  and  multiply” ;  not¬ 
withstanding  all  these,  as  well  as  the  fishes, 
fowls,  or  men,  do  by  generation  increase  and 
continue  their  kind. 

36.  What  then  shall  I  say,  0  Truth  my  Light? 
“That  it  was  idly  said,  and  without  meaning?” 
Not  so,  0  Father  of  piety,  far  be  it  from  a  min¬ 
ister  of  Thy  word  to  say  so.  And  if  I  understand 
not  what  Thou  meanest  by  that  phrase,  let  my 
betters,  that  is,  those  of  more  understanding 
than  myself,  make  better  use  of  it,  according  as 
Thou,  my  God,  hast  given  to  each  man  to  un¬ 
derstand.  But  let  my  confession  also  be  pleasing 
in  Thine  eyes,  wherein  I  confess  unto  Thee  that 
I  believe,  0  Lord,  that  Thou  spakest  not  so  in 
vain;  nor  will  I  suppress  what  this  lesson  sug¬ 
gests  to  me.  For  it  is  true,  nor  do  I  see  what 
should  hinder  me  from  thus  understanding  the 
figurative  sayings  of  Thy  Bible.  For  I  know  a 
thing  to  be  manifoldly  signified  by  corporeal  ex¬ 
pressions,  which  is  understood  one  way  by  the 
mind;  and  that  understood  many  ways  in  the 
mind,  which  is  signified  one  way  by  corporeal 
expression.  Behold,  the  single  love  of  God  and 
our  neighbour,  by  what  manifold  sacraments, 
and  innumerable  languages,  and  in  each  several 
language,  in  how  innumerable  modes  of  speak¬ 
ing.  it  is  corporeally  expressed.  Thus  do  the  off¬ 
spring  of  the  waters  increase  and  multiply.  Ob¬ 
serve  again,  whosoever  readest  this ;  behold,  what 
Scripture  delivers,  and  the  voice  pronounces 
one  only  way,  “In  the  Beginning  God  created 
heaven  and  earth”;  is  it  not  understood  mani¬ 
foldly,  not  through  any  deceit  of  error,  but  by 
various  kinds  of  true  senses?  Thus  do  man’s  off¬ 
spring  “increase”  and  “multiply.” 

37.  If  therefore  we  conceive  of  the  natures  of 
the  things  themselves,  not  allegorically,  but 
properly,  then  does  the  phrase  “increase  and 
multiply”  agree  unto  all  things  that  come  of 
seed.  But  if  we  treat  of  the  words  as  figuratively 
spoken  (which  I  rather  suppose  to  be  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  the  Scripture,  which  doth  not,  surely, 
superfluously  ascribe  this  benediction  to  the  off¬ 
spring  of  aquatic  animals  and  man  only),  then 
do  we  find  “multitude”  to  belong  to  creatures 
spiritual  as  well  as  corporeal,  as  in  heaven  and 
earth,  and  to  souls  both  righteous  and  unright¬ 
eous,  as  in  light  and  darkness;  and  to  holy  au¬ 
thors  who  have  been  the  ministers  of  the  Law 
unto  us,  as  in  the  firmament  which  is  settled  be¬ 
twixt  the  waters  and  the  waters ;  and  to  the  so¬ 
ciety  of  people  yet  in  the  bitterness  of  infidelity, 
as  in  the  sea;  and  to  the  zeal  of  holy  souls,  as  in 
the  dry  land;  and  to  works  of  mercy  belonging 
to  this  present  life,  as  in  the  herbs  bearing  seed, 


1 21 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  35-40 


and  in  trees  bearing  fruit ;  and  to  spiritual  gifts 
set  forth  for  edification,  as  in  the  lights  of  heav¬ 
en:  and  to  affections  formed  unto  temperance, 
as  in  the  living  soul.  In  all  these  instances  we 
meet  with  multitudes,  abundance,  and  increase; 
but  w’hat  shall  in  such  wise  “increase  and  mul¬ 
tiply”  that  one  thing  may  be  expressed  many 
ways,  and  one  expression  understood  many 
wrays,  w’e  find  not,  except  in  signs  corporeally  ex¬ 
pressed,  and  in  things  mentally  conceived.  By 
signs  corporeally  pronounced  w’e  understand  the 
generations  of  the  waters,  necessarily  occasioned 
by  the  depth  of  the  flesh;  by  things  mentally 
conceived,  human  generations,  on  account  of  the 
fruitfulness  of  reason.  And  for  this  end  do  wTe 
believe  Thee,  Lord,  to  have  said  to  these  kinds. 
“Increase  and  multiply.”  For  in  this  blessing  I 
conceive  Thee  to  have  granted  us  a  pow’er  and  a 
faculty,  both  to  express  several  w’ays  what  wre 
understand  but  one,  and  to  understand  several 
w’ays  w’hat  w’e  read  to  be  obscurely  delivered 
but  in  one.  Thus  are  the  waters  of  the  sea  re¬ 
plenished,  which  are  not  moved  but  by  several 
significations;  thus  with  human  increase  is  the 
earth  also  replenished,  w’hose  dryness  appeareth 
in  its  longing,1  and  reason  ruleth  over  it. 

[XXV]  38. 1  w’ould  also  say,  0  Lord  my  God, 
what  the  following  Scripture  minds  me  of ;  yea. 
I  will  say,  and  not  fear.  For  I  will  say  the  truth. 
Thyself  inspiring  me  with  w’hat  Thou  willedst 
me  to  deliver  out  of  those  w’ords.  But  by  no 
other  inspiration  than  Thine  do  I  believe  my¬ 
self  to  speak  truth,  seeing  Thou  art  the  Truth, 
and  every  man  a  liar.2  He  therefore  “that  speak- 
eth  a  lie  speaketh  of  his  ow’n”;3  that  therefore  I 
may  speak  truth,  I  will  speak  of  Thine.  Behold. 
Thou  hast  given  unto  us  for  food  “every  herb 
bearing  seed”  w’hich  is  upon  all  the  earth,  “and 
every  tree,  in  w’hich  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yield¬ 
ing  seed.”4  And  not  to  us  alone,  but  also  to  all 
the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the 
earth,  and  to  all  creeping  things;5  but  unto  the 
fishes  and  to  the  great  w’hales,  hast  Thou  not 
given  them.  Nowt  w’e  said  that  by  these  fruits  of 
the  earthrw’ere  signified,  and  figured  in  an  alle¬ 
gory,  the  w’orks  of  mercy  w’hich  are  provided  for 
the  necessities  of  this  life  out  of  the  fruitful 
earth.  Such  an  earth  was  the  devout  Onesi- 
phorus,  unto  w’hose  house  Thou  gavest  mercy, 
because  he  often  refreshed  Thy  Paul,  and  wTas 
not  ashamed  of  his  chain.6  Thus  did  also  the 
brethren,  and  such  fruit  did  they  bear,  who  out 
of  Macedonia,  supplied  w’hat  was  lacking  to 

lSee  above,  21.  2Rom.  3.  4;  Ps.  116.  n. 

3John,  8.  44.  4Gen.  1.  29. 

5Ibid.,  ver.  30.  6II  Tim.  1.  16. 


him.7  But  how’  grieved  he  for  some  trees,  which 
did  not  afford  him  the  fruit  due  unto  him,  w’here 
he  saith,  “At  my  first  answ’er  no  man  stood  by 
me,  but  all  men  forsook  me.  I  pray  God  that  it 
may  not  be  laid  to  their  charge.”8  For  these 
fruits  are  due  to  such  as  minister  the  spiritual 
doctrine  unto  us  out  of  their  understanding  of 
the  divine  mysteries;  and  they  are  due  to  them, 
as  men;  yea,  and  due  to  them  also  as  the  living 
soul.  w’hich  giveth  itself  as  an  example,  in  all 
continency;  and  due  unto  them  also  as  flying 
creatures,  for  their  blessings  wrhich  are  multi¬ 
plied  upon  the  earth,  because  their  sound  w’ent 
out  into  all  lands.9 

[XXVI]  39.  But  they  are  fed  by  these  fruits, 
that  are  delighted  with  them ;  nor  are  they  de¬ 
lighted  with  them  “whose  God  is  their  belly.”  10 
For  neither  in  them  that  yield  them  are  the 
things  yielded  the  fruit,  but  with  w’hat  mind 
they  yield  them.  He  therefore  that  served  God, 
and  not  his  owTn  belly,11 1  plainly  see  why  he  re¬ 
joiced;  I  see  it,  and  I  rejoice  with  him.  For  he 
had  received  from  the  Philippians  what  they  had 
sent  by  Epaphroditus12  unto  him :  and  yet  I  per¬ 
ceive  wiiy  he  rejoiced.  For  wdiereat  he  rejoiced 
upon  that  he  fed;  for,  speaking  in  truth,  “I  re¬ 
joiced,”  saith  he  “greatly  in  the  Lord,  that 
now’  at  the  last  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished 
again,  wdierein  ye  w’ere  also  careful,”13  but  it  had 
become  wrearisome  unto  you.  These  Philippians 
then  had  now’  dried  up  with  a  long  weariness, 
and  withered  as  it  w’ere  as  to  bearing  this  fruit  of 
a  good  w’ork ;  and  he  rejoiceth  for  them,  that 
they  flourished  again,  not  for  himself,  that  they 
supplied  his  w’ants.  Therefore  subjoins  he,  “not 
that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want,  for  I  have 
learned  in  whatsoever  state  I  am.  therewith  to 
be  content.  I  know’  both  how’  to  be  abased,  and  I 
know’  howT  to  abound:  everywhere  and  in  all 
things  I  am  instructed  both  to  be  full,  and  to  be 
hungry;  both  to  abound,  and  to  suffer  need.  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Him  Which  strength¬ 
ened  me.”  14 

40.  Whereat  then  rejoicest  thou,  0  great 
Paul?  whereat  rejoicest  thou?  whereon  feedest 
thou,  0  man,  renewed  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
after  the  image  of  Him  that  created  thee,  thou 
living  soul,  of  so  much  continency,  thou  tongue 
like  flying  fowls,  speaking  mysteries?  (For  to 
such  creatures  is  this  food  due.)  What  is  it  that 
feeds  thee?  Joy.  Hear  wre  w’hat  follow’s:  “not¬ 
withstanding.  ye  have  well  done,  that  ye  did 
communicate  with  my  affliction.15  Hearat  he  re- 

7II  Cor.  2.  9.  8II  Tim.  4.  16.  9Ps.  19.  4. 

10Phil.  3.  19.  uRom.  16.  18.  12Phil.  4.  18. 

uIbid.,  ver.  10.  14Phil.  4.  n-13.  lbIbid.,  ver.  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


122 

joiceth,  hereon  feedeth;  because  they  had  well 
done,  not  because  his  strait  was  eased  who  saith 
unto  Thee,  “Thou  hast  enlarged  me  when  I  was 
in  distress'’;1  for  that  he  knew  “to  abound,  and 
to  suffer  want,”  in  Thee  Who  strengthenest  him. 
“For  ye  Philippians  also  know,”  saith  he,  “that 
in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel,  when  I  departed 
from  Macedonia,  no  Church  communicated  with 
me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye 
only.  For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and 
again  unto  my  necessity.”  2  Unto  these  good 
works,  he  now  rejoiceth  that  they  are  returned, 
and  is  gladdened  that  they  flourished  again,  as 
when  a  fruitful  field  resumes  its  green. 

41.  Was  it  for  his  own  necessities,  because  he 
said,  “Ye  sent  unto  my  necessity”?  Rejoiceth  he 
for  that?  Verily  not  for  that.  But  how  know  we 
this?  Because  himself  says  immediately,  “not 
because  I  desire  a  gift,  but  I  desire  fruit.”3 1  have 
learned  of  Thee,  my  God,  to  distinguish  betwixt 
a  “gift”  and  “fruit.”  A  “gift”  is  the  thing  itself 
which  he  gives,  that  imparts  these  necessaries 
unto  us,  as  money,  meat,  drink,  clothing,  shelter, 
help;  but  the  “fruit”  is  the  good  and  right  will 
of  the  giver.  For  the  Good  Master  said  not  only, 
“He  that  receiveth  a  prophet,”  but  added,  “in 
the  name  of  a  prophet”:  nor  did  He  only  say, 
“He  that  receiveth  a  righteous  man,”  but  added, 
“in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man.”  So  verily  shall 
the  one  receive  the  reward  of  a  prophet,  the 
other,  the  reward  of  a  righteous  man:  nor  saith 
He  only,  “Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto 
one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold  water”;  but 
added,  “in  the  name  of  a  disciple”:  and  so  con- 
cludeth,  “Verily  I  say  unto  you.  he  shall  in  nowise 
lose  his  reward.”4  The  gift  is,  to  receive  a  proph¬ 
et,  to  receive  a  righteous  man,  to  give  a  cup  of 
cold  water  to  a  disciple :  but  the  fruit,  to  do  this 
in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  in  the  name  of  a  right¬ 
eous  man,  in  the  name  of  a  disciple.  With  fruit 
was  Elijah  fed  by  the  widow  that  knew  she  fed 
a  man  of  God,  and  therefore  fed  him :  but  by  the 
raven  was  he  fed  with  a  gift.  Nor  was  the  inner 
man5  of  Elijah  so  fed,  but  the  outer  only,  which 
might  also  for  want  of  that  food  have  perished. 

[XXVII]  42.I  will  then  speak  what  is  true  in 
Thy  sight,  0  Lord,  that  when  carnal  men  and 
infidels  (for  the  gaining  and  initiating  whom,  the 
initiatory  Sacraments  and  the  mighty  workings 
of  miracles  are  necessary,6  which  we  suppose  to 
be  signified  by  the  name  of  “fishes”  and 
“whales”)  undertake  the  bodily  refreshment,  or 
otherwise  succour  Thy  servant  with  something 

1Ps.  4.  1.  2Phil.  4.  15,  16.  3Ibid.,  ver.  17. 

4Matt.  10.  41.  42.  5I  Kings,  17. 

6See  City  of  God,  Bk.  xxii,  8. 


useful  for  this  present  life;  whereas  they  be  ig¬ 
norant,  why  this  is  to  be  done,  and  to  what  end: 
neither  do  they  feed  these,  nor  are  these  fed  by 
them;  because  neither  do  the  one  do  it  out  of  an 
holy  and  right  intent;  nor  do  the  other  rejoice 
at  their  gifts,  whose  fruit  they  as  yet  behold  not. 
For  upon  that  is  the  mind  fed,  of  which  it  is  j 
glad.  And  therefore  do  not  the  fishes  and  whales  I 
feed  upon  such  meats  as  the  earth  brings  not 
forth  until  after  it  was  separated  and  divided 
from  the  bitterness  of  the  waves  of  the  sea. 

[XXVIII]  43.  And  Thou,  0  God.  sawest 
every  thing  that  Thou  hadst  made,  and.  behold, 
it  was  very  good.7  Yea,  we  also  see  the  same, 
and  behold,  all  things  are  very  good.  Of  the  sev¬ 
eral  kinds  of  Thy  works,  when  Thou  hadst  said 
“Let  them  be,”  and  they  were,  Thou  sawest  each 
that  it  was  good.  Seven  times  have  I  counted  it 
to  be  written  that  Thou  sawest  that  that  which 
Thou  madest  was  “good,”  and  this  is  the  eighth, 
that  Thou  sawest  every  thing  that  Thou  hadst 
made,  and,  behold,  it  was  not  only  good,  but  also 
“very  good,”  as  being  now  altogether.  For  sev¬ 
erally,  they  were  only  good;  but  altogether,  both 
good,  and  very  good.  All  beautiful  bodies  ex¬ 
press  the  same;  by  reason  that  a  body  consisting 
of  members  all  beautiful  is  far  more  beautiful 
than  the  same  members  by  themselves  are,  by 
whose  well-ordered  blending  the  whole  is  per¬ 
fected;  notwithstanding  that  the  members  sev¬ 
erally  be  also  beautiful. 

[XXIX]  44.  And  I  looked  narrowly  to  find 
whether  seven  or  eight  times  Thou  sawest  that 
Thy  works  were  good,  when  they  pleased  Thee ; 
but  in  Thy  seeing  I  found  no  times,  whereby  I 
might  understand  that  Thou  sawest  so  often, 
what  Thou  madest.  And  I  said,  “Lord,  is  not 
this  Thy  Scripture  true,  since  Thou  art  true,  and 
being  Truth,  hast  set  it  forth?  why  then  dost 
Thou  say  unto  me,  ‘that  in  Thy  seeing  there  be 
no  times’;  whereas  this  Thy  Scripture  tells  me 
that  what  Thou  madest  each  day,  Thou  sawest 
that  it  was  good;  and  when  I  counted  them,  I 
found  how  often.”  Unto  this  Thou  answerest 
me,  for  Thou  art  my  God.  and  with  a  strong 
voice  tellest  Thy  servant  in  his  inner  ear,  break¬ 
ing  through  my  deafness  and  crying,  “0  man, 
that  which  My  Scripture  saith,  I  say;  and  yet 
doth  that  speak  in  time;  but  time  has  no  relation 
to  My  Word;  because  My  Word  exists  in  equal 
eternity  with  Myself.  So  the  things  which  ye  see 
through  My  Spirit,  I  see ;  like  as  what  ye  speak 
by  My  Spirit,  I  speak.  And  so  when  ye  see  those 
things  in  time,  I  see  them  not  in  time ;  as  when 
ye  speak  in  time,  I  speak  them  not  in  time.” 

7Gen.  1.  31. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  41-47  123 


[XXX]  45.  And  I  heard,  0  Lord  my  God,  and 
drank  up  a  drop  of  sweetness  out  of  Thy  truth, 
and  understood  that  certain  men  there  be  who 
mislike  Thy  works ;  and  say.  that  many  of  them 
Thou  madest,  compelled  by  necessity;  such  as 
the  fabric  of  the  heavens,  and  harmony  of  the 
stars;  and  that  Thou  madest  them  not  of  what 
was  Thine,  but  that  they  were  otherwhere  and 
from  other  sources  created,  for  Thee  to  bring 
together  and  compact  and  combine,  when  out  of 
Thy  conquered  enemies  Thou  raisedst  up  the 
walls  of  the  universe ;  that  they,  bound  down  by 
the  structure,  might  not  again  be  able  to  rebel 
against  Thee.  For  other  things,  they  say  Thou 
neither  madest  them,  nor  even  compactedst 
them,  such  as  all  flesh  and  all  very  minute  crea¬ 
tures  and  whatsoever  hath  its  root  in  the  earth ; 
but  that  a  mind  at  enmity  with  Thee,  and  an¬ 
other  nature  not  created  by  Thee,  and  contrary 
unto  Thee,  did,  in  these  lower  stages  of  the 
world,  beget  and  frame  these  things.  Phrenzied 
are  they  who  say  thus,  because  they  see  not  Thy 
works  by  Thy  Spirit,  nor  recognize  Thee  in 
them. 

[XXXI]  46.  But  they  who  by  Thy  Spirit  see 
these  things,  Thou  seest  in  them.  Therefore 
when  they  see  that  these  things  are  good,  Thou 
seest  that  they  are  good;  and  whatsoever  things 
for  Thy  sake  please.  Thou  pleasest  in  them,  and 
what  through  Thy  Spirit  please  us,  they  please 
Thee  in  us.  “For  what  man  knoweth  the  things 
of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  a  man,  which  is  in 
him?  even  so  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  one, 
but  the  Spirit  of  God.  Now  we,”  saith  he,  “have 
received,  not  the  spirit  of  this  world,  but  the 
Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  we  might  know  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God.”1  And 
I  am  admonished,  “Truly,  ‘the  things  of  God 
knoweth  no  one,  but  the  Spirit  of  God’ ;  how  then 
do  we  also  know  ‘what  things  are  given  us  of 
God’?”  Answer  is  made  me:  “Because  the  things 
which  we  know  by  His  Spirit,  even  these  ‘no  one 
knoweth,  but  the  Spirit  of  God.’  For  as  it  is 
rightly  said  unto  those  that  were  to  speak  by  the 
Spirit  oft  God,  ‘it  is  not  ye  that  speak’;2  so  is  it 
rightly  said  to  them  that  know  through  the 
Spirit  of  God,  ‘It  is  not  ye  that  know.’  And  no 
less  then  is  it  rightly  said  to  those  that  see 
through  the  Spirit  of  God,  ‘It  is  not  ye  that  see’; 
so  whatsoever  through  the  Spirit  of  God  they 
see  to  be  good,  it  is  not  they,  but  God  that  ‘sees 
that  it  is  good.’  ”  It  is  one  thing  then  for  a  man 
to  think  that  to  be  ill  which  is  good,  as  the  fore- 
named  do;  another,  that  that  which  is  good,  a 
man  should  see  that  it  is  good  (as  Thy  creatures 

U  Cor.  2.  12.  2Matt.  io.  20. 


be  pleasing  unto  many,  because  they  be  good, 
whom  yet  Thou  pleasest  not  in  them,  when  they 
prefer  to  enjoy  them,  to  Thee) ;  and  another, 
that  when  a  man  sees  a  thing  that  it  is  good,  God 
should  in  him  see  that  it  is  good,  so,  namely, 
that  He  should  be  loved  in  that  which  He  made, 
Who  cannot  be  loved  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
Which  He  hath  given.  “Because  the  love  of  God 
is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Which  is  given  unto  us”  ;3  by  Whom  we  see  that 
whatsoever  in  any  degree  is,  is  good.  For  from 
Him  it  is,  who  Himself  Is  not  in  degree,  but 
what  He  Is,  Is. 

[XXXII]  47.  Thanks  to  Thee,  0  Lord.  We 
behold  the  heaven  and  earth,  whether  the  cor¬ 
poreal  part,  superior  and  inferior,  or  the  spiritu¬ 
al  and  corporeal  creature;  and  in  the  adorning  of 
these  parts  whereof  the  universal  pile  of  the 
world,  or  rather  the  universal  creation,  doth  con¬ 
sist,  we  see  light  made,  and  divided  from  the 
darkness.  We  see  the  firmament  of  heaven, 
whether  that  primary  body  of  the  world  between 
the  spiritual  upper  waters  and  the  inferior  cor¬ 
poreal  waters,  or  (since  this  also  is  called  heav¬ 
en)  this  space  of  air  through  which  wander  the 
fowls  of  heaven,  betwixt  those  waters  which  are 
in  vapours  borne  above  them,  and  in  clear  nights 
distil  down  in  dew;  and  those  heavier  waters 
which  flow  along  the  earth.  We  behold  a  face  of 
waters  gathered  together  in  the  fields  of  the  sea ; 
and  the  dry  land  both  void  and  formed  so  as  to 
be  visible  and  harmonized,  yea,  and  the  matter 
of  herbs  and  trees.  We  behold  the  lights  shining 
from  above,  the  sun  to  suffice  for  the  day,  the 
moon  and  the  stars  to  cheer  the  night;  and  that, 
by  all  these,  times  should  be  marked  and  signi¬ 
fied.  We  behold  on  all  sides  a  moist  element,  re¬ 
plenished  with  fishes,  beasts,  and  birds;  because 
the  grossness  of  the  air,  which  bears  up  the 
flights  of  birds,  thickeneth  itself  by  the  exhala¬ 
tion  of  the  waters.  We  behold  the  face  of  the 
earth  decked  out  with  earthly  creatures,  and 
man,  created  after  Thy  image  and  likeness,  even 
through  that  Thy  very  image  and  likeness  (that 
is  the  power  of  reason  and  understanding),  set 
over  all  irrational  creatures.  And  as  in  his  soul 
there  is  one  power  which  has  dominion  by  di¬ 
recting,  another  made  subject,  that  it  might 
obey;  so  was  there  for  the  man,  corporeally  also, 
made  a  woman,  who  in  the  mind  of  her  reason¬ 
able  understanding  should  have  a  parity  of  na¬ 
ture,  but  in  the  sex  of  her  body  should  be  in  like 
manner  subject  to  the  sex  of  her  husband,  as  the 
appetite  of  doing  is  fain  to  conceive  the  skill  of 
right-doing,  from  the  reason  of  the  mind.  These 

3Rom.  5.  5. 


124  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


things  we  behold,  and  they  are  severally  good, 
and  altogether  very  good. 

[XXXIII]  48.  Let  Thy  works  praise  Thee, 
that  we  may  love  Thee;  and  let  us  love  Thee, 
that  Thy  works  may  praise  Thee,  which  from 
time  have  beginning  and  ending,  rising  and  set¬ 
ting,  growth  and  decay,  form  and  privation. 
They  have  then  their  succession  of  morning  and 
evening,  part  secretly,  part  apparently;  for  they 
were  made  of  nothing,  by  Thee,  not  of  Thee; 
not  of  any  matter  not  Thine,  or  that  was  before, 
but  of  matter  concreated  (that  is,  at  the  same 
time  created  by  Thee),  because,  to  its  state 
without  form,  Thou  without  any  interval  of 
time  didst  give  form.  For  seeing  the  matter  of 
heaven  and  earth  is  one  thing,  and  the  form  an¬ 
other,  Thou  madest  the  matter  of  merely  noth¬ 
ing.  but  the  form  of  the  world  out  of  the  matter 
without  form;  yet  both  together,  so  that  the 
form  should  follow  the  matter  without  any  in¬ 
terval  of  delay. 

[XXXIV]  49.  We  have  also  examined  what 
Thou  willedst  to  be  shadowed  forth,  whether  by 
the  creation,  or  the  relation  of  things  in  such  an 
order.  And  we  have  seen  that  things  singly  are 
good,  and  together  very  good,1  in  Thy  Word,  in 
Thy  Only-Begotten,  both  heaven  and  earth,  the 
Head  and  the  body  of  the  Church,  in  Thy  pre¬ 
destination  before  all  times,  without  morning 
and  evening.  But  when  Thou  begannest  to  exe¬ 
cute  in  time  the  things  predestinated,  to  the  end 
Thou  mightest  reveal  hidden  things,  and  rectify 
our  disorders ;  for  our  sins  hung  over  us,  and  we 
had  sunk  into  the  dark  deep,  and  Thy  good 
Spirit  was  borne  over  us,  to  help  us  in  due  sea¬ 
son;  and  Thou  didst  justify  the  ungodly,2  and 
dividest  them  from  the  wicked;  and  Thou  mad¬ 
est  the  firmament  of  authority  of  Thy  Book  be¬ 
tween  those  placed  above,  who  were  to  be  docile 
unto  Thee,  and  those  under,  who  were  to  be  sub¬ 
ject  to  them:  and  Thou  gatheredst  together  the 
society  of  unbelievers  into  one  conspiracy,  that 
the  zeal  of  the  faithful  might  appear,  and  they 
might  bring  forth  works  of  mercy,  even  distrib¬ 
uting  to  the  poor  their  earthly  riches,  to  obtain 
heavenly.  And  after  this  didst  Thou  kindle  cer¬ 
tain  lights  in  the  firmament,  Thy  Holy  ones, 
having  the  word  of  life;  and  shining  with  an 
eminent  authority  set  on  high  through  spiritual 
gifts;  after  that  again,  for  the  initiation  of  the 
unbelieving  Gentiles,  didst  Thou  out  of  corpo¬ 
real  matter  produce  the  Sacraments,  and  visible 
miracles,  and  forms  of  words  according  to  the 
firmament  of  Thy  Book,  by  which  the  faithful 
should  be  blessed  and  multiplied.  Next  didst 
'Gen.  1.  31.  2Rom.  4.  5. 


Thou  form  the  living  soul  of  the  faithful, 
through  affections  well  ordered  by  the  vigour  of 
continency;  and  after  that,  the  mind  subjected 
to  Thee  alone  and  needing  to  imitate  no  human 
authority,  hast  Thou  renewed  after  Thy  image 
and  likeness;  and  didst  subject  its  rational  ac¬ 
tions  to  the  excellency  of  the  understanding,  as 
the  woman  to  the  man ;  and  to  all  Offices  of  Thy 
Ministry,  necessary  for  the  perfecting  of  the 
faithful  in  this  life.  Thou  willedst  that  for  their 
temporal  uses,  good  things,  fruitful  to  them¬ 
selves  in  time  to  come,  be  given  by  the  same 
faithful.3  All  these  we  see,  and  they  are  very 
good,  because  Thou  seest  them  in  us,  Who  hast 
given  unto  us  Thy  Spirit,  by  which  we  might  see 
them,  and  in  them  love  Thee. 

[XXXV]  50.  0  Lord  God,  give  peace  unto  us, 
for  Thou  hast  given  us  all  things:  the  peace  of 
rest,  the  peace  of  the  Sabbath,  which  hath  no 
evening.  For  all  this  most  goodly  array  of  things 
“very  good,”  having  finished  their  courses,  is  to 
pass  away,  for  in  them  there  was  morning  and 
evening. 

[XXXVI]  51.  But  the  seventh  day  hath  no 
evening,  nor  hath  it  setting;  because  Thou  hast 
sanctified  it  to  an  everlasting  continuance;  that 
that  which  Thou  didst  after  Thy  works  which 
were  very  good,  resting  the  seventh  day,  al¬ 
though  Thou  madest  them  in  unbroken  rest, 
that  may  the  voice  of  Thy  Book  announce  be¬ 
forehand  unto  us,  that  we  also  after  our  works 
(therefore  very  good,  because  Thou  hast  given 
them  us)  shall  rest  in  Thee  also  in  the  Sabbath 
of  eternal  life. 

[XXXVII]  52.  For  then  shalt  Thou  so  rest  in 
us,  as  now  Thou  workest  in  us ;  and  so  shall  that 
be  Thy  rest  through  us,  as  these  are  Thy  works 
through  us.  But  Thou,  Lord,  ever  workest,  and 
art  ever  at  rest.  Nor  dost  Thou  see  in  time,  nor 
art  moved  in  time,  nor  restest  in  a  time;  and  yet 
Thou  makest  things  seen  in  time,  yea,  the  times 
themselves,  and  the  rest  which  results  from 
time. 

[XXXVIII]  53.  We  therefore  see  these 
things  which  Thou  madest,  because  they  are; 
but  they  are,  because  Thou  seest  them.  And  we 
see  without,  that  they  are,  and  within,  that  they 
are  good,  but  Thou  sawest  them  there,  when 
made,  where  Thou  sawest  them,  yet  to  be  made. 
And  we  were  at  a  later  time  moved  to  do  well, 
after  our  hearts  had  conceived  of  Thy  Spirit; 
but  in  the  former  time  we  were  moved  to  do 
evil,  forsaking  Thee;  but  Thou,  the  One,  the 
Good  God,  didst  never  cease  doing  good.  And 
we  also  have  some  good  works,  of  Thy  gift,  but 
3Cf.  City  of  God ,  Bk.  ix.  17. 


CONFESSIONS  XIII.  48-53 


not  eternal ;  after  them  we  trust  to  rest  in  Thy 
great  hallowing.  But  Thou,  being  the  Good 
which  needeth  no  good,  art  ever  at  rest,  because 
Thy  rest  is  Thou  Thyself.  And  what  man  can 
teach  man  to  understand  this?  or  what  Angel,  an 


Angel?  or  what  Angel,  a  man?  Let  it  be  asked  of 
Thee,  sought  in  Thee,  knocked  for  at  Thee;  so, 
so  shall  it  be  received,  so  shall  it  be  found,  so 
shall  it  be  opened.1  Amen. 

^att.  7.  7. 


GRATIAS  TIBI  DOMINE 


CONTENTS:  THE  CITY  OF  GOD 


BOOK  I.  Augustine  censures  the  pagans,  who  at¬ 
tributed  the  calamities  of  the  world ,  and  espe¬ 
cially  the  recent  sack  of  Rome  by  the  Goths,  to 
the  Christian  religion,  and  its  prohibition  of  the 
worship  of  the  gods.  He  speaks  of  the  blessings 
and  ills  of  life,  which  then,  as  always,  happened 
to  good  and  bad  men  alike.  Finally,  he  rebukes 
the  shamelessness  of  those  who  cast  up  to  the 
Christians  that  their  women  had  been  violated 
by  the  soldiers.  129 

BOOK  II.  In  this  book  Augustine  reviews  those 
calamities  which  the  Romans  suffered  before  the 
time  of  Christ,  and  while  the  worship  of  the 
false  gods  was  universally  practised;  and  demon¬ 
strates  that,  far  from  being  preserved  from  mis¬ 
fortune  by  the  gods,  the  Romans  have  been  by 
them  overwhelmed  with  the  only,  or  at  least  the 
greatest,  of  all  calamities — the  corruption  of 
manners,  and  the  vices  of  the  soul.  150 

BOOK  III.  As  in  the  fore  going. bo  ok  Augustine  has 
proved  regarding  moral  and  spiritual  calamities, 
so  in  this  book  he  proves  regarding  external  and 
bodily  disasters,  that  since  the  foundation  of  the 
city  the  Romans  have  been  continually  subject  to 
them;  and  that  even  when  the  false  gods  were 
worshipped  without  a  rival,  before  the  advent  of 
Christ,  they  afforded  no  relief  from  such  calam¬ 
ities.  169 

BOOK  IV.  In  this  book  it  is  proved  that  the  ex¬ 
tent  and  long  duration  of  the  Roman  Empire  is 
to  be  ascribed,  not  to  Jove  or  the  gods  of  the 
heathen,  to  whom  individually  scarce  even  sin¬ 
gle  things  and  the  very  basest  functions  were  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  entrusted,  but  to  the  one  true  God, 
the  author  of  felicity,  by  whose  power  and  judg¬ 
ment  earthly  kingdoms  are  founded  and  main¬ 
tained.  1  188 

BOOK  V.  Augustine  first  discusses  the  doctrine  of 
fate,  for  the  sake  of  confuting  those  who  are  dis¬ 
posed  to  refer  to  fate  the  power  and  increase  of 
the  Roman  Empire,  which  could  not  be  attrib¬ 
uted  to  false  gods,  as  has  been  shown  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  book.  After  that,  he  proves  that  there  is 
no  contradiction  between  God’s  prescience  and 
our  free-will.  He  then  speaks  of  the  manners  of 
the  ancient  Romans,  and  shows  in  what  sense  it 
was  due  to  the  virtue  of  the  Romans  themselves, 
and  in  how  far  to  the  counsel  of  God,  that  He  in¬ 


creased  their  dominion,  though  they  did  not  wor¬ 
ship  Him.  Finally,  he  explains  what  is  to  be  ac¬ 
counted  the  true  happiness  of  the  Christian  em¬ 
perors.  207 

BOOK  VI.  Hitherto  the  argument  has  been  con¬ 
ducted  against  those  who  believe  that  the  gods 
are  to  be  worshipped  for  the  sake  of  temporal 
advantages.  Now  it  is  directed  against  those  who 
believe  that  they  are  to  be  worshipped  for  the 
sake  of  eternal  life.  Augustine  devotes  the  five 
following  books  to  the  confutation  of  this  latter 
belief,  and  first  of  all  shows  how  mean  an  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  gods  was  held  by  Varro  himself,  the 
most  esteemed  writer  on  heathen  theology.  Of 
this  theology  Augustine  adopts  Varro’ s  division 
into  three  kinds,  mythical,  natural,  and  civil; 
and  at  once  demonstrates  that  neither  the  myth¬ 
ical  nor  the  civil  can  contribute  anything  to  the 
happiness  of  the  future  life.  230 

BOOK  VII.  In  this  Book  it  is  shown  that  eternal 
life  is  not  obtained  by  the  worship  of  Janus, 
Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  the  other  ** select  gods”  of 
the  civil  theology.  243 

BOOK  VIII.  Augustine  comes  now  to  the  third 
kind  of  theology,  that  is,  the  natural,  and  takes 
up  the  question  whether  the  worship  of  the  gods 
of  the  natural  theology  is  of  any  avail  towards 
securing  blessedness  in  the  life  to  come.  This 
question  he  prefers  to  discuss  with  the  Platonists, 
because  the  Platonic  system  is  facile  princeps 
among  philosophies  and  makes  the  nearest  ap¬ 
proximation  to  Christian  truth.  In  pursuing  this 
argument,  he  first  refutes  Apuleius,  and  all  who 
maintain  that  the  demons  should  be  worshipped 
as  messengers  and  mediators  between  gods  and 
men;  demonstrating  that  by  no  possibility  can 
men  be  reconciled  to  good  gods  by  demons,  who 
are  the  slaves  of  vice,  and  who  delight  in  and 
patronize  what  good  and  wise  men  abhor  and 
condemn — the  blasphemous  fictions  of  poets,  the¬ 
atrical  exhibitions,  and  magical  arts.  264 

BOOK  IX.  Having  in  the  preceding  book  shown 
that  the  worship  of  demons  must  be  abjured, 
since  they  in  a  thousand  ways  proclaim  them¬ 
selves  to  be  wicked  spirits,  Augustine  in  this 
book  meets  those  who  allege  a  distinction  among 
demons,  some  being  evil,  while  others  are  good; 
and,  having  exploded  this  distinction,  he  proves 


127 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


128 

that  to  no  demon,  but  to  Christ  alone,  belongs 
the  office  of  providing  men  with  eternal  blessed¬ 
ness.  285 

BOOK  X.  In  this  book  Augustine  teaches  that  the 
good  angels  wish  God  alone,  whom  they  them¬ 
selves  serve,  to  receive  that  divine  honour  which 
is  rendered  by  sacrifice,  and  which  is  called  lat- 
reia.  He  then  goes  on  to  dispute  against  Por¬ 
phyry  about  the  principle  and  way  of  the  soul's 
cleansing  and  deliverance.  298 

BOOK  XI.  Here  begins  the  second  part  of  this 
work,  which  treats  of  the  origin,  history,  and 
destinies  of  the  Two  Cities,  the  earthly  and  the 
heavenly.  In  the  first  place,  Augustine  shows  in 
this  book  how  the  Two  Cities  were  formed  orig¬ 
inally,  by  the  separation  of  the  good  and  bad 
angels;  and  takes  occasion  to  treat  of  the  creation 
of  the  World,  as  it  is  described  in  Holy  Scripture 
in  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.  322 

BOOK  XII.  Augustine  first  institutes  two  in¬ 
quiries  regarding  the  angels:  namely,  whence  is 
there  in  some  a  good  and  in  others  an  evil  will? 
and,  what  is  the  reason  of  the  blessedness  of  the 
good  and  the  misery  of  the  evil?  Afterwards  he 
treats  of  the  creation  of  man,  and  teaches  that  he 
is  not  from  eternity,  but  was  created,  and  by 
none  other  than  God.  342 

BOOK  XIII.  In  this  book  it  is  taught  that  death 
is  penal  and  had  its  origin  in  Adam's  sin.  360 

BOOK  XIV.  Augustine  again  treats  of  the  sin  of 
the  first  man  and  teaches  that  it  is  the  cause  of 
the  carnal  life  and  vicious  affections  of  man. 
Especially  he  proves  that  the  shame  which  ac¬ 
companies  lust  is  the  just  punishment  of  that 
disobedience,  and  inquires  how  man,  if  he  had 
not  sinned,  would  have  been  able  without  lust  to 
propagate  his  kind.  376 

BOOK  XV.  Having  treated  in  the  four  preceding 
books  of  the  origin  of  the  Two  Cities,  the  earth¬ 
ly  and  the  heavenly,  Augustine  explains  their 
growth  and  progress  in  the  four  books  which  fol¬ 
low;  and,  in  order  to  do  so,  he  explains  the  chief 
passages  of  the  sacred  history  which  bear  upon 
this  subject.  In  this  fifteenth  book  he  opens  this 
part  of  his  work  by  explaining  the  events  re¬ 
corded  in  Genesis  from  the  time  of  Cain  and 
Abel  to  the  Deluge.  397 


BOOK  XVI.  In  the  former  part  of  this  book,  from 
the  first  to  the  twelfth  chapter,  the  progress  of 
the  Two  Cities,  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly , 
from  Noah  to  Abraham,  is  exhibited  from  Holy 
Scripture:  in  the  latter  part,  the  progress  of  the 
heavenly  alone,  from  Abraham  to  the  Kings  of 
Israel,  is  the  subject.  422 

BOOK  XVII.  In  this  Book  the  history  of  the  City 
of  God  is  traced  during  the  period  of  the  kings 
and  prophets  from  Samuel  to  David,  even  to 
Christ;  and  the  prophecies  which  are  recorded 
in  the  Books  of  Kings,  Psalms,  and  those  of 
Solomon,  are  interpreted  of  Christ  and  the 
Church.  449 

BOOK  XVIII.  Augustine  traces  the  parallel  courses 
of  the  earthly  and  heavenly  cities  from  the  time 
of  Abraham  to  the  end  of  the  world;  and  alludes 
to  the  oracles  regarding  Christ,  both  those  uttered 
by  the  sibyls,  and  those  of  the  sacred  prophets 
who  wrote  after  the  foundation  of  Rome,  Hosea, 
Amos,  Isaiah,  Micah,  and  their  successors.  472 

BOOK  XIX.  In  this  book  the  end  of  the  Two 
Cities,  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  is  discussed. 
Augustine  reviews  the  opinions  of  the  philoso¬ 
phers  regarding  the  supreme  good,  and  their  vain 
efforts  to  make  for  themselves  a  happiness  in  this 
life;  and,  while  he  refutes  these,  he  takes  occa¬ 
sion  to  show  what  the  peace  and  happiness  be¬ 
longing  to  the  heavenly  city,  or  the  people  of 
Christ,  are  both  now  and  hereafter.  507 

BOOK  XX.  Concerning  the  Last  Judgment,  and 
the  declarations  regarding  it  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.  530 

BOOK  XXI.  Of  the  end  reserved  for  the  city  of  the 
Devil,  namely,  the  eternal  punishment  of  the 
damned;  and  of  the  arguments  which  unbelief 
brings  against  it.  560 

BOOK  XXII.  This  book  treats  of  the  end  of  the  City 
of  God,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  eternal  happiness  of 
the  saints;  the  faith  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  is  established  and  explained;  and  the 
work  concludes  by  showing  how  the  saints , 
clothed  in  immortal  and  spiritual  bodies,  shall  be 
employed.  586 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD 


BOOK  I 

ARGUMENT.  Augustine  censures  the  pagans,  who  attributed  the  calam¬ 
ities  OF  THE  WORLD,  AND  ESPECIALLY  THE  RECENT  SACK  OF  ROME  BY  THE  GOTHS, 
TO  THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION,  AND  ITS  PROHIBITION  OF  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  GODS. 

He  speaks  of  the  blessings  and  ills  of  life,  which  then,  as  always,  hap¬ 
pened  TO  GOOD  AND  BAD  MEN  ALIKE.  FINALLY,  HE  REBUKES  THE  SHAMELESSNESS 
OF  THOSE  WHO  CAST  UP  TO  THE  CHRISTIANS  THAT  THEIR  WOMEN  HAD  BEEN  VIO¬ 
LATED  BY  THE  SOLDIERS. 


PREFACE 

Explaining  his  design  in  undertaking  this  work 

The  glorious  city  of  God  is  my  theme  in  this 
work,  which  you,  my  dearest  son  Marcellinus,1 
suggested,  and  which  is  due  to  you  by  my  prom¬ 
ise.  I  have  undertaken  its  defence  against  those 
who  prefer  their  own  gods  to  the  Founder  of  this 
city, — a  city  surpassingly  glorious,  whether  we 
view  it  as  it  still  lives  by  faith  in  this  fleeting 
course  of  time,  and  sojourns  as  a  stranger  in  the 
midst  of  the  ungodly,  or  as  it  shall  dwell  in  the 
fixed  stability  of  its  eternal  seat,  which  it  now 
with  patience  waits  for,  expecting  until  “right¬ 
eousness  shall  return  unto  judgement,”2  and  it 
obtain,  by  virtue  of  its  excellence,  final  victory 
and  perfect  peace.  A  great  work  this,  and  an  ar¬ 
duous;  but  God  is  my  helper.  For  I  am  aware 
what  ability  is  requisite  to  persuade  the  proud 
how  great  is  the  virtue  of  humility,  which  raises 
us,  not  by  a  quite  human  arrogance,  but  by  a 
divine  grace,  above  all  earthly  dignities  that  tot¬ 
ter  on  this  shifting  scene.  For  the  King  and 
Founder  of  this  city  of  which  we  speak  has  in 
Scripture  littered  to  His  people  a  dictum  of  the 
divine  law  in  these  words:  “God  resisteth  the 
proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble.”3  But 

Marcellinus  was  a  friend  of  Augustine,  and  urged  him 
to  write  this  work.  He  was  commissioned  by  the  Emperor 
Honorius  to  convene  a  conference  of  Catholic  and  schis¬ 
matic  Donatist  bishops  in  the  summer  of  41 1,  and  con¬ 
ceded  the  victory  to  the  Catholics;  but  on  account  of  his 
rigor  in  executing  the  laws  against  the  Donatists,  he  fell 
a  victim  to  their  revenge,  and  was  honored  by  a  place 
among  the  martyrs. 

2Ps.  94.  15.  In  the  Revised  Vers.:  “Judgment  shall  re¬ 
turn  unto  righteousness.” 

3Jas.  4.  6  and  1  Pet.  5.  5. 


this,  which  is  God’s  prerogative,  the  inflated  am¬ 
bition  of  a  proud  spirit  also  affects,  and  dearly 
loves  that  this  be  numbered  among  its  attri¬ 
butes,  to 

Show  pity  to  the  humbled  soul, 

And  crush  the  sons  of  pride.* 

And  therefore,  as  the  plan  of  this  work  we  have 
undertaken  requires,  and  as  occasion  offers,  we 
must  speak  also  of  the  earthly  city,  which, 
though  it  be  mistress  of  the  nations,  is  itself 
ruled  by  its  lust  of  rule. 

Chap.  i.  Of  the  adversaries  of  the  name  of 
Christ,  whom  the  barbarians  for  Christ’s  sake 
spared  when  they  stormed  the  city 
For  to  this  earthly  city  belong  the  enemies 
against  whom  I  have  to  defend  the  city  of  God. 
Many  of  them,  indeed,  being  reclaimed  from 
their  ungodly  error,  have  become  sufficiently 
creditable  citizens  of  this  city;  but  many  are  so 
inflamed  with  hatred  against  it,  and  are  so  un¬ 
grateful  to  its  Redeemer  for  His  signal  benefits, 
as  to  forget  that  they  would  now  be  unable  to 
utter  a  single  word  to  its  prejudice,  had  they  not 
found  in  its  sacred  places,  as  they  fled  from  the 
enemy’s  steel,  that  life  in  which  they  now  boast 
themselves.5  Are  not  those  very  Romans,  who 
were  spared  by  the  barbarians  through  their  re¬ 
spect  for  Christ,  become  enemies  to  the  name  of 
Christ?  The  reliquaries  of  the  martyrs  and  the 
churches  of  the  apostles  bear  witness  to  this; 

4Virgil,  sEneid,  bk.  vi.  854. 

6Augustine  refers  to  the  sacking  of  the  city  of  Rome  by 
the  West-Gothic  King  Alaric,  410.  He  spared  the  Catholic 
Christians.  See  Gibbon’s  Decline  and  Fall. 


129 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


for  in  the  sack  of  the  city  they  were  open  sanc¬ 
tuary  for  all  who  fled  to  them,  whether  Christian 
or  Pagan.  To  their  very  threshold  the  blood¬ 
thirsty  enemy  raged;  there  his  murderous  fury 
owned  a  limit.  Thither  did  such  of  the  enemy  as 
had  any  pity  convey  those  to  whom  they  had 
given  quarter,  lest  any  less  mercifully  disposed 
might  fall  upon  them.  And,  indeed,  when  even 
those  murderers  who  everywhere  else  showed 
themselves  pitiless  came  to  those  spots  where 
that  was  forbidden  which  the  licence  of  war  per¬ 
mitted  in  every  other  place,  their  furious  rage 
for  slaughter  was  bridled,  and  their  eagerness 
to  take  prisoners  was  quenched.  Thus  escaped 
multitudes  who  now  reproach  the  Christian  re¬ 
ligion,  and  impute  to  Christ  the  ills  that  have 
befallen  their  city;  but  the  preservation  of  their 
own  life — a  boon  which  they  owe  to  the  respect 
entertained  for  Christ  by  the  barbarians — they 
attribute  not  to  our  Christ,  but  to  their  own 
good  luck.  They  ought  rather,  had  they  any 
right  perceptions,  to  attribute  the  severities  and 
hardships  inflicted  by  their  enemies  to  that  di¬ 
vine  providence  which  is  wont  to  reform  tjie  de¬ 
praved  manners  of  men  by  chastisement,  and 
which  exercises  with  similar  afflictions  the  right¬ 
eous  and  praiseworthy — either  translating  them, 
when  they  have  passed  through  the  trial,  to  a 
better  world,  or  detaining  them  still  on  earth  for 
ulterior  purposes.  And  they  ought  to  attribute 
it  to  the  spirit  of  these  Christian  times  that,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  custom  of  war,  these  blood-thirsty 
barbarians  spared  them,  and  spared  them  for 
Christ’s  sake,  whether  this  mercy  was  actually 
shown  in  promiscuous  places,  or  in  those  places 
specially  dedicated  to  Christ’s  name,  and  of 
which  the  very  largest  were  selected  as  sanctu¬ 
aries,  that  full  scope  might  thus  be  given  to  the 
expansive  compassion  which  desired  that  a  large 
multitude  might  find  shelter  there.  Therefore 
ought  they  to  give  God  thanks,  and  with  sincere 
confession  flee  for  refuge  to  His  name,  that  so 
they  may  escape  the  punishment  of  eternal  fire 
— they  who  with  lying  lips  took  upon  them  this 
name,  that  they  might  escape  the  punishment  of 
present  destruction.  For  of  those  whom  you  see 
insolently  and  shamelessly  insulting  the  servants 
of  Christ,  there  are  numbers  who  would  not 
have  escaped  that  destruction  and  slaughter  had 
they  not  pretended  that  they  themselves  were 
Christ’s  servants.  Yet  now,  in  ungrateful  pride 
and  most  impious  madness,  and  at  the  risk  of  be¬ 
ing  punished  in  everlasting  darkness,  they  per¬ 
versely  oppose  that  name  under  which  they 
fraudulently  protected  themselves  for  the  sake 
of  enjoying  the  light  of  this  brief  life. 


Chap.  2.  That  it  is  quite  contrary  to  the  usage 
of  war,  that  the  victors  should  spare  the  van¬ 
quished  for  the  sake  of  their  gods 
There  are  histories  of  numberless  wars,  both 
before  the  building  of  Rome  and  since  its  rise 
and  the  extension  of  its  dominion;  let  these  be 
read,  and  let  one  instance  be  cited  in  which, 
when  a  city  had  been  taken  by  foreigners,  the 
victors  spared  those  who  were  found  to  have 
fled  for  sanctuary  to  the  temples  of  their  gods; 
or  one  instance  in  which  a  barbarian  general 
gave  orders  that  none  should  be  put  to  the 
sword  who  had  been  found  in  this  or  that  tem¬ 
ple.  Did  not  Emeas  see 

Dying  Priam  at  the  shrine, 

Staining  the  hearth  he  made  divine ?1 

Did  not  Diomede  and  Ulysses 

Drag  with  red  hands,  the  sentry  slain , 

Her  fateful  image  from  your  fane , 

Her  chaste  locks  touch,  and  stain  with  gore 
The  virgin  coronal  she  wore?2 

Neither  is  that  true  which  follows,  that 

Thenceforth  the  tide  of  fortune  changed, 

And  Greece  grew  weak.3 

For  after  this  they  conquered  and  destroyed 
Troy  with  fire  and  sword;  after  this  they  be¬ 
headed  Priam  as  he  fled  to  the  altars.  Neither 
did  Troy  perish  because  it  lost  Minerva.  For 
what  had  Minerva  herself  first  lost,  that  she 
should  perish?  Her  guards  perhaps?  No  doubt; 
just  her  guards.  For  as  soon  as  they  were  slain, 
she  could  be  stolen.  It  was  not,  in  fact,  the 
men  who  were  preserved  by  the  image,  but  the 
image  by  the  men.  How,  then,  was  she  invoked 
to  defend  the  city  and  the  citizens,  she  who 
could  not  defend  her  own  defenders? 

Chap.  3.  That  the  Romans  did  not  show  their 
usual  sagacity  when  they  trusted  that  they 
would  be  benefited  by  the  gods  who  had  been 
unable  to  defend  Troy 
And  these  be  the  gods  to  whose  protecting 
care  the  Romans  were  delighted  to  entrust  their 
city!  0  too,  too  piteous  mistake!  And  they  are 
enraged  at  us  when  we  speak  thus  about  their 
gods,  though,  so  far  from  being  enraged  at  their 
own  writers,  they  part  with  money  to  learn  what 
they  say;  and,  indeed,  the  very  teachers  of  these 
authors  are  reckoned  worthy  of  a  salary  from 
the  public  purse,  and  of  other  honours.  There  is 

1Virgil,  Aineid, ,  bk.  ii.  501-2.  The  renderings  of  Virgil 
are  from  Conington. 

2Ibid .,  bk.  11.  166. 


Hbid. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  I.  2-4 


Virgil,  who  is  read  by  boys,  in  order  that  this 
great  poet,  this  most  famous  and  approved  of 
all  poets,  may  impregnate  their  virgin  minds, 
and  may  not  readily  be  forgotten  by  them,  ac¬ 
cording  to  that  saying  of  Horace, 

The  fresh  cask  long  keeps  its  first  tang. 

Well,  in  this  Virgil.  I  say,  Juno  is  introduced  as 
hostile  to  the  Trojans,  and  stirring  up  Eolus, 
the  king  of  the  winds,  against  them  in  the  words, 

A  race  I  hate  now  ploughs  the  sea , 
Transporting  Troy  to  Italy, 

And  home-gods  conquered 1  .  .  . 

And  ought  prudent  men  to  have  entrusted  the 
defence  of  Rome  to  these  conquered  gods?  But 
it  will  be  said,  this  was  only  the  saying  of  Juno, 
who,  like  an  angry  woman,  did  not  know  what 
she  was  saying.  What,  then,  says  .Eneas  himself 
— Eneas  who  is  so  often  designated  “pious”? 
Does  he  not  say, 

Lo!  Panthus,  ' scaped  from  death  by  flight, 
Priest  of  Apollo  on  the  height, 

His  conquered  gods  with  trembling  hands 
He  bears,  and  shelter  swift  demands ?2 

Is  it  not  clear  that  the  gods  (whom  he  does  not 
scruple  to  call  “conquered”)  were  rather  en¬ 
trusted  to  Eneas  than  he  to  them,  when  it  is 
said  to  him. 

The  gods  of  her  domestic  shrines 
Your  country  to  your  care  consigns ?3 

If,  then,  Virgil  says  that  the  gods  were  such  as 
these,  and  were  conquered,  and  -that  when  con¬ 
quered  they  could  not  escape  except  under  the 
protection  of  a  man,  what  a  madness  is  it  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  Rome  had  been  wisely  entrusted  to 
these  guardians,  and  could  not  have  been  taken 
unless  it  had  lost  them !  Indeed,  to  worship  con¬ 
quered  gods  as  protectors  and  champions,  what 
is  this  but  to  worship,  not  good  divinities,  but  evil 
omens?4  Would  it  not  be  wiser  to  believe,  not 
that  Rome  would  never  have  fallen  into  so  great 
a  calamity  had  not  they  first  perished,  but  rather 
that  they  would  have  perished  long  since  had 
not  Rome  preserved  them  as  long  as  she  could? 
For  who  does  not  see,  when  he  thinks  of  it,  what 
a  foolish  assumption  it  is  that  they  could  not  be 
vanquished  under  vanquished  defenders,  and 
that  they  only  perished  because  they  had  lost 
their  guardian  gods,  when,  indeed,  the  only  cause 
of  their  perishing  was  that  they  chose  for  their 
protectors  gods  condemned  to  perish?  The 

Wirgil,  sEneid ,  bk.  i.  71.  Hbid.,  293. 

Hbid.,  bk.  11.  319.  ANon  numina  bona,  sedomina  mala. 


poets,  therefore,  when  they  composed  and  sang 
these  things  about  the  conquered  gods,  had  no 
intention  to  invent  falsehoods,  but  uttered,  as 
honest  men,  what  the  truth  extorted  from  them. 
This,  however,  will  be  carefully  and  copiously 
discussed  in  another  and  more  fitting  place. 
Meanwhile  I  will  briefly,  and  to  the  best  of  my 
ability,  explain  what  I  meant  to  say  about  these 
ungrateful  men  who  blasphemously  impute  to 
Christ  the  calamities  which  they  deservedly  suf¬ 
fer  in  consequence  of  their  own  wicked  ways, 
while  that  which  is  for  Christ’s  sake  spared  them 
in  spite  of  their  wickedness  they  do  not  even 
take  the  trouble  to  notice;  and  in  their  mad  and 
blasphemous  insolence,  they  use  against  His 
name  those  very  lips  wherewith  they  falsely 
claimed  that  same  name  that  their  lives  might 
be  spared.  In  the  places  consecrated  to  Christ, 
where  for  His  sake  no  enemy  would  injure 
them,  they  restrained  their  tongues  that  they 
might  be  safe  and  protected;  but  no  sooner  do 
they  emerge  from  these  sanctuaries,  than  they 
unbridle  these  tongues  to  hurl  against  Him 
curses  full  of  hate. 

Chap.  4.  Of  the  asylum  of  Juno  in  Troy,  which 
saved  no  one  from  the  Greeks;  and  of  the 
churches  of  the  apostles,  which  protected 
from  the  barbarians  all  who  fled  to  them 
Troy  itself,  the  mother  of  the  Roman  people, 
was  not  able,  as  I  have  said,  to  protect  its  own 
citizens  in  the  sacred  places  of  their  gods  from 
the  fire  and  sword  of  the  Greeks,  though  the 
Greeks  worshipped  the  same  gods.  Not  only  so, 

Phoenix  and  Ulysses  fell 
In  the  void  courts  by  Juno's  cell 
Were  set  the  spoils  to  keep; 

Snatched  from  the  burning  shrines  away, 
There  Ilium's  mighty  treasure  lay, 

Rich  altars,  bowls  of  massy  gold, 

And  captive  raiment,  rudely  rolled 
In  one  promiscuous  heap; 

While  boys  and  matrons,  wild  with  fear, 

In  long  array  were  standing  near.5 

In  other  words,  the  place  consecrated  to  so  great 
a  goddess  was  chosen,  not  that  from  it  none 
might  be  led  out  a  captive,  but  that  in  it  all  the 
captives  might  be  immured.  Compare  now  this 
“asylum” — the  asylum  not  of  an  ordinary  god, 
not  of  one  of  the  rank  and  file  of  gods,  but  of 
Jove’s  own  sister  and  wife,  the  queen  of  all  the 
gods — with  the  churches  built  in  memory  of  the 
apostles.  Into  it  were  collected  the  spoils  rescued 
from  the  blazing  temples  and  snatched  from  the 
gods,  not  that  they  might  be  restored  to  the  van- 
6Virgil,  JLneid ,  bk.  ii.  761. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


quished.  but  divided  among  the  victors;  while 
into  these  was  carried  back,  with  the  most  reli¬ 
gious  observance  and  respect,  everything  which 
belonged  to  them,  even  though  found  elsewhere. 
There  liberty  was  lost;  here  preserved.  There 
bondage  was  strict;  here  strictly  excluded.  Into 
that  temple  men  were  driven  to  become  the 
chattels  of  their  enemies,  now  lording  it  over 
them ;  into  these  churches  men  were  led  by  their 
relenting  foes,  that  they  might  be  at  liberty.  In 
fine,  the  gentle  Greeks  appropriated  that  temple 
of  Juno  to  the  purposes  of  their  own  avarice  and 
pride;  while  these  churches  of  Christ  were  chos¬ 
en  even  by  the  savage  barbarians  as  the  fit 
scenes  for  humility  and  mercy.  But  perhaps, 
after  all,  the  Greeks  did  in  that  victory  of  theirs 
spare  the  temples  of  those  gods  whom  they  wor¬ 
shipped  in  common  with  the  Trojans,  and  did 
not  dare  to  put  to  the  sword  or  make  captive 
the  wretched  and  vanquished  Trojans  who  fled 
thither;  and  perhaps  Virgil,  in  the  manner  of 
poets,  has  depicted  what  never  really  happened? 
But  there  is  no  question  that  he  depicted  the  us¬ 
ual  custom  of  an  enemy  when  sacking  a  city. w 

Chap.  5.  Ccesar’s  statement  regarding  the  uni¬ 
versal  custom  of  an  enemy  when  sacking  a  city 
Even  Caesar  himself  gives  us  positive  testi¬ 
mony  regarding  this  custom;  for,  in  his  deliver¬ 
ance  in  the  senate  about  the  conspirators,  he 
says  (as  Sallust,  a  historian  of  distinguished  ve¬ 
racity,  writes)  “that  virgins  and  boys  are  vio¬ 
lated,  children  torn  from  the  embrace  of  their 
parents,  matrons  subjected  to  whatever  should 
be  the  pleasure  of  the  conquerors,  temples  and 
houses  plundered,  slaughter  and  burning  rife;  in 
fine,  all  things  filled  with  arms,  corpses,  blood, 
and  wailing.”  If  he  had  not  mentioned  temples 
here,  we  might  suppose  that  enemies  were  in  the 
habit  of  sparing  the  dwellings  of  the  gods.  And 
the  Roman  temples  were  in  danger  of  these  dis¬ 
asters,  not  from  foreign  foes,  but  from  Catiline 
and  his  associates,  the  most  noble  senators  and 
citizens  of  Rome.  But  these,  it  may  be  said,  were 
abandoned  men,  and  the  parricides  of  their 
fatherland. 

Chap.  6.  That  not  even  the  Romans,  when  they 
took  cities ,  spared  the  conquered  in  their  tem¬ 
ples 

Why,  then,  need  our  argument  take  note  of 
the  many  nations  who  have  waged  wars  with  one 
another,  and  have  nowhere  spared  the  conquered 
in  the  temples  of  their  gods?  Let  us  look  at  the 
practice  of  the  Romans  themselves:  let  us,  I 
say,  recall  and  review  the  Romans,  whose  chief 


praise  it  has  been  “to  spare  the  vanquished  and 
subdue  the  proud,”  and  that  they  preferred 
“rather  to  forgive  than  to  revenge  an  injury”; 
and  among  so  many  and  great  cities  which  they 
have  stormed,  taken,  and  overthrown  for  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  their  dominion,  let  us  be  told  what 
temples  they  were  accustomed  to  exempt,  so 
that  whoever  took  refuge  in  them  was  free.  Or 
have  they  really  done  this,  and  has  the  fact  been 
suppressed  by  the  historians  of  these  events?  Is 
it  to  be  believed  that  men  who  sought  out  with 
the  greatest  eagerness  points  they  could  praise, 
would  omit  those  which,  in  their  own  estima¬ 
tion,  are  the  most  signal  proofs  of  piety?  Mar¬ 
cus  Marcellus,  a  distinguished  Roman,  who  took 
Syracuse,  a  most  splendidly  adorned  city,  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  bewailed  its  coming  ruin,  and  to 
have  shed  his  own  tears  over  it  before  he  spilt 
its  blood.  He  took  steps  also  to  preserve  the 
chastity  even  of  his  enemy.  For  before  he  gave 
orders  for  the  storming  of  the  city,  he  issued  an 
edict  forbidding  the  violation  of  any  free  person. 
Yet  the  city  was  sacked  according  to  the  custom 
of  war ;  nor  do  we  anywhere  read  that  even  by 
so  chaste  and  gentle  a  commander  orders  were 
given  that  no  one  should  be  injured  who  had  fled 
to  this  or  that  temple.  And  this  certainly  would 
by  no  means  have  been  omitted,  when  neither 
his  weeping  nor  his  edict  preservative  of  chas¬ 
tity  could  be  passed  in  silence.  Fabius,  the  con¬ 
queror  of  the  city  of  Tarentum,  is  praised  for 
abstaining  from  making  booty  of  the  images. 
For  when  his  secretary  proposed  the  question  to 
him,  what  he  wished  done  with  the  statues  of  the 
gods,  which  had  been  taken  in  large  numbers,  he 
veiled  his  moderation  under  a  joke.  For  he  asked 
of  what  sort  they  were ;  and  when  they  reported 
to  him  that  there  were  not  only  many  large  im¬ 
ages,  but  some  of  them  armed,  “Oh,”  says  he, 
“let  us  leave  with  the  Tarentines  their  angry 
gods.”  Seeing,  then,  that  the  writers  of  Roman 
history  could  not  pass  in  silence,  neither  the 
weeping  of  the  one  general  nor  the  laughing  of 
the  other,  neither  the  chaste  pity  of  the  one  nor 
the  facetious  moderation  of  the  other,  on  what 
occasion  would  it  be  omitted,  if,  for  the  honour 
of  any  of  their  enemy’s  gods,  they  had  shown 
this  particular  form  of  leniency,  that  in  any  tem¬ 
ple  slaughter  or  captivity  was  prohibited? 

Chap.  7.  That  the  cruelties  which  occurred  in 
the  sack  of  Rome  were  in  accordance  with  the 
custom  of  war,  whereas  the  acts  of  clemency 
resulted  from  the  influence  of  Christ’s  name 
All  the  spoiling,  then,  which  Rome  was  ex¬ 
posed  to  in  the  recent  calamity — all  the  slaugh- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  I.  5-9  133 


ter,  plundering,  burning,  and  misery — was  the 
result  of  the  custom  of  war.  But  what  was  novel 
was  that  savage  barbarians  showed  themselves 
in  so  gentle  a  guise,  that  the  largest  churches 
were  chosen  and  set  apart  for  the  purpose  of  be¬ 
ing  filled  with  the  people  to  whom  quarter  was 
given,  and  that  in  them  none  were  slain,  from 
them  none  forcibly  dragged;  that  into  them 
many  were  led  by  their  relenting  enemies  to  be 
set  at  liberty,  and  that  from  them  none  were  led 
into  slavery  by  merciless  foes.  Whoever  does 
not  see  that  this  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  name 
of  Christ,  and  to  the  Christian  temper,  is  blind; 
whoever  sees  this,  and  gives  no  praise,  is  un¬ 
grateful;  whoever  hinders  any  one  from  praising 
it,  is  mad.  Far  be  it  from  any  prudent  man  to 
impute  this  clemency  to  the  barbarians.  Their 
fierce  and  bloody  minds  were  awed,  and  bridled, 
and  marvellously  tempered  by  Him  who  so  long 
before  said  by  His  prophet,  “I  will  visit  their 
transgression  with  the  rod,  and  their  iniquities 
with  stripes;  nevertheless  my  loving-kindness 
will  I  not  utterly  take  from  them.”1 

Chap.  8.  Of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages 
which  often  indiscriminately  accrue  to  good 
and  wicked  men 

Will  some  one  say,  Why,  then,  was  this  divine 
compassion  extended  even  to  the  ungodly  and 
ungrateful?  Why,  but  because  it  was  the  mercy 
of  Him  who  daily  “maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the 
evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the 
just  and  on  the  unjust.”2  For  though  some  of 
these  men,  taking  thought  of  this,  repent  of 
their  wickedness  and  reform,  some,  as  the  apos¬ 
tle  says,  “despising  the  riches  of  His  goodness 
and  long-suffering,  after  their  hardness  and  im¬ 
penitent  heart,  treasure  up  unto  themselves 
wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation 
of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  who  will  ren¬ 
der  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds”:3  nev¬ 
ertheless  does  the  patience  of  God  still  invite 
the  wicked  to  repentance,  even  as  the  scourge 
of  Go<^  educates  the  good  to  patience.  And  so, 
too,  does  the  mercy  of  God  embrace  the  good 
that  it  may  cherish  them,  as  the  severity  of  God 
arrests  the  wicked  to  punish  them.  To  the  divine 
providence  it  has  seemed  good  to  prepare  in  the 
world  to  come  for  the  righteous  good  things, 
which  the  unrighteous  shall  not  enjoy;  and  for 
the  wicked  evil  things,  by  which  the  good  shall 
not  be  tormented.  But  as  for  the  good  things  of 
this  life,  and  its  ills,  God  has  willed  that  these 
should  be  common  to  both;  that  we  might  not 
too  eagerly  covet  the  things  which  wicked  men 
1  Ps.  89.  32.  2Matt.  5.  45.  3  Rom.  2.  4. 


are  seen  equally  to  enjoy,  nor  shrink  with  an  un¬ 
seemly  fear  from  the  ills  which  even  good  men 
often  suffer. 

There  is,  too,  a  very  great  difference  in  the 
purpose  served  both  by  those  events  which  we 
call  adverse  and  those  called  prosperous.  For  the 
good  man  is  neither  uplifted  with  the  good 
things  of  time,  nor  broken  by  its  ills;  but  the 
wicked  man,  because  he  is  corrupted  by  this 
world’s  happiness,  feels  himself  punished  by  its 
unhappiness.  Yet  often,  even  in  the  present  dis¬ 
tribution  of  temporal  things,  does  God  plainly 
evince  His  own  interference.  For  if  every  sin 
were  now  visited  with  manifest  punishment, 
nothing  would  seem  to  be  reserved  for  the  final 
judgement;  on  the  other  hand,  if  no  sin  received 
now  a  plainly  divine  punishment,  it  would  be 
concluded  that  there  is  no  divine  providence  at 
all.  And  so  of  the  good  things  of  this  life:  if  God 
did  not  by  a  very  visible  liberality  confer  these 
on  some  of  those  persons  who  ask  for  them,  we 
should  say  that  these  good  things  were  not  at 
His  disposal;  and  if  He  gave  them  to  all  who 
sought  them,  we  should  suppose  that  such  were 
the  only  rewards  of  His  service ;  and  such  a  serv¬ 
ice  would  make  us  not  godly,  but  greedy  rather, 
and  covetous.  Wherefore,  though  good  and  bad 
men  suffer  alike,  we  must  not  suppose  that  there 
is  no  difference  between  the  men  themselves,  be¬ 
cause  there  is  no  difference  in  what  they  both 
suffer.  For  even  in  the  likeness  of  the  sufferings, 
there  remains  an  unlikeness  in  the  sufferers ;  and 
though  exposed  to  the  same  anguish,  virtue  and 
vice  are  not  the  same  thing.  For  as  the  same  fire 
causes  gold  to  glow  brightly,  and  chaff  to  smoke; 
and  under  the  same  flail  the  straw  is  beaten 
small,  while  the  grain  is  cleansed;  and  as  the 
lees  are  not  mixed  with  the  oil,  though  squeezed 
out  of  the  vat  by  the  same  pressure,  so  the  same 
violence  of  affliction  proves,  purges,  clarifies 
the  good,  but  damns,  ruins,  exterminates  the 
wicked.  And  thus  it  is  that  in  the  same  affliction 
the  wicked  detest  God  and  blaspheme,  while  the 
good  pray  and  praise.  So  material  a  difference 
does  it  make,  not  what  ills  are  suffered,  but 
what  kind  of  man  suffers  them.  For,  stirred 
up  with  the  same  movement,  mud  exhales  a 
horrible  stench,  and  ointment  emits  a  fragrant 
odour. 

Chap.  9.  Of  the  reasons  for  administering  cor¬ 
rection  to  bad  a?id  good  together 

What,  then,  have  the  Christians  suffered  in 
that  calamitous  period,  which  would  not  profit 
every  one  who  duly  and  faithfully  considered 
the  following  circumstances?  First  of  all,  they 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


must  humbly  consider  those  very  sins  which 
have  provoked  God  to  fill  the  world  with  such 
terrible  disasters;  for  although  they  be  far  from 
the  excesses  of  wicked,  immoral,  and  ungodly 
men,  yet  they  do  not  judge  themselves  so  clean 
removed  from  all  faults  as  to  be  too  good  to  suf¬ 
fer  for  these  even  temporal  ills.  For  every  man, 
however  laudably  he  lives,  yet  yields  in  some 
points  to  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  Though  he  do  not 
fall  into  gross  enormity  of  wickedness,  and 
abandoned  viciousness,  and  abominable  profan¬ 
ity,  yet  he  slips  into  some  sins,  either  rarely  or 
so  much  the  more  frequently  as  the  sins  seem  of 
less  account.  But  not  to  mention  this,  where  can 
we  readily  find  a  man  who  holds  in  fit  and  just 
estimation  those  persons  on  account  of  whose 
revolting  pride,  luxury,  and  avarice,  and  cursed 
iniquities  and  impiety,  God  now  smites  the  earth 
as  His  predictions  threatened?  Where  is  the  man 
who  lives  with  them  in  the  style  in  which  it  be¬ 
comes  us  to  live  with  them?  For  often  we  wick¬ 
edly  blind  ourselves  to  the  occasions  of  teaching 
and  admonishing  them,  sometimes  even  of  repri¬ 
manding  and  chiding  them,  either  because'we 
shrink  from  the  labour  or  are  ashamed  to  offend 
them,  or  because  we  fear  to  lose  good  friend¬ 
ships,  lest  this  should  stand  in  the  way  of  our  ad¬ 
vancement.  or  injure  us  in  some  worldly  mat¬ 
ter.  which  either  our  covetous  disposition  de¬ 
sires  to  obtain,  or  our  weakness  shrinks  from 
losing.  So  that,  although  the  conduct  of  wicked 
men  is  distasteful  to  the  good,  and  therefore 
they  do  not  fall  with  them  into  that  damnation 
which  in  the  next  life  awaits  such  persons,  yet, 
because  they  spare  their  damnable  sins  through 
fear,  therefore,  even  though  their  own  sins  be 
slight  and  venial,  they  are  justly  scourged  with 
the  wicked  in  this  world,  though  in  eternity  they 
quite  escape  punishment.  Justly,  when  God  af¬ 
flicts  them  in  common  with  the  wicked,  do  they 
find  this  life  bitter,  through  love  of  whose  sweet¬ 
ness  they  declined  to  be  bitter  to  these  sinners. 

If  any  one  forbears  to  reprove  and  find  fault 
with  those  who  are  doing  wrong,  because  he 
seeks  a  more  seasonable  opportunity,  or  because 
he  fears  they  may  be  made  worse  by  his  rebuke, 
or  that  other  weak  persons  may  be  disheartened 
from  endeavouring  to  lead  a  good  and  pious  life, 
and  may  be  driven  from  the  faith;  this  man’s 
omission  seems  to  be  occasioned  not  by  covet¬ 
ousness.  but  by  a  charitable  consideration.  But 
what  is  blameworthy  is,  that  they  who  them¬ 
selves  revolt  from  the  conduct  of  the  wicked, 
and  live  in  quite  another  fashion,  yet  spare  those 
faults  in  other  men  which  they  ought  to  repre¬ 
hend  and  wean  them  from;  and  spare  them  be¬ 


cause  they  fear  to  give  offence,  lest  they  should 
injure  their  interests  in  those  things  which  good 
men  may  innocently  and  legitimately  use — 
though  they  use  them  more  greedily  than  be¬ 
comes  persons  who  are  strangers  in  this  world, 
and  profess  the  hope  of  a  heavenly  country.  For 
not  only  the  weaker  brethren  who  enjoy  mar¬ 
ried  life,  and  have  children  (or  desire  to  have 
them),  and  own  houses  and  establishments, 
whom  the  apostle  addresses  in  the  churches, 
warning  and  instructing  them  how  they  should 
live,  both  the  wives  with  their  husbands,  and 
the  husbands  with  their  wives,  the  children  with 
their  parents,  and  parents  with  their  children, 
and  servants  with  their  masters,  and  masters 
with  their  servants — not  only  do  these  weaker 
brethren  gladly  obtain  and  grudgingly  lose  many 
earthly  and  temporal  things  on  account  of  which 
they  dare  not  offend  men  whose  polluted  and 
wicked  life  greatly  displeases  them;  but  those 
also  who  live  at  a  higher  level,  who  are  not  en¬ 
tangled  in  the  meshes  of  married  life,  but  use 
meagre  food  and  raiment,  do  often  take  thought 
of  their  own  safety  and  good  name,  and  abstain 
from  finding  fault  with  the  wicked,  because  they 
fear  their  wiles  and  violence.  And  although  they 
do  not  fear  them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  be 
drawn  to  the  commission  of  like  iniquities,  nay, 
not  by  any  threats  or  violence  soever;  yet  those 
very  deeds  which  they  refuse  to  share  in  the 
commission  of,  they  often  decline  to  find  fault 
with,  when  possibly  they  might  by  finding  fault 
prevent  their  commission.  They  abstain  from 
interference,  because  they  fear  that,  if  it  fail  of 
good  effect,  their  own  safety  or  reputation  may 
be  damaged  or  destroyed;  not  because  they  see 
that  their  preservation  and  good  name  are  need¬ 
ful.  that  they  may  be  able  to  influence  those 
who  need  their  instruction,  but  rather  because 
they  weakly  relish  the  flattery  and  respect  of 
men,  and  fear  the  judgments  of  the  people,  and 
the  pain  or  death  of  the  body;  that  is  to  say, 
their  non-intervention  is  the  result  of  selfishness 
and  not  of  love. 

Accordingly  this  seems  to  me  to  be  one  prin¬ 
cipal  reason  why  the  good  are  chastised  along 
with  the  wicked,  when  God  is  pleased  to  visit 
with  temporal  punishments  the  profligate  man¬ 
ners  of  a  community.  They  are  punished  to¬ 
gether,  not  because  they  have  spent  an  equally 
corrupt  life,  but  because  the  good  as  well  as  the 
wicked,  though  not  equally  with  them,  love  this 
present  life;  while  they  ought  to  hold  it  cheap, 
that  the  wicked,  being  admonished  and  reformed 
by  their  example,  might  lay  hold  of  life  eternal. 
And  if  they  will  not  be  the  companions  of  the 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  I.  io  135 


good  in  seeking  life  everlasting,  they  should  be 
loved  as  enemies  and  be  dealt  with  patiently. 
For  so  long  as  they  live,  it  remains  uncertain 
whether  they  may  not  come  to  a  better  mind. 
These  selfish  persons  have  more  cause  to  fear 
than  those  to  whom  it  was  said  through  the 
prophet,  “He  is  taken  away  in  his  iniquity,  but 
his  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman’s 
hand.”1  For  watchmen  or  overseers  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  are  appointed  in  churches  that  they  may  un¬ 
sparingly  rebuke  sin.  Nor  is  that  man  guiltless 
of  the  sin  we  speak  of,  who,  though  he  be  not 
a  watchman,  yet  sees  in  the  conduct  of  those 
with  whom  the  relationships  of  this  life  bring 
him  into  contact,  many  things  that  should  be 
blamed,  and  yet  overlooks  them,  fearing  to  give 
offence,  and  lose  such  worldly  blessings  as  may 
legitimately  be  desired,  but  which  he  too  eager¬ 
ly  grasps.  Then,  lastly,  there  is  another  reason 
why  the  good  are  afflicted  with  temporal  calam¬ 
ities — the  reason  which  Job’s  case  exemplifies: 
that  the  human  spirit  may  be  proved,  and  that 
it  may  be  manifested  with  what  fortitude  of 
pious  trust,  and  with  how  unmercenary  a  love, 
it  cleaves  to  God. 

Chap.  io.  That  the  saints  lose  nothing  in  losing 

temporal  goods 

These  are  the  considerations  which  one  must 
keep  in  view,  that  he  may  answer  the  question 
whether  any  evil  happens  to  the  faithful  and 
godly  which  cannot  be  turned  to  profit.  Or  shall 
we  say  that  the  question  is  needless,  and  that 
the  apostle  is  vapouring  when  he  says,  “We 
know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God?”2 

They  lost  all  they  had.  Their  faith?  Their  god¬ 
liness?  The  possessions  of  the  hidden  man  of 
the  heart,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  are  of  great 
price?3  Did  they  lose  these?  For  these  are  the 
wealth  of  Christians,  to  whom  the  wealthy 
apostle  said,  “Godliness  with  contentment  is 
great  gain.  For  we  brought  nothing  into  this 
world,  fand  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing 
out.  And  having  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be 
therewith  content.  But  they  that  will  be  rich 
fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  many 
foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in 
destruction  and  perdition.  For  the  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil;  which,  while  some 
coveted  after,  they  have  erred  from  the  faith, 
and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  sor¬ 
rows.”4 

They,  then,  who  lost  their  worldly  all  in  the 

^zek.  33.  6.  3I  Pet.  3,  4. 

2Rom.  8.  28.  4I  Tim.  6.  6-10. 


sack  of  Rome,  if  they  owned  their  possessions 
as  they  had  been  taught  by  the  apostle,  who 
himself  was  poor  without,  but  rich  within — 
that  is  to  say,  if  they  used  the  world  as  not 
using  it — could  say  in  the  words  of  Job,  heavily 
tried  but  not  overcome:  “Naked  came  I  out 
of  my  mother’s  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return 
thither:  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away;  as  it  pleased  the  Lord,  so  has  it  come 
to  pass:  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.”5 
Like  a  good  servant,  Job  counted  the  will  of  his 
Lord  his  great  possession,  by  obedience  to 
which  his  soul  was  enriched;  nor  did  it  grieve 
him  to  lose,  while  yet  living,  those  goods  which 
he  must  shortly  leave  at  his  death.  But  as  to 
those  feebler  spirits  who,  though  they  cannot 
be  said  to  prefer  earthly  possessions  to  Christ, 
do  yet  cleave  to  them  with  a  somewhat  im¬ 
moderate  attachment,  they  have  discovered  by 
the  pain  of  losing  these  things  how  much  they 
were  sinning  in  loving  them.  For  their  grief  is 
of  their  own  making;  in  the  words  of  the  apostle 
quoted  above,  “they  have  pierced  themselves 
through  with  many  sorrows.”  For  it  was  well 
that  they  who  had  so  long  despised  these  ver¬ 
bal  admonitions  should  receive  the  teaching 
of  experience.  For  when  the  apostle  says,  “They 
that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation,”  and  so 
on,  what  he  blames  in  riches  is  not  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  them,  but  the  desire  of  them.  For  else¬ 
where  he  says,  “Charge  them  that  are  rich  in 
this  world,  that  they  be  not  high-minded,  nor 
trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the  living  God, 
who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy;  that 
they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works, 
ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate; 
laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good  foun¬ 
dation  against  the  time  to  come,  that  they  may 
lay  hold  on  eternal  life.”6  They  who  were  mak¬ 
ing  such  a  use  of  their  property  have  been  con¬ 
soled  for  light  losses  by  great  gains,  and  have 
had  more  pleasure  in  those  possessions  which 
they  have  securely  laid  past,  by  freely  giving 
them  away,  than  grief  in  those  which  they  en¬ 
tirely  lost  by  an  anxious  and  selfish  hoarding  of 
them.  For  nothing  could  perish  on  earth  save 
what  they  would  be  ashamed  to  carry  away  from 
earth.  Our  Lord’s  injunction  runs,  “Lay  not  up 
for  yourselves  treasures  upon  earth,  where 
moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves 
break  through  and  steal;  but  lay  up  for  your¬ 
selves  treasures  in  heaven,  where  neither  moth 
nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not 
break  through  nor  steal :  for  where  your  treas¬ 
ure  is,  there  will  your  heart  be  also.”7  And 
6Job,  1.  21.  6I  Tim.  6.  17-19.  7Matt.  6.  19-21. 


136  ST.  AUGUSTINE 

they  who  have  listened  to  this  injunction  have  when  they  said  so.  These  too,  however,  had 


proved  in  the  time  of  tribulation  how  well  they 
were  advised  in  not  despising  this  most  trust¬ 
worthy  teacher,  and  most  faithful  and  mighty 
guardian  of  their  treasure.  For  if  many  were 
glad  that  their  treasure  was  stored  in  places 
which  the  enemy  chanced  not  to  light  upon, 
how  much  better  founded  was  the  joy  of  those 
who,  by  the  counsel  of  their  God,  had  fled  with 
their  treasure  to  a  citadel  which  no  enemy  can 
possibly  reach!  Thus  our  Paulinus,  bishop  of 
Nola,  who  voluntarily  abandoned  vast  wealth 
and  became  quite  poor,  though  abundantly  rich 
in  holiness,  when  the  barbarians  sacked  Nola, 
and  took  him  prisoner,  used  silently  to  pray,  as 
he  afterwards  told  me,  “0  Lord,  let  me  not  be 
troubled  for  gold  and  silver,  for  where  all  my 
treasure  is  Thou  knowest.”  For  all  his  treasure 
was  where  he  had  been  taught  to  hide  and  store 
it  by  Him  who  had  also  foretold  that  these 
calamities  would  happen  in  the  world.  Con¬ 
sequently  those  persons  who  obeyed  their  Lord 
when  He  warned  them  where  and  how  to  lay 
up  treasure,  did  not  lose  even  their  earthly 
possessions  in  the  invasion  of  the  barbarians; 
while  those  who  are  now  repenting  that  they 
did  not  obey  Him  have  learnt  the  right  use  of 
earthly  goods,  if  not  by  the  wisdom  which  would 
have  prevented  their  loss,  at  least  by  the  ex¬ 
perience  which  follows  it. 

But  some  good  and  Christian  men  have  been 
put  to  the  torture,  that  they  might  be  forced 
to  deliver  up  their  goods  to  the  enemy.  They 
could  indeed  neither  deliver  nor  lose  that  good 
which  made  themselves  good.  If,  however, 
they  preferred  torture  to  the  surrender  of  the 
mammon  of  iniquity,  then  I  say  they  were  not 
good  men.  Rather  they  should  have  been  re¬ 
minded  that,  if  they  suffered  so  severely  for  the 
sake  of  money,  they  should  endure  all  torment, 
if  need  be,  for  Christ’s  sake;  that  they  might  be 
taught  to  love  Him  rather  who  enriches  with 
eternal  felicity  all  who  suffer  for  Him,  and  not 
silver  and  gold,  for  which  it  was  pitiable  to 
suffer,  whether  they  preserved  it  by  telling  a 
lie  or  lost  it  by  telling  the  truth.  For  under 
these  tortures  no  one  lost  Christ  by  confessing 
Him,  no  one  preserved  wealth  save  by  denying 
its  existence.  So  that  possibly  the  torture  which 
taught  them  that  they  should  set  their  affec¬ 
tions  on  a  possession  they  could  not  lose  was 
more  useful  than  those  possessions  which,  with¬ 
out  any  useful  fruit  at  all,  disquieted  and  tor¬ 
mented  their  anxious  owners.  But  then  we  are 
reminded  that  some  were  tortured  who  had  no 
wealth  to  surrender,  but  who  were  not  believed 


perhaps  some  craving  for  wealth,  and  were  not 
willingly  poor  with  a  holy  resignation;  and  to 
such  it  had  to  be  made  plain,  that  not  the  actual 
possession  alone,  but  also  the  desire  of  wealth, 
deserved  such  excruciating  pains.  And  even  if 
they  were  destitute  of  any  hidden  stores  of  gold 
and  silver,  because  they  were  living  in  hopes  of 
a  better  life — I  know  not  indeed  if  any  such 
person  was  tortured  on  the  supposition  that  he 
had  wealth;  but  if  so,  then  certainly  in  confess¬ 
ing,  when  put  to  the  question,  a  holy  poverty, 
he  confessed  Christ.  And  though  it  was  scarcely 
to  be  expected  that  the  barbarians  should  be¬ 
lieve  him,  yet  no  confessor  of  a  holy  poverty 
could  be  tortured  without  receiving  a  heavenly 
reward. 

Again,  they  say  that  the  long  famine  laid 
many  a  Christian  low.  But  this,  too,  the  faith¬ 
ful  turned  to  good  uses  by  a  pious  endurance 
of  it.  For  those  whom  famine  killed  outright 
it  rescued  from  the  ills  of  this  life,  as  a  kindly 
disease  would  have  done;  and  those  who  were 
only  hunger-bitten  were  taught  to  live  more 
sparingly,  and  inured  to  longer  fasts. 

Chap,  ii  .Of  the  end  of  this  life,  whether  it  is 

material  that  it  be  long  delayed 

But,  it  is  added,  many  Christians  were  slaugh¬ 
tered,  and  were  put  to  death  in  a  hideous  variety 
of  cruel  ways.  Well,  if  this  be  hard  to  bear,  it 
is  assuredly  the  common  lot  of  all  who  are  born 
into  this  life.  Of  this  at  least  I  am  certain,  that 
no  one  has  ever  died  who  was  not  destined  to 
die  some  time.  Now  the  end  of  life  puts  the 
longest  life  on  a  par  with  the  shortest.  For  of 
two  things  which  have  alike  ceased  to  be,  the 
one  is  not  better,  the  other  worse — the  one 
greater,  the  other  less.  And  of  what  consequence 
is  it  what  kind  of  death  puts  an  end  to  life,  since 
he  who  has  died  once  is  not  forced  to  go  through 
the  same  ordeal  a  second  time?  And  as  in  the 
daily  casualties  of  life  every  man  is,  as  it  were, 
threatened  with  numberless  deaths,  so  long  as  it 
remains  uncertain  which  of  them  is  his  fate,  I 
would  ask  whether  it  is  not  better  to  suffer  one 
and  die,  than  to  live  in  fear  of  all?  I  am  not  un¬ 
aware  of  the  poor-spirited  fear  which  prompts 
us  to  choose  rather  to  live  long  in  fear  of  so 
many  deaths,  than  to  die  once  and  so  escape 
them  all ;  but  the  weak  and  cowardly  shrinking 
of  the  flesh  is  one  thing,  and  the  well-considered 
and  reasonable  persuasion  of  the  soul  quite  an¬ 
other.  That  death  is  not  to  be  judged  an  evil 
which  is  the  end  of  a  good  life;  for  death  be- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  I.  11-13  137 


comes  evil  only  by  the  retribution  which  follows 
it.  They,  then,  who  are  destined  to  die,  need  not 
be  careful  to  inquire  what  death  they  are  to  die, 
but  into  what  place  death  will  usher  them.  And 
since  Christians  are  well  aware  that  the  death 
of  the  godly  pauper  whose  sores  the  dogs  licked 
was  far  better  than  of  the  wicked  rich  man  who 
lay  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  what  harm  could 
these  terrific  deaths  do  to  the  dead  who  had 
lived  well? 

Chap.  12.  Of  the  burial  of  the  dead:  that  the 
denial  of  it  to  Christians  does  them  no  injury 
Further  still,  we  are  reminded  that  in  such  a 
carnage  as  then  occurred,  the  bodies  could  not 
even  be  buried.  But  godly  confidence  is  not  ap¬ 
palled  by  so  ill-omened  a  circumstance;  for  the 
faithful  bear  in  mind  that  assurance  has  been 
given  that  not  a  hair  of  their  head  shall  perish, 
and  that,  therefore,  though  they  even  be  de¬ 
voured  by  beasts,  their  blessed  resurrection  will 
not  hereby  be  hindered.  The  Truth  would  no¬ 
wise  have  said,  “Fear  not  them  which  kill  the 
body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul/’1  if  any¬ 
thing  whatever  that  an  enemy  could  do  to  the 
body  of  the  slain  could  be  detrimental  to  the 
future  life.  Or  will  some  one  perhaps  take  so 
absurd  a  position  as  to  contend  that  those  who 
kill  the  body  are  not  to  be  feared  before  death, 
and  lest  they  kill  the  body,  but  after  death,  lest 
they  deprive  it  of  burial?  If  this  be  so,  then  that 
is  false  which  Christ  says,  “Be  not  afraid  of 
them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no 
more  that  they  can  do”;2  for  it  seems  they  can 
do  great  injury  to  the  dead  body.  Far  be  it  from 
us  to  suppose  that  the  Truth  can  be  thus  false. 
They  who  kill  the  body  are  said  “to  do  some¬ 
thing,”  because  the  deathblow  is  felt,  the  body 
still  having  sensation ;  but  after  that,  they  have 
no  more  that  they  can  do,  for  in  the  slain  body 
there  is  no  sensation.  And  so  there  are  indeed 
many  bodies  of  Christians  lying  unburied;  but 
no  one  has  separated  them  from  heaven,  nor 
from  t;hat  earth  which  is  all  filled  with  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  Him  who  knows  whence  He  will  raise 
again  what  He  created.  It  is  said,  indeed,  in  the 
Psalm :  “The  dead  bodies  of  Thy  servants  have 
they  given  to  be  meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the 
heaven,  the  flesh  of  Thy  saints  unto  the  beasts 
of  the  earth.  Their  blood  have  they  shed  like 
water  round  about  Jerusalem;  and  there  was 
none  to  bury  them.”3  But  this  was  said  rather 
to  exhibit  the  cruelty  of  those  who  did  these 
things,  than  the  misery  of  those  who  suffered 
them.  To  the  eyes  of  men  this  appears  a  harsh 
xMatt.  10.  28.  2Luke,  12.  4.  3Ps.  79.  2,  3. 


and  doleful  lot,  yet  “precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints.”4  Wherefore  all 
these  last  offices  and  ceremonies  that  concern 
the  dead,  the  careful  funeral  arrangements,  and 
the  equipment  of  the  tomb,  and  the  pomp  of 
obsequies,  are  rather  the  solace  of  the  living 
than  the  comfort  of  the  dead.  If  a  costly  burial 
does  any  good  to  a  wicked  man,  a  squalid  burial, 
or  none  at  all,  may  harm  the  godly.  His  crowd 
of  domestics  furnished  the  purple-clad  Dives 
with  a  funeral  gorgeous  in  the  eye  of  man;  but 
in  the  sight  of  God  that  was  a  more  sumptuous 
funeral  which  the  ulcerous  pauper  received  at 
the  hands  of  the  angels,  who  did  not  carry  him 
out  to  a  marble  tomb,  but  bore  him  aloft  to 
Abraham’s  bosom. 

The  men  against  whom  I  have  undertaken  to 
defend  the  city  of  God  laugh  at  all  this.  But 
even  their  own  philosophers5  have  despised  a 
careful  burial;  and  often  whole  armies  have 
fought  and  fallen  for  their  earthly  country  with¬ 
out  caring  to  inquire  whether  they  would  be  left 
exposed  on  the  field  of  battle,  or  become  the 
food  of  wild  beasts.  Of  this  noble  disregard  of 
sepulture  poetry  has  well  said:  “He  who  has  no 
tomb  has  the  sky  for  his  vault.”  How  much  less 
ought  they  to  insult  over  the  unburied  bodies  of 
Christians,  to  whom  it  has  been  promised  that 
the  flesh  itself  shall  be  restored,  and  the  body 
formed  anew,  all  the  members  of  it  being  gath¬ 
ered  not  only  from  the  earth,  but  from  the  most 
secret  recesses  of  any  other  of  the  elements  in 
which  the  dead  bodies  of  men  have  lain  hid! 

Chap.  13.  Reasons  for  burying  the  bodies  of  the 

saints 

Nevertheless  the  bodies  of  the  dead  are  not 
on  this  account  to  be  despised  and  left  unburied; 
least  of  all  the  bodies  of  the  righteous  and 
faithful,  which  have  been  used  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  His  organs  and  instruments  for  all  good 
works.  For  if  the  dress  of  a  father,  or  his  ring,  or 
anything  he  wore,  be  precious  to  his  children,  in 
proportion  to  the  love  they  bore  him,  with  how 
much  more  reason  ought  we  to  care  for  the 
bodies  of  those  we  love,  which  they  wore  far 
more  closely  and  intimately  than  any  clothing! 
For  the  body  is  not  an  extraneous  ornament  or 
aid,  but  a  part  of  man’s  very  nature.  And  there¬ 
fore  to  the  righteous  of  ancient  times  the  last 
offices  were  piously  rendered,  and  sepulchres 
provided  for  them,  and  obsequies  celebrated;6 
and  they  themselves,  while  yet  alive,  gave  com¬ 
mandment  to  their  sons  about  the  burial,  and, 

4Ps.  1 1 6.  15.  6Diogenes  especially,  and  his  followers. 

6Gen.  25.  9;  35.  29,  etc. 


138  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


on  occasion,  even  about  the  removal  of  their 
bodies  to  some  favorite  place.1  And  Tobit,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  angel’s  testimony,  is  commended, 
and  is  said  to  have  pleased  God  by  burying  the 
dead.2  Our  Lord  Himself,  too,  though  He  was  to 
rise  again  the  third  day,  applauds,  and  com¬ 
mends  to  our  applause,  the  good  work  of  the  re¬ 
ligious  woman  who  poured  precious  ointment 
over  His  limbs,  and  did  it  against  His  burial.3 
And  the  Gospel  speaks  with  commendation  of 
those  who  were  careful  to  take  down  His  body 
from  the  cross,  and  wrap  it  lovingly  in  costly 
cerements,  and  see  to  its  burial.4  These  instances 
certainly  do  not  prove  that  corpses  have  any 
feeling;  but  they  show  that  God’s  providence 
extends  even  to  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  that 
such  pious  offices  are  pleasing  to  Him,  as  cher¬ 
ishing  faith  in  the  resurrection.  And  we  may  also 
draw  from  them  this  wholesome  lesson,  that  if 
God  does  not  forget  even  any  kind  office  which 
loving  care  pays  to  the  unconscious  dead,  much 
more  does  He  reward  the  charity  we  exercise 
towards  the  living.  Other  things,  indeed,  which 
the  holy  patriarchs  said  of  the  burial  and  re¬ 
moval  of  their  bodies,  they  meant  to  be  taken 
in  a  prophetic  sense;  but  of  these  we  need  not 
here  speak  at  large,  what  we  have  already  said 
being  sufficient.  But  if  the  want  of  those  things 
which  are  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  liv¬ 
ing,  as  food  and  clothing,  though  painful  and 
trying,  does  not  break  down  the  fortitude  and 
virtuous  endurance  of  good  men,  nor  eradicate 
piety  from  their  souls,  but  rather  renders  it 
more  fruitful,  how  much  less  can  the  absence  of 
the  funeral,  and  of  the  other  customary  atten¬ 
tions  paid  to  the  dead,  render  those  wretched 
who  are  already  reposing  in  the  hidden  abodes 
of  the  blessed!  Consequently,  though  in  the  sack 
of  Rome  and  of  other  towns  the  dead  bodies  of 
the  Christians  were  deprived  of  these  last  of¬ 
fices,  this  is  neither  the  fault  of  the  living,  for 
they  could  not  render  them ;  nor  an  infliction  to 
the  dead,  for  they  cannot  feel  the  loss. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  captivity  of  the  saints ,  and 
that  divine  consolation  never  failed  them 
therein 

But,  say  they,  many  Christians  were  even  led 
away  captive.  This  indeed  were  a  most  pitiable 
fate,  if  they  could  be  led  away  to  any  place 
where  they  could  not  find  their  God.  But  for  this 
calamity  also  sacred  Scripture  affords  great  con¬ 
solation.  The  three  youths5  were  captives ;  Dan¬ 
iel  was  a  captive;  so  were  other  prophets:  and 

1Gen.  47.  29;  50.  24.  2Tob.  12.  12. 

^att.  26.  10-13.  4John,  19.  38.  BDan.  3. 


God,  the  comforter,  did  not  fail  them.  And  in 
like  manner  He  has  not  failed  His  own  people  in 
the  power  of  a  nation  which,  though  barbarous, 
is  yet  human — He  who  did  not  abandon  the 
prophet  in  the  belly  of  a  monster.  These  things, 
indeed,  are  turned  to  ridicule  rather  than  credit¬ 
ed  by  those  with  whom  we  are  debating;  though 
they  believe  what  they  read  in  their  own  books, 
that  Arion  of  Methymna,  the  famous  lyrist, 
when  he  was  thrown  overboard,  was  received  on 
a  dolphin’s  back  and  carried  to  land.6  But  that 
story  of  ours  about  the  prophet  Jonah  is  far 
more  incredible — more  incredible  because  more 
marvellous,  and  more  marvellous  because  a 
greater  exhibition  of  power. 

Chap.  15.  Of  Regulus,  in  whom  we  have  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  voluntary  endurance  of  captiv¬ 
ity  for  the  sake  of  religion;  which  yet  did  not 
profit  him ,  though  he  was  a  worshipper  of  the 
gods 

But  among  their  own  famous  men  they  have 
a  very  noble  example  of  the  voluntary  endur¬ 
ance  of  captivity  in  obedience  to  a  religious 
scruple.  Marcus  Attilius  Regulus,  a  Roman  gen¬ 
eral,  was  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians.  But  they,  being  more  anxious  to  ex¬ 
change  their  prisoners  with  the  Romans  than  to 
keep  them,  sent  Regulus  as  a  special  envoy  with 
their  own  ambassadors  to  negotiate  this  ex¬ 
change,  but  bound  him  first  with  an  oath,  that 
if  he  failed  to  accomplish  their  wish,  he  would 
return  to  Carthage.  He  went  and  persuaded  the 
senate  to  the  opposite  course,  because  he  be¬ 
lieved  it  was  not  for  the  advantage  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  republic  to  make  an  exchange  of  prisoners. 
After  he  had  thus  exerted  his  influence,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  did  not  compel  him  to  return  to  the  ene¬ 
my;  but  what  he  had  sworn  he  voluntarily  per¬ 
formed.  But  the  Carthaginians  put  him  to  death 
with  refined,  elaborate,  and  horrible  tortures. 
They  shut  him  up  in  a  narrow  box,  in  which  he 
was  compelled  to  stand,  and  in  which  finely 
sharpened  nails  were  fixed  all  round  about  him, 
so  that  he  could  not  lean  upon  any  part  of  it 
without  intense  pain;  and  so  they  killed  him  by 
depriving  him  of  sleep.  With  justice,  indeed,  do 
they  applaud  the  virtue  which  rose  superior  to 
so  frightful  a  fate.  However,  the  gods  he  swore 
by  were  those  who  are  now  supposed  to  avenge 
the  prohibition  of  their  worship,  by  inflicting 
these  present  calamities  on  the  human  race.  But 
if  these  gods,  who  were  worshipped  specially  in 
this  behalf,  that  they  might  confer  happiness 
in  this  life,  either  willed  or  permitted  these  pun- 
6Herodotus,  History ,  Bk.  i.  23,  24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ishments  to  be  inflicted  on  one  who  kept  his  oath 
to  them,  what  more  cruel  punishment  could  they 
in  their  anger  have  inflicted  on  a  perjured  per¬ 
son?  But  why  may  I  not  draw  from  my  reason¬ 
ing  a  double  inference?  Regulus  certainly  had 
such  reverence  for  the  gods  that  for  his  oath’s 
sake  he  would  neither  remain  in  his  own  land 
nor  go  elsewhere,  but  without  hesitation  re¬ 
turned  to  his  bitterest  enemies.  If  he  thought 
that  this  course  would  be  advantageous  with 
respect  to  this  present  life,  he  was  certainly 
much  deceived,  for  it  brought  his  life  to  a 
frightful  termination.  By  his  own  example,  in 
fact,  he  taught  that  the  gods  do  not  secure  the 
temporal  happiness  of  their  worshippers;  since 
he  himself,  who  was  devoted  to  their  worship, 
as  both  conquered  in  battle  and  taken  prisoner, 
and  then,  because  he  refused  to  act  in  violation 
of  the  oath  he  had  sworn  by  them,  was  tortured 
and  put  to  death  by  a  new,  and  hitherto  un¬ 
heard  of,  and  all  too  horrible  kind  of  punish¬ 
ment.  And  on  the  supposition  that  the  worship¬ 
pers  of  the  gods  are  rewarded  by  felicity  in  the 
life  to  come,  why,  then,  do  they  calumniate  the 
influence  of  Christianity?  why  do  they  assert 
that  this  disaster  has  overtaken  the  city  because 
it  has  ceased  to  worship  its  gods,  since,  worship 
them  as  assiduously  as  it  may,  it  may  yet  be  as 
unfortunate  as  Regulus  was?  Or  will  some  one 
carry  so  wonderful  a  blindness  to  the  extent  of 
wildly  attempting,  in  the  face  of  the  evident 
truth,  to  contend  that  though  one  man  might  be 
unfortunate,  though  a  worshipper  of  the  gods, 
yet  a  whole  city  could  not  be  so?  That  is  to  say, 
the  power  of  their  gods  is  better  adapted  to  pre¬ 
serve  multitudes  than  individuals — as  if  a  mul¬ 
titude  were  not  composed  of  individuals. 

But  if  they  say  that  M.  Regulus,  even  while 
a  prisoner  and  enduring  these  bodily  torments, 
might  yet  enjoy  the  blessedness  of  a  virtuous 
soul,  then  let  them  recognize  that  true  virtue  by 
which  a  city  also  may  be  blessed.  For  the  bless¬ 
edness  of  a  community  and  of  an  individual 
flow  from  the  same  source;  for  a  community  is 
nothing  else  than  a  harmonious  collection  of  in¬ 
dividuals.  So  that  I  am  not  concerned  meantime 
to  discuss  what  kind  of  virtue  Regulus  pos¬ 
sessed;  enough  that  by  his  very  noble  example 
they  are  forced  to  own  that  the  gods  are  to  be 
worshipped  not  for  the  sake  of  bodily  comforts 
or  external  advantages;  for  he  preferred  to  lose 
all  such  things  rather  than  offend  the  gods  by 
whom  he  had  sworn.  But  what  can  we  make  of 
men  who  glory  in  having  such  a  citizen,  but 
dread  having  a  city  like  him?  If  they  do  not 
dread  this,  then  let  them  acknowledge  that  some 


GOD  I.  14-16  139 

such  calamity  as  befell  Regulus  may  also  befall 
a  community,  though  they  be  worshipping  their 
gods  as  diligently  as  he;  and  let  them  no  longer 
throw  the  blame  of  their  misfortunes  on  Chris¬ 
tianity.  But  as  our  present  concern  is  with  those 
Christians  who  were  taken  prisoners,  let  those 
who  take  occasion  from  this  calamity  to  revile 
our  most  wholesome  religion  in  a  fashion  not 
less  imprudent  than  impudent,  consider  this  and 
hold  their  peace;  for  if  it  was  no  reproach  to 
their  gods  that  a  most  punctilious  worshipper  of 
theirs  should,  for  the  sake  of  keeping  his  oath 
to  them,  be  deprived  of  his  native  land  without 
hope  of  finding  another,  and  fall  into  the  hands 
of  his  enemies,  and  be  put  to  death  by  a  long- 
drawn  and  exquisite  torture,  much  less  ought  the 
Christian  name  to  be  charged  with  the  captivity 
of  those  who  believe  in  its  power,  since  they,  in 
confident  expectation  of  a  heavenly  country, 
know  that  they  are  pilgrims  even  in  their  own 
homes. 

Chap.  16.  Of  the  violation  of  the  consecrated 
and  other  Christian  virgins,  to  which  they 
were  subjected  in  captivity,  and  to  which  their 
own  will  gave  no  consent;  and  whether  this 
contaminated  their  souls 
But  they  fancy  they  bring  a  conclusive  charge 
against  Christianity,  when  they  aggravate  the 
horror  of  captivity  by  adding  that  not  only 
wives  and  unmarried  maidens,  but  even  conse¬ 
crated  virgins,  were  violated.  But  truly,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  this,  it  is  not  Christian  faith,  nor  piety, 
nor  even  the  virtue  of  chastity,  which  is  hemmed 
into  any  difficulty;  the  only  difficulty  is  so  to 
treat  the  subject  as  to  satisfy  at  once  modesty 
and  reason.  And  in  discussing  it  we  shall  not  be 
so  careful  to  reply  to  our  accusers  as  to  comfort 
our  friends.  Let  this,  therefore,  in  the  first  place, 
be  laid  down  as  an  unassailable  position,  that  the 
virtue  which  makes  the  life  good  has  its  throne 
in  the  soul,  and  thence  rules  the  members  of  the 
body,  which  becomes  holy  in  virtue  of  the  holi¬ 
ness  of  the  will ;  and  that  while  the  will  remains 
firm  and  unshaken,  nothing  that  another  person 
does  with  the  body,  or  upon  the  body,  is  any 
fault  of  the  person  who  suffers  it,  so  long  as  he 
cannot  escape  it  without  sin.  But  as  not  only 
pain  may  be  inflicted,  but  lust  gratified  on  the 
body  of  another,  whenever  anything  of  this  lat¬ 
ter  kind  takes  place,  shame  invades  even  a  thor¬ 
oughly  pure  spirit  from  which  modesty  has  not 
departed — shame,  lest  that  act  which  could  not 
be  suffered  without  some  sensual  pleasure, 
should  be  believed  to  have  been  committed  also 
with  some  assent  of  the  will. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  17.  0}  suicide  committed  through  fear  of 

punishment  or  dishonour 

And  consequently,  even  if  some  of  these  vir¬ 
gins  killed  themselves  to  avoid  such  disgrace, 
who  that  has  any  human  feeling  would  refuse  to 
forgive  them?  And  as  for  those  who  would  not 
put  an  end  to  their  lives,  lest  they  might  seem 
to  escape  the  crime  of  another  by  a  sin  of  their 
own,  he  who  lays  this  to  their  charge  as  a  great 
wickedness  is  himself  not  guiltless  of  the  fault  of 
folly.  For  if  it  is  not  lawful  to  take  the  law  into 
our  own  hands  and  slay  even  a  guilty  person, 
whose  death  no  public  sentence  has  warranted, 
then  certainly  he  who  kills  himself  is  a  homi¬ 
cide,  and  so  much  the  guiltier  of  his  own  death 
as  he  was  more  innocent  of  that  offence  for 
which  he  doomed  himself  to  die.  Do  we  justly 
execrate  the  deed  of  Judas,  and  does  truth  itself 
pronounce  that  by  hanging  himself  he  rather 
aggravated  than  expiated  the  guilt  of  that  most 
iniquitous  betrayal,  since,  by  despairing  of  God’s 
mercy  in  his  sorrow  that  wrought  death,  he  left 
to  himself  no  place  for  a  healing  penitence? 
How  much  more  ought  he  to  abstain  from  lay¬ 
ing  violent  hands  on  himself  who  has  done  noth¬ 
ing  worthy  of  such  a  punishment!  For  Judas, 
when  he  killed  himself,  killed  a  wicked  man; 
but  he  passed  from  this  life  chargeable  not  only 
with  the  death  of  Christ,  but  with  his  own:  for 
though  he  killed  himself  on  account  of  his  crime, 
his  killing  himself  was  another  crime.  Whv, 
then,  should  a  man  who  has  done  no  ill  do  ill  to 
himself,  and  by  killing  himself  kill  the  innocent 
to  escape  another’s  guilty  act,  and  perpetrate 
upon  himself  a  sin  of  his  own,  that  the  sin  of  an¬ 
other  may  not  be  perpetrated  on  him? 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  violence  which  may  be  done  to 

the  body  by  another’s  lust  while  the  mind  re - 

mains  inviolate 

But  is  there  a  fear  that  even  another’s  lust 
may  pollute  the  violated?  It  will  not  pollute,  if 
it  be  another’s :  if  it  pollute,  it  is  not  another’s, 
but  is  shared  also  by  the  polluted.  But  since 
purity  is  a  virtue  of  the  soul,  and  has  for  its 
companion  virtue,  the  fortitude  which  will  rath¬ 
er  endure  all  ills  than  consent  to  evil;  and  since 
no  one,  however  magnanimous  and  pure,  has  al¬ 
ways  the  disposal  of  his  own  body,  but  can  con¬ 
trol  only  the  consent  and  refusal  of  his  will, 
what  sane  man  can  suppose  that,  if  his  body  be 
seized  and  forcibly  made  use  of  to  satisfy  the 
lust  of  another,  he  thereby  loses  his  purity?  For 
if  purity  can  be  thus  destroyed,  then  assuredly 
purity  is  no  virtue  of  the  soul;  nor  can  it  be 


numbered  among  those  good  things  by  which  the 
life  is  made  good,  but  among  the  good  things  of 
the  body,  in  the  same  category  as  strength, 
beauty,  sound  and  unbroken  health,  and,  in 
short,  all  such  good  things  as  may  be  dimin¬ 
ished  without  at  all  diminishing  the  goodness 
and  rectitude  of  our  life.  But  if  purity  be  noth¬ 
ing  better  than  these,  why  should  the  body  be 
perilled  that  it  may  be  preserved?  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  belongs  to  the  soul,  then  not  even 
when  the  body  is  violated  is  it  lost.  Nay  more, 
the  virtue  of  holy  continence,  when  it  resists 
the  uncleanness  of  carnal  lust,  sanctifies  even 
the  body,  and  therefore  when  this  continence 
remains  unsubdued,  even  the  sanctity  of  the 
body  is  preserved,  because  the  will  to  use  it 
holily  remains,  and,  so  far  as  lies  in  the  body 
itself,  the  power  also. 

For  the  sanctity  of  the  body  does  not  con¬ 
sist  in  the  integrity  of  its  members,  nor  in  their 
exemption  from  all  touch;  for  they  are  exposed 
to  various  accidents  which  do  violence  to  and 
wound  them,  and  the  surgeons  who  administer 
relief  often  perform  operations  that  sicken  the 
spectator.  A  midwife,  suppose,  has  (whether 
maliciously  or  accidentally,  or  through  unskil¬ 
fulness)  destroyed  the  virginity  of  some  girl, 
while  endeavouring  to  ascertain  it :  I  suppose  no 
one  is  so  foolish  as  to  believe  that,  by  this  de¬ 
struction  of  the  integrity  of  one  organ,  the  vir¬ 
gin  has  lost  anything  even  of  her  bodily  sanctity. 
And  thus,  so  long  as  the  soul  keeps  this  firmness 
of  purpose  which  sanctifies  even  the  body,  the 
violence  done  by  another’s  lust  makes  no  im¬ 
pression  on  this  bodily  sanctity,  which  is  pre¬ 
served  intact  by  one’s  own  persistent  continence. 
Suppose  a  virgin  violates  the  oath  she  has  sworn 
to  God,  and  goes  to  meet  her  seducer  with  the 
intention  of  yielding  to  him,  shall  we  say  that  as 
she  goes  she  is  possessed  even  of  bodily  sanctity, 
when  already  she  has  lost  and  destroyed  that 
sanctity  of  soul  which  sanctifies  the  body?  Far 
be  it  from  us  to  so  misapply  words.  Let  us  rather 
draw  this  conclusion,  that  while  the  sanctity  of 
the  soul  remains  even  when  the  body  is  violated, 
the  sanctity  of  the  body  is  not  lost;  and  that,  in 
like  manner,  the  sanctity  of  the  body  is  lost  when 
the  sanctity  of  the  soul  is  violated,  though  the 
body  itself  remains  intact.  And  therefore  a 
woman  who  has  been  violated  by  the  sin  of  an¬ 
other,  and  without  any  consent  of  her  own,  has 
no  cause  to  put  herself  to  death;  much  less  has 
she  cause  to  commit  suicide  in  order  to  avoid 
such  violation,  for  in  that  case  she  commits  cer¬ 
tain  homicide  to  prevent  a  crime  which  is  uncer¬ 
tain  as  yet,  and  not  her  own. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  19  .Of  Lucretia,  who  put  an  end  to  her 

life  because  of  the  outrage  done  her. 

This,  then,  is  our  position,  and  it  seems  suffi¬ 
ciently  lucid.  We  maintain  that  when  a  woman 
is  violated  while  her  soul  admits  no  consent  to 
the  iniquity,  but  remains  inviolably  chaste,  the 
sin  is  not  hers,  but  his  who  violates  her.  But  do 
they  against  whom  we  have  to  defend  not  only 
the  souls,  but  the  sacred  bodies  too  of  these  out¬ 
raged  Christian  captives — do  they,  perhaps,  dare 
to  dispute  our  position?  But  all  know  how  loudly 
they  extol  the  purity  of  Lucretia,  that  noble  ma¬ 
tron  of  ancient  Rome.  When  King  Tarquin’s  son 
had  violated  her  body,  she  made  known  the 
wickedness  of  this  young  profligate  to  her  hus¬ 
band  Collatinus,  and  to  Brutus  her  kinsman, 
men  of  high  rank  and  full  of  courage,  and  bound 
them  by  an  oath  to  avenge  it.  Then,  heart-sick, 
and  unable  to  bear  the  shame,  she  put  an  end  to 
her  life.  What  shall  we  call  her?  An  adulteress, 
or  chaste?  There  is  no  question  which  she  was. 
Not  more  happily  than  truly  did  a  declaimer  say 
of  this  sad  occurrence:  “Here  was  a  marvel: 
there  were  two,  and  only  one  committed  adul- 
tery.”  Most  forcibly  and  truly  spoken.  For  this 
declaimer,  seeing  in  the  union  of  the  two  bodies 
the  foul  lust  of  the  one,  and  the  chaste  will  of 
the  other,  and  giving  heed  not  to  the  contact  of 
the  bodily  members,  but  to  the  wide  diversity  of 
their  souls,  says:  “There  were  two,  but  the  adul¬ 
tery  was  committed  only  by  one.” 

But  how  is  it,  that  she  who  was  no  partner  to 
the  crime  bears  the  heavier  punishment  of  the 
two?  For  the  adulterer  was  only  banished  along 
with  his  father;  she  suffered  the  extreme  pen¬ 
alty.  If  that  was  not  impurity  by  which  she  was 
unwillingly  ravished,  then  this  is  not  justice  by 
which  she,  being  chaste,  is  punished.  To  you  I 
appeal,  ye  laws  and  judges  of  Rome.  Even  after 
the  perpetration  of  great  enormities,  you  do  not 
suffer  the  criminal  to  be  slain  untried.  If,  then, 
one  were  to  bring  to  your  bar  this  case,  and 
were  \o  prove  to  you  that  a  woman  not  only  un¬ 
tried,  but  chaste  and  innocent,  had  been  killed, 
would  you  not  visit  the  murderer  with  punish¬ 
ment  proportionably  severe?  This  crime  was 
committed  by  Lucretia;  that  Lucretia  so  cele¬ 
brated  and  lauded  slew  the  innocent,  chaste, 
outraged  Lucretia.  Pronounce  sentence.  But  if 
you  cannot,  because  there  does  not  appear  any 
one  whom  you  can  punish,  why  do  you  extol 
with  such  unmeasured  laudation  her  who  slew 
an  innocent  and  chaste  woman?  Assuredly  you 
will  find  it  impossible  to  defend  her  before  the 
judges  of  the  realms  below,  if  they  be  such  as 


GOD  I.  17-19  141 

your  poets  are  fond  of  representing  them;  for 
she  is  among  those : 

Who  guiltless  sent  themselves  to  doom, 

And  all  for  loathing  of  the  day , 

In  madness  threw  their  lives  away. 

And  if  she  with  the  others  wishes  to  return, 

Fate  bars  the  way:  around  their  keep 
The  slow  unlovely  waters  creep, 

And  bind  with  ninefold  chain.1 

Or  perhaps  she  is  not  there,  because  she  slew 
herself  conscious  of  guilt,  not  of  innocence?  She 
herself  alone  knows  her  reason;  but  what  if  she 
was  betrayed  by  the  pleasure  of  the  act,  and 
gave  some  consent  to  Sextus,  though  so  violent¬ 
ly  abusing  her,  and  then  was  so  affected  with  re¬ 
morse,  that  she  thought  death  alone  could  ex¬ 
piate  her  sin?  Even  though  this  were  the  case, 
she  ought  still  to  have  held  her  hand  from  sui¬ 
cide,  if  she  could  with  her  false  gods  have  accom¬ 
plished  a  fruitful  repentance.  However,  if  such 
were  the  state  of  the  case,  and  if  it  were  false 
that  there  were  two,  but  one  only  committed 
adultery;  if  the  truth  were  that  both  were  in¬ 
volved  in  it,  one  by  open  assault,  the  other  by 
secret  consent,  then  she  did  not  kill  an  innocent 
woman;  and  therefore  her  erudite  defenders 
may  maintain  that  she  is  not  among  that  class  of 
the  dwellers  below  “who  guiltless  sent  them¬ 
selves  to  doom.”  But  this  case  of  Lucretia  is  in 
such  a  dilemma  that  if  you  extenuate  the  homi¬ 
cide,  you  confirm  the  adultery;  if  you  acquit 
her  of  adultery,  you  make  the  charge  of  homi¬ 
cide  heavier;  and  there  is  no  way  out  of  the  di¬ 
lemma,  when  one  asks:  If  she  was  adulterous, 
why  praise  her?  if  chaste,  why  slay  her? 

Nevertheless,  for  our  purpose  of  refuting 
those  who  are  unable  to  comprehend  what  true 
sanctity  is,  and  who  therefore  insult  over  our 
outraged  Christian  women,  it  is  enough  that  in 
the  instance  of  this  noble  Roman  matron  it  was 
said  in  her  praise,  “There  were  two,  but  the 
adultery  was  the  crime  of  only  one.”  For  Lucre¬ 
tia  was  confidently  believed  to  be  superior  to  the 
contamination  of  any  consenting  thought  to  the 
adultery.  And  accordingly,  since  she  killed  her¬ 
self  for  being  subjected  to  an  outrage  in  which 
she  had  no  guilty  part,  it  is  obvious  that  this  act 
of  hers  was  prompted  not  by  the  love  of  purity, 
but  by  the  overwhelming  burden  of  her  shame. 
She  was  ashamed  that  so  foul  a  crime  had  been 
perpetrated  upon  her,  though  without  her  abet¬ 
ting;  and  this  matron,  with  the  Roman  love  of 
glory  in  her  veins,  was  seized  with  a  proud  dread 
that,  if  she  continued  to  live,  it  would  be  sup- 
1Virgil,  JZneid,  bk.  vi.  434. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


posed  she  willingly  did  not  resent  the  wrong 
that  had  been  done  her.  She  could  not  exhibit  to 
men  her  conscience,  but  she  judged  that  her  self- 
inflicted  punishment  would  testify  her  state  of 
mind;  and  she  burned  with  shame  at  the  thought 
that  her  patient  endurance  of  the  foul  affront 
that  another  had  done  her,  should  be  construed 
into  complicity  with  him.  Not  such  was  the  de¬ 
cision  of  the  Christian  women  who  suffered  as 
she  did  and  yet  survive.  They  declined  to  avenge 
upon  themselves  the  guilt  of  others  and  so  add 
crimes  of  their  own  to  those  crimes  in  which 
they  had  no  share.  For  this  they  would  have 
done  had  their  shame  driven  them  to  homicide, 
as  the  lust  of  their  enemies  had  driven  them  to 
adultery.  Within  their  own  souls,  in  the  witness 
of  their  own  conscience,  they  enjoy  the  glory  of 
chastity.  In  the  sight  of  God,  too,  they  are  es¬ 
teemed  pure,  and  this  contents  them ;  they  ask 
no  more;  it  suffices  them  to  have  opportunity  of 
doing  good,  and  they  decline  to  evade  the  dis¬ 
tress  of  human  suspicion,  lest  they  thereby  devi¬ 
ate  from  the  divine  law. 

Chap.  20.  That  Christians  have  no  authority  for 
committing  suicide  in  any  circumstances 
whatever 

It  is  not  without  significance,  that  in  no  pas¬ 
sage  of  the  holy  canonical  books  there  can  be 
found  either  divine  precept  or  permission  to 
take  away  our  own  life,  whether  for  the  sake  of 
entering  on  the  enjoyment  of  immortality,  or  of 
shunning,  or  ridding  ourselves  of  anything 
whatever.  Nay,  the  law,  rightly  interpreted,  even 
prohibits  suicide,  where  it  says,  “Thou  shalt 
not  kill.”  This  is  proved  especially  by  the  omis¬ 
sion  of  the  words  “thy  neighbour,”  which 
are  inserted  when  false  witness  is  forbidden: 
“Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour.”  Nor  yet  should  any  one  on  this  ac¬ 
count  suppose  he  has  not  broken  this  command¬ 
ment  if  he  has  borne  false  witness  only  against 
himself.  For  the  love  of  our  neighbour  is  regu¬ 
lated  by  the  love  of  ourselves,  as  it  is  written, 
“Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.”  If, 
then,  he  who  makes  false  statements  about  him¬ 
self  is  not  less  guilty  of  bearing  false  witness 
than  if  he  had  made  them  to  the  injury  of  his 
neighbour;  although  in  the  commandment  pro¬ 
hibiting  false  witness  only  his  neighbour  is  men¬ 
tioned,  and  persons  taking  no  pains  to  under¬ 
stand  it  might  suppose  that  a  man  was  allowed 
to  be  a  false  witness  to  his  own  hurt ;  how  much 
greater  reason  have  we  to  understand  that  a  man 
may  not  kill  himself,  since  in  the  command¬ 
ment,  “Thou  shalt  not  kill,”  there  is  no  limita¬ 


tion  added  nor  any  exception  made  in  favour  of 
any  one.  and  least  of  all  in  favour  of  him  on 
whom  the  command  is  laid!  And  so  some  at¬ 
tempt  to  extend  this  command  even  to  beasts 
and  cattle,  as  if  it  forbade  us  to  take  life  from 
any  creature.  But  if  so,  why  not  extend  it  also 
to  the  plants,  and  all  that  is  rooted  in  and  nour¬ 
ished  by  the  earth?  For  though  this  class  of 
creatures  have  no  sensation,  yet  they  also  are 
said  to  live,  and  consequently  they  can  die;  and 
therefore,  if  violence  be  done  them,  can  be 
killed.  So,  too,  the  apostle,  when  speaking  of  the 
seeds  of  such  things  as  these,  says,  “That  which 
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die”; 
and  in  the  Psalm  it  is  said,  “He  killed  their  vines 
with  hail.”  Must  we  therefore  reckon  it  a  break¬ 
ing  of  this  commandment,  “Thou  shalt  not  kill,” 
to  pull  a  flower?  Are  we  thus  insanely  to  coun¬ 
tenance  the  foolish  error  of  the  Manichaeans? 
Putting  aside,  then,  these  ravings,  if,  when  we 
say,  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  we  do  not  understand 
this  of  the  plants,  since  they  have  no  sensation, 
nor  of  the  irrational  animals  that  fly,  swim, 
walk,  or  creep,  since  they  are  dissociated  from 
us  by  their  want  of  reason,  and  are  therefore  by 
the  just  appointment  of  the  Creator  subjected 
to  us  to  kill  or  keep  alive  for  our  own  uses;  if  so, 
then  it  remains  that  we  understand  that  com¬ 
mandment  simply  of  man.  The  commandment 
is,  “Thou  shalt  not  kill  man”;  therefore  neither 
another  nor  yourself,  for  he  who  kills  himself 
still  kills  nothing  else  than  man. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  cases  in  which  we  may  put 
men  to  death  without  incurring  the  guilt  of 
murder 

However,  there  are  some  exceptions  made  by 
the  divine  authority  to  its  own  law  that  men 
may  not  be  put  to  death.  These  exceptions  are  of 
two  kinds,  being  justified  either  by  a  general 
law.  or  by  a  special  commission  granted  for  a 
time  to  some  individual.  And  in  this  latter  case, 
he  to  whom  authority  is  delegated,  and  who  is 
but  the  sword  in  the  hand  of  him  who  uses  it,  is 
not  himself  responsible  for  the  death  he  deals. 
And,  accordingly,  they  who  have  waged  war  in 
obedience  to  the  divine  command,  or  in  con¬ 
formity  with  His  laws,  have  represented  in  their 
persons  the  public  justice  or  the  wisdom  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  and  in  this  capacity  have  put  to  death 
wicked  men;  such  persons  have  by  no  means 
violated  the  commandment,  “Thou  shalt  not 
kill.”  Abraham  indeed  was  not  merely  deemed 
guiltless  of  cruelty,  but  was  even  applauded  for 
his  piety,  because  he  was  ready  to  slay  his  son 
in  obedience  to  God,  not  to  his  own  passion. 


THE  CITY  OF 

And  it  is  reasonably  enough  made  a  question, 
whether  we  are  to  esteem  it  to  have  been  in  com¬ 
pliance  with  a  command  of  God  that  Jephthah 
killed  his  daughter,  because  she  met  him  when 
he  had  vowed  that  he  would  sacrifice  to  God 
whatever  first  met  him  as  he  returned  victorious 
from  battle.  Samson,  too,  who  drew  down  the 
house  on  himself  and  his  foes  together,  is  justi¬ 
fied  only  on  this  ground,  that  the  Spirit  who 
wrought  wonders  by  him  had  given  him  secret 
instructions  to  do  this.  With  the  exception,  then, 
of  these  two  classes  of  cases,  which  are  justified 
either  by  a  just  law  that  applies  generally,  or  by 
a  special  intimation  from  God  Himself,  the 
fountain  of  all  justice,  whoever  kills  a  man, 
either  himself  or  another,  is  implicated  in  the 
guilt  of  murder. 

Chap.  22.  That  suicide  can  never  be  prompted 

by  magnanimity 

But  they  who  have  laid  violent  hands  on 
themselves  are  perhaps  to  be  admired  for  their 
greatness  of  soul,  though  they  cannot  be  ap¬ 
plauded  for  the  soundness  of  their  judgment. 
However,  if  you  look  at  the  matter  more  closely, 
you  will  scarcely  call  it  greatness  of  soul,  which 
prompts  a  man  to  kill  himself  rather  than  to 
bear  up  against  some  hardships  of  fortune,  or 
sins  in  which  he  is  not  implicated.  Is  it  not  rath¬ 
er  proof  of  a  feeble  mind,  to  be  unable  to  bear 
either  the  pains  of  bodily  servitude  or  the  fool¬ 
ish  opinion  of  the  vulgar?  And  is  not  that  to  be 
pronounced  the  greater  mind,  which  rather  faces 
than  flees  the  ills  of  life,  and  which,  in  compari¬ 
son  of  the  light  and  purity  of  conscience,  holds 
in  small  esteem  the  judgment  of  men,  and  spe¬ 
cially  of  the  vulgar,  which  is  frequently  in¬ 
volved  in  a  mist  of  error?  And,  therefore,  if  sui¬ 
cide  is  to  be  esteemed  a  magnanimous  act,  none 
can  take  higher  rank  for  magnanimity  than  that 
Cleombrotus,  who  (as  the  story  goes),  when  he 
had  read  Plato’s  book  in  which  he  treats  of  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  threw  himself  from  a 
wall,  and  so  passed  from  this  life  to  that  which 
he  believed  to  be  better.  For  he  was  not  hard 
pressed  by  calamity,  nor  by  any  accusation,  false 
or  true,  which  he  could  not  very  well  have  lived 
down;  there  was,  in  short,  no  motive  but  only 
magnanimity  urging  him  to  seek  death,  and 
break  away  from  the  sweet  detention  of  this  life. 
And  yet  that  this  was  a  magnanimous  rather 
than  a  justifiable  action,  Plato  himself,  whom  he 
had  read,  would  have  told  him ;  for  he  would  cer¬ 
tainly  have  been  forward  to  commit,  or  at  least 
to  recommend  suicide,  had  not  the  same  bright 
intellect  which  saw  that  the  soul  was  immortal, 


GOD  I.  20-23  143 

discerned  also  that  to  seek  immortality  by  sui¬ 
cide  was  to  be  prohibited  rather  than  encour¬ 
aged. 

Again,  it  is  said  many  have  killed  themselves 
to  prevent  an  enemy  doing  so.  But  we  are  not 
inquiring  whether  it  has  been  done,  but  whether 
it  ought  to  have  been  done.  Sound  judgment  is 
to  be  preferred  even  to  examples,  and  indeed  ex¬ 
amples  harmonize  with  the  voice  of  reason;  but 
not  all  examples,  but  those  only  which  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  their  piety,  and  are  proportion¬ 
ately  worthy  of  imitation.  For  suicide  we  cannot 
cite  the  example  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  or 
apostles;  though  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when 
He  admonished  them  to  flee  from  city  to  city  if 
they  were  persecuted,  might  very  well  have  tak¬ 
en  that  occasion  to  advise  them  to  lay  violent 
hands  on  themselves,  and  so  escape  their  perse¬ 
cutors.  But  seeing  He  did  not  do  this,  nor  pro¬ 
posed  this  mode  of  departing  this  life,  though 
He  were  addressing  His  own  friends  for  whom 
He  had  promised  to  prepare  everlasting  man¬ 
sions,  it  is  obvious  that  such  examples  as  are 
produced  from  the  “nations  that  forget  God,” 
give  no  warrant  of  imitation  to  the  worshippers 
of  the  one  true  God. 

Chap.  23.  What  we  are  to  think  of  the  example 
of  Cato,  who  slew  himself  because  unable  to 
endure  Ccesar’s  victory 
Beside  Lucretia,  of  whom  enough  has  already 
been  said,  our  advocates  of  suicide  have  some 
difficulty  in  finding  any  other  prescriptive  ex¬ 
ample,  unless  it  be  that  of  Cato,  who  killed  him¬ 
self  at  Utica.  His  example  is  appealed  to,  not  be¬ 
cause  he  was  the  only  man  who  did  so,  but  be¬ 
cause  he  was  so  esteemed  as  a  learned  and  ex¬ 
cellent  man,  that  it  could  plausibly  be  main¬ 
tained  that  what  he  did  was  and  is  a  good  thing 
to  do.  But  of  this  action  of  his,  what  can  I  say 
but  that  his  own  friends,  enlightened  men  as  he, 
prudently  dissuaded  him,  and  therefore  judged 
his  act  to  be  that  of  a  feeble  rather  than  a  strong 
spirit,  and  dictated  not  by  honourable  feeling 
forestalling  shame,  but  by  weakness  shrinking 
from  hardships?  Indeed,  Cato  condemns  him¬ 
self  by  the  advice  he  gave  to  his  dearly  loved 
son.  For  if  it  was  a  disgrace  to  live  under  Caesar’s 
rule,  why  did  the  father  urge  the  son  to  this  dis¬ 
grace,  by  encouraging  him  to  trust  absolutely  to 
Caesar’s  generosity?  Why  did  he  not  persuade 
him  to  die  along  with  himself?  If  Torquatus  was 
applauded  for  putting  his  son  to  death,  when 
contrary  to  orders  he  had  engaged,  and  engaged 
successfully,  with  the  enemy,  why  did  con¬ 
quered  Cato  spare  his  conquered  son,  though  he 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


did  not  spare  himself?  Was  it  more  disgraceful 
to  be  a  victor  contrary  to  orders,  than  to  submit 
to  a  victor  contrary  to  the  received  ideas  of  hon¬ 
our?  Cato,  then,  cannot  have  deemed  it  to  be 
shameful  to  live  under  Caesar’s  rule ;  for  had  he 
done  so,  the  father’s  sword  would  have  deliv¬ 
ered  his  son  from  this  disgrace.  The  truth  is  that 
his  son,  whom  he  both  hoped  and  desired  would 
be  spared  by  Caesar,  was  not  more  loved  by  him 
than  Caesar  was  envied  the  glory  of  pardoning 
him  (as  indeed  Caesar  himself  is  reported  to 
have  said1) ;  or  if  envy  is  too  strong  a  word,  let 
us  say  he  was  ashamed  that  this  glory  should  be 
his. 

Chap.  24.  That  in  that  virtue  in  which  Regulus 
excels  Cato,  Christians  are  pre-eminently  dis¬ 
tinguished 

Our  opponents  are  offended  at  our  preferring 
to  Cato  the  saintly  Job,  who  endured  dreadful 
evils  in  his  body  rather  than  deliver  himself 
from  all  torment  by  self-inflicted  death;  or  other 
saints,  of  whom  it  is  recorded  in  our  authorita¬ 
tive  and  trustworthy  books  that  they  bore  cap¬ 
tivity  and  the  oppression  of  their  enemies  rath¬ 
er  than  commit  suicide.  But  their  own  books 
authorize  us  to  prefer  to  Marcus  Cato,  Marcus 
Regulus.  For  Cato  had  never  conquered  Caesar; 
and  when  conquered  by  him,  disdained  to  sub¬ 
mit  himself  to  him,  and  that  he  might  escape 
this  submission  put  himself  to  death.  Regulus, 
on  the  contrary,  had  formerly  conquered  the 
Carthaginians,  and  in  command  of  the  army  of 
Rome  had  won  for  the  Roman  republic  a  victory 
which  no  citizen  could  bewail,  and  which  the  en¬ 
emy  himself  was  constrained  to  admire;  yet  af¬ 
terwards,  when  he  in  his  turn  was  defeated  by 
them,  he  preferred  to  be  their  captive  rather 
than  to  put  himself  beyond  their  reach  by  sui¬ 
cide.  Patient  under  the  domination  of  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  and  constant  in  his  love  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  he  neither  deprived  the  one  of  his  con¬ 
quered  body,  nor  the  other  of  his  unconquered 
spirit.  Neither  was  it  love  of  life  that  prevented 
him  from  killing  himself.  This  was  plainly 
enough  indicated  by  his  unhesitatingly  return¬ 
ing,  on  account  of  his  promise  and  oath,  to  the 
same  enemies  whom  he  had  more  grievously 
provoked  by  his  words  in  the  senate  than  even 
by  his  arms  in  battle.  Having  such  a  contempt 
of  life,  and  preferring  to  end  it  by  whatever  tor¬ 
ments  excited  enemies  might  contrive,  rather 
than  terminate  it  by  his  own  hand,  he  could  not 
more  distinctly  have  declared  how  great  a  crime 
he  judged  suicide  to  be.  Among  all  their  famous 
2Plutarch,  Cato,  the  Younger. 


and  remarkable  citizens,  the  Romans  have  no 
better  man  to  boast  of  than  this,  who  was  nei¬ 
ther  corrupted  by  prosperity,  for  he  remained 
a  very  poor  man  after  winning  such  victories; 
nor  broken  by  adversity,  for  he  returned  intrep¬ 
idly  to  the  most  miserable  end.  But  if  the  brav¬ 
est  and  most  renowned  heroes,  who  had  but  an 
earthly  country  to  defend,  and  who,  though  they 
had  but  false  gods,  yet  rendered  them  a  true 
worship,  and  carefully  kept  their  oath  to  them ; 
if  these  men,  who  by  the  custom  and  right  of 
war  put  conquered  enemies  to  the  sword,  yet 
shrank  from  putting  an  end  to  their  own  lives 
even  when  conquered  by  their  enemies;  if, 
though  they  had  no  fear  at  all  of  death,  they 
would  yet  rather  suffer  slavery  than  commit  sui¬ 
cide,  how  much  rather  must  Christians,  the  wor¬ 
shippers  of  the  true  God,  the  aspirants  to  a 
heavenly  citizenship,  shrink  from  this  act,  if  in 
God’s  providence  they  have  been  for  a  season 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  to 
prove  or  to  correct  them !  And  certainly,  Chris¬ 
tians  subjected  to  this  humiliating  condition  will 
not  be  deserted  by  the  Most  High,  who  for  their 
sakes  humbled  Himself.  Neither  should  they 
forget  that  they  are  bound  by  no  laws  of  war, 
nor  military  orders,  to  put  even  a  conquered  en¬ 
emy  to  the  sword;  and  if  a  man  may  not  put  to 
death  the  enemy  who  has  sinned,  or  may  yet  sin 
against  him,  who  is  so  infatuated  as  to  maintain 
that  he  may  kill  himself  because  an  enemy  has 
sinned,  or  is  going  to  sin,  against  him? 

Chap.  25.  That  we  should  not  endeavour  by  sin 

to  obviate  sin 

But,  we  are  told,  there  is  ground  to  fear  that, 
when  the  body  is  subjected  to  the  enemy’s  lust, 
the  insidious  pleasure  of  sense  may  entice  the 
soul  to  consent  to  the  sin,  and  steps  must  be 
taken  to  prevent  so  disastrous  a  result.  And  is 
not  suicide  the  proper  mode  of  preventing  not 
only  the  enemy’s  sin,  but  the  sin  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  so  allured?  Now,  in  the  first  place,  the  soul 
which  is  led  by  God  and  His  wisdom,  rather  than 
by  bodily  concupiscence,  will  certainly  never 
consent  to  the  desire  aroused  in  its  own  flesh  by 
another’s  lust.  And,  at  all  events,  if  it  be  true,  as 
the  truth  plainly  declares,  that  suicide  is  a  de¬ 
testable  and  damnable  wickedness,  who  is  such 
a  fool  as  to  say,  “Let  us  sin  now,  that  we  may 
obviate  a  possible  future  sin;  let  us  now  commit 
murder,  lest  we  perhaps  afterwards  should  com¬ 
mit  adultery”?  If  we  are  so  controlled  by  iniq¬ 
uity  that  innocence  is  out  of  the  question,  and 
we  can  at  best  but  make  a  choice  of  sins,  is  not 
a  future  and  uncertain  adultery  preferable  to  a 


THE  CITY  OF 

present  and  certain  murder?  Is  it  not  better  to 
commit  a  wickedness  which  penitence  may  heal, 
than  a  crime  which  leaves  no  place  for  healing 
contrition?  I  say  this  for  the  sake  of  those  men 
or  women  who  fear  they  may  be  enticed  into 
consenting  to  their  violator’s  lust,  and  think  they 
should  lay  violent  hands  on  themselves,  and  so 
prevent,  not  another’s  sin,  but  their  own.  But 
far  be  it  from  the  mind  of  a  Christian  confid¬ 
ing  in  God,  and  resting  in  the  hope  of  His  aid; 
far  be  it,  I  say,  from  such  a  mind  to  yield  a 
shameful  consent  to  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  how¬ 
soever  presented.  And  if  that  lustful  disobedi¬ 
ence.  which  still  dwells  in  our  mortal  members, 
follows  its  own  law  irrespective  of  our  will,  sure¬ 
ly  its  motions  in  the  body  of  one  who  rebels 
against  them  are  as  blameless  as  its  motions  in 
the  body  of  one  who  sleeps. 

Chap.  26.  That  in  certain  peculiar  cases  the  ex¬ 
amples  of  the  saints  are  not  to  be  followed 
But,  they  say,  in  the  time  of  persecution  some 
holy  women  escaped  those  who  menaced  them 
with  outrage,  by  casting  themselves  into  rivers 
which  they  knew  would  drown  them :  and  having 
died  in  this  manner,  they  are  venerated  in  the 
Church  Catholic  as  martyrs.  Of  such  persons  I 
do  not  presume  to  speak  rashly.  I  cannot  tell 
whether  there  may  not  have  been  vouchsafed  to 
the  Church  some  divine  authority,  proved  by 
trustworthy  evidences,  for  so  honouring  their 
memory:  it  may  be  that  it  is  so.  It  may  be  they 
were  not  deceived  by  human  judgment,  but 
prompted  by  divine  wisdom,  to  their  act  of  self- 
destruction.  We  know  that  this  was  the  case  with 
Samson.  And  when  God  enjoins  any  act,  and  in¬ 
timates  by  plain  evidence  that  He  has  enjoined 
it,  who  will  call  obedience  criminal?  Who  will 
accuse  so  religious  a  submission?  But  then  every 
man  is  not  justified  in  sacrificing  his  son  to  God, 
because  Abraham  was  commendable  in  so  do¬ 
ing.  The  soldier  who  has  slain  a  man  in  obedi¬ 
ence  to  the  authority  under  which  he  is  lawfully 
commissioned,  is  not  accused  of  murder  by  any 
law  of  his  state;  nay,  if  he  has  not  slain  him,  it 
is  then  he  is  accused  of  treason  to  the  state  and 
of  depising  the  law.  But  if  he  has  been  acting  on 
his  own  authority,  and  at  his  own  impulse,  he 
has  in  this  case  incurred  the  crime  of  shedding 
human  blood.  And  thus  he  is  punished  for  doing 
without  orders  the  very  thing  he  is  punished  for 
neglecting  to  do  when  he  has  been  ordered.  If 
the  commands  of  a  general  make  so  great  a  dif¬ 
ference,  shall  the  commands  of  God  make  none? 
He.  then,  who  knows  it  is  unlawful  to  kill  him¬ 
self,  may  nevertheless  do  so  if  he  is  ordered  by 


GOD  I.  24-27  145 

Him  whose  commands  we  may  not  neglect.  Only 
let  him  be  very  sure  that  the  divine  command 
has  been  signified.  As  for  us,  we  can  become 
privy  to  the  secrets  of  conscience  only  in  so  far 
as  these  are  disclosed  to  us,  and  so  far  only  do 
we  judge :  “No  one  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man. 
save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him.”1  But  this 
we  affirm,  this  we  maintain,  this  we  every  way 
pronounce  to  be  right,  that  no  man  ought  to  in¬ 
flict  on  himself  voluntary  death,  for  this  is  to 
escape  the  ills  of  time  by  plunging  into  those  of 
eternity;  that  no  man  ought  to  do  so  on  account 
of  another  man’s  sins,  for  this  were  to  escape  a 
guilt  which  could  not  pollute  him,  by  incurring 
great  guilt  of  his  own;  that  no  man  ought  to  do 
so  on  account  of  his  own  past  sins,  for  he  has  all 
the  more  need  of  this  life  that  these  sins  may  be 
healed  by  repentance;  that  no  man  should  put 
an  end  to  this  life  to  obtain  that  better  life  we 
look  for  after  death,  for  those  who  die  by  their 
own  hand  have  no  better  life  after  death. 

Chap.  27.  Whether  voluntary  death  should  be 
sought  in  order  to  avoid  sin 
There  remains  one  reason  for  suicide  which  I 
mentioned  before,  and  which  is  thought  a  sound 
one — namely,  to  prevent  one’s  falling  into  sin 
either  through  the  blandishments  of  pleasure  or 
the  violence  of  pain.  If  this  reason  were  a  good 
one,  then  we  should  be  impelled  to  exhort  men 
at  once  to  destroy  themselves,  as  soon  as  they 
have  been  washed  in  the  laver  of  regeneration 
and  have  received  the  forgiveness  of  all  sin. 
Then  is  the  time  to  escape  all  future  sin,  when 
all  past  sin  is  blotted  out.  And  if  this  escape  be 
lawfully  secured  by  suicide,  why  not  then  spe¬ 
cially?  Why  does  any  baptized  person  hold  his 
hand  from  taking  his  own  life?  Why  does  any 
person  who  is  freed  from  the  hazards  of  this  life 
again  expose  himself  to  them,  when  he  has  pow¬ 
er  so  easily  to  rid  himself  of  them  all,  and  when 
it  is  written,  “He  who  loveth  danger  shall  fall 
into  it?” 2  Why  does  he  love,  or  at  least  face,  so 
many  serious  dangers,  by  remaining  in  this  life 
from  which  he  may  legitimately  depart?  But  is 
any  one  so  blinded  and  twisted  in  his  moral  na¬ 
ture,  and  so  far  astray  from  the  truth,  as  to  think 
that,  though  a  man  ought  to  make  away  with 
himself  for  fear  of  being  led  into  sin  by  the  op¬ 
pression  of  one  man,  his  master,  he  ought  yet  to 
live,  and  so  expose  himself  to  the  hourly  temp¬ 
tations  of  this  world,  both  to  all  those  evils 
which  the  oppression  of  one  master  involves, 
and  to  numberless  other  miseries  in  which  this 
life  inevitably  implicates  us?  What  reason,  then, 
*1  Cor.  2.  11.  2Ecclus.  3.  27. 


i46  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


is  there  for  our  consuming  time  in  those  exhor¬ 
tations  by  which  we  seek  to  animate  the  bap¬ 
tized,  either  to  virginal  chastity,  or  vidual  con¬ 
tinence,  or  matrimonial  fidelity,  when  we  have 
so  much  more  simple  and  compendious  a  meth¬ 
od  of  deliverance  from  sin,  by  persuading  those 
who  are  fresh  from  baptism  to  put  an  end  to 
their  lives,  and  so  pass  to  their  Lord  pure  and 
well-conditioned?  If  any  one  thinks  that  such 
persuasion  should  be  attempted,  I  say  not  he  is 
foolish,  but  mad.  With  what  face,  then,  can  he 
say  to  any  man,  “Kill  yourself,  lest  to  your 
small  sins  you  add  a  heinous  sin,  while  you  live 
under  an  unchaste  master,  whose  conduct  is 
that  of  a  barbarian”?  How  can  he  say  this,  if  he 
cannot  without  wickedness  say,  “Kill  yourself, 
now  that  you  are  washed  from  all  your  sins,  lest 
you  fall  again  into  similar  or  even  aggravated 
sins,  while  you  live  in  a  world  which  has  such 
power  to  allure  by  its  unclean  pleasures,  to  tor¬ 
ment  by  its  horrible  cruelties,  to  overcome  by  its 
errors  and  terrors”?  It  is  wicked  to  say  this;  it 
is  therefore  wicked  to  kill  oneself.  For  if  there 
could  be  any  just  cause  of  suicide,  this  were  so. 
And  since  not  even  this  is  so,  there  is  none. 

Chap.  28.  By  what  judgment  of  God  the  enemy 
was  permitted  to  indulge  his  lust  on  the  bodies 
of  continent  Christians 
Let  not  your  life,  then,  be  a  burden  to  you,  ye 
faithful  servants  of  Christ,  though  your  chastity 
was  made  the  sport  of  your  enemies.  You  have 
a  grand  and  true  consolation,  if  you  maintain  a 
good  conscience,  and  know  that  you  did  not  con¬ 
sent  to  the  sins  of  those  who  were  permitted  to 
commit  sinful  outrage  upon  you.  And  if  you 
should  ask  why  this  permission  was  granted,  in¬ 
deed  it  is  a  deep  providence  of  the  Creator  and 
Governor  of  the  world;  and  “unsearchable  are 
His  judgments  and  His  ways  past  finding  out.”1 
Nevertheless,  faithfully  interrogate  your  own 
souls,  whether  ye  have  not  been  unduly  puffed 
up  by  your  integrity,  and  continence,  and  chas¬ 
tity;  and  whether  ye  have  not  been  so  desirous 
of  the  human  praise  that  is  accorded  to  these 
virtues,  that  ye  have  envied  some  who  possessed 
them.  I,  for  my  part,  do  not  know  your  hearts, 
and  therefore  I  make  no  accusation;  I  do  not 
even  hear  what  your  hearts  answer  when  you 
question  them.  And  yet,  if  they  answer  that  it  is 
as  I  have  supposed  it  might  be,  do  not  marvel 
that  you  have  lost  that  by  which  you  can  win 
men’s  praise,  and  retain  that  which  cannot  be 
exhibited  to  men.  If  you  did  not  consent  to  sin, 
it  was  because  God  added  His  aid  to  His  grace 
^om.  11.  33. 


that  it  might  not  be  lost,  and  because  shame  be¬ 
fore  men  succeeded  to  human  glory  that  it 
might  not  be  loved.  But  in  both  respects  even 
the  faint-hearted  among  you  have  a  consolation, 
approved  by  the  one  experience,  chastened  by 
the  other;  justified  by  the  one,  corrected  by  the 
other.  As  to  those  whose  hearts,  when  interro¬ 
gated,  reply  that  they  have  never  been  proud  of 
the  virtue  of  virginity,  widowhood,  or  matri¬ 
monial  chastity,  but,  condescending  to  those  of 
low  estate,  rejoiced  with  trembling  in  these  gifts 
of  God,  and  that  they  have  never  envied  any  one 
the  like  excellences  of  sanctity  and  purity,  but 
rose  superior  to  human  applause,  which  is  wont 
to  be  abundant  in  proportion  to  the  rarity  of 
the  virtue  applauded,  and  rather  desired  that 
their  own  number  be  increased,  than  that  by  the 
smallness  of  their  numbers  each  of  them  should 
be  conspicuous;  even  such  faithful  women,  I 
say,  must  not  complain  that  permission  was  giv¬ 
en  to  the  barbarians  so  grossly  to  outrage  them  ; 
nor  must  they  allow  themselves  to  believe  that 
God  overlooked  their  character  when  He  per¬ 
mitted  acts  which  no  one  with  impunity  com¬ 
mits.  For  some  most  flagrant  and  wicked  desires 
are  allowed  free  play  at  present  by  the  secret 
judgment  of  God,  and  are  reserved  to  the  pub¬ 
lic  and  final  judgment.  Moreover,  it  is  possible 
that  those  Christian  women,  who  are  unconsci¬ 
ous  of  any  undue  pride  on  account  of  their  vir¬ 
tuous  chastity,  whereby  they  sinlessly  suffered 
the  violence  of  their  captors,  had  yet  some  lurk¬ 
ing  infirmity  which  might  have  betrayed  them 
into  a  proud  and  contemptuous  bearing,  had 
they  not  been  subjected  to  the  humiliation  that 
befell  them  in  the  taking  of  the  city.  As,  there¬ 
fore,  some  men  were  removed  by  death  that  no 
wickedness  might  change  their  disposition,  so 
these  women  were  outraged  lest  prosperity 
should  corrupt  their  modesty.  Neither  those 
women,  then,  who  were  already  puffed  up  by  the 
circumstance  that  they  were  still  virgins,  nor 
those  who  might  have  been  so  puffed  up  had 
they  not  been  exposed  to  the  violence  of  the  en¬ 
emy,  lost  their  chastity,  but  rather  gained  hu¬ 
mility;  the  former  were  saved  from  pride  al¬ 
ready  cherished,  the  latter  from  pride  that 
would  shortly  have  grown  upon  them. 

We  must  further  notice  that  some  of  those 
sufferers  may  have  conceived  that  continence  is 
a  bodily  good,  and  abides  so  long  as  the  body  is 
inviolate,  and  did  not  understand  that  the  pur¬ 
ity  both  of  the  body  and  the  soul  rests  on  the 
steadfastness  of  the  will  strengthened  by  God’s 
grace,  and  cannot  be  forcibly  taken  from  an  un¬ 
willing  person.  From  this  error  they  are  prob- 


THE  CITY  OF 

ably  now  delivered.  For  when  they  reflect  how 
conscientiously  they  served  God,  and  when  they 
settle  again  to  the  firm  persuasion  that  He  can 
in  nowise  desert  those  who  so  serve  Him,  and  so 
invoke  His  aid;  and  when  they  consider,  what 
they  cannot  doubt,  how  pleasing  to  Him  is 
chastity,  they  are  shut  up  to  the  conclusion  that 
He  could  never  have  permitted  these  disasters 
to  befall  His  saints,  if  by  them  that  saintliness 
could  be  destroyed  which  He  Himself  had  be¬ 
stowed  upon  them,  and  delights  to  see  in  them. 

Chap.  29.  What  the  servants  of  Christ  should 
say  in  reply  to  the  unbelievers  who  cast  in 
their  teeth  that  Christ  did  not  rescue  them 
from  the  fury  of  their  enemies 
The  whole  family  of  God,  most  high  and  most 
true,  has  therefore  a  consolation  of  its  own — a 
consolation  which  cannot  deceive,  and  which 
has  in  it  a  surer  hope  than  the  tottering  and  fall¬ 
ing  affairs  of  earth  can  afford.  They  will  not  re¬ 
fuse  the  discipline  of  this  temporal  life,  in  which 
they  are  schooled  for  life  eternal;  nor  will  they 
lament  their  experience  of  it,  for  the  good  things 
of  earth  they  use  as  pilgrims  who  are  not  de¬ 
tained  by  them,  and  its  ills  either  prove  or  im¬ 
prove  them.  As  for  those  who  insult  over  them 
in  their  trials,  and  when  ills  befall  them  say, 
“Where  is  thy  God?”1  we  may  ask  them  where 
their  gods  are  when  they  suffer  the  very  calami¬ 
ties  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  which  they  worship 
their  gods,  or  maintain  they  ought  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped;  for  the  family  of  Christ  is  furnished 
with  its  reply:  our  God  is  everywhere  present, 
wholly  everywhere;  not  confined  to  any  place. 
He  can  be  present  unperceived,  and  be  absent 
without  moving;  when  He  exposes  us  to  adversi¬ 
ties,  it  is  either  to  prove  our  perfections  or  cor¬ 
rect  our  imperfections;  and  in  return  for  our  pa¬ 
tient  endurance  of  the  sufferings  of  time,  He  re¬ 
serves  for  us  an  everlasting  reward.  But  who  are 
you,  that  we  should  deign  to  speak  with  you 
even  about  your  own  gods,  much  less  about  our 
God,  who  is  “to  be  feared  above  all  gods?  For 
all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  idols;  but  the 
Lord  made  the  heavens.”2 

Chap.  30.  That  those  who  complain  of  Chris¬ 
tianity  really  desire  to  live  without  restraint 
in  shame  fid  luxury 

If  the  famous  Scipio  Nasica  were  now  alive, 
who  was  once  your  pontiff  and  was  unanimously 
chosen  by  the  senate,  when,  in  the  panic  creat¬ 
ed  by  the  Punic  war,  they  sought  for  the  best 
citizen  to  entertain  the  Phrygian  goddess,  he 
lPs.  42.  10.  2Ps.  96.  4,  5. 


GOD  I.  28-31  147 

would  curb  this  shamelessness  of  yours,  though 
you  would  perhaps  scarcely  dare  to  look  upon 
the  countenance  of  such  a  man.  For  why  in  your 
calamities  do  you  complain  of  Christianity,  un¬ 
less  because  you  desire  to  enjoy  your  luxurious 
licence  unrestrained  and  to  lead  an  abandoned 
and  profligate  life  without  the  interruption  of 
any  uneasiness  or  disaster?  For  certainly  your 
desire  for  peace,  and  prosperity,  and  plenty  is 
not  prompted  by  any  purpose  of  using  these 
blessings  honestly,  that  is  to  say,  with  modera¬ 
tion,  sobriety,  temperance,  and  piety;  for  your 
purpose  rather  is  to  run  riot  in  an  endless  va¬ 
riety  of  sottish  pleasures,  and  thus  to  generate 
from  your  prosperity  a  moral  pestilence  which 
will  prove  a  thousandfold  more  disastrous  than 
the  fiercest  enemies.  It  was  such  a  calamity  as 
this  that  Scipio,  your  chief  pontiff,  your  best 
man  in  the  judgment  of  the  whole  senate, 
feared  when  he  refused  to  agree  to  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Carthage,  Rome’s  rival,  and  opposed 
Cato,  who  advised  its  destruction.  He  feared  se¬ 
curity,  that  enemy  of  weak  minds,  and  he  per¬ 
ceived  that  a  wholesome  fear  would  be  a  fit 
guardian  for  the  citizens.  And  he  was  not  mis¬ 
taken;  the  event  proved  how  wisely  he  had 
spoken.  For  when  Carthage  was  destroyed,  and 
the  Roman  republic  delivered  from  its  great 
cause  of  anxiety,  a  crowd  of  disastrous  evils 
forthwith  resulted  from  the  prosperous  condi¬ 
tion  of  things.  First  concord  was  weakened,  and 
destroyed  by  fierce  and  bloody  seditions;  then 
followed,  by  a  concatenation  of  baleful  causes, 
civil  wars,  which  brought  in  their  train  such 
massacres,  such  bloodshed,  such  lawless  and 
cruel  proscription  and  plunder,  that  those  Ro¬ 
mans  who,  in  the  days  of  their  virtue,  had  ex¬ 
pected  injury  only  at  the  hands  of  their  enemies, 
now  that  their  virtue  was  lost,  suffered  greater 
cruelties  at  the  hands  of  their  fellow-citizens. 
The  lust  of  rule,  which  with  other  vices  existed 
among  the  Romans  in  more  unmitigated  inten¬ 
sity  than  among  any  other  people,  after  it  had 
taken  possession  of  the  more  powerful  few,  sub¬ 
dued  under  its  yoke  the  rest,  worn  and  wearied. 

Chap.  31  .By  what  steps  the  passion  for  govern¬ 
ing  increased  among  the  Romans 
For  at  what  stage  would  that  passion  rest 
when  once  it  has  lodged  in  a  proud  spirit,  until 
by  a  succession  of  advances  it  has  reached  even 
the  throne.  And  to  obtain  such  advances  nothing 
avails  but  unscrupulous  ambition.  But  unscru¬ 
pulous  ambition  has  nothing  to  work  upon,  save 
in  a  nation  corrupted  by  avarice  and  luxury. 
Moreover,  a  people  becomes  avaricious  and  lux- 


1 48  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


urious  by  prosperity;  and  it  was  this  which  that 
very  prudent  man  Nasica  was  endeavouring  to 
avoid  when  he  opposed  the  destruction  of  the 
greatest,  strongest,  wealthiest  city  of  Rome’s 
enemy.  He  thought  that  thus  fear  would  act  as 
a  curb  on  lust,  and  that  lust  being  curbed  would 
not  run  riot  in  luxury,  and  that  luxury  being  pre¬ 
vented  avarice  would  be  at  an  end;  and  that 
these  vices  being  banished,  virtue  would  flourish 
and  increase  the  great  profit  of  the  state;  and 
liberty,  the  first  companion  of  virtue,  would 
abide  unfettered.  For  similar  reasons,  and  ani¬ 
mated  by  the  same  considerate  patriotism,  that 
same  chief  pontiff  of  yours — I  still  refer  to  him 
who  was  adjudged  Rome’s  best  man  without 
one  dissentient  voice — threw  cold  water  on  the 
proposal  of  the  senate  to  build  a  circle  of  seats 
round  the  theatre,  and  in  a  very  weighty  speech 
warned  them  against  allowing  the  luxurious 
manners  of  Greece  to  sap  the  Roman  manliness, 
and  persuaded  them  not  to  yield  to  the  enervat¬ 
ing  and  emasculating  influence  of  foreign  licen¬ 
tiousness.  So  authoritative  and  forcible  were  his 
words  that  the  senate  was  moved  to  prohibit  the 
use  even  of  those  benches  which  hitherto  had 
been  customarily  brought  to  the  theatre  for  the 
temporary  use  of  the  citizens.  How  eagerly 
would  such  a  man  as  this  have  banished  from 
Rome  the  scenic  exhibitions  themselves,  had  he 
dared  to  oppose  the  authority  of  those  whom  he 
supposed  to  be  gods!  For  he  did  not  know  that 
they  were  malicious  devils;  or  if  he  did,  he  sup¬ 
posed  they  should  rather  be  propitiated  than  de¬ 
spised.  For  there  had  not  yet  been  revealed  to 
the  Gentiles  the  heavenly  doctrine  which  should 
purify  their  hearts  by  faith,  and  transform  their 
natural  disposition  by  humble  godliness,  and 
turn  them  from  the  service  of  proud  devils  to 
seek  the  things  that  are  in  heaven,  or  even  above 
the  heavens. 

Chap.  32  .Of  the  establishment  of  scenic  enter¬ 
tainments 

Know  then,  ye  who  are  ignorant  of  this,  and 
ye  who  feign  ignorance  be  reminded,  while  you 
murmur  against  Him  who  has  freed  you  from 
such  rulers,  that  the  scenic  games,  exhibitions 
of  shameless  folly  and  licence,  were  established 
at  Rome,  not  by  men’s  vicious  cravings,  but  by 
the  appointment  of  your  gods.  Much  more  par¬ 
donably  might  you  have  rendered  divine  hon¬ 
ours  to  Scipio  than  to  such  gods  as  these.  The 
gods  were  not  so  moral  as  their  pontiff.  But  give 
me  now  your  attention,  if  your  mind,  inebriated 
by  its  deep  potations  of  error,  can  take  in  any 
sober  truth.  The  gods  enjoined  that  games  be  ex¬ 


hibited  in  their  honour  to  stay  a  physical  pesti¬ 
lence;  their  pontiff  prohibited  the  theatre  from 
being  constructed,  to  prevent  a  moral  pestilence. 
If,  then,  there  remains  in  you  sufficient  mental 
enlightenment  to  prefer  the  soul  to  the  body, 
choose  whom  you  will  worship.  Besides,  though 
the  pestilence  was  stayed,  this  was  not  because 
the  voluptuous  madness  of  stage-plays  had  tak¬ 
en  possession  of  a  warlike  people  hitherto  ac¬ 
customed  only  to  the  games  of  the  circus;  but 
these  astute  and  wicked  spirits,  foreseeing  that 
in  due  course  the  pestilence  would  shortly  cease, 
took  occasion  to  infect,  not  the  bodies,  but  the 
morals  of  their  worshippers,  with  a  far  more 
serious  disease.  And  in  this  pestilence  these  gods 
find  great  enjoyment,  because  it  benighted  the 
minds  of  men  with  so  gross  a  darkness,  and  dis¬ 
honoured  them  with  so  foul  a  deformity,  that 
even  quite  recently  (will  posterity  be  able  to 
credit  it?)  some  of  those  who  fled  from  the  sack 
of  Rome  and  found  refuge  in  Carthage,  were  so 
infected  with  this  disease,  that  day  after  day 
they  seemed  to  contend  with  one  another  who 
should  most  madly  run  after  the  actors  in  the 
theatres. 

Chap.  33.  That  the  overthrow  of  Rome  has  not 
corrected  the  vices  of  the  Romans 
Oh  infatuated  men,  what  is  this  blindness,  or 
rather  madness,  which  possesses  you?  How  is  it 
that  while,  as  we  hear,  even  the  eastern  nations 
are  bewailing  your  ruin,  and  while  powerful 
states  in  the  most  remote  parts  of  the  earth  are 
mourning  your  fall  as  a  public  calamity,  ye 
yourselves  should  be  crowding  to  the  theatres, 
should  be  pouring  into  them  and  filling  them; 
and,  in  short,  be  playing  a  madder  part  now 
than  ever  before?  This  was  the  foul  plague-spot, 
this  the  wreck  of  virtue  and  honour  that  Scipio 
sought  to  preserve  you  from  when  he  prohibited 
the  construction  of  theatres;  this  was  his  reason 
for  desiring  that  you  might  still  have  an  enemy 
to  fear,  seeing  as  he  did  how  easily  prosperity 
would  corrupt  and  destroy  you.  He  did  not  con¬ 
sider  that  republic  flourishing  whose  walls  stand, 
but  whose  morals  are  in  ruins.  But  the  seduc¬ 
tions  of  evil-minded  devils  had  more  influence 
with  you  than  the  precautions  of  prudent  men. 
Hence  the  injuries  you  do  you  will  not  permit  to 
be  imputed  to  you:  but  the  injuries  you  suffer 
you  impute  to  Christianity.  Depraved  by  good 
fortune,  and  not  chastened  by  adversity,  what 
you  desire  in  the  restoration  of  a  peaceful  and 
secure  state  is  not  the  tranquillity  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  but  the  impunity  of  your  own  vi¬ 
cious  luxury.  Scipio  wished  you  to  be  hard 


THE  CITY  OF 

pressed  by  an  enemy,  that  you  might  not  aban¬ 
don  yourselves  to  luxurious  manners;  but  so 
abandoned  are  you  that  not  even  when  crushed 
by  the  enemy  is  your  luxury  repressed.  You 
have  missed  the  profit  of  your  calamity;  you 
have  been  made  most  wretched,  and  have  re¬ 
mained  most  profligate. 

Chap.  34.  Of  God’s  clemency  in  moderating  the 
ruin  of  the  city 

And  that  you  are  yet  alive  is  due  to  God.  Who 
spares  you  that  you  may  be  admonished  to  re¬ 
pent  and  reform  your  lives.  It  is  He  Who  has 
permitted  you,  ungrateful  as  you  are,  to  escape 
the  sword  of  the  enemy,  by  calling  yourselves 
His  servants,  or  by  finding  asylum  in  the  sacred 
places  of  the  martyrs. 

It  is  said  that  Romulus  and  Remus,  in  order 
to  increase  the  population  of  the  city  they 
founded,  opened  a  sanctuary  in  which  every  man 
might  find  asylum  and  absolution  of  all  crime, 
— a  remarkable  foreshadowing  of  what  has  re¬ 
cently  occurred  in  honour  of  Christ.  The  de¬ 
stroyers  of  Rome  followed  the  example  of  its 
founders.  But  it  was  not  greatly  to  their  credit 
that  the  latter,  for  the  sake  of  increasing  the 
number  of  their  citizens,  did  that  which  the  for¬ 
mer  have  done,  lest  the  number  of  their  enemies 
should  be  diminished. 

Chap.  35.  Of  the  sons  of  the  Church  who  are 
hidden  among  the  wicked,  and  of  false  Chris¬ 
tians  within  the  Church 
Let  these  and  similar  answers  (if  any  fuller 
and  fitter  answers  can  be  found)  be  given  to 
their  enemies  by  the  redeemed  family  of  the 
Lord  Christ,  and  by  the  pilgrim  city  of  King 
Christ.  But  let  this  city  bear  in  mind  that 
among  her  enemies  lie  hid  those  who  are  des¬ 
tined  to  be  fellow-citizens,  that  she  may  not 
think  it  a  fruitless  labour  to  bear  what  they  in¬ 
flict  as  enemies  until  they  become  confessors  of 
the  faith.  So,  too,  as  long  as  she  is  a  stranger  in 
the  world,  the  city  of  God  has  in  her  commun¬ 
ion,  and  bound  to  her  by  the  sacraments,  some 
who  shall  not  eternally  dwell  in  the  lot  of  the 
saints.  Of  these,  some  are  not  now  recognized; 
others  declare  themselves,  and  do  not  hesitate 
to  make  common  cause  with  our  enemies  in 
murmuring  against  God,  whose  sacramental 
badge  they  wear.  These  men  you  may  to-day  see 
thronging  the  churches  with  us,  to-morrow 
crowding  the  theatres  with  the  godless.  But  we 
have  the  less  reason  to  despair  of  the  reclama- 


GOD  I.  32-36  149 

tion  even  of  such  persons,  if  among  our  most 
declared  enemies  there  are  now  some,  unknown 
to  themselves,  who  are  destined  to  become  our 
friends.  In  truth,  these  two  cities  are  entangled 
together  in  this  world,  and  intermixed  until  the 
last  judgment  effects  their  separation.  I  now 
proceed  to  speak,  as  God  shall  help  me,  of  the 
rise,  progress,  and  end  of  these  two  cities;  and 
what  I  write,  I  write  for  the  glory  of  the  city  of 
God,  that,  being  placed  in  comparison  with  the 
other,  it  may  shine  with  a  brighter  lustre. 

Chap.  36.  What  subjects  are  to  be  handled  in 

the  following  discourse 

But  I  have  still  some  things  to  say  in  confuta¬ 
tion  of  those  who  refer  the  disasters  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  republic  to  pur  religion,  because  it  prohib¬ 
its  the  offering  of  sacrifices  to  the  gods.  For  this 
end  I  must  recount  all,  or  as  many  as  may  seem 
sufficient,  of  the  disasters  which  befell  that  city 
and  its  subject  provinces,  before  these  sacri¬ 
fices  were  prohibited;  for  all  these  disasters  they 
would  doubtless  have  attributed  to  us,  if  at  that 
time  our  religion  had  shed  its  light  upon  them, 
and  had  prohibited  their  sacrifices.  I  must  then 
go  on  to  show  what  social  well-being  the  true 
God,  in  Whose  hand  are  all  kingdoms,  vouch¬ 
safed  to  grant  to  them  that  their  empire  might 
increase.  I  must  show  why  He  did  so,  and  how 
their  false  gods,  instead  of  at  all  aiding  them, 
greatly  injured  them  by  guile  and  deceit.  And, 
lastly,  I  must  meet  those  who,  when  on  this 
point  convinced  and  confuted  by  irrefragable 
proofs,  endeavour  to  maintain  that  they  wor¬ 
ship  the  gods,  not  hoping  for  the  present  advan¬ 
tages  of  this  life,  but  for  those  which  are  to  be 
enjoyed  after  death.  And  this,  if  I  am  not  mis¬ 
taken,  will  be  the  most  difficult  part  of  my  task, 
and  will  be  worthy  of  the  loftiest  arguments ;  for 
we  must  then  enter  the  lists  with  the  philoso¬ 
phers,  not  the  mere  common  herd  of  philoso¬ 
phers,  but  the  most  renowned,  who  in  many 
points  agree  with  ourselves,  as  regarding  the  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  soul,  and  that  the  true  God  cre¬ 
ated  the  world,  and  by  His  providence  rules  all 
He  has  created.  But  as  they  differ  from  us  on  oth¬ 
er  points,  we  must  not  shrink  from  the  task  of  ex¬ 
posing  their  errors,  that,  having  refuted  the  gain¬ 
saying  of  the  wicked  with  such  ability  as  God 
may  vouchsafe,  we  may  assert  the  city  of  God, 
and  true  piety,  and  the  worship  of  God,  to  which 
alone  the  promise  of  true  and  everlasting  felicity 
is  attached.  Here,  then,  let  us  conclude,  that  we 
may  enter  on  these  subjects  in  a  fresh  book. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


150 


BOOK  II 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  augustine  reviews  those  calamities  which  the 

ROMANS  SUFFERED  BEFORE  THE  TIME  OF  CHRIST,  AND  WHILE  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE 
FALSE  GODS  WAS  UNIVERSALLY  PRACTISED;  AND  DEMONSTRATES  THAT,  FAR  FROM  BE¬ 
ING  PRESERVED  FROM  MISFORTUNE  BY  THE  GODS,  THE  ROMANS  HAVE  BEEN  BY  THEM 
OVERWHELMED  WITH  THE  ONLY,  OR  AT  LEAST  THE  GREATEST,  OF  ALL  CALAMITIES — 
THE  CORRUPTION  OF  MANNERS,  AND  THE  VICES  OF  THE  SOUL. 


Chap.  1.  Of  the  limits  which  must  be  put  to  the 

necessity  of  replying  to  an  adversary 

If  the  feeble  mind  of  man  did  not  presume  to 
resist  the  clear  evidence  of  truth,  but  yielded  its 
infirmity  to  wholesome  doctrines,  as  to  a  health¬ 
giving  medicine,  until  it  obtained  from  God,  by 
its  faith  and  piety,  the  grace  needed  to  heal  it, 
they  who  have  just  ideas,  and  express  them  in 
suitable  language,  would  need  to  use  no  long  dis¬ 
course  to  refute  the  errors  of  empty  conjecture. 
But  this  mental  infirmity  is  now  more  prevalent 
and  hurtful  than  ever,  to  such  an  extent  that 
even  after  the  truth  has  been  as  fully  demon¬ 
strated  as  man  can  prove  it  to  man.  they  hold 
for  the  very  truth  their  own  unreasonable  fan¬ 
cies,  either  on  account  of  their  great  blindness, 
which  prevents  them  from  seeing  what  is  plainly 
set  before  them,  or  on  account  of  their  opiniona- 
tive  obstinacy,  which  prevents  them  from  ac¬ 
knowledging  the  force  of  what  they  do  see. 
There  therefore  frequently  arises  a  necessity  of 
speaking  more  fully  on  those  points  which  are 
already  clear,  that  we  may,  as  it  were,  present 
them  not  to  the  eye,  but  even  to  the  touch,  so 
that  they  may  be  felt  even  by  those  who  close 
their  eyes  against  them.  And  yet  to  what  end 
shall  we  ever  bring  our  discussions,  or  what 
bounds  can  be  set  to  our  discourse,  if  we  proceed 
on  the  principle  that  we  must  always  reply  to 
those  who  reply  to  us?  For  those  who  are  either 
unable  to  understand  our  arguments,  or  are  so 
hardened  by  the  habit  of  contradiction,  that 
though  they  understand  they  cannot  yield  to 
them,  reply  to  us,  and,  as  it  is  written,  “speak 
hard  things,”1  and  are  incorrigibly  vain.  Now,  if 
we  were  to  propose  to  confute  their  objections 
as  often  as  they  with  brazen  face  chose  to  disre¬ 
gard  our  arguments,  and  so  often  as  they  could 
by  any  means  contradict  our  statements,  you  see 
how  endless,  and  fruitless,  and  painful  a  task 
we  should  be  undertaking.  And  therefore  I  do 
not  wish  my  writings  to  be  judged  even  by  you, 
my  son  Marcellinus,  nor  by  any  of  those  others 
at  whose  service  this  work  of  mine  is  freely  and 

Ts.  94.  4. 


in  all  Christian  charity  put,  if  at  least  you  intend 
always  to  require  a  reply  to  every  exception 
which  you  hear  taken  to  what  you  read  in  it ;  for 
so  you  would  become  like  those  silly  women  of 
whom  the  apostle  says  that  they  are  “always 
learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  truth.”2 

Chap.  2.  Recapitulation  of  the  contents  of  the 

first  book 

In  the  foregoing  book,  having  begun  to  speak 
of  the  city  of  God,  to  which  I  have  resolved, 
Heaven  helping  me,  to  consecrate  the  whole  of 
this  work,  it  was  my  first  endeavour  to  reply  to 
those  who  attribute  the  wars  by  which  the  world 
is  being  devastated,  and  especially  the  recent 
sack  of  Rome  by  the  barbarians,  to  the  religion 
of  Christ,  w7hich  prohibits  the  offering  of  abomi¬ 
nable  sacrifices  to  devils.  I  have  shown  that 
they  ought  rather  to  attribute  it  to  Christ,  that 
for  His  name’s  sake  the  barbarians,  in  contra¬ 
vention  of  all  custom  and  law  of  war,  threw  open 
as  sanctuaries  the  largest  churches,  and  in  many 
instances  showed  such  reverence  to  Christ  that 
not  only  His  genuine  servants,  but  even  those 
who  in  their  terror  feigned  themselves  to  be  so, 
were  exempted  from  all  those  hardships  which 
by  the  custom  of  war  may  lawfully  be  inflicted. 
Then  out  of  this  there  arose  the  question  why 
wicked  and  ungrateful  men  were  permitted  to 
share  in  these  benefits;  and  why,  too,  the  hard¬ 
ships  and  calamities  of  war  were  inflicted  on  the 
godly  as  well  as  on  the  ungodly.  And  in  giving  a 
suitably  full  answer  to  this  large  question,  I  oc¬ 
cupied  some  considerable  space,  partly  that  I 
might  relieve  the  anxieties  which  disturb  many 
when  they  observe  that  the  blessings  of  God, 
and  the  common  and  daily  human  casualties, 
fall  to  the  lot  of  bad  men  and  good  without  dis¬ 
tinction  ;  but  mainly  that  I  might  minister  some 
consolation  to  those  holy  and  chaste  women  who 
were  outraged  by  the  enemy,  in  such  a  way  as  to 
shock  their  modesty,  though  not  to  sully  their 
purity,  and  that  I  might  preserve  them  from  be¬ 
ing  ashamed  of  life,  though  they  have  no  guilt 

2II  Tim.  3.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  II.  1-4  151 


to  be  ashamed  of.  And  then  I  briefly  spoke 
against  those  who  with  a  most  shameless  wan¬ 
tonness  insult  over  those  poor  Christians  who 
were  subjected  to  those  calamities,  and  espe¬ 
cially  over  those  broken-hearted  and  humiliated, 
though  chaste  and  holy  women;  these  fellows 
themselves  being  most  depraved  and  unmanly 
profligates,  quite  degenerate  from  the  genuine 
Romans,  whose  famous  deeds  are  abundantly 
recorded  in  history  and  everywhere  celebrated, 
but  who  have  found  in  their  descendants  the 
greatest  enemies  of  their  glory.  In  truth,  Rome, 
which  was  founded  and  increased  by  the  labours 
of  these  ancient  heroes,  was  more  shamefully 
ruined  by  their  descendants,  while  its  walls  were 
still  standing,  than  it  is  now  by  the  razing  of 
them.  For  in  this  ruin  there  fell  stones  and  tim¬ 
bers;  but  in  the  ruin  those  profligates  effected, 
there  fell,  not  the  mural,  but  the  moral  bulwarks 
and  ornaments  of  the  city,  and  their  hearts 
burned  with  passions  more  destructive  than  the 
flames  which  consumed  their  houses.  Thus  I 
brought  my  first  book  to  a  close.  And  now  I  go 
on  to  speak  of  those  calamities  which  that  city 
itself,  or  its  subject  provinces,  have  suffered 
since  its  foundation;  all  of  which  they  would 
equally  have  attributed  to  the  Christian  religion, 
if  at  that  early  period  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel 
against  their  false  and  deceiving  gods  had  been 
as  largely  and  freely  proclaimed  as  now. 

Chap.  3.  That  we  need  only  to  read  history  in 
order  to  see  what  calamities  the  Romans  suf¬ 
fered  before  the  religion  of  Christ  began  to 
compete  with  the  worship  of  the  gods 
But  remember  that,  in  recounting  these 
things,  I  have  still  to  address  myself  to  ignorant 
men;  so  ignorant,  indeed,  as  to  give  birth  to  the 
common  saying,  “Drought  and  Christianity  go 
hand  in  hand.”  There  are  indeed  some  among 
them  who  are  thoroughly  well-educated  men, 
and  have  a  taste  for  history,  in  which  the  things 
I  speak  of  are  open  to  their  observation ;  but  in 
order  to  irritate  the  uneducated  masses  against 
us,  they  feign  ignorance  of  these  events  and  do 
what  they  can  to  make  the  vulgar  believe  that 
those  disasters,  which  in  certain  places  and  at 
certain  times  uniformly  befall  mankind,  are  the 
result  of  Christianity,  which  is  being  everywhere 
diffused,  and  is  possessed  of  a  renown  and  bril¬ 
liancy  which  quite  eclipse  their  own  gods.  Let 
them  then,  along  with  us,  call  to  mind  with  what 
various  and  repeated  disasters  the  prosperity  of 
Rome  was  blighted,  before  ever  Christ  had  come 
in  the  flesh,  and  before  His  name  had  been  bla¬ 
zoned  among  the  nations  with  that  glory  which 


they  vainly  grudge.  Let  them,  if  they  can,  de¬ 
fend  their  gods  in  this  article,  since  they  main¬ 
tain  that  they  worship  them  in  order  to  be  pre¬ 
served  from  these  disasters,  which  they  now  im¬ 
pute  to  us  if  they  suffer  in  the  least  degree.  For 
why  did  these  gods  permit  the  disasters  I  am  to 
speak  of  to  fall  on  their  worshippers  before  the 
preaching  of  Christ’s  name  offended  them,  and 
put  an  end  to  their  sacrifices? 

Chap.  4.  That  the  worshippers  of  the  gods  never 
received  from  them  any  healthy  moral  pre¬ 
cepts ,  and  that  in  celebrating  their  worship  all 
sorts  of  impurities  were  practiced 
First  of  all,  we  would  ask  why  their  gods  took 
no  steps  to  improve  the  morals  of  their  wor¬ 
shippers.  That  the  true  God  should  neglect 
those  who  did  not  seek  His  help,  that  was  but 
justice;  but  why  did  those  gods,  from  whose 
worship  ungrateful  men  are  now  complaining 
that  they  are  prohibited,  issue  no  laws  which 
might  have  guided  their  devotees  to  a  virtuous 
life?  Surely  it  was  but  just  that  such  care  as  men 
showed  to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  the  gods  on 
their  part  should  have  to  the  conduct  of  men. 
But,  it  is  replied,  it  is  by  his  own  will  a  man  goes 
astray.  Who  denies  it?  But  none  the  less  was  it 
incumbent  on  these  gods,  who  were  men’s  guard¬ 
ians,  to  publish  in  plain  terms  the  laws  of  a  good 
life,  and  not  to  conceal  them  from  their  wor¬ 
shippers.  It  was  their  part  to  send  prophets  to 
reach  and  convict  such  as  broke  these  laws,  and 
publicly  to  proclaim  the  punishments  which 
await  evil-doers,  and  the  rewards  which  may  be 
looked  for  by  those  that  do  well.  Did  ever  the 
walls  of  any  of  their  temples  echo  to  any  such 
warning  voice?  I  myself,  when  I  was  a  young 
man,  used  sometimes  to  go  to  the  sacrilegious 
entertainments  and  spectacles;  I  saw  the  priests 
raving  in  religious  excitement  and  heard  the 
choristers;  I  took  pleasure  in  the  shameful 
games  which  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  gods 
and  goddesses,  of  the  virgin  Coelestis,  and  Bere- 
cynthia,1  the  mother  of  all  the  gods.  And  on  the 
holy  day  consecrated  to  her  purification,  there 
were  sung  before  her  couch  productions  so  ob¬ 
scene  and  filthy  for  the  ear — I  do  not  say  of  the 
mother  of  the  gods,  but  of  the  mother  of  any 
senator  or  honest  man — nay,  so  impure,  that 
not  even  the  mother  of  the  foul-mouthed  play¬ 
ers  themselves  could  have  formed  one  of  the  au¬ 
dience.  For  natural  reverence  for  parents  is  a 
bond  which  the  most  abandoned  cannot  ignore. 
And,  accordingly,  the  lewd  actions  and  filthy 

^erecynthia  is  one  of  the  many  names  of  Rhea  or 
Cybele. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


words  with  which  these  players  honoured  the 
mother  of  the  gods,  in  presence  of  a  vast  assem¬ 
blage  and  audience  of  both  sexes,  they  could  not 
for  very  shame  have  rehearsed  at  home  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  their  own  mothers.  And  the  crowds  that 
were  gathered  from  all  quarters  by  curiosity,  of¬ 
fended  modesty  must,  I  should  suppose,  have 
scattered  in  the  confusion  of  shame.  If  these 
are  sacred  rites,  what  is  sacrilege?  If  this  is  puri¬ 
fication,  what  is  pollution?  This  festivity  was 
called  the  Tables,  as  if  a  banquet  were  being 
given  at  which  unclean  devils  might  find  suit¬ 
able  refreshment.  For  it  is  not  difficult  to  see 
what  kind  of  spirits  they  must  be  who  are  de¬ 
lighted  with  such  obscenities,  unless,  indeed,  a 
man  be  blinded  by  these  evil  spirits  passing 
themselves  off  under  the  name  of  gods,  and  ei¬ 
ther  disbelieves  in  their  existence,  or  leads  such 
a  life  as  prompts  him  rather  to  propitiate  and 
fear  them  than  the  true  God. 

Chap.  5.  Of  the  obscenities  practiced  in  honour 
of  the  mother  of  the  gods 
In  this  matter  I  would  prefer  to  have  as  my 
assessors  in  judgment,  not  those  men  who 
rather  take  pleasure  in  these  infamous  customs 
than  take  pains  to  put  an  end  to  them,  but  that 
same  Scipio  Nasica  who  was  chosen  by  the  sen¬ 
ate  as  the  citizen  most  worthy  to  receive  in  his 
hands  the  image  of  that  demon  Cybele,  and  con¬ 
vey  it  into  the  city.  He  would  tell  us  whether  he 
would  be  proud  to  see  his  own  mother  so  highly 
esteemed  by  the  state  as  to  have  divine  honours 
adjudged  to  her;  as  the  Greeks  and  Romans  and 
other  nations  have  decreed  divine  honours  to 
men  who  had  been  of  material  service  to  them, 
and  have  believed  that  their  mortal  benefactors 
were  thus  made  immortal,  and  enrolled  among 
the  gods.  Surely  he  would  desire  that  his  mother 
should  enjoy  such  felicity  were  it  possible.  But 
if  we  proceeded  to  ask  him  whether,  among  the 
honours  paid  to  her,  he  would  wish  such  shame¬ 
ful  rites  as  these  to  be  celebrated,  would  he  not 
at  once  exclaim  that  he  would  rather  his  mother 
lay  stone-dead,  than  survive  as  a  goddess  to  lend 
her  ear  to  these  obscenities?  Is  it  possible  that 
he  who  was  of  so  severe  a  morality  that  he  used 
his  influence  as  a  Roman  senator  to  prevent  the 
building  of  a  theatre,  in  that  city  dedicated  to 
the  manly  virtues,  would  wish  his  mother  to  be 
propitiated  as  a  goddess  with  words  which  would 
have  brought  the  blush  to  her  cheek  when 
a  Roman  matron?  Could  he  possibly  believe 
that  the  modesty  of  an  estimable  woman  would 
be  so  transformed  by  her  promotion  to  divinity 
that  she  would  suffer  herself  to  be  invoked  and 


celebrated  in  terms  so  gross  and  immodest,  that 
if  she  had  heard  the  like  while  alive  upon  earth, 
and  had  listened  without  stopping  her  ears  and 
hurrying  from  the  spot,  her  relatives,  her  hus¬ 
band.  and  her  children  would  have  blushed  for 
her?  Therefore,  the  mother  of  the  gods  being 
such  a  character  as  the  most  profligate  man 
would  be  ashamed  to  have  for  his  mother,  and 
meaning  to  enthral  the  minds  of  the  Romans, 
demanded  for  her  service  their  best  citizen,  not 
to  ripen  him  still  more  in  virtue  by  her  helpful 
counsel,  but  to  entangle  him  by  her  deceit,  like 
her  of  whom  it  is  written,  “The  adulteress  will 
hunt  for  the  precious  soul.”  1  Her  intent  was  to 
puff  up  this  high-souled  man  by  an  apparently 
divine  testimony  to  his  excellence,  in  order  that 
he  might  rely  upon  his  own  eminence  in  virtue, 
and  make  no  further  efforts  after  true  piety  and 
religion,  without  which  natural  genius,  however 
brilliant,  vapours  into  pride  and  comes  to  noth¬ 
ing.  For  what  but  a  guileful  purpose  could  that 
goddess  demand  the  best  man,  seeing  that  in 
her  own  sacred  festivals  she  requires  such  ob¬ 
scenities  as  the  best  men  would  be  covered  with 
shame  to  hear  at  their  own  tables? 

Chap.  6.  That  the  gods  of  the  pagans  never  in - 
culcated  holiness  of  life 
This  is  the  reason  why  those  divinities  quite 
neglected  the  lives  and  morals  of  the  cities  and 
nations  who  worshipped  them,  and  threw  no 
dreadful  prohibition  in  their  way  to  hinder  them 
from  becoming  utterly  corrupt,  and  to  preserve 
them  from  those  terrible  and  detestable  evils 
which  visit  not  harvests  and  vintages,  not  house 
and  possessions,  not  the  body  which  is  subject  to 
the  soul,  but  the  soul  itself,  the  spirit  that  rules 
the  whole  man.  If  there  was  any  such  prohibi¬ 
tion,  let  it  be  produced,  let  it  be  proved.  They 
will  tell  us  that  purity  and  probity  were  incul¬ 
cated  upon  those  who  were  initiated  in  the  mys¬ 
teries  of  religion,  and  that  secret  incitements  to 
virtue  were  whispered  in  the  ear  of  the  elite;  but 
this  is  an  idle  boast.  Let  them  show  or  name  to 
us  the  places  which  were  at  any  time  conse¬ 
crated  to  assemblages  in  which,  instead  of  the 
obscene  songs  and  licentious  acting  of  players, 
instead  of  the  celebration  of  those  most  filthy 
and  shameless  Fugalia  (well  called  Fugaliay 
since  they  banish  modesty  and  right  feeling), 
the  people  were  commanded  in  the  name  of  the 
gods  to  restrain  avarice,  bridle  impurity,  and 
conquer  ambition;  where,  in  short,  they  might 
learn  in  that  school  which  Persius  vehemently 
lashes  them  to,  when  he  says:  “Be  taught,  ye 
1Prov.  6.  26. 


THE  CITY  OF 

abandoned  creatures,  and  ascertain  the  causes 
of  things;  what  we  are,  and  for  what  end  we  are 
born;  what  is  the  law  of  our  success  in  life;  and 
by  what  art  we  may  turn  the  goal  without  mak¬ 
ing  shipwreck;  what  limit  we  should  put  to  our 
wealth,  what  we  may  lawfully  desire,  and  what 
uses  filthy  lucre  serves ;  how  much  we  should  be¬ 
stow  upon  our  country  and  our  family;  learn, 
in  short,  what  God  meant  thee  to  be,  and  what 
place  He  has  ordered  you  to  fill.”  Let  them  name 
to  us  the  places  where  such  instructions  were 
wont  to  be  communicated  from  the  gods,  and 
where  the  people  who  worshipped  them  were  ac¬ 
customed  to  resort  to  hear  them,  as  we  can 
point  to  our  churches  built  for  this  purpose  in 
every  land  where  the  Christian  religion  is  re¬ 
ceived. 

Chap.  7.  That  the  suggestions  of  philosophers 
are  precluded  from  having  any  moral  effect, 
because  they  have  not  the  authority  which  be¬ 
longs  to  divine  instruction ,  and  because  man's 
natural  bias  to  evil  induces  him  rather  to  fol¬ 
low  the  examples  of  the  gods  than  to  obey  the 
precepts  of  men 

But  will  they  perhaps  remind  us  of  the  schools 
of  the  philosophers,  and  their  disputations?  In 
the  first  place,  these  belong  not  to  Rome,  but  to 
Greece ;  and  even  if  we  yield  to  them  that  they 
are  now  Roman,  because  Greece  itself  has  be¬ 
come  a  Roman  province,  still  the  teachings  of 
the  philosophers  are  not  the  commandments  of 
the  gods,  but  the  discoveries  of  men,  who,  at  the 
prompting  of  their  own  speculative  ability,  made 
efforts  to  discover  the  hidden  laws  of  nature  and 
the  right  and  wrong  in  ethics,  and  in  dialectic 
what  was  consequent  according  to  the  rules  of 
logic  and  what  was  inconsequent  and  erroneous. 
And  some  of  them,  by  God’s  help,  made  great 
discoveries;  but  when  left  to  themselves  they 
were  betrayed  by  human  infirmity,  and  fell  into 
mistakes.  And  this  was  ordered  by  divine  provi¬ 
dence,  that  their  pride  might  be  restrained,  and 
that  by  their  example  it  might  be  pointed  out 
that  it #is  humility  which  has  access  to  the  high¬ 
est  regions.  But  of  this  we  shall  have  more  to 
say,  if  the  Lord  God  of  truth  permit,  in  its  own 
place.1  However,  if  the  philosophers  have  made 
any  discoveries  which  are  sufficient  to  guide 
men  to  virtue  and  blessedness,  would  it  not  have 
been  greater  justice  to  vote  divine  honours  to 
them?  Were  it  not  more  accordant  with  every 
virtuous  sentiment  to  read  Plato’s  writings  in  a 
“Temple  of  Plato,”  than  to  be  present  in  the 
temples  of  devils  to  witness  the  priests  of  Cy- 
1See  below,  Books  vin-xn. 


GOD  II.  5-8  153 

bele  mutilating  themselves,  the  effeminate  be¬ 
ing  consecrated,  the  raving  fanatics  cutting 
themselves,  and  whatever  other  cruel  or  shame¬ 
ful,  or  shamefully  cruel  or  cruelly  shameful, 
ceremony  is  enjoined  by  the  ritual  of  such  gods 
as  these?  Were  it  not  a  more  suitable  education, 
and  more  likely  to  prompt  the  youth  to  virtue,  if 
they  heard  public  recitals  of  the  laws  of  the 
gods,  instead  of  the  vain  laudation  of  the  cus¬ 
toms  and  laws  of  their  ancestors?  Certainly  all 
the  worshippers  of  the  Roman  gods,  when  once 
they  are  possessed  by  what  Persius  calls  “the 
burning  poison  of  lust,”  prefer  to  witness  the 
deeds  of  Jupiter  rather  than  to  hear  what  Plato 
taught  or  Cato  censured.  Hence  the  young  pro¬ 
fligate  in  Terence,  when  he  sees  on  the  wall  a 
fresco  representing  the  fabled  descent  of  Jupi¬ 
ter  into  the  lap  of  Danae  in  the  form  of  a  golden 
shower,  accepts  this  as  authoritative  precedent 
for  his  own  licentiousness,  and  boasts  that  he  is 
an  imitator  of  God.  “And  what  God?”  he  says. 
“He  who  with  His  thunder  shakes  the  loftiest 
temples.  And  was  I,  a  poor  creature  compared 
to  Him,  to  make  bones  of  it?  No;  I  did  it,  and 
with  all  my  heart.” 

Chap.  8.  That  the  theatrical  exhibitions  pub¬ 
lishing  the  shameful  actions  of  the  gods,  pro¬ 
pitiated  rather  than  offended  them 
But,  some  one  will  interpose,  these  are  the 
fables  of  poets,  not  the  deliverances  of  the  gods 
themselves.  Well,  I  have  no  mind  to  arbitrate 
between  the  lewdness  of  theatrical  entertain¬ 
ments  and  of  mystic  rites;  only  this  I  say,  and 
history  bears  me  out  in  making  the  assertion, 
that  those  same  entertainments,  in  which  the  fic¬ 
tions  of  poets  are  the  main  attraction,  were  not 
introduced  in  the  festivals  of  the  gods  by  the 
ignorant  devotion  of  the  Romans,  but  that  the 
gods  themselves  gave  the  most  urgent  com¬ 
mands  to  this  effect,  and  indeed  extorted  from 
the  Romans  these  solemnities  and  celebrations 
in  their  honour.  I  touched  on  this  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  book,  and  mentioned  that  dramatic  enter¬ 
tainments  were  first  inaugurated  at  Rome  on  oc¬ 
casion  of  a  pestilence  and  by  authority  of  the 
pontiff.  And  what  man  is  there  who  is  not  more 
likely  to  adopt,  for  the  regulation  of  his  own  life, 
the  examples  that  are  represented  in  plays  which 
have  a  divine  sanction,  rather  than  the  precepts 
written  and  promulgated  with  no  more  than  hu¬ 
man  authority?  If  the  poets  gave  a  false  repre¬ 
sentation  of  Jove  in  describing  him  as  adulter¬ 
ous,  then  it  were  to  be  expected  that  the  chaste 
gods  should  in  anger  avenge  so  wicked  a  fiction, 
in  place  of  encouraging  the  games  which  circu- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


lated  it.  Of  these  plays,  the  most  inoffensive  are 
comedies  and  tragedies,  that  is  to  say,  the 
dramas  which  poets  write  for  the  stage,  and 
which,  though  they  often  handle  impure  sub¬ 
jects,  yet  do  so  without  the  filthiness  of  lan¬ 
guage  which  characterizes  many  other  perform¬ 
ances;  and  it  is  these  dramas  which  boys  are 
obliged  by  their  seniors  to  read  and  learn  as  a 
part  of  what  is  called  a  liberal  and  gentlemanly 
education. 

Chap.  9.  That  the  poetical  licence  which  the 
Greeks ,  in  obedience  to  their  gods,  allowed, 
was  restrained  by  the  ancient  Romans 
The  opinion  of  the  ancient  Romans  on  this 
matter  is  attested  by  Cicero  in  his  work  De 
Republica,  in  which  Scipio,  one  of  the  interlocu¬ 
tors,  says,  “The  lewdness  of  comedy  could  never 
have  been  suffered  by  audiences,  unless  the  cus¬ 
toms  of  society  had  previously  sanctioned  the 
same  lewdness.”  And  in  the  earlier  days  the 
Greeks  preserved  a  certain  reasonableness  in 
their  licence,  and  made  it  a  law,  that  whatever 
comedy  wished  to  say  of  any  one,  it  must  sa/  it 
of  him  by  name.  And  so  in  the  same  work  of 
Cicero’s,  Scipio  says,  “Whom  has  it  not  as¬ 
persed?  Nay,  whom  has  it  not  worried?  Whom 
has  it  spared?  Allow  that  it  may  assail  dema¬ 
gogues  and  factions,  men  injurious  to  the  com¬ 
monwealth — a  Cleon,  a  Cleophon,  a  Hyperbolus. 
That  is  tolerable,  though  it  had  been  more  seem¬ 
ly  for  the  public  censor  to  brand  such  men,  than 
for  a  poet  to  lampoon  them;  but  to  blacken  the 
fame  of  Pericles  with  scurrilous  verse,  after  he 
had  with  the  utmost  dignity  presided  over  their 
state  alike  in  war  and  in  peace,  was  as  unworthy 
of  a  poet,  as  if  our  own  Plautus  or  Naevius  were 
to  bring  Publius  and  Cneius  Scipio  on  the  comic 
stage,  or  as  if  Caecilius  were  to  caricature  Cato.” 
And  then  a  little  after  he  goes  on :  “Though  our 
Twelve  Tables  attached  the  penalty  of  death 
only  to  a  very  few  offences,  yet  among  these  few 
this  was  one:  if  any  man  should  have  sung  a 
pasquinade,  or  have  composed  a  satire  calcu¬ 
lated  to  bring  infamy  or  disgrace  on  another 
person.  Wisely  decreed.  For  it  is  by  the  decisions 
of  magistrates,  and  by  a  well-informed  justice, 
that  our  lives  ought  to  be  judged,  and  not  by  the 
flighty  fancies  of  poets;  neither  ought  we  to  be 
exposed  to  her  calumnies,  save  where  we  have 
the  liberty  of  replying,  and  defending  ourselves 
before  an  adequate  tribunal.”  This  much  I  have 
judged  it  advisable  to  quote  from  the  fourth 
book  of  Cicero’s  De  Republica;  and  I  have 
made  the  quotation  word  for  word,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  some  words  omitted,  and  some  slight¬ 


ly  transposed,  for  the  sake  of  giving  the  sense 
more  readily.  And  certainly  the  extract  is  perti¬ 
nent  to  the  matter  I  am  endeavouring  to  explain. 
Cicero  makes  some  further  remarks,  and  con¬ 
cludes  the  passage  by  showing  that  the  ancient 
Romans  did  not  permit  any  living  man  to  be 
either  praised  or  blamed  on  the  stage.  But  the 
Greeks,  as  I  said,  though  not  so  moral,  were 
more  logical  in  allowing  this  licence  which  the 
Romans  forbade;  for  they  saw  that  their  gods 
approved  and  enjoyed  the  scurrilous  language  of 
low  comedy  when  directed  not  only  against  men, 
but  even  against  themselves ;  and  this,  whether 
the  infamous  actions  imputed  to  them  were  the 
fictions  of  poets,  or  were  their  actual  iniquities 
commemorated  and  acted  in  the  theatres.  And 
would  that  the  spectators  had  judged  them 
worthy  only  of  laughter,  and  not  of  imitation! 
Manifestly  it  had  been  a  stretch  of  pride  to 
spare  the  good  name  of  the  leading  men  and  the 
common  citizens,  when  the  very  deities  did  not 
grudge  that  their  own  reputation  should  be 
blemished. 

Chap.  10.  That  the  devils,  in  suffering  either 
false  or  true  crimes  to  be  laid  to  their  charge, 
meant  to  do  men  a  mischief 
It  is  alleged,  in  excuse  of  this  practice,  that 
the  stories  told  of  the  gods  are  not  true,  but 
false,  and  mere  inventions,  but  this  only  makes 
matters  worse,  if  we  form  our  estimate  by  the 
morality  our  religion  teaches;  and  if  we  con¬ 
sider  the  malice  of  the  devils,  what  more  wily 
and  astute  artifice  could  they  practise  upon 
men?  When  a  slander  is  uttered  against  a  leading 
statesman  of  upright  and  useful  life,  is  it  not 
reprehensible  in  proportion  to  its  untruth  and 
groundlessness?  What  punishment,  then,  shall 
be  sufficient  when  the  gods  are  the  objects  of  so 
wicked  and  outrageous  an  injustice?  But  the 
devils,  whom  these  men  repute  gods,  are  content 
that  even  iniquities  they  are  guiltless  of  should 
be  ascribed  to  them,  so  long  as  they  may  en¬ 
tangle  men’s  minds  in  the  meshes  of  these  opin¬ 
ions,  and  draw  them  on  along  with  themselves 
to  their  predestinated  punishment:  whether 
such  things  were  actually  committed  by  the  men 
whom  these  devils,  delighting  in  human  infatua¬ 
tion,  cause  to  be  worshipped  as  gods,  and  in 
whose  stead  they,  by  a  thousand  malign  and 
deceitful  artifices,  substitute  themselves,  and  so 
receive  worship;  or  whether,  though  they  were 
really  the  crimes  of  men,  these  wicked  spirits 
gladly  allowed  them  to  be  attributed  to  higher 
beings,  that  there  might  seem  to  be  conveyed 
from  heaven  itself  a  sufficient  sanction  for  the 


THE  CITY  OF 

perpetration  of  shameful  wickedness.  The 
Greeks,  therefore,  seeing  the  character  of  the 
gods  they  served,  thought  that  the  poets  should 
certainly  not  refrain  from  showing  up  human 
vices  on  the  stage,  either  because  they  desired  to 
be  like  their  gods  in  this,  or  because  they  were 
afraid  that,  if  they  required  for  themselves  a 
more  unblemished  reputation  than  they  asserted 
for  the  gods,  they  might  provoke  them  to  anger. 

Chap.  ii.  That  the  Greeks  admitted  players  to 
offices  of  state  on  the  ground  that  men  who 
pleased  the  gods  shoidd  not  be  contemptuous¬ 
ly  treated  by  their  fellows 
It  was  a  part  of  this  same  reasonableness  of 
the  Greeks  which  induced  them  to  bestow  upon 
the  actors  of  these  same  plays  no  inconsiderable 
civic  honours.  In  the  above-mentioned  book  of 
the  De  Republica,  it  is  mentioned  that  /Esch- 
ines,  a  very  eloquent  Athenian,  who  had  been  a 
tragic  actor  in  his  youth,  became  a  statesman, 
and  that  the  Athenians  again  and  again  sent  an¬ 
other  tragedian,  Aristodemus,  as  their  plenipo¬ 
tentiary  to  Philip.  For  they  judged  it  unbecom¬ 
ing  to  condemn  and  treat  as  infamous  persons 
those  who  were  the  chief  actors  in  the  scenic 
entertainments  which  they  saw  to  be  so  pleasing 
to  the  gods.  No  doubt  this  was  immoral  of  the 
Greeks,  but  there  can  be' as  little  doubt  they 
acted  in  conformity  with  the  character  of  their 
gods;  for  how  could  they  have  presumed  to  pro¬ 
tect  the  conduct  of  the  citizens  from  being  cut 
to  pieces  by  the  tongues  of  poets  and  players, 
who  were  allowed,  and  even  enjoined  by  the 
gods,  to  tear  their  divine  reputation  to  tatters? 
And  how  could  they  hold  in  contempt  the  men 
who  acted  in  the  theatres  those  dramas  which, 
as  they  had  ascertained,  gave  pleasure  to  the 
gods  whom  they  worshipped?  Nay,  how  could 
they  but  grant  to  them  the  highest  civic  hon¬ 
ours?  On  what  plea  could  they  honour  the 
priests  who  offered  for  them  acceptable  sacri¬ 
fices  to  the  gods,  if  they  branded  with  infamy 
the  actors  who  in  behalf  of  the  people  gave  to 
the  gods  that  pleasure  or  honour  which  they 
demanded,  and  which,  according  to  the  account 
of  the  priests,  they  were  angry  at  not  receiving. 
Labeo,1  whose  learning  makes  him  an  authority 
on  such  points,  is  of  opinion  that  the  distinction 
between  good  and  evil  deities  should  find  expres¬ 
sion  in  a  difference  of  worship;  that  the  evil 
should  be  propitiated  by  bloody  sacrifices  and 
doleful  rites,  but  the  good  with  a  joyful  and 
pleasant  observance,  as,  e.g.  (as  he  says  him¬ 
self),  with  plays,  festivals,  and  banquets.  All 
*A  jurist  of  the  time  of  Augustus. 


GOD  II.  9-12  155 

this  we  shall,  with  God’s  help,  hereafter  discuss. 
At  present,  and  speaking  to  the  subject  on  hand, 
whether  all  kinds  of  offerings  are  made  indis¬ 
criminately  to  all  the  gods,  as  if  all  were  good 
(and  it  is  an  unseemly  thing  to  conceive  that 
there  are  evil  gods ;  but  these  gods  of  the  pagans 
are  all  evil,  because  they  are  not  gods,  but  evil 
spirits),  or  whether,  as  Labeo  thinks,  a  distinc¬ 
tion  is  made  between  the  offerings  presented  to 
the  different  gods  the  Greeks  are  equally  justi¬ 
fied  in  honouring  alike  the  priests  by  whom  the 
sacrifices  are  offered,  and  the  players  by  whom 
the  dramas  are  acted,  that  they  may  not  be  open 
to  the  charge  of  doing  an  injury  to  all  their  gods, 
if  the  plays  are  pleasing  to  all  of  them,  or  (which 
were  still  worse)  to  their  good  gods,  if  the  plays 
are  relished  only  by  them. 

Chap.  12.  That  the  Romans ,  by  refusing  to  the 
poets  the  same  licence  in  respect  of  men 
which  they  allowed  them  in  the  case  of  the 
gods,  showed  a  more  delicate  sensitiveness  re¬ 
garding  themselves  than  regarding  the  gods 
The  Romans,  however,  as  Scipio  boasts  in 
that  same  discussion,  declined  having  their  con¬ 
duct  and  good  name  subjected  to  the  assaults 
and  slanders  of  the  poets,  and  went  so  far  as  to 
make  it  a  capital  crime  if  any  one  should  dare  to 
compose  such  verses.  This  was  a  very  honour¬ 
able  course  to  pursue,  so  far  as  they  themselves 
were  concerned,  but  in  respect  of  the  gods  it  was 
proud  and  irreligious:  for  they  knew  that  the 
gods  not  only  tolerated,  but  relished,  being 
lashed  by  the  injurious  expressions  of  the  poets, 
and  yet  they  themselves  would  not  suffer  this 
same  handling;  and  what  their  ritual  prescribed 
as  acceptable  to  the  gods,  their  law  prohibited 
as  injurious  to  themselves.  How  then,  Scipio,  do 
you  praise  the  Romans  for  refusing  this  licence 
to  the  poets,  so  that  no  citizen  could  be  calum¬ 
niated,  while  you  know  that  the  gods  were  not 
included  under  this  protection?  Do  you  count 
your  senate-house  worthy  of  so  much  higher  a 
regard  than  the  Capitol?  Is  the  one  city  of  Rome 
more  valuable  in  your  eyes  than  the  whole  heav¬ 
en  of  gods,  that  you  prohibit  your  poets  from 
uttering  any  injurious  words  against  a  citizen, 
though  they  may  with  impunity  cast  what  im¬ 
putations  they  please  upon  the  gods,  without  the 
interference  of  senator,  censor,  prince,  or  pon¬ 
tiff?  It  was,  forsooth,  intolerable  that  Plautus  or 
Naevius  should  attack  Publius  and  Cneius  Scipio, 
insufferable  that  Caecilius  should  lampoon  Cato; 
but  quite  proper  that  your  Terence  should  en¬ 
courage  youthful  lust  by  the  wicked  example  of 
supreme  Jove. 


i56  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  13.  That  the  Romans  should  have  under - 
stood  that  gods  who  desired  to  be  worshipped 
in  licentious  entertainments  were  unworthy  of 
divine  honour 

But  Scipio,  were  he  alive,  would  possibly  re¬ 
ply:  “How  could  we  attach  a  penalty  to  that 
which  the  gods  themselves  have  consecrated? 
For  the  theatrical  entertainments  in  which  such 
things  are  said,  and  acted,  and  performed,  were 
introduced  into  Roman  society  by  the  gods,  who 
ordered  that  they  should  be  dedicated  and  ex¬ 
hibited  in  their  honour.”  But  was  not  this,  then, 
the  plainest  proof  that  they  were  no  true  gods, 
nor  in  any  respect  worthy  of  receiving  divine 
honours  from  the  republic?  Suppose  they  had 
required  that  in  their  honour  the  citizens  of 
Rome  should  be  held  up  to  ridicule,  every  Ro¬ 
man  would  have  resented  the  hateful  proposal. 
How  then,  I  would  ask,  can  they  be  esteemed 
worthy  of  worship,  when  they  propose  that  their 
own  crimes  be  used  as  material  for  celebrating 
their  praises?  Does  not  this  artifice  expose  them, 
and  prove  that  they  are  detestable  devils?  Thus 
the  Romans,  though  they  were  superstitious 
enough  to  serve  as  gods  those  who  made  no 
secret  of  their  desire  to  be  worshipped  in  licen¬ 
tious  plays,  yet  had  sufficient  regard  to  their 
hereditary  dignity  and  virtue,  to  prompt  them 
to  refuse  to  players  any  such  rewards  as  the 
Greeks  accorded  them.  On  this  point  we  have 
this  testimony  of  Scipio,  recorded  in  Cicero: 
“They  considered  comedy  and  all  theatrical  per¬ 
formances  as  disgraceful,  and  therefore  not  only 
debarred  players  from  offices  and  honours  open 
to  ordinary  citizens,  but  also  decreed  that  their 
names  should  be  branded  by  the  censor,  and 
erased  from  the  roll  of  their  tribe.”  An  excel¬ 
lent  decree,  and  another  testimony  to  the  saga¬ 
city  of  Rome;  but  I  could  wish  their  prudence 
had  been  more  thoroughgoing  and  consistent. 
For  when  I  hear  that  if  any  Roman  citizen  chose 
the  stage  as  his  profession,  he  not  only  closed  to 
himself  every  laudable  career,  but  even  became 
an  outcast  from  his  own  tribe,  I  cannot  but  ex¬ 
claim:  This  is  the  true  Roman  spirit,  this  is 
worthy  of  a  state  jealous  of  its  reputation.  But 
then  some  one  interrupts  my  rapture,  by  inquir¬ 
ing  with  what  consistency  players  are  debarred 
from  all  honours,  while  plays  are  counted  among 
the  honours  due  to  the  gods?  For  a  long  while 
the  virtue  of  Rome  was  uncontaminated  by  the¬ 
atrical  exhibitions ;  and  if  they  had  been  adopted 
for  the  sake  of  gratifying  the  taste  of  the  cit¬ 
izens,  they  would  have  been  introduced  hand  in 
hand  with  the  relaxation  of  manners.  But  the 


fact  is  that  it  was  the  gods  who  demanded  that 
they  should  be  exhibited  to  gratify  them.  With 
what  justice,  then,  is  the  player  excommuni¬ 
cated  by  whom  God  is  worshipped?  On  what 
pretext  can  you  at  once  adore  him  who  exacts 
and  brand  him  who  acts  these  plays?  This,  then, 
is  the  controversy  in  which  the  Greeks  and  Ro¬ 
mans  are  engaged.  The  Greeks  think  they  justly 
honour  players,  because  they  worship  the  gods 
who  demand  plays;  the  Romans,  on  the  other 
hand,  do  not  suffer  an  actor  to  disgrace  by  his 
name  his  own  plebeian  tribe,  far  less  the  senator¬ 
ial  order.  And  the  whole  of  this  discussion  may 
be  summed  up  in  the  following  syllogism.  The 
Greeks  give  us  the  major  premise:  If  such  gods 
are  to  be  worshipped,  then  certainly  such  men 
may  be  honoured.  The  Romans  add  the  minor: 
But  such  men  must  by  no  means  be  honoured. 
The  Christians  draw  the  conclusion :  Therefore 
such  gods  must  by  no  means  be  worshipped. 

Chap.  14.  That  Plato ,  who  excluded  poets  from 
a  well-ordered  city ,  was  better  than  these  gods 
who  desire  to  be  honoured  by  theatrical  plays 
We  have  still  to  inquire  why  the  poets  who 
write  the  plays,  and  who  by  the  law  of  the 
Twelve  Tables  are  prohibited  from  injuring  the 
good  name  of  the  citizens,  are  reckoned  more 
estimable  than  the  actors,  though  they  so 
shamefully  asperse  the  character  of  the  gods? 
Is  it  right  that  the  actors  of  these  poetical  and 
God-dishonouring  effusions  be  branded,  while 
their  authors  are  honoured?  Must  we  not  here 
award  the  palm  to  a  Greek,  Plato,  who,  in  fram¬ 
ing  his  ideal  republic,1  conceived  that  poets 
should  be  banished  from  the  city  as  enemies  of 
the  state?  He  could  not  brook  that  the  gods  be 
brought  into  disrepute,  nor  that  the  minds  of  the 
citizens  be  depraved  and  besotted,  by  the  fic¬ 
tions  of  the  poets.  Compare  now  human  nature 
as  you  see  it  in  Plato,  expelling  poets  from  the 
city  that  the  citizens  be  uninjured,  with  the  di¬ 
vine  nature  as  you  see  it  in  these  gods  exacting 
plays  in  their  own  honour.  Plato  strove,  though 
unsuccessfully,  to  persuade  the  light-minded 
and  lascivious  Greeks  to  abstain  from  so  much 
as  writing  such  plays;  the  gods  used  their  au¬ 
thority  to  extort  the  acting  of  the  same  from 
the  dignified  and  sober-minded  Romans.  And 
not  content  with  having  them  acted,  they  had 
them  dedicated  to  themselves,  consecrated  to 
themselves,  solemnly  celebrated  in  their  own 
honour.  To  which,  then,  would  it  be  more  be¬ 
coming  in  a  state  to  decree  divine  honours — to 
Plato,  who  prohibited  these  wicked  and  licen¬ 
see  the  Republic ,  bk.  hi. 


THE  CITY  OF 

tious  plays,  or  to  the  demons  who  delighted  in 
blinding  men  to  the  truth  of  what  Plato  unsuc¬ 
cessfully  sought  to  inculcate? 

This  philosopher,  Plato,  has  been  elevated  by 
Labeo  to  the  rank  of  a  demigod,  and  set  thus 
upon  a  level  with  such  as  Hercules  and  Romulus. 
Labeo  ranks  demigods  higher  than  heroes,  but 
both  he  counts  among  the  deities.  But  I  have  no 
doubt  that  he  thinks  this  man  whom  he  reckons 
a  demigod  worthy  of  greater  respect  not  only 
than  the  heroes,  but  also  than  the  gods  them¬ 
selves.  The  laws  of  the  Romans  and  the  specula¬ 
tions  of  Plato  have  this  resemblance,  that  the 
latter  pronounce  a  wholesale  condemnation  of 
poetical  fictions,  while  the  former  restrain  the 
licence  of  satire,  at  least  so  far  as  men  are  the 
objects  of  it.  Plato  will  not  suffer  poets  even  to 
dwell  in  his  city:  the  laws  of  Rome  prohibit  ac¬ 
tors  from  being  enrolled  as  citizens;  and  if  they 
had  not  feared  to  offend  the  gods  who  had  asked 
the  services  of  the  players,  they  would  in  all 
likelihood  have  banished  them  altogether.  It  is 
obvious,  therefore,  that  the  Romans  could  not 
receive,  nor  reasonably  expect  to  receive,  laws 
for  the  regulation  of  their  conduct  from  their 
gods,  since  the  laws  they  themselves  enacted 
far  surpassed  and  put  to  shame  the  morality  of 
the  gods.  The  gods  demand  stageplays  in  their 
own  honour;  the  Romans  exclude  the  players 
from  all  civic  honours ;  the  former  commanded 
that  they  should  be  celebrated  by  the  scenic 
representation  of  their  own  disgrace;  the  latter 
commanded  that  no  poet  should  dare  to  blemish 
the  reputation  of  any  citizen.  But  that  demigod 
Plato  resisted  the  lust  of  such  gods  as  these  and 
showed  the  Romans  what  their  genius  had  left 
incomplete;  for  he  absolutely  excluded  poets 
from  his  ideal  state,  whether  they  composed  fic¬ 
tions  with  no  regard  to  truth  or  set  the  worst 
possible  examples  before  wretched  men  under 
the  guise  of  divine  actions.  We  for  our  part,  in¬ 
deed.  reckon  Plato  neither  a  god  nor  a  demigod; 
we  would  not  even  compare  him  to  any  of  God’s 
holy  angels;  nor  to  the  truth-speaking  prophets, 
nor  to  any  of  the  apostles  or  martyrs  of  Christ, 
nay,  not  to  any  faithful  Christian  man.  The  rea¬ 
son  of  this  opinion  of  ours  we  will,  God  pros¬ 
pering  us,  render  in  its  own  place.  Nevertheless, 
since  they  wish  him  to  be  considered  a  demigod, 
we  think  he  certainly  is  more  entitled  to  that 
rank,  and  is  every  way  superior,  if  not  to  Her¬ 
cules  and  Romulus  (though  no  historian  could 
ever  narrate  nor  any  poet  sing  of  him  that  he  had 
killed  his  brother,  or  committed  any  crime),  yet 
certainly  to  Priapus,  or  a  Cynocephalus,  or  the 
Fever — divinities  whom  the  Romans  have  partly 


GOD  II.  13-16  157 

received  from  foreigners, and  partly  consecrated 
by  home-grown  rites.  How,  then,  could  gods 
such  as  these  be  expected  to  promulgate  good 
and  wholesome  laws,  either  for  the  prevention  of 
moral  and  social  evils,  or  for  their  eradication 
where  they  had  already  sprung  up? — gods  who 
used  their  influence  even  to  sow  and  cherish 
profligacy,  by  appointing  that  deeds  truly  or 
falsely  ascribed  to  them  should  be  published  to 
the  people  by  means  of  theatrical  exhibitions, 
and  by  thus  gratuitously  fanning  the  flame  of 
human  lust  with  the  breath  of  a  seemingly  divine 
approbation.  In  vain  does  Cicero,  speaking  of 
poets,  exclaim  against  this  state  of  things  in 
these  words:  “When  the  plaudits  and  acclama¬ 
tion  of  the  people,  who  sit  as  infallible  judges, 
are  won  by  the  poets,  what  darkness  benights 
the  mind,  what  fears  invade,  what  passions  in¬ 
flame  it!” 

Chap.  15.  That  it  was  vanity,  not  reason,  which 
created  some  of  the  Roman  gods 
But  is  it  not  manifest  that  vanity  rather  than 
reason  regulated  the  choice  of  some  of  their  false 
gods?  This  Plato,  whom  they  reckon  a  demigod, 
and  who  used  all  his  eloquence  to  preserve  men 
from  the  most  dangerous  spiritual  calamities, 
has  yet  not  been  counted  worthy  even  of  a  little 
shrine;  but  Romulus,  because  they  can  call  him 
their  own,  they  have  esteemed  more  highly  than 
many  gods,  though  their  secret  doctrine  can  al¬ 
low  him  the  rank  only  of  a  demigod.  To  him  they 
allotted  a  flamen,  that  is  to  say,  a  priest  of  a 
class  so  highly  esteemed  in  their  religion  (dis¬ 
tinguished,  too,  by  their  conical  mitres),  that  for 
only  three  of  their  gods  were  flamens  appointed, 
— the  Flamen  Dialis  for  Jupiter,  Martialis  for 
Mars,  and  Quirinalis  for  Romulus  (for  when  the 
ardour  of  his  fellow-citizens  had  given  Romulus 
a  seat  among  the  gods,  they  gave  him  this  new 
name  Quirinus).  And  thus  by  this  honour  Rom¬ 
ulus  has  been  preferred  to  Neptune  and  Pluto, 
Jupiter’s  brothers,  and  to  Saturn  himself,  their 
father.  They  have  assigned  the  same  priesthood 
to  serve  him  as  to  serve  Jove;  and  in  giving 
Mars  (the  reputed  father  of  Romulus)  the  same 
honour,  is  this  not  rather  for  Romulus’  sake 
than  to  honour  Mars? 

Chap.  16.  That  if  the  gods  had  really  possessed 
any  regard  for  righteousness,  the  Romans 
should  have  received  good  laws  from  them,  in¬ 
stead  of  having  to  borrow  them  from  other 
nations 

Moreover,  if  the  Romans  had  been  able  to  re¬ 
ceive  a  rule  of  life  from  their  gods,  they  would 


1 58  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


not  have  borrowed  Solon’s  laws  from  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  as  they  did  some  years  after  Rome  was 
founded-;  and  yet  they  did  not  keep  them  as  they 
received  them,  but  endeavoured  to  improve  and 
amend  them.  Although  Lycurgus  pretended  that 
he  was  authorized  by  Apollo  to  give  laws  to  the 
Lacedemonians,  the  sensible  Romans  did  not 
choose  to  believe  this  and  were  not  induced  to 
borrow  laws  from  Sparta.  Numa  Pompilius,  who 
succeeded  Romulus  in  the  kingdom,  is  said  to 
have  framed  some  laws,  which,  however,  were 
not  sufficient  for  the  regulation  of  civic  affairs. 
Among  these  regulations  were  many  pertaining 
to  religious  observances,  and  yet  he  is  not  re¬ 
ported  to  have  received  even  these  from  the 
gods.  With  respect,  then,  to  moral  evils,  evils  of 
life  and  conduct — evils  which  are  so  mighty, 
that,  according  to  the  wisest  pagans,  by  them 
states  are  ruined  while  their  cities  stand  unin¬ 
jured — their  gods  made  not  the  smallest  provi¬ 
sion  for  preserving  their  worshippers  from  these 
evils,  but,  on  the  contrary,  took  special  pains  to 
increase  them,  as  we  have  previously  endeav¬ 
oured  to  prove. 

Chap.  17  .Of  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women,  and 

other  iniquities  perpetrated  in  Rome 

But  possibly  we  are  to  find  the  reason  for  this 
neglect  of  the  Romans  by  their  gods,  in  the  say¬ 
ing  of  Sallust,  that  “equity  and  virtue  prevailed 
among  the  Romans  not  more  by  force  of  laws 
than  of  nature.”  I  presume  it  is  to  this  inborn 
equity  and  goodness  of  disposition  we  are  to 
ascribe  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women.  What,  in¬ 
deed,  could  be  more  equitable  and  virtuous,  than 
to  carry  off  by  force,  as  each  man  was  fit,  and 
without  their  parents’  consent,  girls  who  were 
strangers  and  guests,  and  who  had  been  decoyed 
and  entrapped  by  the  pretence  of  a  spectacle!  If 
the  Sabines  were  wrong  to  deny  their  daughters 
when  the  Romans  asked  for  them,  was  it  not  a 
greater  wrong  in  the  Romans  to  carry  them  off 
after  that  denial?  The  Romans  might  more  just¬ 
ly  have  waged  war  against  the  neighbouring  na¬ 
tion  for  having  refused  their  daughters  in  mar¬ 
riage  when  they  first  sought  them,  than  for  hav¬ 
ing  demanded  them  back  when  they  had  stolen 
them.  War  should  have  been  proclaimed  at  first; 
it  was  then  that  Mars  should  have  helped  his 
warlike  son,  that  he  might  by  force  of  arms 
avenge  the  injury  done  him  by  the  refusal  of 
marriage,  and  might  also  thus  win  the  women  he 
desired.  There  might  have  been  some  appear¬ 
ance  of  “right  of  war”  in  a  victor  carrying  off,  in 


virtue  of  this  right,  the  virgins  who  had  been 
without  any  show  of  right  denied  him ;  whereas 
there  was  no  “right  of  peace”  entitling  him  to 
carry  off  those  who  were  not  given  to  him,  and 
to  wage  an  unjust  war  with  their  justly  enraged 
parents.  One  happy  circumstance  was  indeed 
connected  with  this  act  of  violence,  viz.,  that 
though  it  was  commemorated  by  the  games  of 
the  circus,  yet  even  this  did  not  constitute  it  a 
precedent  in  the  city  or  realm  of  Rome.  If  one 
would  find  fault  with  the  results  of  this  act,  it 
must  rather  be  on  the  ground  that  the  Romans 
made  Romulus  a  god  in  spite  of  his  perpetrating 
this  iniquity;  for  one  cannot  reproach  them  with 
making  this  deed  any  kind  of  precedent  for  the 
rape  of  women. 

Again,  I  presume  it  was  due  to  this  natural 
equity  and  virtue,  that  after  the  expulsion  of 
King  Tarquin,  whose  son  had  violated  Lucretia, 
Junius  Brutus  the  consul  forced  Lucius  Tar- 
quinius  Collatinus,  Lucretia’s  husband  and  his 
own  colleague,  a  good  and  innocent  man,  to 
resign  his  office  and  go  into  banishment,  on  the 
one  sole  charge  that  he  was  of  the  name  and 
blood  of  the  Tarquins.  This  injustice  was  per¬ 
petrated  with  the  approval,  or  at  least  con¬ 
nivance,  of  the  people,  who  had  themselves 
raised  to  the  consular  office  both  Collatinus  and 
Brutus.  Another  instance  of  this  equity  and  vir¬ 
tue  is  found  in  their  treatment  of  Marcus  Camil- 
lus.  This  eminent  man,  after  he  had  rapidly  con¬ 
quered  the  Veians,  at  that  time  the  most  for¬ 
midable  of  Rome’s  enemies,  and  who  had  main¬ 
tained  a  ten  years’  war,  in  which  the  Roman 
army  had  suffered  the  usual  calamities  attendant 
on  bad  generalship,  after  he  had  restored  secur¬ 
ity  to  Rome,  which  had  begun  to  tremble  for  its 
safety,  and  after  he  had  taken  the  wealthiest 
city  of  the  enemy,  had  charges  brought  against 
him  by  the  malice  of  those  that  envied  his  suc¬ 
cess,  and  by  the  insolence  of  the  tribunes  of  the 
people;  and  seeing  that  the  city  bore  him  no 
gratitude  for  preserving  it,  and  that  he  would 
certainly  be  condemned,  he  went  into  exile,  and 
even  in  his  absence  was  fined  10,000  asses. 
Shortly  after,  however,  his  ungrateful  country 
had  again  to  seek  his  protection  from  the 
Gauls.  But  I  cannot  now  mention  all  the  shame¬ 
ful  and  iniquitous  acts  with  which  Rome  was 
agitated,  when  the  aristocracy  attempted  to 
subject  the  people,  and  the  people  resented 
their  encroachments,  and  the  advocates  of  ei¬ 
ther  party  were  actuated  rather  by  the  love  of 
victory  than  by  any  equitable  or  virtuous  con¬ 
sideration. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  18.  What  the  history  of  Sallust  reveals 
regarding  the  life  of  the  Romans ,  either  when 
straitened  by  anxiety  or  relaxed  in  security 
I  will  therefore  pause,  and  adduce  the  tes¬ 
timony  of  Sallust  himself,  whose  words  in  praise 
of  the  Romans  (that  “equity  and  virtue  pre¬ 
vailed  among  them  not  more  by  force  of  laws 
than  of  nature”)  have  given  occasion  to  this 
discussion.  He  was  referring  to  that  period  im¬ 
mediately  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  in 
which  the  city  became  great  in  an  incredibly 
short  space  of  time.  And  yet  this  same  writer  ac¬ 
knowledges  in  the  first  book  of  his  history,  in  the 
very  exordium  of  his  work,  that  even  at  that 
time,  when  a  very  brief  interval  had  elapsed 
after  the  government  had  passed  from  kings  to 
consuls,  the  more  powerful  men  began  to  act  un¬ 
justly,  and  occasioned  the  defection  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  from  the  patricians,  and  other  disorders  in 
the  city.  For  after  Sallust  had  stated  that  the 
Romans  enjoyed  greater  harmony  and  a  purer 
state  of  society  between  the  second  and  third 
Punic  wars  than  at  any  other  time,  and  that  the 
cause  of  this  was  not  their  love  of  good  order, 
but  their  fear  lest  the  peace  they  had  with 
Carthage  might  be  broken  (this  also,  as  we  men¬ 
tioned,  Nasica  contemplated  when  he  opposed 
the  destruction  of  Carthage,  for  he  supposed 
that  fear  would  tend  to  repress  wickedness,  and 
to  preserve  wholesome  ways  of  living),  he  then 
goes  on  to  say:  “Yet,  after  the  destruction  of 
Carthage,  discord,  avarice,  ambition,  and  the 
other  vices  which  are  commonly  generated  by 
prosperity,  more  than  ever  increased.”  If  they 
“increased,”  and  that  “more  than  ever,”  then 
already  they  had  appeared,  and  had  been  in¬ 
creasing.  And  so  Sallust  adds  this  reason  for 
what  he  said.  “For,”  he  says,  “the  oppressive 
measures  of  the  powerful,  and  the  consequent 
secessions  of  the  plebs  from  the  patricians,  and 
other  civil  dissensions,  had  existed  from  the 
first,  and  affairs  were  administered  with  equity 
and  well-tempered  justice  for  no  longer  a  period 
than  tfhe  short  time  after  the  expulsion  of  the 
kings,  while  the  city  was  occupied  with  the  seri¬ 
ous  Tuscan  war  and  Tarquin’s  vengeance.”  You 
see  how,  even  in  that  brief  period  after  the  ex¬ 
pulsion  of  the  kings,  fear,  he  acknowledges,  was 
the  cause  of  the  interval  of  equity  and  good  or¬ 
der.  They  were  afraid,  in  fact,  of  the  war  which 
Tarquin  waged  against  them,  after  he  had  been 
driven  from  the  throne  and  the  city,  and  had  al¬ 
lied  himself  with  the  Tuscans.  But  observe  what 
he  adds:  “After  that,  the  patricians  treated  the 


GOD  II.  17-18  159 

people  as  their  slaves,  ordering  them  to  be 
scourged  or  beheaded  just  as  the  kings  had  done, 
driving  them  from  their  holdings,  and  harshly 
tyrannizing  over  those  who  had  no  property  to 
lose.  The  people,  overwhelmed  by  these  oppres¬ 
sive  measures,  and  most  of  all  by  exorbitant 
usury,  and  obliged  to  contribute  both  money  and 
personal  service  to  the  constant  wars,  at  length 
took  arms,  and  seceded  to  Mount  i\ventine  and 
Mount  Sacer.  and  thus  obtained  for  themselves 
tribunes  and  protective  laws.  But  it  was  only 
the  second  Punic  war  that  put  an  end  on  both 
sides  to  discord  and  strife.”  You  see  what  kind 
of  men  the  Romans  were,  even  so  early  as  a  few 
years  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings;  and  it  is 
of  these  men  he  says,  that  “equity  and  virtue 
prevailed  among  them  not  more  by  force  of  law 
than  of  nature.” 

Now,  if  these  were  the  days  in  which  the  Ro¬ 
man  republic  shows  fairest  and  best,  what  are 
we  to  say  or  think  of  the  succeeding  age.  when, 
to  use  the  words  of  the  same  historian,  “chang¬ 
ing  little  by  little  from  the  fair  and  virtuous  city 
it  was,  it  became  utterly  wicked  and  dissolute?” 
This  was.  as  he  mentions,  after  the  destruction 
of  Carthage.  Sallust’s  brief  sum  and  sketch  of 
this  period  may  be  read  in  his  own  history,  in 
which  he  shows  how  the  •  profligate  manners 
which  were  propagated  by  prosperity  resulted  at 
last  even  in  civil  wars.  He  says :  “And  from  this 
time  the  primitive  manners,  instead  of  under¬ 
going  an  insensible  alteration  as  hitherto  they 
had  done,  were  swept  away  as  by  a  torrent:  the 
young  men  were  so  depraved  by  luxury  and  ava¬ 
rice  that  it  may  justly  be  said  that  no  father  had 
a  son  who  could  either  preserve  his  own  patri¬ 
mony,  or  keep  his  hands  off  other  men’s.”  Sallust 
adds  a  number  of  particulars  about  the  vices  of 
Sulla,  and  the  debased  condition  of  the  republic 
in  general ;  and  other  writers  make  similar  obser¬ 
vations,  though  in  much  less  striking  language. 

However,  I  suppose  you  now  see,  or  at  least 
any  one  who  gives  his  attention  has  the  means 
of  seeing,  in  what  a  sink  of  iniquity  that  city 
was  plunged  before  the  advent  of  our  heavenly 
King.  For  these  things  happened  not  only  be¬ 
fore  Christ  had  begun  to  teach,  but  before  He 
was  even  born  of  the  Virgin.  If,  then,  they  dare 
not  impute  to  their  gods  the  grievous  evils  of 
those  former  times,  more  tolerable  before  the 
destruction  of  Carthage,  but  intolerable  and 
dreadful  after  it,  although  it  was  the  gods  who 
by  their  malign  craft  instilled  into  the  minds  of 
men  the  conceptions  from  which  such  dreadful 
vices  branched  out  on  all  sides,  why  do  they  im- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


160 

pute  these  present  calamities  to  Christ.  Who 
teaches  life-giving  truth,  and  forbids  us  to  wor¬ 
ship  false  and  deceitful  gods,  and  Who,  abom¬ 
inating  and  condemning  with  His  divine  au¬ 
thority  those  wicked  and  hurtful  lusts  of  men, 
gradually  withdraws  His  own  people  from  a 
world  that  is  corrupted  by  these  vices,  and  is 
falling  into  ruins,  to  make  of  them  an  eternal 
city,  whose  glory  rests  not  on  the  acclamations 
of  vanity,  but  on  the  judgment  of  truth? 

Chap.  19.  Of  the  corruption  which  had  grown 
upon  the  Roman  republic  before  Christ  abol¬ 
ished  the  worship  of  the  gods 
Here,  then,  is  this  Roman  republic,  “which 
has  changed  little  by  little  from  the  fair  and  vir¬ 
tuous  city  it  was,  and  has  become  utterly  wicked 
and  dissolute.”  It  is  not  I  who  am  the  first  to 
say  this,  but  their  own  authors,  from  whom  we 
learned  it  for  a  fee,  and  who  wrote  it  long  be¬ 
fore  the  coming  of  Christ.  You  see  how,  before 
the  coming  of  Christ,  and  after  the  destruction 
of  Carthage,  “the  primitive  manners,  instead  of 
undergoing  insensible  alteration,  as  hitherto  they 
had  done,  were  swept  away  as  by  a  torrent;  and 
how  depraved  by  luxury  and  avarice  the  youth 
were.”  Let  them  now,  on  their  part,  read  to  us 
any  laws  given  by  their  gods  to  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  and  directed  against  luxury  and  avarice. 
And  would  that  they  had  only  been  silent  on  the 
subjects  of  chastity  and  modesty,  and  had  not 
demanded  from  the  people  indecent  and  shame¬ 
ful  practices,  to  which  they  lent  a  pernicious  pat¬ 
ronage  by  their  so-called  divinity.  Let  them  read 
our  commandments  in  the  Prophets,  Gospels, 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  or  Epistles;  let  them  pe¬ 
ruse  the  large  number  of  precepts  against  ava¬ 
rice  and  luxury  which  are  everywhere  read  to 
the  congregations  that  meet  for  this  purpose, 
and  which  strike  the  ear,  not  with  the  uncertain 
sound  of  a  philosophical  discussion,  but  with  the 
thunder  of  God’s  own  oracle  pealing  from  the 
clouds.  And  yet  they  do  not  impute  to  their  gods 
the  luxury  and  avarice,  the  cruel  and  dissolute 
manners,  that  had  rendered  the  republic  utterly 
wicked  and  corrupt,  even  before  the  coming  of 
Christ;  but  whatever  affliction  their  piide  and 
effeminacy  have  exposed  them  to  in  these  latter 
days,  they  furiously  impute  to  our  religion.  If 
the  kings  of  the  earth  and  all  their  subjects,  if 
all  princes  and  judges  of  the  earth,  if  young  men 
and  maidens,  old  and  young,  every  age,  and  both 
sexes;  if  they  whom  the  Baptist  addressed,  the 
publicans  and  the  soldiers,  were  all  together  to 
hearken  to  and  observe  the  precepts  of  the 
Christian  religion  regarding  a  just  and  virtuous 


life,  then  should  the  republic  adorn  the  whole 
earth  with  its  own  felicity,  and  attain  in  life 
everlasting  to  the  pinnacle  of  kingly  glory.  But 
because  this  man  listens,  and  that  man  scoffs, 
and  most  are  enamoured  of  the  blandishments 
of  vice  rather  than  the  wholesome  severity  of 
virtue,  the  people  of  Christ,  whatever  be  their 
condition — whether  they  be  kings,  princes, 
judges,  soldiers,  or  provincials,  rich  or  poor, 
bond  or  free,  male  or  female — are  enjoined  to 
endure  this  earthly  republic,  wicked  and  disso¬ 
lute  as  it  is,  that  so  they  may  by  this  endurance 
win  for  themselves  an  eminent  place  in  that 
most  holy  and  august  assembly  of  angels  and 
republic  of  heaven,  in  which  the  will  of  God  is 
the  law. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  kind  of  happiness  and  life 
truly  delighted  in  by  those  who  inveigh 
against  the  Christian  religion 
But  the  worshippers  and  admirers  of  these 
gods  delight  in  imitating  their  scandalous  in¬ 
iquities,  and  are  nowise  concerned  that  the  re¬ 
public  be  less  depraved  and  licentious.  Only  let 
it  remain  undefeated,  they  say,  only  let  it  flour¬ 
ish  and  abound  in  resources;  let  it  be  glorious 
by  its  victories,  or  still  better,  secure  in  peace; 
and  what  matters  it  to  us?  This  is  our  concern, 
that  every  man  be  able  to  increase  his  wealth  so 
as  to  supply  his  daily  prodigalities,  and  so  that 
the  powerful  may  subject  the  weak  for  their  own 
purposes.  Let  the  poor  court  the  rich  for  a  living, 
and  that  under  their  protection  they  may  enjoy 
a  sluggish  tranquillity;  and  let  the  rich  abuse  the 
poor  as  their  dependants,  to  minister  to  their 
pride.  Let  the  people  applaud  not  those  who  pro¬ 
tect  their  interests,  but  those  who  provide  them 
with  pleasure.  Let  no  severe  duty  be  com¬ 
manded,  no  impurity  forbidden.  Let  kings  esti¬ 
mate  their  prosperity,  not  by  the  righteousness, 
but  by  the  servility  of  their  subjects.  Let  the 
provinces  stand  loyal  to  the  kings,  not  as  moral 
guides,  but  as  lords  of  their  possessions  and  pur¬ 
veyors  of  their  pleasures;  not  with  a  hearty  rev¬ 
erence,  but  a  crooked  and  servile  fear.  Let  the 
laws  take  cognizance  rather  of  the  injury  done 
to  another  man’s  property,  than  of  that  done  to 
one’s  own  person.  If  a  man  be  a  nuisance  to  his 
neighbour,  or  injure  his  property,  family,  or  per¬ 
son,  let  him  be  actionable;  but  in  his  own  affairs 
let  every  one  with  impunity  do  what  he  will  in 
company  with  his  own  family,  and  with  those 
who  willingly  join  him.  Let  there  be  a  plentiful 
supply  of  public  prostitutes  for  every  one  who 
wishes  to  use  them,  but  specially  for  those  who 
are  too  poor  to  keep  one  for  their  private  use. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Let  there  be  erected  houses  of  the  largest  and 
most  ornate  description:  in  these  let  there  be 
provided  the  most  sumptuous  banquets,  where 
every  one  who  pleases  may,  by  day  or  night, 
play,  drink,  vomit,  dissipate.  Let  there  be  every¬ 
where  heard  the  rustling  of  dancers,  the  loud, 
immodest  laughter  of  the  theatre;  let  a  succes¬ 
sion  of  the  most  cruel  and  the  most  voluptuous 
pleasures  maintain  a  perpetual  excitement.  If 
such  happiness  is  distasteful  to  any,  let  him  be 
branded  as  a  public  enemy;  and  if  any  attempt 
to  modify  or  put  an  end  to  it  let  him  be  silenced, 
banished,  put  an  end  to.  Let  these  be  reckoned 
the  true  gods,  who  procure  for  the  people  this 
condition  of  things,  and  preserve  it  when  once 
possessed.  Let  them  be  worshipped  as  they  wish; 
let  them  demand  whatever  games  they  please, 
from  or  with  their  own  worshippers;  only  let 
them  secure  that  such  felicity  be  not  imperilled 
by  foe,  plague,  or  disaster  of  any  kind.  What 
sane  man  would  compare  a  republic  such  as  this, 

I  will  not  say  to  the  Roman  empire,  but  to  the 
palace  of  Sardanapalus,  the  ancient  king  who 
was  so  abandoned  to  pleasures  that  he  caused  it 
to  be  inscribed  on  his  tomb  that,  now  that  he  was 
dead,  he  possessed  only  those  things  which  he 
had  swallowed  and  consumed  by  his  appetites 
while  alive?  If  these  men  had  such  a  king  as  this, 
who,  while  self-indulgent,  should  lay  no  severe 
restraint  on  them,  they  would  more  enthusias¬ 
tically  consecrate  to  him  a  temple  and  a  flamen 
than  the  ancient  Romans  did  to  Romulus. 

Chap.  21.  Cicero’s  opinion  of  the  Roman  repub¬ 
lic 

But  if  our  adversaries  do  not  care  how  foully 
and  disgracefully  the  Roman  republic  be  stained 
by  corrupt  practices,  so  long  only  as  it  holds  to¬ 
gether  and  continues  in  being,  and  if  they  there¬ 
fore  pooh-pooh  the  testimony  of  Sallust  to  its 
“utterly  wicked  and  profligate”  condition,  what 
will  they  make  of  Cicero’s  statement  that  even 
in  his  time  it  had  become  entirely  extinct  and 
that  there  remained  extant  no  Roman  republic 
at  allP'He  introduces  Scipio  (the  Scipio  who  had 
destroyed  Carthage)  discussing  the  republic,  at 
a  time  when  already  there  were  presentiments  of 
its  speedy  ruin  by  that  corruption  which  Sallust 
describes.  In  fact,  at  the  time  when  the  discus¬ 
sion  took  place,  one  of  the  Gracchi,  who,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Sallust,  was  the  first  great  instigator  of 
seditions,  had  already  been  put  to  death.  His 
death,  indeed,  is  mentioned  in  the  same  book. 
Now  Scipio,  at  the  end  of  the  second  book,  says : 
“As  among  the  different  sounds  which  proceed 
from  lyres,  flutes,  and  the  human  voice,  there 


GOD  II.  19-21  161 

must  be  maintained  a  certain  harmony  which  a 
cultivated  ear  cannot  endure  to  hear  disturbed 
or  jarring,  but  which  may  be  elicited  in  full  and 
absolute  concord  by  the  modulation  even  of 
voices  very  unlike  one  another;  so,  where  reason 
is  allowed  to  modulate  the  diverse  elements  of 
the  state,  there  is  obtained  a  perfect  concord 
from  the  upper,  lower,  and  middle  classes  as 
from  various  sounds;  and  what  musicians  call 
harmony  in  singing,  is  concord  in  matters  of 
state,  which  is  the  strictest  bond  and  best  secur¬ 
ity  of  any  republic,  and  which  by  no  ingenuity 
can  be  retained  where  justice  has  become  ex¬ 
tinct.”  Then,  when  he  had  expatiated  somewhat 
more  fully,  and  had  more  copiously  illustrated 
the  benefits  of  its  presence  and  the  ruinous  ef¬ 
fects  of  its  absence  upon  a  state,  Pilus,  one  of 
the  company  present  at  the  discussion,  struck 
in  and  demanded  that  the  question  should  be 
more  thoroughly  sifted,  and  that  the  subject  of 
justice  should  be  freely  discussed  for  the  sake  of 
ascertaining  what  truth  there  was  in  the  maxim 
which  was  then  becoming  daily  more  current, 
that  “the  republic  cannot  be  governed  without 
injustice.”  Scipio  expressed  his  willingness  to 
have  this  maxim  discussed  and  sifted,  and  gave 
it  as  his  opinion  that  it  was  baseless,  and  that 
no  progress  could  be  made  in  discussing  the  re¬ 
public  unless  it  was  established  not  only  that 
this  maxim,  that  “the  republic  cannot  be  gov¬ 
erned  without  injustice,”  was  false,  but  also  that 
the  truth  is  that  it  cannot  be  governed  without 
the  most  absolute  justice.  And  the  discussion  of 
this  question,  being  deferred  till  the  next  day,  is 
carried  on  in  the  third  book  with  great  anima¬ 
tion.  For  Pilus  himself  undertook  to  defend  the 
position  that  the  republic  cannot  be  governed 
without  injustice,  at  the  same  time  being  at  spe¬ 
cial  pains  to  clear  himself  of  any  real  participa¬ 
tion  in  that  opinion.  He  advocated  with  great 
keenness  the  cause  of  injustice  against  justice, 
and  endeavoured  by  plausible  reasons  and  exam¬ 
ples  to  demonstrate  that  the  former  is  beneficial, 
the  latter  useless,  to  the  republic.  Then,  at  the 
request  of  the  company,  Laelius  attempted  to  de¬ 
fend  justice,  and  strained  every  nerve  to  prove 
that  nothing  is  so  hurtful  to  a  state  as  injustice; 
and  that  without  justice  a  republic  can  neither 
be  governed  nor  even  continue  to  exist. 

When  this  question  has  been  handled  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  company,  Scipio  reverts  to 
the  original  thread  of  discourse,  and  repeats  with 
commendation  his  own  brief  definition  of  a  re¬ 
public,  that  it  is  the  weal  of  the  people.  “The 
people”  he  defines  as  being  not  every  assem¬ 
blage  or  mob,  but  an  assemblage  associated  by 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


162 

a  common  acknowledgment  of  law,  and  by  a 
community  of  interests.  Then  he  shows  the  use 
of  definition  in  debate;  and  from  these  defi¬ 
nitions  of  his  own  he  gathers  that  a  republic, 
or  “weal  of  the  people,”  then  exists  only  when 
it  is  well  and  justly  governed,  whether  by  a 
monarch,  or  an  aristocracy,  or  by  the  whole 
people.  But  when  the  monarch  is  unjust,  or, 
as  the  Greeks  say,  a  tyrant;  or  the  aristocrats 
are  unjust,  and  form  a  faction;  or  the  people 
themselves  are  unjust,  and  become,  as  Scipio 
for  want  of  a  better  name  calls  them,  them¬ 
selves  the  tyrant,  then  the  republic  is  not  only 
blemished  (as  had  been  proved  the  day  before), 
but,  by  legitimate  deduction  from  those  defini¬ 
tions,  it  altogether  ceases  to  be.  For  it  could  not 
be  the  people's  weal  when  a  tyrant  factiously 
lorded  it  over  the  state;  neither  would  the  peo¬ 
ple  be  any  longer  a  people  if  it  were  unjust, 
since  it  would  no  longer  answer  the  definition  of 
a  people — “an  assemblage  associated  by  a  com¬ 
mon  acknowledgment  of  law,  and  by  a  commu¬ 
nity  of  interests.” 

When,  therefore,  the  Roman  republic  was 
such  as  Sallust  described  it,  it  was  not  “utterly 
wicked  and  profligate,”  as  he  says,  but  had  al¬ 
together  ceased  to  exist,  if  we  are  to  admit  the 
reasoning  of  that  debate  maintained  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  republic  by  its  best  representatives. 
Tully  himself,  too,  speaking  not  in  the  person  of 
Scipio  or  any  one  else,  but  uttering  his  own  sen¬ 
timents.  uses  the  following  language  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  fifth  book,  after  quoting  a  line 
from  the  poet  Ennius,  in  which  he  said,  “Rome’s 
severe  morality  and  her  citizens  are  her  safe¬ 
guard.”  “This  verse,”  says  Cicero,  “seems  to  me 
to  have  all  the  sententious  truthfulness  of  an 
oracle.  For  neither  would  the  citizens  have 
availed  without  the  morality  of  the  community, 
nor  would  the  morality  of  the  commons  without 
outstanding  men  have  availed  either  to  establish 
or  so  long  to  maintain  in  vigour  so  grand  a  re¬ 
public  with  so  wide  and  just  an  empire.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  before  our  day,  the  hereditary  usages 
formed  our  foremost  men,  and  they  on  their 
part  retained  the  usages  and  institutions  of  their 
fathers.  But  our  age,  receiving  the  republic  as  a 
chef-d’oeuvre  of  another  age  which  has  already 
begun  to  grow  old,  has  not  merely  neglected  to 
restore  the  colours  of  the  original,  but  has  not 
even  been  at  the  pains  to  preserve  so  much  as 
the  general  outline  and  most  outstanding  fea¬ 
tures.  For  what  survives  of  that  primitive  mor¬ 
ality  which  the  poet  called  Rome’s  safeguard? 
It  is  so  obsolete  and  forgotten,  that,  far  from 
practising  it,  one  does  not  even  know  it.  And  of 


the  citizens  what  shall  I  say?  Morality  has  per¬ 
ished  through  poverty  of  great  men ;  a  poverty 
for  which  we  must  not  only  assign  a  reason,  but 
for  the  guilt  of  which  we  must  answer  as  crim¬ 
inals  charged  with  a  capital  crime.  For  it  is 
through  our  vices,  and  not  by  any  mishap,  that 
we  retain  only  the  name  of  a  republic,  and  have 
long  since  lost  the  reality.” 

This  is  the  confession  of  Cicero,  long  indeed 
after  the  death  of  Africanus,  whom  he  intro¬ 
duced  as  an  interlocutor  in  his  work  De  Repub¬ 
lican  but  still  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  Yet, 
if  the  disasters  he  bewails  had  been  lamented 
after  the  Christian  religion  had  been  diffused 
and  had  begun  to  prevail,  is  there  a  man  of  our 
adversaries  who  would  not  have  thought  that 
they  were  to  be  imputed  to  the  Christians? 
Why,  then,  did  their  gods  not  take  steps  then  to 
prevent  the  decay  and  extinction  of  that  repub¬ 
lic,  over  the  loss  of  which  Cicero,  long  before 
Christ  had  come  in  the  flesh,  sings  so  lugubrious 
a  dirge?  Its  admirers  have  need  to  inquire 
whether,  even  in  the  days  of  primitive  men  and 
morals,  true  justice  flourished  in  it;  or  was  it 
not  perhaps  even  then,  to  use  the  casual  expres¬ 
sion  of  Cicero,  rather  a  coloured  painting  than 
the  living  reality?  But,  if  God  will,  we  shall 
consider  this  elsewhere.  For  I  mean  in  its  own 
place  to  show  that — according  to  the  definitions 
in  which  Cicero  himself,  using  Scipio  as  his 
mouthpiece,  briefly  propounded  what  a  republic 
is.  and  what  a  people  is,  and  according  to  many 
testimonies,  both  of  his  own  lips  and  of  those 
who  took  part  in  that  same  debate — Rome  never 
was  a  republic,  because  true  justice  had  never  a 
place  in  it.  But  accepting  the  more  feasible  defi¬ 
nitions  of  a  republic,  I  grant  there  was  a  repub¬ 
lic  of  a  certain  kind,  and  certainly  much  better 
administered  by  the  more  ancient  Romans  than 
by  their  modern  representatives.  But  the  fact  is. 
true  justice  has  no  existence  save  in  that  repub¬ 
lic  whose  founder  and  ruler  is  Christ,  if  at  least 
any  choose  to  call  this  a  republic ;  and  indeed  we 
cannot  deny  that  it  is  the  people’s  weal.  But  if 
perchance  this  name,  which  has  become  familiar 
in  other  connections,  be  considered  alien  to  our 
common  parlance,  we  may  at  all  events  say  that 
in  this  city  is  true  justice;  the  city  of  which 
Holy  Scripture  says,  “Glorious  things  are  said  of 
thee,  0  city  of  God.” 

Chap.  22.  That  the  Roman  gods  never  took  any 

steps  to  prevent  the  republic  from  being 

ruined  by  immorality 

But  what  is  relevant  to  the  present  question 
is  this,  that,  however  admirable  our  adversaries 


THE  CITY  OF 

say  the  republic  was  or  is,  it  is  certain  that  by 
the  testimony  of  their  own  most  learned  writers 
it  had  become,  long  before  the  coming  of  Christ, 
utterly  wicked  and  dissolute,  and  indeed  had  no 
existence,  but  had  been  destroyed  by  profligacy. 
To  prevent  this,  surely  these  guardian  gods 
ought  to  have  given  precepts  of  morals  and  a 
rule  of  life  to  the  people  by  whom  they  were 
worshipped  in  so  many  temples,  with  so  great  a 
variety  of  priests  and  sacrifices,  with  such  num¬ 
berless  and  diverse  rites,  so  many  festal  solem¬ 
nities,  so  many  celebrations  of  magnificent 
games.  But  in  all  this  the  demons  only  looked 
after  their  own  interest,  and  cared  not  at  all  how 
their  worshippers  lived,  or  rather  were  at  pains 
to  induce  them  to  lead  an  abandoned  life,  so 
long  as  they  paid  these  tributes  to  their  honour, 
and  regarded  them  with  fear.  If  any  one  denies 
this,  let  him  produce,  let  him  point  to,  let  him 
read  the  laws  which  the  gods  had  given  against 
sedition,  and  which  the  Gracchi  transgressed 
when  they  threw  everything  into  confusion;  or 
those  Marius,  and  Cinna,  and  Carbo  broke  when 
they  involved  their  country  in  civil  wars,  most 
iniquitous  and  unjustifiable  in  their  causes, 
cruelly  conducted,  and  yet  more  cruelly  ter¬ 
minated;  or  those  which  Sulla  scorned,  whose 
life,  character,  and  deeds,  as  described  by  Sal¬ 
lust  and  other  historians’,  are  the  abhorrence  of 
all  mankind.  Who  will  deny  that  at  that  time 
the  republic  had  become  extinct? 

Possibly  they  will  be  bold  enough  to  suggest 
in  defence  of  the  gods,  that  they  abandoned  the 
city  on  account  of  the  profligacy  of  the  citizens, 
according  to  the  lines  of  Virgil : 

Gone  from  each  jane,  each  sacred  shrine, 

Are  those  who  made  this  realm  divine} 

But,  firstly,  if  it  be  so,  then  they  cannot  com¬ 
plain  against  the  Christian  religion,  as  if  it  were 
that  which  gave  offence  to  the  gods  and  caused 
them  to  abandon  Rome,  since  the  Roman  im¬ 
morality  had  long  ago  driven  from  the  altars  of 
the  city  a  cloud  of  little  gods,  like  as  many  flies. 
And  yet  where  was  this  host  of  divinities,  when, 
long  before  the  corruption  of  the  primitive  mor¬ 
ality,  Rome  was  taken  and  burnt  by  the  Gauls? 
Perhaps  they  were  present,  but  asleep?  For  at 
that  time  the  whole  city  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  Cap- 
itoline  Hill ;  and  this  too  would  have  been  taken, 
had  not  the  watchful  geese  aroused  the  sleeping 
gods!  And  this  gave  occasion  to  the  festival  of 
the  goose,  in  which  Rome  sank  nearly  to  the  su¬ 
perstition  of  the  Egyptians,  who  worship  beasts 

1AZneid,  bk.  ii.  351-2. 


GOD  II.  22-23  163 

and  birds.  But  of  these  adventitious  evils  which 
are  inflicted  by  hostile  armies  or  by  some  dis¬ 
aster,  and  which  attach  rather  to  the  body  than 
the  soul,  I  am  not  meanwhile  disputing.  At  pres¬ 
ent  I  speak  of  the  decay  of  morality,  which  at 
first  almost  imperceptibly  lost  its  brilliant  hue, 
but  afterwards  was  wholly  obliterated,  was 
swept  away  as  by  a  torrent,  and  involved  the  re¬ 
public  in  such  disastrous  ruin,  that  though  the 
houses  and  walls  remained  standing  the  leading 
writers  do  not  scruple  to  say  that  the  republic 
was  destroyed.  Now,  the  departure  of  the  gods 
“from  each  fane,  each  sacred  shrine,”  and  their 
abandonment  of  the  city  to  destruction,  was  an 
act  of  justice,  if  their  laws  inculcating  justice 
and  a  moral  life  had  been  held  in  contempt  by 
that  city.  But  what  kind  of  gods  were  these, 
pray,  who  declined  to  live  with  a  people  who 
worshipped  them,  and  whose  corrupt  life  they 
had  done  nothing  to  reform? 

Chap.  23.  That  the  vicissitudes  of  this  life  are 
dependent  not  on  the  favour  or  hostility  of 
demons ,  but  on  the  will  of  the  true  God 
But,  further,  is  it  not  obvious  that  the  gods 
have  abetted  the  fulfilment  of  men’s  desires,  in¬ 
stead  of  authoritatively  bridling  them?  For 
Marius,  a  low-born  and  self-made  man,  who 
ruthlessly  provoked  and  conducted  civil  wars, 
was  so  effectually  aided  by  them  that  he  was 
seven  times  consul,  and  died  full  of  years  in  his 
seventh  consulship,  escaping  the  hands  of  Sulla, 
who  immediately  afterwards  came  into  power. 
Why,  then,  did  they  not  also  aid  him,  so  as  to  re¬ 
strain  him  from  so  many  enormities?  For  if  it  is 
said  that  the  gods  had  no  hand  in  his  success, 
this  is  no  trivial  admission  that  a  man  can  attain 
the  dearly  coveted  felicity  of  this  life  even 
though  his  own  gods  be  not  propitious ;  that  men 
can  be  loaded  with  the  gifts  of  fortune  as  Marius 
was,  can  enjoy  health,  power,  wealth,  honours, 
dignity,  length  of  days,  though  the  gods  be  hos¬ 
tile  to  him ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  men  can 
be  tormented  as  Regulus  was,  with  captivity, 
bondage,  destitution,  watchings,  pain,  and  cruel 
death,  though  the  gods  be  his  friends.  To  con¬ 
cede  this  is  to  make  a  compendious  confession 
that  the  gods  are  useless,  and  their  worship 
superfluous.  If  the  gods  have  taught  the  people 
rather  what  goes  clean  counter  to  the  virtues  of 
the  soul,  and  that  integrity  of  life  which  meets  a 
reward  after  death ;  if  even  in  respect  of  tempor¬ 
al  and  transitory  blessings  they  neither  hurt  those 
whom  they  hate  nor  profit  whom  they  love,  why 
are  they  worshipped,  why  are  they  invoked  with 
such  eager  homage?  Why  do  men  murmur  in 


1 64  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


difficult  and  sad  emergencies,  as  if  the  gods  had 
retired  in  anger?  and  why,  on  their  account,  is 
the  Christian  religion  injured  by  the  most  un¬ 
worthy  calumnies?  If  in  temporal  matters  they 
have  power  either  for  good  or  for  evil,  why  did 
they  stand  by  Marius,  the  worst  of  Rome’s  citi¬ 
zens,  and  abandon  Regulus,  the  best?  Does  this 
not  prove  themselves  to  be  most  unjust  and 
wicked?  And  even  if  it  be  supposed  that  for  this 
very  reason  they  are  the  rather  to  be  feared  and 
worshipped,  this  is  a  mistake;  for  we  do  not 
read  that  Regulus  worshipped  them  less  assidu¬ 
ously  than  Marius.  Neither  is  it  apparent  that  a 
wicked  life  is  to  be  chosen,  on  the  ground  that 
the  gods  are  supposed  to  have  favoured  Mari¬ 
us  more  than  Regulus.  For  Metellus,  the  most 
highly  esteemed  of  all  the  Romans,  who  had  five 
sons  in  the  consulship,  was  prosperous  even  in 
this  life;  and  Catiline,  the  worst  of  men.  reduced 
to  poverty  and  defeated  in  the  war  his  own  guilt 
had  aroused,  lived  and  perished  miserably.  Real 
and  secure  felicity  is  the  peculiar  possession  of 
those  who  worship  that  God  by  whom  alone  it 
can  be  conferred. 

It  is  thus  apparent  that,  when  the  republic 
was  being  destroyed  by  profligate  manners,  its 
gods  did  nothing  to  hinder  its  destruction  by  the 
direction  or  correction  of  its  manners,  but  rather 
accelerated  its  destruction  by  increasing  the  de¬ 
moralization  and  corruption  that  already  ex¬ 
isted.  They  need  not  pretend  that  their  goodness 
was  shocked  by  the  iniquity  of  the  city,  and  that 
they  withdrew  in  anger.  For  they  were  there, 
sure  enough;  they  are  detected,  convicted:  they 
were  equally  unable  to  break  silence  so  as  to 
guide  others,  and  to  keep  silence  so  as  to  conceal 
themselves.  I  do  not  dwell  on  the  fact  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Minturnae  took  pity  on  Marius, 
and  commended  him  to  the  goddess  Marica  in 
her  grove,  that  she  might  give  him  success  in  all 
things,  and  that  from  the  abyss  of  despair  in 
which  he  then  lay  he  forthwith  returned  unhurt 
to  Rome,  and  entered  the  city  the  ruthless  lead¬ 
er  of  a  ruthless  army;  and  they  who  wish  to 
know  how  bloody  was  his  victory,  how  unlike  a 
citizen  and  how  much  more  relentlessly  than 
any  foreign  foe  he  acted,  let  them  read  the  his¬ 
tories.  But  this,  as  I  said,  I  do  not  dwell  upon; 
nor  do  I  attribute  the  bloody  bliss  of  Marius  to 
I  know  not  what  Minturnian  goddess,  but  rather 
to  the  secret  providence  of  God,  that  the  mouths 
of  our  adversaries  might  be  shut,  and  that  they 
who  are  not  led  by  passion,  but  by  prudent  con¬ 
sideration  of  events,  might  be  delivered  from 
error.  And  even  if  the  demons  have  any  power 
in  these  matters,  they  have  only  that  power 


which  the  secret  decree  of  the  Almighty  allots 
to  them,  in  order  that  we  may  not  set  too  great 
store  by  earthly  prosperity,  seeing  it  is  often¬ 
times  vouchsafed  even  to  wicked  men  like  Mari¬ 
us;  and  that  we  may  not,  on  the  other  hand,  re¬ 
gard  it  as  an  evil,  since  we  see  that  many  good 
and  pious  worshippers  of  the  one  true  God  are. 
in  spite  of  the  demons,  pre-eminently  success¬ 
ful;  and.  finally,  that  we  may  not  suppose  that 
these  unclean  spirits  are  either  to  be  propitiated 
or  feared  for  the  sake  of  earthly  blessings  or 
calamities:  for  as  wicked  men  on  earth  cannot 
do  all  they  would,  so  neither  can  these  demons, 
but  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  permitted  by  the 
decree  of  Him  whose  judgments  are  fully  com¬ 
prehensible,  justly  reprehensible  by  none. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  deeds  of  Sulla ,  in  which  the 
demons  boasted  that  he  had  their  help 
It  is  certain  that  Sulla — whose  rule  was  so 
cruel  that,  in  comparison  with  it,  the  preceding 
state  of  things  which  he  came  to  avenge  was  re¬ 
gretted — when  first  he  advanced  towards  Rome 
to  give  battle  to  Marius,  found  the  auspices  so 
favourable  when  he  sacrificed  that,  according  to 
Livy’s  account,  the  augur  Postumius  expressed 
his  willingness  to  lose  his  head  if  Sulla  did  not, 
with  the  help  of  the  gods,  accomplish  what  he 
designed.  The  gods,  you  see,  had  not  departed 
from  “every  fane  and  sacred  shrine,!’  since  they 
were  still  predicting  the  issue  of  these  affairs, 
and  yet  were  taking  no  steps  to  correct  Sulla 
himself.  Their  presages  promised  him  great 
prosperity,  but  no  threatenings  of  theirs  sub¬ 
dued  his  evil  passions.  And  then,  when  he  was  in 
Asia  conducting  the  war  against  Mithridates,  a 
message  from  Jupiter  was  delivered  to  him  by 
Lucius  Titius,  to  the  effect  that  he  would  con¬ 
quer  Mithridates;  and  so  it  came  to  pass.  And 
afterwards,  when  he  was  meditating  a  return  to 
Rome  for  the  purpose  of  avenging  in  the  blood 
of  the  citizens  injuries  done  to  himself  and  his 
friends,  a  second  message  from  Jupiter  was  de¬ 
livered  to  him  by  a  soldier  of  the  sixth  legion,  to 
the  effect  that  it  was  he  who  had  predicted  the 
victory  over  Mithridates,  and  that  now  he  prom¬ 
ised  to  give  him  power  to  recover  the  republic 
from  his  enemies,  though  with  great  bloodshed. 
Sulla  at  once  inquired  of  the  soldier  what  form 
had  appeared  to  him ;  and,  on  his  reply,  recog¬ 
nized  that  it  was  the  same  as  Jupiter  had  for¬ 
merly  employed  to  convey  to  him  the  assurance 
regarding  the  victory  over  Mithridates.  How, 
then,  can  the  gods  be  justified  in  this  matter  for 
the  care  they  took  to  predict  these  shadowy 
successes,  and  for  their  negligence  in  correcting 


THE  CITY  OF 

Sulla  and  restraining  him  from  stirring  up  a  civil 
war  so  lamentable  and  atrocious  that  it  not 
merely  disfigured,  but  extinguished,  the  repub¬ 
lic?  The  truth  is,  as  I  have  often  said,  and  as 
Scripture  informs  us,  and  as  the  facts  them¬ 
selves  sufficiently  indicate,  the  demons  are  found 
to  look  after  their  own  ends  only,  that  they  may 
be  regarded  and  worshipped  as  gods,  and  that 
men  may  be  induced  to  offer  to  them  a  worship 
which  associates  them  with  their  crimes,  and  in¬ 
volves  them  in  one  common  wickedness  and 
judgment  of  God. 

Afterwards,  when  Sulla  had  come  to  Taren- 
tum  and  had  sacrificed  there,  he  saw  on  the  head 
of  the  victim’s  liver  the  likeness  of  a  golden 
crown.  Thereupon  the  same  soothsayer  Postu- 
mius  interpreted  this  to  signify  a  signal  victory 
and  ordered  that  he  only  should  eat  of  the  en¬ 
trails.  A  little  afterwards,  the  slave  of  a  certain 
Lucius  Pontius  cried  out,  “I  am  Bellona’s  mes¬ 
senger;  the  victory  is  yours,  Sulla!”  Then  he 
added  that  the  Capitol  should  be  burned.  As 
soon  as  he  had  uttered  this  prediction  he  left  the 
camp,  but  returned  the  following  day  more  ex¬ 
cited  than  ever,  and  shouted,  “The  Capitol  is 
fired!”  And  fired  indeed  it  was.  This  it  was  easy 
for  a  demon  both  to  foresee  and  quickly  to  an¬ 
nounce.  But  observe,  as  relevant  to  our  subject, 
what  kind  of  gods  they  are  under  whom  these 
men  desire  to  live,  who  blaspheme  the  Saviour 
that  delivers  the  wills  of  the  faithful  from  the 
dominion  of  devils.  The  man  cried  out  in  pro¬ 
phetic  rapture,  “The  victory  is  yours,  Sulla!” 
And  to  certify  that  he  spoke  by  a  divine  spirit, 
he  predicted  also  an  event  which  was  shortly  to 
happen,  and  which  indeed  did  fall  out,  in  a  place 
from  which  he  in  whom  this  spirit  was  speaking 
was  far  distant.  But  he  never  cried,  “Forbear 
thy  villanies,  Sulla!” — the  villanies  which  were 
committed  at  Rome  by  that  victor  to  whom  a 
golden  crown  on  the  calf’s  liver  had  been  shown 
as  the  divine  evidence  of  his  victory.  If  such 
signs  as  this  were  customarily  sent  by  just  gods, 
and  not  by  wicked  demons,  then  certainly  the 
entrails  he  consulted  should  rather  have  given 
Sulla  intimation  of  the  cruel  disasters  that  were 
to  befall  the  city  and  himself.  For  that  victory 
was  not  so  conducive  to  his  exaltation  to  power 
as  it  was  fatal  to  his  ambition;  for  by  it  he  be¬ 
came  so  insatiable  in  his  desires,  and  was  ren¬ 
dered  so  arrogant  and  reckless  by  prosperity, 
that  he  may  be  said  rather  to  have  inflicted  a 
moral  destruction  on  himself  than  corporal  de¬ 
struction  on  his  enemies.  But  these  truly  woe¬ 
ful  and  deplorable  calamities  the  gods  gave  him 
no  previous  hint  of,  neither  by  entrails,  augury, 


GOD  II.  24-25  165 

dream,  nor  prediction.  For  they  feared  his 
amendment  more  than  his  defeat.  Yea,  they 
took  good  care  that  this  glorious  conqueror  of 
his  own  fellow-citizens  should  be  conquered  and 
led  captive  by  his  own  infamous  vices,  and 
should  thus  be  the  more  submissive  slave  of  the 
demons  themselves. 

Chap.  25.  How  powerfully  the  evil  spirits  incite 
men  to  wicked  actions ,  by  giving  them  the 
quasi-divine  authority  of  their  example 
Now,  who  does  not  hereby  comprehend — un¬ 
less  he  has  preferred  to  imitate  such  gods  rather 
than  by  divine  grace  to  withdraw  himself  from 
their  fellowship — who  does  not  see  how  eagerly 
these  evil  spirits  strive  by  their  example  to  lend, 
as  it  were,  divine  authority  to  crime?  Is  not  this 
proved  by  the  fact  that  they  were  seen  in  a  wide 
plain  in  Campania  rehearsing  among  themselves 
the  battle  which  shortly  after  took  place  there 
with  great  bloodshed  between  the  armies  of 
Rome?  For  at  first  there  were  heard  loud  crash¬ 
ing  noises,  and  afterwards  many  reported  that 
they  had  seen  for  some  days  together  two  armies 
engaged.  And  when  this  battle  ceased,  they 
found  the  ground  all  indented  with  just  such 
footprints  of  men  and  horses  as  a  great  conflict 
would  leave.  If,  then,  the  deities  were  veritably 
fighting  with  one  another,  the  civil  wars  of  men 
are  sufficiently  justified;  yet,  by  the  way,  let  it 
be  observed  that  such  pugnacious  gods  must  be 
very  wicked  or  very  wretched.  If,  however,  it 
was  but  a  sham-fight,  what  did  they  intend  by 
this,  but  that  the  civil  wars  of  the  Romans 
should  seem  no  wickedness,  but  an  imitation  of 
the  gods?  For  already  the  civil  wars  had  begun; 
and  before  this,  some  lamentable  battles  and  ex¬ 
ecrable  massacres  had  occurred.  Already  many 
had  been  moved  by  the  story  of  the  soldier,  who, 
on  stripping  the  spoils  of  his  slain  foe,  recog¬ 
nized  in  the  stripped  corpse  his  own  brother, 
and,  with  deep  curses  on  civil  wars,  slew  himself 
there  and  then  on  his  brother’s  body.  To  dis¬ 
guise  the  bitterness  of  such  tragedies,  and  kin¬ 
dle  increasing  ardour  in  this  monstrous  warfare, 
these  malign  demons,  who  were  reputed  and 
worshipped  as  gods,  fell  upon  this  plan  of  reveal¬ 
ing  themselves  in  a  state  of  civil  war,  that  no 
compunction  for  fellow-citizens  might  cause  the 
Romans  to  shrink  from  such  battles,  but  that 
the  human  criminality  might  be  justified  by  the 
divine  example.  By  a  like  craft,  too,  did  these 
evil  spirits  command  that  scenic  entertainments, 
of  which  I  have  already  spoken,  should  be  insti¬ 
tuted  and  dedicated  to  them.  And  in  these  en¬ 
tertainments  the  poetical  compositions  and  ac- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


1 66 

tions  of  the  drama  ascribed  such  iniquities  to 
the  gods  that  every  one  might  safely  imitate 
them,  whether  he  believed  the  gods  had  actually 
done  such  things,  or,  not  believing  this,  yet  per¬ 
ceived  that  they  most  eagerly  desired  to  be  rep¬ 
resented  as  having  done  them.  And  that  no  one 
might  suppose,  that  in  representing  the  gods  as 
fighting  with  one  another,  the  poets  had  slan¬ 
dered  them,  and  imputed  to  them  unworthy  ac¬ 
tions,  the  gods  themselves,  to  complete  the  de¬ 
ception,  confirmed  the  compositions  of  the 
poets  by  exhibiting  their  own  battles  to  the  eyes 
of  men,  not  only  through  actions  in  the  theatres, 
but  in  their  own  persons  on  the  actual  field. 

We  have  been  forced  to  bring  forward  these 
facts,  because  their  authors  have  not  scrupled 
to  say  and  to  write  that  the  Roman  republic  had 
already  been  ruined  by  the  depraved  moral  hab¬ 
its  of  the  citizens,  and  had  ceased  to  exist  be¬ 
fore  the  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now 
this  ruin  they  do  not  impute  to  their  own  gods, 
though  they  impute  to  our  Christ  the  evils  of 
this  life,  which  cannot  ruin  good  men,  be  they 
alive  or  dead.  And  this  they  do,  though  our 
Christ  has  issued  so  many  precepts  inculcating 
virtue  and  restraining  vice;  while  their  own 
gods  have  done  nothing  whatever  to  preserve 
that  republic  that  served  them,  and  to  restrain  it 
from  ruin  by  such  precepts,  but  have  rather 
hastened  its  destruction,  by  corrupting  its  mo¬ 
rality  through  their  pestilent  example.  No  one, 
I  fancy,  will  now  be  bold  enough  to  say  that  the 
republic  was  then  ruined  because  of  the  depar¬ 
ture  of  the  gods  “from  each  fane,  each  sacred 
shrine,”  as  if  they  were  the  friends  of  virtue 
and  were  offended  by  the  vices  of  men.  No, 
there  are  too  many  presages  from  entrails,  au¬ 
guries,  soothsayings,  whereby  they  boastingly 
proclaimed  themselves  prescient  of  future 
events  and  controllers  of  the  fortune  of  war — 
all  which  prove  them  to  have  been  present.  And 
had  they  been  indeed  absent,  the  Romans  would 
never  in  these  civil  wars  have  been  so  far  trans¬ 
ported  by  their  own  passions  as  they  were  by  the 
instigations  of  these  gods. 

Chap.  26.  That  the  demons  gave  in  secret  cer¬ 
tain  obscure  instructions  in  morals ,  while  in 
public  their  own  solemnities  inculcated  all 
wickedness 

Seeing  that  this  is  so — seeing  that  the  filthy 
and  cruel  deeds,  the  disgraceful  and  criminal 
actions  of  the  gods,  whether  real  or  feigned, 
were  at  their  own  request  published,  and  wrere 
consecrated,  and  dedicated  in  their  honour  as 
sacred  and  stated  solemnities;  seeing  they 


vowed  vengeance  on  those  who  refused  to  ex¬ 
hibit  them  to  the  eyes  of  all,  that  they  might 
be  proposed  as  deeds  worthy  of  imitation,  why 
is  it  that  these  same  demons,  who,  by  taking 
pleasure  in  such  obscenities,  acknowledge  them¬ 
selves  to  be  unclean  spirits,  and  by  delighting  in 
their  own  villanies  and  iniquities,  real  or  imag¬ 
inary,  and  by  requesting  from  the  immodest, 
and  extorting  from  the  modest,  the  celebration 
of  these  licentious  acts,  proclaim  themselves  in¬ 
stigators  to  a  criminal  and  lewd  life — why,  I 
ask,  are  they  represented  as  giving  some  good 
moral  precepts  to  a  few  of  their  own  elect,  ini¬ 
tiated  in  the  secrecy  of  their  shrines?  If  it  be 
so,  this  very  thing  only  serves  further  to  demon¬ 
strate  the  malicious  craft  of  these  pestilent 
spirits.  For  so  great  is  the  influence  of  probity 
and  chastity  that  all  men,  or  almost  all  men,  are 
moved  by  the  praise  of  these  virtues;  nor  is  any 
man  so  depraved  by  vice,  but  he  hath  some  feel¬ 
ing  of  honour  left  in  him.  So  that,  unless  the 
devil  sometimes  transformed  himself,  as  Scrip¬ 
ture  says,  into  an  angel  of  light,1  he  could  not 
compass  his  deceitful  purpose.  Accordingly,  in 
public,  a  bold  impurity  fills  the  ear  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  with  noisy  clamour;  in  private,  a  feigned 
chastity  speaks  in  scarce  audible  whispers  to  a 
few:  an  open  stage  is  provided  for  shameful 
things,  but  on  the  praiseworthy  the  curtain  falls : 
grace  hides,  disgrace  flaunts:  a  wicked  deed 
draws  an  overflowing  house,  a  virtuous  speech 
finds  scarce  a  hearer,  as  though  purity  were  to 
be  blushed  at,  impurity  boasted  of.  Where  else 
can  such  confusion  reign,  but  in  devils’  temples? 
Where,  but  in  the  haunts  of  deceit?  For  the  se¬ 
cret  precepts  are  given  as  a  sop  to  the  virtuous, 
who  are  few  in  number ;  the  wicked  examples  are 
exhibited  to  encourage  the  vicious,  who  are 
countless. 

Where  and  when  those  initiated  in  the  mys¬ 
teries  of  Coelestis  received  any  good  instruc¬ 
tions,  we  know  not.  What  we  do  know  is,  that 
before  her  shrine,  in  which  her  image  is  set,  and 
amidst  a  vast  crowd  gathering  from  all  quarters 
and  standing  closely  packed  together,  we  were 
intensely  interested  spectators  of  the  games 
which  were  going  on,  and  saw,  as  we  pleased  to 
turn  the  eye,  on  this  side  a  grand  display  of 
harlots,  on  the  other  the  virgin  goddess;  we  saw 
this  virgin  worshipped  with  prayer  and  with 
obscene  rites.  There  we  saw  no  shame-faced 
mimes,  no  actress  overburdened  with  modesty; 
all  that  the  obscene  rites  demanded  was  fully 
complied  with.  We  were  plainly  shown  what  was 
pleasing  to  the  virgin  deity,  and  the  matron  who 

1II  Cor.  11. 14. 


THE  CITY  OF 

witnessed  the  spectacle  returned  home  from  the 
temple  a  wiser  woman.  Some,  indeed,  of  the 
more  prudent  women  turned  their  faces  from 
the  immodest  movements  of  the  players,  and 
learned  the  art  of  wickedness  by  a  furtive  re¬ 
gard.  For  they  were  restrained,  by  the  modest 
demeanour  due  to  men,  from  looking  boldly  at 
the  immodest  gestures;  but  much  more  were 
they  restrained  from  condemning  with  chaste 
heart  the  sacred  rites  of  her  whom  they  adored. 
And  yet  this  licentiousness — which,  if  practised 
in  one’s  home,  could  only  be  done  there  in  se¬ 
cret — was  practised  as  a  public  lesson  in  the 
temple;  and  if  any  modesty  remained  in  men,  it 
was  occupied  in  marvelling  that  wickedness 
which  men  could  not  unrestrainedly  commit 
should  be  part  of  the  religious  teaching  of  the 
gods,  and  that  to  omit  its  exhibition  should  incur 
the  anger  of  the  gods.  What  spirit  can  that  be, 
which  by  a  hidden  inspiration  stirs  men’s  cor¬ 
ruption.  and  goads  them  to  adultery,  and  feeds 
on  the  full-fledged  iniquity,  unless  it  be  the  same 
that  finds  pleasure  in  such  religious  ceremonies, 
sets  in  the  temples  images  of  devils,  and  loves  to 
see  in  play  the  images  of  vices;  that  whispers  in 
secret  some  righteous  sayings  to  deceive  the  few 
who  are  good,  and  scatters  in  public  invitations 
to  profligacy,  to  gain  possession  of  the  millions 
who  are  wicked? 

Chap.  27.  That  the  obscenities  of  those  plays 
which  the  Romans  consecrated  in  order  to 
propitiate  their  gods ,  contributed  largely  to 
the  overthrow  of  public  order. 

Cicero,  a  weighty  man,  and  a  philosopher  in 
his  way,  when  about  to  be  made  edile,  wished 
the  citizens  to  understand  that,  among  the  other 
duties  of  his  magistracy,  he  must  propitiate 
Flora  by  the  celebration  of  games.  And  these 
games  are  reckoned  devout  in  proportion  to 
their  lewdness.  In  another  place,  and  when  he 
was  now  consul,  and  the  state  in  great  peril,  he 
says  that  games  had  been  celebrated  for  ten 
days  together,  and  that  nothing  had  been  omit¬ 
ted  which  could  pacify  the  gods:  as  if  it  had  not 
been  more  satisfactory  to  irritate  the  gods  by 
temperance  than  to  pacify  them  by  debauchery, 
and  to  provoke  their  hate  by  honest  living  than 
soothe  it  by  such  unseemly  grossness.  For  no 
matter  how  cruel  was  the  ferocity  of  those  men 
who  were  threatening  the  state,  and  on  whose 
account  the  gods  were  being  propitiated,  it  could 
not  have  been  more  hurtful  than  the  alliance  of 
gods  who  were  won  with  the  foulest  vices.  To 
avert  the  danger  which  threatened  men’s  bodies, 
the  gods  were  conciliated  in  a  fashion  that  drove 


GOD  II.  26-28  167 

virtue  from  their  spirits;  and  the  gods  did  not 
enrol  themselves  as  defenders  of  the  battle¬ 
ments  against  the  besiegers,  until  they  had  first 
stormed  and  sacked  the  morality  of  the  citizens. 
This  propitiation  of  such  divinities — a  propitia¬ 
tion  so  wanton,  so  impure,  so  immodest,  so 
wicked,  so  filthy,  whose  actors  the  innate  and 
praiseworthy  virtue  of  the  Romans  disabled 
from  civic  honours,  erased  from  their  tribe,  rec¬ 
ognized  as  polluted  and  made  infamous — this 
propitiation,  I  say,  so  foul,  so  detestable,  and 
alien  from  every  religious  feeling,  these  fabu¬ 
lous  and  ensnaring  accounts  of  the  criminal  ac¬ 
tions  of  the  gods,  these  scandalous  actions  which 
they  either  shamefully  and  wickedly  commit¬ 
ted,  or  more  shamefully  and  wickedly  feigned, 
all  this  the  whole  city  learned  in  public  both  by 
the  words  and  gestures  of  the  actors.  They  saw 
that  the  gods  delighted  in  the  commission  of 
these  things  and  therefore  believed  that  they 
wished  them  not  only  to  be  exhibited  to  them, 
but  to  be  imitated  by  themselves.  But  as  for 
that  good  and  honest  instruction  which  they 
speak  of,  it  was  given  in  such  secrecy,  and  to  so 
few  (if  indeed  given  at  all),  that  they  seemed 
rather  to  fear  it  might  be  divulged,  than  that  it 
might  not  be  practised. 

Chap.  28.  That  the  Christian  religion  is  health¬ 
giving 

They,  then,  are  but  abandoned  and  ungrateful 
wretches,  in  deep  and  fast  bondage  to  that  ma¬ 
lign  spirit,  who  complain  and  murmur  that  men 
are  rescued  by  the  name  of  Christ  from  the  hell¬ 
ish  thraldom  of  these  unclean  spirits,  and  from 
a  participation  in  their  punishment,  and  are 
brought  out  of  the  night  of  pestilential  ungodli¬ 
ness  into  the  light  of  most  healthful  piety.  Only 
such  men  could  murmur  that  the  masses  flock 
to  the  churches  and  their  chaste  acts  of  worship, 
where  a  seemly  separation  of  the  sexes  is  ob¬ 
served;  where  they  learn  how  they  may  so  spend 
this  earthly  life,  as  to  merit  a  blessed  eternity 
hereafter;  where  Holy  Scripture  and  instruction 
in  righteousness  are  proclaimed  from  a  raised 
platform  in  presence  of  all,  that  both  they  who 
do  the  word  may  hear  to  their  salvation  and 
they  who  do  it  not  may  hear  to  judgment.  And 
though  some  enter  who  scoff  at  such  precepts, 
all  their  petulance  is  either  quenched  by  a  sud¬ 
den  change,  or  is  restrained  through  fear  or 
shame.  For  no  filthy  and  wicked  action  is  there 
set  forth  to  be  gazed  at  or  to  be  imitated;  but 
either  the  precepts  of  the  true  God  are  recom¬ 
mended,  His  miracles  narrated,  His  gifts  praised, 
or  His  benefits  implored. 


i68 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  29.  An  exhortation  to  the  Romans  to  re¬ 
nounce  paganism 

This,  rather,  is  the  religion  worthy  of  your 
desires,  0  admirable  Roman  race — the  progeny 
of  your  Scaevolas  and  Scipios,  of  Regulus,  and 
of  Fabricius.  This  rather  covet,  this  distinguish 
from  that  foul  vanity  and  crafty  malice  of  the 
devils.  If  there  is  in  your  nature  any  eminent 
virtue,  only  by  true  piety  is  it  purged  and  per¬ 
fected,  while  by  impiety  it  is  wrecked  and  pun¬ 
ished.  Choose  now  what  you  will  pursue,  that 
your  praise  may  be  not  in  yourself,  but  in  the 
true  God,  in  Whom  is  no  error.  For  of  popular 
glory  you  have  had  your  share;  but  by  the  se¬ 
cret  providence  of  God,  the  true  religion  was 
not  offered  to  your  choice.  Awake,  it  is  now  day; 
as  you  have  already  awaked  in  the  persons  of 
some  in  whose  perfect  virtue  and  sufferings  for 
the  true  faith  we  glory:  for  they,  contending  on 
all  sides  with  hostile  powers,  and  conquering 
them  all  by  bravely  dying,  have  purchased  for 
us  this  country  of  ours  with  their  blood;  to 
which  country  we  invite  you,  and  exhort  youJ;o 
add  yourselves  to  the  number  of  the  citizens  of 
this  city,  which  also  has  a  sanctuary  of  its  own 
in  the  true  remission  of  sins.  Do  not  listen  to 
those  degenerate  sons  of  thine  who  slander 
Christ  and  Christians,  and  impute  to  them  these 
disastrous  times,  though  they  desire  times  in 
which  they  may  enjoy  rather  impunity  for  their 
wickedness  than  a  peaceful  life.  Such  has  never 
been  Rome’s  ambition  even  in  regard  to  her 
earthly  country.  Lay  hold  now  on  the  celestial 
country,  which  is  easily  won.  and  in  which  you 
will  reign  truly  and  for  ever.  For  there  shalt 
thou  find  no  vestal  fire,  no  Capitoline  stone,  but 
the  one  true  God. 

No  date ,  no  goal  will  here  ordain: 

But  grant  an  endless,  boundless  reign.1 

No  longer,  then,  follow  after  false  and  deceit¬ 
ful  gods;  abjure  them  rather,  and  despise  them, 
bursting  forth  into  true  liberty.  Gods  they  are 
not,  but  malignant  spirits,  to  whom  your  eternal 
happiness  will  be  a  sore  punishment.  Juno,  from 
whom  you  deduce  your  origin  according  to  the 
flesh,  did  not  so  bitterly  grudge  Rome’s  citadels 
to  the  Trojans  as  these  devils  whom  yet  ye  re¬ 
pute  gods  grudge  an  everlasting  seat  to  the  race 
of  mankind.  And  thou  thyself  hast  in  no  waver- 

1  Virgil,  sBneid,  bk.  i.  278. 


ing  voice  passed  judgment  on  them,  when  thou 
didst  pacify  them  with  games,  and  yet  didst  ac¬ 
count  as  infamous  the  men  by  whom  the  plays 
were  acted.  Suffer  us,  then,  to  assert  thy  freedom 
against  the  unclean  spirits  who  had  imposed  on 
thy  neck  the  yoke  of  celebrating  their  own 
shame  and  filthiness.  The  actors  of  these  divine 
crimes  thou  hast  removed  from  offices  of  hon¬ 
our;  supplicate  the  true  God,  that  He  may  re¬ 
move  from  thee  those  gods  who  delight  in  their 
crimes — a  most  disgraceful  thing  if  the  crimes 
are  really  theirs,  and  a  most  malicious  inven¬ 
tion  if  the  crimes  are  feigned.  Well  done,  in  that 
thou  hast  spontaneously  banished  from  the 
number  of  your  citizens  all  actors  and  players. 
Awake  more  fully:  the  majesty  of  God  cannot 
be  propitiated  by  that  which  defiles  the  dignity 
of  man.  How,  then,  can  you  believe  that  gods 
who  take  pleasure  in  such  lewd  plays,  belong  to 
the  number  of  the  holy  powers  of  heaven,  when 
the  men  by  whom  these  plays  are  acted  are  by 
yourselves  refused  admission  into  the  number 
of  Roman  citizens  even  of  the  lowest  grade?  In¬ 
comparably  more  glorious  than  Rome  is  that 
heavenly  city  in  which  for  victory  you  have 
truth;  for  dignity,  holiness;  for  peace,  felicity; 
for  life,  eternity.  Much  less  does  it  admit  into 
its  society  such  gods,  if  thou  dost  blush  to  ad¬ 
mit  into  thine  such  men.  Wherefore,  if  thou 
wouldst  attain  to  the  blessed  city,  shun  the  soci¬ 
ety  of  devils.  They  who  are  propitiated  by  deeds 
of  shame,  are  unworthy  of  the  worship  of  right- 
hearted  men.  Let  these,  then,  be  obliterated 
from  your  worship  by  the  cleansing  of  the 
Christian  religion,  as  those  men  were  blotted 
from  your  citizenship  by  the  censor’s  mark. 

But,  so  far  as  regards  carnal  benefits,  which 
are  the  only  blessings  the  wicked  desire  to  enjoy, 
and  carnal  miseries,  which  alone  they  shrink 
from  enduring,  we  will  show  in  the  following 
book  that  the  demons  have  not  the  power  they 
are  supposed  to  have;  and  although  they  had  it, 
we  ought  rather  on  that  account  to  despise  these 
blessings,  than  for  the  sake  of  them  to  worship 
those  gods  and  by  worshipping  them  to  miss  the 
attainment  of  these  blessings  they  grudge  us. 
But  that  they  have  not  even  this  power  which  is 
ascribed  to  them  by  those  who  worship  them  for 
the  sake  of  temporal  advantages,  this,  I  say,  I 
will  prove  in  the  following  book;  so  let  us  here 
close  the  present  argument. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  II.  29,  III.  1-2 


169 


BOOK  III 

ARGUMENT .  As  in  the  foregoing  book  augustine  has  proved  regarding 

MORAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  CALAMITIES,  SO  IN  THIS  BOOK  HE  PROVES  REGARDING  EXTER¬ 
NAL  AND  BODILY  DISASTERS,  THAT  SINCE  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  CITY  THE  ROMANS 
HAVE  BEEN  CONTINUALLY  SUBJECT  TO  THEM;  AND  THAT  EVEN  WHEN  THE  FALSE 
GODS  WERE  WORSHIPPED  WITHOUT  A  RIVAL,  BEFORE  THE  ADVENT  OF  CHRIST,  THEY 
AFFORDED  NO  RELIEF  FROM  SUCH  CALAMITIES. 


Chap.  i.  Of  the  ills  which  alone  the  wicked 
fear,  and  which  the  world  continually  suf¬ 
fered,  even  when  the  gods  were  worshipped 
Of  moral  and  spiritual  evils,  which  are  above 
all  others  to  be  deprecated,  I  think  enough  has 
already  been  said  to  show  that  the  false  gods 
took  no  steps  to  prevent  the  people  who  wor¬ 
shipped  them  from  being  overwhelmed  by  such 
calamities,  but  rather  aggravated  the  ruin.  I  see 
I  must  now  speak  of  those  evils  which  alone  are 
dreaded  by  the  heathen — famine,  pestilence, 
war,  pillage,  captivity,  massacre,  and  the  like 
calamities,  already  enumerated  in  the  first  book. 
For  evil  men  account  those  things  alone  evil 
which  do  not  make  men  evil;  neither  do  they 
blush  to  praise  good  things,  and  yet  to  remain 
evil  among  the  good  things  they  praise.  It 
grieves  them  more  to  own  a  bad  house  than  a 
bad  life,  as  if  it  were  man’s  greatest  good  to 
have  everything  good  but  himself.  But  not  even 
such  evils  as  were  alone  dreaded  by  the  heathen 
were  warded  off  by  their  gods,  even  when  they 
were  most  unrestrictedly  worshipped.  For  in 
various  times  and  places  before  the  advent  of 
our  Redeemer,  the  human  race  was  crushed  with 
numberless  and  sometimes  incredible  calami¬ 
ties;  and  at  that  time  what  gods  but  those  did 
the  world  worship,  if  you  except  the  one  nation 
of  the  Hebrews,  and,  beyond  them,  such  indi¬ 
viduals  as  the  most  secret  and  most  just  judg¬ 
ment  of  God  counted  worthy  of  divine  grace? 
But  that  I  may  not  be  prolix,  I  will  be  silent  re¬ 
garding  the  heavy  calamities  that  have  been  suf¬ 
fered  t?y  any  other  nations,  and  will  speak  only 
of  what  happened  to  Rome  and  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire,  by  which  I  mean  Rome  properly  so  called, 
and  those  lands  which  already,  before  the  com¬ 
ing  of  Christ,  had  by  alliance  or  conquest  be¬ 
come,  as  it  were,  members  of  the  body  of  the 
state. 

Chap.  2.  Whether  the  gods ,  whom  the  Greeks 
and  Romans  worshipped  in  common ,  were 
justified  in  permitting  the  destruction  of  Ilium 
First,  then,  why  was  Troy  or  Ilium,  the  cradle 
of  the  Roman  people  (for  I  must  not  overlook 


nor  disguise  what  I  touched  upon  in  the  first 
book1),  conquered,  taken  and  destroyed  by  the 
Greeks,  though  it  esteemed  and  worshipped  the 
same  gods  as  they?  Priam,  some  answer,  paid 
the  penalty  of  the  perjury  of  his  father  Laome- 
don.2  Then  it  is  true  that  Laomedon  hired  Apol¬ 
lo  and  Neptune  as  his  workmen.  For  the  story 
goes  that  he  promised  them  wages  and  then 
broke  his  bargain.  I  wonder  that  famous  diviner 
Apollo  toiled  at  so  huge  a  work,  and  never  sus¬ 
pected  Laomedon  was  going  to  cheat  him  of  his 
pay.  And  Neptune  too,  his  uncle,  brother  of 
Jupiter,  king  of  the  sea,  it  really  was  not  seemly 
that  he  should  be  ignorant  of  what  was  to  hap¬ 
pen.  For  he  is  introduced  by  Homer3  (who  lived 
and  wrote  before  the  building  of  Rome)  as  pre¬ 
dicting  something  great  of  the  posterity  of 
^Eneas,  who  in  fact  founded  Rome.  And  as  Hom¬ 
er  says,  Neptune  also  rescued  ^Eneas  in  a  cloud 
from  the  wrath  of  Achilles,  though  (according 
to  Virgil) 

All  his  will  was  to  destroy 

His  own  creation,  perjured  Troy  A 

Gods,  then,  so  great  as  Apollo  and  Neptune,  in 
ignorance  of  the  cheat  that  was  to  defraud  them 
of  their  wages,  built  the  walls  of  Troy  for  noth¬ 
ing  but  thanks  and  thankless  people.  There  may 
be  some  doubt  whether  it  is  not  a  worse  crime  to 
believe  such  persons  to  be  gods,  than  to  cheat 
such  gods.  Even  Homer  himself  did  not  give  full 
credence  to  the  story;  for  while  he  represents 
Neptune,  indeed,  as  hostile  to  the  Trojans,  he 
introduces  Apollo  as  their  champion,  though  the 
story  implies  that  both  were  offended  by  that 
fraud.  If,  therefore,  they  believe  their  fables, 
let  them  blush  to  worship  such  gods ;  if  they  dis¬ 
credit  the  fables,  let  no  more  be  said  of  the 
“Trojan  perjury”;  or  let  them  explain  how  the 
gods  hated  Trojan,  but  loved  Roman  perjury. 
For  how  did  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  even  in 
so  large  and  corrupt  a  city,  find  so  abundant  a 
supply  of  men  whose  hands  and  tongues  found 
them  a  living  by  perjury  and  civic  broils?  What 

^hap.  4.  2Virgil,  Georgies ,  bk.  i.  502. 

Hliad,  bk.  xx.  293,  et  seq.  *Mneid.  bk.  v.  810,  81 1. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


else  but  perjury  corrupted  the  judgments 
pronounced  by  so  many  of  the  senators?  What 
else  corrupted  the  people’s  votes  and  decisions 
of  all  causes  tried  before  them?  For  it  seems 
that  the  ancient  practice  of  taking  oaths  has 
been  preserved  even  in  the  midst  of  the  great¬ 
est  corruption,  not  for  the  sake  of  restrain¬ 
ing  wickedness  by  religious  fear,  but  to  com¬ 
plete  the  tale  of  crimes  by  adding  that  of 
perjury. 

Chap.  3.  That  the  gods  could  not  be  offended 
by  the  adultery  of  Paris ,  this  crime  being  so 
common  among  themselves 
There  is  no  ground,  then,  for  representing  the 
gods  (by  whom,  as  they  say,  that  empire  stood, 
though  they  are  proved  to  have  been  conquered 
by  the  Greeks)  as  being  enraged  at  the  Trojan 
perjury.  Neither,  as  others  again  plead  in  their 
defence,  was  it  indignation  at  the  adultery  of 
Paris  that  caused  them  to  withdraw  their  pro¬ 
tection  from  Troy.  For  their  habit  is  to  be  insti¬ 
gators  and  instructors  in  vice,  not  its  avengers. 
“The  city  of  Rome,”  says  Sallust,  “was  first 
built  and  inhabited,  as  I  have  heard,  by  the  Tro¬ 
jans,  who,  flying  their  country,  under  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Emeas,  wandered  about  without  making 
any  settlement.”  If,  then,  the  gods  were  of  opin¬ 
ion  that  the  adultery  of  Paris  should  be  pun¬ 
ished,  it  was  chiefly  the  Romans,  or  at  least  the 
Romans  also,  who  should  have  suffered;  for  the 
adultery  was  brought  about  by  Emeas’  mother. 
But  how  could  they  hate  in  Paris  a  crime  which 
they  made  no  objection  to  in  their  own  sister 
Venus,  who  (not  to  mention  any  other  instance) 
committed  adultery  with  Anchises,  and  so  be¬ 
came  the  mother  of  Emeas?  Is  it  because  in  the 
one  case  Menelaus  was  aggrieved,  while  in  the 
other  Vulcan  connived  at  the  crime?  For  the 
gods,  I  fancy,  are  so  little  jealous  of  their  wives 
that  they  make  no  scruple  of  sharing  them  with 
men.  But  perhaps  I  may  be  suspected  of  turning 
the  myths  into  ridicule,  and  not  handling  so 
weighty  a  subject  with  sufficient  gravity.  Well, 
then,  let  us  say  that  Emeas  is  not  the  son  of 
Venus.  I  am  willing  to  admit  it ;  but  is  Romulus 
any  more  the  son  of  Mars?  For  why  not  the  one 
as  well  as  the  other?  Or  is  it  lawful  for  gods  to 
have  intercourse  with  women,  unlawful  for  men 
to  have  intercourse  with  goddesses?  A  hard,  or 
rather  an  incredible,  condition  that  what  was 
allowed  to  Mars  by  the  law  of  Venus,  should  not 
be  allowed  to  Venus  herself  by  her  own  law. 
However,  both  cases  have  the  authority  of 
Rome;  for  Caesar  in  modern  times  believed  no 
less  that  he  was  descended  from  Venus,  than  the 


ancient  Romulus  believed  himself  the  son  of 
Mars. 

Chap.  4.  Of  V arrows  opinion ,  that  it  is  useful  for 
men  to  feign  themselves  the  offspring  of  the 
gods 

Some  one  will  say,  But  do  you  believe  all  this? 
Not  I  indeed.  For  even  Varro,  a  very  learned 
heathen,  all  but  admits  that  these  stories  are 
false,  though  he  does  not  boldly  and  confidently 
say  so.  But  he  maintains  it  is  useful  for  states 
that  brave  men  believe,  though  falsely,  that  they 
are  descended  from  the  gods;  for  that  thus  the 
human  spirit,  cherishing  the  belief  of  its  divine 
descent,  will  both  more  boldly  venture  into 
great  enterprises,  and  will  carry  them  out  more 
energetically,  and  will  therefore  by  its  very  con¬ 
fidence  secure  more  abundant  success.  You  see 
how  wide  a  field  is  opened  to  falsehood  by  this 
opinion  of  Varro’s,  which  I  have  expressed  as 
well  as  I  could  in  my  own  words;  and  how  com¬ 
prehensible  it  is  that  many  of  the  religions  and 
sacred  legends  should  be  feigned  in  a  community 
in  which  it  was  judged  profitable  for  the  citizens 
that  lies  should  be  told  even  about  the  gods 
themselves. 

Chap.  5.  That  it  is  not  credible  that  the  gods 
shoidd  have  punished  the  adultery  of  Paris , 
seeing  they  showed  no  indignation  at  the 
adultery  of  the  mother  of  Romulus 
But  whether  Venus  could  bear  Emeas  to  a 
human  father  Anchises,  or  Mars  beget  Romulus 
of  the  daughter  of  Numitor,  we  leave  as  unset¬ 
tled  questions.  For  our  own  Scriptures  suggest 
the  very  similar  question,  whether  the  fallen 
angels  had  sexual  intercourse  with  the  daughters 
of  men,  by  which  the  earth  was  at  that  time 
filled  with  giants,  that  is,  with  enormously  large 
and  strong  men.  At  present,  then,  I  will  limit  my 
discussion  to  this  dilemma :  If  that  which  their 
books  relate  about  the  mother  of  Emeas  and  the 
father  of  Romulus  be  true,  how  can  the  gods  be 
displeased  with  men  for  adulteries  which,  when 
committed  by  themselves,  excite  no  displeasure? 
If  it  is  false,  not  even  in  this  case  can  the  gods 
be  angry  that  men  should  really  commit  adulter¬ 
ies,  which,  even  when  falsely  attributed  to  the 
gods,  they  delight  in.  Moreover,  if  the  adultery 
of  Mars  be  discredited,  that  Venus  also  may  be 
freed  from  the  imputation,  then  the  mother  of 
Romulus  is  left  unshielded  by  the  pretext  of  a 
divine  seduction.  For  Sylvia  was  a  vestal  priest¬ 
ess,  and  the  gods  ought  to  avenge  this  sacrilege 
on  the  Romans  with  greater  severity  than  Paris’ 
adultery  on  the  Trojans.  For  even  the  Romans 


THE  CITY  OF 

themselves  in  primitive  times  used  to  go  so 
far  as  to  bury  alive  any  vestal  who  was  detect¬ 
ed  in  adultery,  while  women  unconsecrated, 
though  they  were  punished,  were  never  pun¬ 
ished  with  death  for  that  crime;  and  thus  they 
more  earnestly  vindicated  the  purity  of 
shrines  they  esteemed  divine,  than  of  the  hu¬ 
man  bed. 

Chap.  6.  That  the  gods  exacted  no  pe?ialty  for 
the  fratricidal  act  of  Romulus 
I  add  another  instance:  If  the  sins  of  men  so 
greatly  incensed  those  divinities  that  they  aban¬ 
doned  Troy  to  fire  and  sword  to  punish  the  crime 
of  Paris,  the  murder  of  Romulus’  brother  ought 
to  have  incensed  them  more  against  the  Romans 
than  the  cajoling  of  a  Greek  husband  moved 
them  against  the  Trojans:  fratricide  in  a  newly- 
born  city  should  have  provoked  them  more  than 
adultery  in  a  city  already  flourishing.  It  makes 
no  difference  to  the  question  we  now  discuss 
whether  Romulus  ordered  his  brother  to  be 
slain,  or  slew  him  with  his  own  hand;  it  is  a 
crime  which  many  shamelessly  deny,  many 
through  shame  doubt,  many  in  grief  disguise. 
And  we  shall  not  pause  to  examine  and  weigh 
the  testimonies  of  historical  writers  on  the  sub¬ 
ject.  All  agree  that  the  brother  of  Romulus  was 
slain,  not  by  enemies,  not  by  strangers.  If  it  was 
Romulus  who  either  commanded  or  perpetrated 
this  crime;  Romulus  was  more  truly  the  head  of 
the  Romans  than  Paris  of  the  Trojans ;  why  then 
did  he  who  carried  off  another  man’s  wife  bring 
down  the  anger  of  the  gods  on  the  Trojans,  while 
he  who  took  his  brother’s  life  obtained  the  guar¬ 
dianship  of  those  same  gods?  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  crime  was  not  wrought  either  by  the 
hand  or  will  of  Romulus,  then  the  whole  city  is 
chargeable  with  it,  because  it  did  not  see  to  its 
punishment,  and  thus  committed,  not  fratricide, 
but  parricide,  which  is  worse.  For  both  brothers 
were  the  founders  of  that  city,  of  which  the  one 
was  by  villainy  prevented  from  being  a  ruler.  So 
far  as  I  See,  then,  no  evil  can  be  ascribed  to  Troy 
which  warranted  the  gods  in  abandoning  it  to  de¬ 
struction.  nor  any  good  to  Rome  which  accounts 
for  the  gods  visiting  it  with  prosperity;  unless 
the  truth  be,  that  they  fled  from  Troy  because 
they  were  vanquished,  and  betook  themselves  to 
Rome  to  practise  their  characteristic  deceptions 
there.  Nevertheless  they  kept  a  footing  for 
themselves  in  Troy,  that  they  might  deceive  fu¬ 
ture  inhabitants  who  repeopled  these  lands; 
while  at  Rome,  by  a  wider  exercise  of  their  ma¬ 
lignant  arts,  they  exulted  in  more  abundant  hon¬ 
ours. 


GOD  III.  3-7  171 

Chap.  7.  Of  the  destruction  of  Ilium  by  Fim¬ 
bria,  a  lieutenant  of  Marius 

And  surely  we  may  ask  what  wrong  poor  Ili¬ 
um  had  done,  that,  in  the  first  heat  of  the  civil 
wars  of  Rome,  it  should  suffer  at  the  hand  of 
Fimbria,  the  veriest  villain  among  Marius’  par¬ 
tisans,  a  more  fierce  and  cruel  destruction  than 
the  Grecian  sack.  For  when  the  Greeks  took  it 
many  escaped,  and  many  who  did  not  escape 
were  suffered  to  live,  though  in  captivity.  But 
Fimbria  from  the  first  gave  orders  that  not  a 
life  should  be  spared,  and  burnt  up  together  the 
city  and  all  its  inhabitants.  Thus  was  Ilium  re¬ 
quited,  not  by  the  Greeks,  whom  she  had  pro¬ 
voked  by  wrong-doing;  but  by  the  Romans,  who 
had  been  built  out  of  her  ruins;  while  the  gods, 
adored  alike  of  both  sides,  did  simply  nothing, 
or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  could  do  nothing. 
Is  it  then  true,  that  at  this  time  also,  after 
Troy  had  repaired  the  damage  done  by  the 
Grecian  fire,  all  the  gods  by  whose  help  the 
kingdom  stood,  “forsook  each  fane,  each  sacred 
shrine”? 

But  if  so,  I  ask  the  reason;  for  in  my  judg¬ 
ment,  the  conduct  of  the  gods  was  as  much  to 
be  reprobated  as  that  of  the  townsmen  to  be 
applauded.  For  these  closed  their  gates  against 
Fimbria,  that  they  might  preserve  the  city  for 
Sulla,  and  were  therefore  burnt  and  consumed 
by  the  enraged  general.  Now,  up  to  this  time, 
Sulla’s  cause  was  the  more  worthy  of  the  two ; 
for  till  now  he  used  arms  to  restore  the  republic, 
and  as  yet  his  good  intentions  had  met  with  no 
reverses.  What  better  thing,  then,  could  the  Tro¬ 
jans  have  done?  What  more  honourable,  what 
more  faithful  to  Rome,  or  more  worthy  of  her 
relationship,  than  to  preserve  their  city  for  the 
better  part  of  the  Romans,  and  to  shut  their 
gates  against  a  parricide  of  his  country?  It  is  for 
the  defenders  of  the  gods  to  consider  the  ruin 
which  this  conduct  brought  on  Troy.  The  gods 
deserted  an  adulterous  people,  and  abandoned 
Troy  to  the  fires  of  the  Greeks,  that  out  of  her 
ashes  a  chaster  Rome  might  arise.  But  why  did 
they  a  second  time  abandon  this  same  town,  al¬ 
lied  now  to  Rome,  and  not  making  war  upon  her 
noble  daughter,  but  preserving  a  most  steadfast 
and  pious  fidelity  to  Rome’s  most  justifiable 
faction?  Why  did  they  give  her  up  to  be  de¬ 
stroyed,  not  by  the  Greek  heroes,  but  by  the 
basest  of  the  Romans?  Or,  if  the  gods  did  not 
favor  Sulla’s  cause,  for  which  the  unhappy  Tro¬ 
jans  maintained  their  city,  why  did  they  them¬ 
selves  predict  and  promise  Sulla  such  successes? 
Must  we  call  them  flatterers  of  the  fortunate, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


rather  than  helpers  of  the  wretched?  Troy  was 
not  destroyed,  then,  because  the  gods  deserted 
it.  For  the  demons,  always  watchful  to  deceive, 
did  what  they  could.  For,  when  all  the  statues 
were  overthrown  and  burnt  together  with  the 
town,  Livy  tells  us  that  only  the  image  of  Min¬ 
erva  is  said  to  have  been  found  standing  unin¬ 
jured  amidst  the  ruins  of  her  temple;  not  that  it 
might  be  said  in  their  praise,  “The  gods  who 
made  this  realm  divine,”  but  that  it  might  not 
be  said  in  their  defence,  They  are  “gone  from 
each  fane,  each  sacred  shrine”:  for  that  marvel 
was  permitted  to  them,  not  that  they  might  be 
proved  to  be  powerful,  but  that  they  might  be 
convicted  of  being  present. 

Chap.  8.  Whether  Rome  ought  to  have  been  en¬ 
trusted  to  the  Trojan  gods 

Where,  then,  was  the  wisdom  of  entrusting 
Rome  to  the  Trojan  gods,  who  had  demonstrat¬ 
ed  their  weakness  in  the  loss  of  Troy?  Will  some 
one  say  that,  when  Fimbria  stormed  Troy v  the 
gods  were  already  resident  in  Rome?  How,  then, 
did  the  image  of  Minerva  remain  standing?  Be¬ 
sides,  if  they  were  at  Rome  when  Fimbria  de¬ 
stroyed  Troy,  perhaps  they  were  at  Troy  when 
Rome  itself  was  taken  and  set  on  fire  by  the 
Gauls.  But  as  they  are  very  acute  in  hearing, 
and  very  swift  in  their  movements,  they  came 
quickly  at  the  cackling  of  the  goose  to  defend 
at  least  the  Capitol,  though  to  defend  the 
rest  of  the  city  they  were  too  long  in  being 
warned. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  it  is  credible  that  the  peace 

during  the  reign  of  Numa  was  brought  about 

by  the  gods 

It  is  also  believed  that  it  was  by  the  help  of 
the  gods  that  the  successor  of  Romulus,  Numa 
Pompilius,  enjoyed  peace  during  his  entire 
reign,  and  shut  the  gates  of  Janus,  which  are 
customarily  kept  open  during  war.  And  it  is  sup¬ 
posed  he  was  thus  requited  for  appointing  many 
religious  observances  among  the  Romans.  Cer¬ 
tainly  that  king  would  have  commanded  our 
congratulations  for  so  rare  a  leisure,  had  he  been 
wise  enough  to  spend  it  on  wholesome  pursuits, 
and,  subduing  a  pernicious  curiosity,  had  sought 
out  the  true  God  with  true  piety.  But  as  it  was, 
the  gods  were  not  the  authors  of  his  leisure;  but 
possibly  they  would  have  deceived  him  less  had 
they  found  him  busier.  For  the  more  disengaged 
they  found  him,  the  more  they  themselves  occu¬ 
pied  his  attention.  Varro  informs  us  of  all  his 
efforts  and  of  the  arts  he  employed  to  associate 


these  gods  with  himself  and  the  city;  and  in  its 
own  place,  if  God  will,  I  shall  discuss  these  mat¬ 
ters.  Meanwhile,  as  we  are  speaking  of  the  bene¬ 
fits  conferred  by  the  gods,  I  readily  admit  that 
peace  is  a  great  benefit;  but  it  is  a  benefit  of  the 
true  God,  which,  like  the  sun,  the  rain,  and  other 
supports  of  life,  is  frequently  conferred  on  the 
ungrateful  and  wicked.  But  if  this  great  boon 
was  conferred  on  Rome  and  Pompilius  by  their 
gods,  why  did  they  never  afterwards  grant  it  to 
the  Roman  empire  during  even  more  meritori¬ 
ous  periods?  Were  the  sacred  rites  more  efficient 
at  their  first  institution  than  during  their  subse¬ 
quent  celebration?  But  they  had  no  existence  in 
Numa’s  time,  until  he  added  them  to  the  ritual; 
whereas  afterwards  they  had  already  been  cele¬ 
brated  and  preserved,  that  benefit  might  arise 
from  them.  How,  then,  is  it  that  those  forty- 
three,  or  as  others  prefer  it,  thirty-nine  years  of 
Numa’s  reign,  were  passed  in  unbroken  peace, 
and  yet  that  afterwards,  when  the  worship  was 
established,  and  the  gods  themselves,  who  were 
invoked  by  it,  were  the  recognized  guardians  and 
patrons  of  the  city,  we  can  with  difficulty  find 
during  the  whole  period,  from  the  building  of 
the  city  to  the  reign  of  Augustus,  one  year — 
that,  viz.,  which  followed  the  close  of  the  first 
Punic  war — in  which,  for  a  marvel,  the  Romans 
were  able  to  shut  the  gates  of  war? 

Chap.  10.  Whether  it  was  desirable  that  the  Ro¬ 
man  empire  should  be  increased  by  such  a 
furious  succession  of  wars ,  when  it  might  have 
been  quiet  and  safe  by  following  in  the  peace¬ 
ful  ways  of  Numa 

Do  they  reply  that  the  Roman  empire  could 
never  have  been  so  widely  extended,  nor  so  glo¬ 
rious,  save  by  constant  and  unintermitting 
wars?  A  fit  argument,  truly!  Why  must  a  king¬ 
dom  be  distracted  in  order  to  be  great?  In  this 
little  world  of  man’s  body,  is  it  not  better  to 
have  a  moderate  stature,  and  health  with  it, 
than  to  attain  the  huge  dimensions  of  a  giant  by 
unnatural  torments,  and  when  you  attain  it  to 
find  no  rest,  but  to  be  pained  the  more  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  size  of  your  members?  What  evil 
would  have  resulted,  or  rather  what  good  would 
not  have  resulted,  had  those  times  continued 
which  Sallust  sketched,  when  he  says,  “At  first 
the  kings  (for  that  was  the  first  title  of  empire 
in  the  world)  were  divided  in  their  sentiments : 
part  cultivated  the  mind,  others  the  body:  at 
that  time  the  life  of  men  was  led  without  covet- 
eousness;  every  one  was  sufficiently  satisfied 
with  his  own”!  Was  it  requisite,  then,  for 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  III.  8-n  173 


Rome’s  prosperity,  that  the  state  of  things  which 
Virgil  reprobates  should  succeed : 

At  length  stole  on  a  baser  age 
And  war’s  indomitable  rage , 

And  greedy  lust  of  gain.1 
But  obviously  the  Romans  have  a  plausible 
defence  for  undertaking  and  carrying  on  such 
disastrous  wars — to  wit,  that  the  pressure  of 
their  enemies  forced  them  to  resist,  so  that  they 
were  compelled  to  fight,  not  by  any  greed  of  hu¬ 
man  applause,  but  by  the  necessity  of  protecting 
life  and  liberty.  Well,  let  that  pass.  Here  is  Sal¬ 
lust’s  account  of  the  matter:  “For  when  their 
state,  enriched  with  laws,  institutions,  territory, 
seemed  abundantly  prosperous  and  sufficiently 
powerful,  according  to  the  ordinary  law  of  hu¬ 
man  nature,  opulence  gave  birth  to  envy.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  neighbouring  kings  and  states 
took  arms  and  assaulted  them.  A  few  allies  lent 
assistance;  the  rest,  struck  with  fear,  kept  aloof 
from  dangers.  But  the  Romans,  watchful  at 
home  and  in  war,  were  active,  made  prepara¬ 
tions,  encouraged  one  another,  marched  to  meet 
their  enemies,  protected  by  arms  their  liberty, 
country,  parents.  Afterwards,  when  they  had 
repelled  the  dangers  by  their  bravery,  they  car¬ 
ried  help  to  their  allies  and  friends,  and  procured 
alliances  more  by  conferring  than  by  receiving 
favours.”  This  was  to  build  up  Rome’s  greatness 
by  honourable  means.  But,  in  Numa’s  reign,  I 
would  know  whether  the  long  peace  was  main¬ 
tained  in  spite  of  the  incursions  of  wicked  neigh¬ 
bours,  of  if  these  incursions  were  discontinued 
that  the  peace  might  be  maintained?  For  if  even 
then  Rome  was  harassed  by  wars,  and  yet  did 
not  meet  force  with  force,  the  same  means  she 
then  used  to  quiet  her  enemies  without  conquer¬ 
ing  them  in  war,  or  terrifying  them  with  the  on¬ 
set  of  battle,  she  might  have  used  always,  and 
have  reigned  in  peace  with  the  gates  of  Janus 
shut.  And  if  this  was  not  in  her  power,  then 
Rome  enjoyed  peace  not  at  the  will  of  her  gods, 
but  at  the  will  of  her  neighbours  round  about, 
and  only  so  long  as  they  cared  to  provoke  her 
with  no  war,  unless  perhaps  these  pitiful  gods 
will  dare  to  sell  to  one  man  as  their  favour  what 
lies  not  in  their  power  to  bestow,  but  in  the  will 
of  another  man.  These  demons,  indeed,  in  so  far 
as  they  are  permitted,  can  terrify  or  incite  the 
minds  of  wicked  men  by  their  own  peculiar 
wickedness.  But  if  they  always  had  this  power, 
and  if  no  action  were  taken  against  their  efforts 
by  a  more  secret  and  higher  power,  they  would 
be  supreme  to  give  peace  or  the  victories  of  war, 
which  almost  always  fall  out  through  some  hu- 
lALneid ,  bk.  viii.  326-7. 


man  emotion,  and  frequently  in  opposition  to 
the  will  of  the  gods,  as  is  proved  not  only  by 
lying  legends,  which  scarcely  hint  or  signify 
any  grain  of  truth,  but  even  by  Roman  history 
itself. 

Chap.  ii.  Of  the  statue  of  Apollo  at  Cumce , 

whose  tears  are  supposed  to  have  portended 

disaster  to  the  Greeks,  whom  the  god  was  un¬ 
able  to  succour 

And  it  is  still  this  weakness  of  the  gods  which 
is  confessed  in  the  story  of  the  Cumaen  Apollo, 
who  is  said  to  have  wept  for  four  days  during 
the  war  with  the  Achaeans  and  King  Aristonicus. 
And  when  the  augurs  were  alarmed  at  the  por¬ 
tent,  and  had  determined  to  cast  the  statue  into 
the  sea,  the  old  men  of  Cumae  interposed,  and  re¬ 
lated  that  a  similar  prodigy  had  occurred  to  the 
same  image  during  the  wars  against  Antiochus 
and  against  Perseus,  and  that  by  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  gifts  had  been  presented  to  Apollo,  be¬ 
cause  the  event  had  proved  favourable  to  the 
Romans.  Then  soothsayers  were  summoned  who 
were  supposed  to  have  greater  professional  skill, 
and  they  pronounced  that  the  weeping  of  Apol¬ 
lo’s  image  was  propitious  to  the  Romans,  be¬ 
cause  Cumae  was  a  Greek  colony,  and  that  Apol¬ 
lo  was  bewailing  (and  thereby  presaging)  the 
grief  and  calamity  that  was  about  to  light  upon 
his  own  land  of  Greece,  from  which  he  had  been 
brought.  Shortly  afterwards  it  was  reported  that 
King  Aristonicus  was  defeated  and  made  pris¬ 
oner,  a  defeat  certainly  opposed  to  the  will  of 
Apollo ;  and  this  he  indicated  by  even  shedding 
tears  from  his  marble  image.  And  this  shows  us 
that,  though  the  verses  of  the  poets  are  myth¬ 
ical,  they  are  not  altogether  devoid  of  truth,  but 
describe  the  manners  of  the  demons  in  a  suffi¬ 
ciently  fit  style.  For  in  Virgil,  Diana  mourned 
for  Camilla,2  and  Hercules  wept  for  Pallas 
doomed  to  die.3  This  is  perhaps  the  reason  why 
Numa  Pompilius,  too,  when,  enjoying  prolonged 
peace,  but  without  knowing  or  inquiring  from 
whom  he  received  it,  he  began  in  his  leisure  to 
consider  to  what  gods  he  should  entrust  the  safe 
keeping  and  conduct  of  Rome,  and  not  dreaming 
that  the  true,  almighty,  and  most  high  God  cares 
for  earthly  affairs,  but  recollecting  only  that  the 
Trojan  gods  which  .Eneas  had  brought  to  Italy 
had  been  able  to  preserve  neither  the  Trojan  nor 
Lavinian  kingdom  founded  by  .Eneas  himself, 
concluded  that  he  must  provide  other  gods  as 
guardians  of  fugitives  and  helpers  of  the  weak, 
and  add  them  to  those  earlier  divinities  who  had 

*JEneid,  bk.  xi.  532. 

Hbid ,  bk.  x.  464. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


either  come  over  to  Rome  with  Romulus,  or 
when  Alba  was  destroyed. 

Chap.  12.  That  the  Romans  added  a  vast  num¬ 
ber  of  gods  to  those  introduced  by  Numa,  and 
that  their  numbers  helped  them  not  at  all 

But  though  Pompilius  introduced  so  ample  a 
ritual,  yet  did  not  Rome  see  fit  to  be  content  with 
it.  For  as  yet  Jupiter  himself  had  not  his  chief 
temple,  it  being  King  Tarquin  who  built  the 
Capitol.  And  ^Ksculapius  left  Epidaurus  for 
Rome,  that  in  this  foremost  city  he  might  have  a 
finer  field  for  the  exercise  of  his  great  medical 
skill.  The  mother  of  the  gods,  too,  came  I  know 
not  whence  from  Pessinuns;  it  being  unseemly 
that,  while  her  son  presided  on  the  Capitoline 
Hill,  she  herself  should  lie  hid  in  obscurity.  But 
if  she  is  the  mother  of  all  the  gods,  she  not  only 
followed  some  of  her  children  to  Rome,  but  left 
others  to  follow  her.  I  wonder,  indeed,  if  she 
were  the  mother  of  Cynocephalus,  who  a  long 
while  afterwards  came  from  Egypt.  Whether 
also  the  goddess  Fever  was  her  offspring,  is  a 
matter  for  her  grandson  ^Ksculapius  to  decide. 
But  of  whatever  breed  she  be,  the  foreign  gods 
will  not  presume.  I  trust,  to  call  a  goddess  base- 
born  who  is  a  Roman  citizen.  Who  can  number 
the  deities  to  whom  the  guardianship  of  Rome 
was  entrusted?  Indigenous  and  imported,  both 
of  heaven,  earth,  hell,  seas,  fountains,  rivers; 
and,  as  Varro  says,  gods  certain  and  uncertain, 
male  and  female:  for,  as  among  animals,  so 
among  all  kinds  of  gods  are  there  these  distinc¬ 
tions.  Rome,  then,  enjoying  the  protection  of 
such  a  cloud  of  deities,  might  surely  have  been 
preserved  from  some  of  those  great  and  horrible 
calamities,  of  which  I  can  mention  but  a  few. 
For  by  the  great  smoke  of  her  altars  she  sum¬ 
moned  to  her  protection,  as  by  a  beacon-fire,  a 
host  of  gods,  for  whom  she  appointed  and  main¬ 
tained  temples,  altars,  sacrifices,  priests,  and 
thus  offended  the  true  and  most  high  God,  to 
whom  alone  all  this  ceremonial  is  lawfully  due. 
And,  indeed,  she  was  more  prosperous  when  she 
had  fewer  gods;  but  the  greater  she  became,  the 
more  gods  she  thought  she  should  have,  as  the 
larger  ship  needs  to  be  manned  by  a  larger  crew. 
I  suppose  she  despaired  of  the  smaller  number 
under  whose  protection  she  had  spent  compara¬ 
tively  happy  days,  being  able  to  defend  her 
greatness.  For  even  under  the  kings  (with  the 
exception  of  Numa  Pompilius,  of  whom  I  have 
already  spoken),  how  wicked  a  contentiousness 
must  have  existed  to  occasion  the  death  of 
Romulus’  brother! 


Chap.  13.  By  what  right  or  agreement  the  Ro¬ 
mans  obtained  their  first  wives 
How  is  it  that  neither  Juno,  who  with  her  hus¬ 
band  Jupiter  even  then  cherished 

Rome's  sons ,  the  nation  of  the  gown} 
nor  Venus  herself,  could  assist  the  children  of 
the  loved  iKneas  to  find  wives  by  some  right  and 
equitable  means?  For  the  lack  of  this  entailed 
upon  the  Romans  the  lamentable  necessity  of 
stealing  their  wives,  and  then  waging  war  with 
their  fathers-in-law;  so  that  the  wretched  wom¬ 
en,  before  they  had  recovered  from  the  wrong 
done  them  by  their  husbands,  were  dowried  with 
the  blood  of  their  fathers.  “But  the  Romans 
conquered  their  neighbours.”  Yes,  but  with  what 
wounds  on  both  sides,  and  with  what  sad  slaugh¬ 
ter  of  relatives  and  neighbours!  The  war  of  Cae¬ 
sar  and  Pompey  was  the  contest  of  only  one 
father-in-law  with  one  son-in-law;  and  before  it 
began,  the  daughter  of  Caesar,  Pompey’s  wife, 
was  already  dead.  But  with  how  keen  and  just 
an  accent  of  grief  does  Lucan  exclaim:  “I  sing 
that  worse  than  civil  war  waged  in  the  plains  of 
Emathia,  and  in  which  the  crime  was  justified 
by  the  victory!” 

The  Romans,  then,  conquered  that  they  might, 
with  hands  stained  in  the  blood  of  their  fathers- 
in-law,  wrench  the  miserable  girls  from  their 
embrace — girls  who  dared  not  weep  for  their 
slain  parents,  for  fear  of  offending  their  victori¬ 
ous  husbands,  and  while  yet  the  battle  was  rag¬ 
ing,  stood  with  their  prayers  on  their  lips,  and 
knew  not  for  whom  to  utter  them.  Such  nuptials 
were  certainly  prepared  for  the  Roman  people 
not  by  Venus,  but  Bellona;  or  possibly  that  in¬ 
fernal  fury  Alecto  had  more  liberty  to  injure 
them  now  that  Juno  was  aiding  them,  than  when 
the  prayers  of  that  goddess  had  excited  her 
against  ^Kneas.  Andromache  in  captivity  was 
happier  than  these  Roman  brides.  For  though 
she  was  a  slave,  yet,  after  she  had  become  the 
wife  of  Pyrrhus,  no  more  Trojans  fell  by  his 
hand;  but  the  Romans  slew  in  battle  the  very 
fathers  of  the  brides  they  fondled.  Andromache, 
the  victor’s  captive,  could  only  mourn,  not  fear, 
the  death  of  her  people.  The  Sabine  women,  re¬ 
lated  to  men  still  combatants,  feared  the  death 
of  their  fathers  when  their  husbands  went  out  to 
battle,  and  mourned  their  death  as  they  re¬ 
turned,  while  neither  their  grief  nor  their  fear 
could  be  freely  expressed.  For  the  victories  of 
their  husbands,  involving  the  destruction  of 
fellow-townsmen,  relatives,  brothers,  fathers, 
caused  either  pious  agony  or  cruel  exultation. 
lIbid ,  bk.  1.  286 


THE  CITY  OF 

Moreover,  as  the  fortune  of  war  is  capricious, 
some  of  them  lost  their  husbands  by  the  sword 
of  their  parents,  while  others  lost  husband  and 
father  together  in  mutual  destruction.  For  the 
Romans  by  no  means  escaped  with  impunity, 
but  they  were  driven  back  within  their  walls  and 
defended  themselves  behind  closed  gates;  and 
when  the  gates  were  opened  by  guile,  and  the 
enemy  admitted  into  the  town,  the  Forum  itself 
was  the  field  of  a  hateful  and  fierce  engagement 
of  fathers-in-law  and  sons-in-law.  The  ravishers 
were  indeed  quite  defeated,  and,  flying  on  all 
sides  to  their  houses,  sullied  with  new  shame 
their  original  shameful  and  lamentable  triumph. 
It  was  at  this  juncture  that  Romulus,  hoping  no 
more  from  the  valour  of  his  citizens,  prayed 
Jupiter  that  they  might  stand  their  ground;  and 
from  this  occasion  the  god  gained  the  name  of 
Stator.  But  not  even  thus  would  the  mischief 
have  been  finished,  had  not  the  ravished  women 
themselves  flashed  out  with  dishevelled  hair,  and 
cast  themselves  before  their  parents,  and  thus 
disarmed  their  just  rage,  not  with  the  arms  of 
victory,  but  with  the  supplications  of  filial  affec¬ 
tion.  Then  Romulus,  who  could  not  brook  his 
own  brother  as  a  colleague,  was  compelled  to  ac¬ 
cept  Titus  Tatius,  king  of  the  Sabines,  as  his 
partner  on  the  throne.  But  how  long  would  he 
who  misliked  the  fellowship  of  his  own  twin- 
brother  endure  a  stranger?  So,  Tatius  being 
slain,  Romulus  remained  sole  king,  that  he  might 
be  the  greater  god.  See  what  rights  of  marriage 
these  were  that  fomented  unnatural  wars.  These 
were  the  Roman  leagues  of  kindred,  relation¬ 
ship,  alliance,  religion.  This  was  the  life  of  the 
city  so  abundantly  protected  by  the  gods.  You 
see  how  many  severe  things  might  be  said  on  this 
theme;  but  our  purpose  carries  us  past  them, 
and  requires  our  discourse  for  other  matters. 

Chap.  14  .Of  the  wickedness  of  the  war  waged 
by  the  Romans  against  the  Albans ,  and  of  the 
victories  won  by  the  lust  of  power 
But  Miat  happened  after  Numa’s  reign,  and 
under  the  other  kings,  when  the  Albans  were 
provoked  into  war,  with  sad  results  not  to  them¬ 
selves  alone,  but  also  to  the  Romans?  The  long 
peace  of  Numa  had  become  tedious;  and  with 
what  endless  slaughter  and  detriment  of  both 
states  did  the  Roman  and  Alban  armies  bring  it 
to  an  end!  For  Alba,  which  had  been  founded  by 
Ascanius,  son  of  /Eneas,  and  which  was  more 
properly  the  mother  of  Rome  than  Troy  herself, 
was  provoked  to  battle  by  Tullus  Hostilius,  king 
of  Rome,  and  in  the  conflict  both  inflicted  and 
received  such  damage,  that  at  length  both  par- 


GOD  III.  12-14  175 

ties  wearied  of  the  struggle.  It  was  then  devised 
that  the  war  should  be  decided  by  the  combat  of 
three  twin-brothers  from  each  army:  from  the 
Romans  the  three  Horatii  stood  forward,  from 
the  Albans  the  three  Curiatii.  Two  of  the  Hora¬ 
tii  were  overcome  and  disposed  of  by  the  Curi¬ 
atii;  but  by  the  remaining  Horatius  the  three 
Curiatii  were  slain.  Thus  Rome  remained  vic¬ 
torious,  but  with  such  a  sacrifice  that  only  one 
survivor  returned  to  his  home.  Whose  was  the 
loss  on  both  sides?  Whose  the  grief,  but  of  the 
offspring  of  /Eneas,  the  descendants  of  Ascanius, 
the  progeny  of  Venus,  the  grandsons  of  Jupiter? 
For  this,  too,  was  a  “worse  than  civil”  war,  in 
which  the  belligerent  states  were  mother  and 
daughter.  And  to  this  combat  of  the  three  twin- 
brothers  there  was  added  another  atrocious  and 
horrible  catastrophe.  For  as  the  two  nations  had 
formerly  been  friendly  (being  related  and  neigh¬ 
bours),  the  sister  of  the  Horatii  had  been  be¬ 
trothed  to  one  of  the  Curiatii;  and  she,  when 
she  saw  her  brother  wearing  the  spoils  of  her  be¬ 
trothed,  burst  into  tears,  and  was  slain  by  her 
own  brother  in  his  anger.  To  me,  this  one  girl 
seems  to  have  been  more  humane  than  the  whole 
Roman  people.  I  cannot  think  her  to  blame  for 
lamenting  the  man  to  whom  already  she  had 
plighted  her  troth,  or,  as  perhaps  she  was  doing, 
for  grieving  that  her  brother  should  have  slain 
him  to  whom  he  had  promised  his  sister.  For 
why  do  we  praise  the  grief  of  /Eneas  (in  Virgil1) 
over  the  enemy  cut  down  even  by  his  own  hand? 
Why  did  Marcellus  shed  tears  over  the  city  of 
Syracuse,  when  he  recollected,  just  before  he 
destroyed,  its  magnificence  and  meridian  glory, 
and  thought  upon  the  common  lot  of  all  things? 
I  demand,  in  the  name  of  humanity,  that  if  men 
are  praised  for  tears  shed  over  enemies  con¬ 
quered  by  themselves,  a  weak  girl  should  not  be 
counted  criminal  for  bewailing  her  lover  slaugh¬ 
tered  by  the  hand  of  her  brother.  While,  then, 
that  maiden  was  weeping  for  the  death  of  her 
betrothed  inflicted  by  her  brother’s  hand,  Rome 
was  rejoicing  that  such  devastation  had  been 
wrought  on  her  mother  state  and  that  she  had 
purchased  a  victory  with  such  an  expenditure  of 
the  common  blood  of  herself  and  the  Albans. 

Why  allege  to  me  the  mere  names  and  words 
of  “glory”  and  “victory”?  Tear  off  the  disguise 
of  wild  delusion,  and  look  at  the  naked  deeds: 
weigh  them  naked,  judge  them  naked.  Let  the 

1Ibid,  bk.  x.  821,  of  Lausus: 

But  when  Anchises ’  son  surveyed 
The  fair,  fair  face  so  ghastly  made, 

He  groaned,  by  tenderness  unmanned, 

And  stretched  the  sympathizing  hand,  etc. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


176 

charge  be  brought  against  Alba,  as  Troy  was 
charged  with  adultery.  There  is  no  such  charge, 
none  like  it  found:  the  war  was  kindled  only  in 
order  that  there 

Might  sound  in  languid  ears  the  cry 

Of  Tullus  and  of  victory,1 
This  vice  of  restless  ambition  was  the  sole  mo¬ 
tive  to  that  social  and  parricidal  war — a  vice 
which  Sallust  brands  in  passing;  for  when  he  has 
spoken  with  brief  but  hearty  commendation  of 
those  primitive  times  in  which  life  was  spent 
without  covetousness,  and  every  one  was  suffi¬ 
ciently  satisfied  with  what  he  had,  he  goes  on: 
“But  after  Cyrus  in  Asia,  and  the  Lacedemoni¬ 
ans  and  Athenians  in  Greece,  began  to  subdue 
cities  and  nations,  and  to  account  the  lust  of 
sovereignty  a  sufficient  ground  for  war,  and  to 
reckon  that  the  greatest  glory  consisted  in  the 
greatest  empire”;  and  so  on,  as  I  need  not  now 
quote.  This  lust  of  sovereignty  disturbs  and  con¬ 
sumes  the  human  race  with  frightful  ills.  By 
this  lust  Rome  was  overcome  when  she  tri¬ 
umphed  over  Alba  and,  praising  her  own  crime, 
called  it  glory.  For,  as  our  Scriptures  say,  “the 
wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart’s  desire,  and  bless- 
eth  the  covetous,  whom  the  Lord  abhorreth.” 2 
Away,  then,  with  these  deceitful  masks,  these 
deluding  whitewashes,  that  things  may  be  truth¬ 
fully  seen  and  scrutinized.  Let  no  man  tell  me 
that  this  and  the  other  was  a  “great”  man,  be¬ 
cause  he  fought  and  conquered  so  and  so.  Gladi¬ 
ators  fight  and  conquer,  and  this  barbarism  has 
its  meed  of  praise;  but  I  think  it  were  better  to 
take  the  consequences  of  any  sloth,  than  to  seek 
the  glory  won  by  such  arms.  And  if  two  gladia¬ 
tors  entered  the  arena  to  fight,  one  being  father, 
the  other  his  son,  who  would  endure  such  a  spec¬ 
tacle?  who  would  not  be  revolted  by  it?  How, 
then,  could  that  be  a  glorious  war  which  a  daugh¬ 
ter-state  waged  against  its  mother?  Or  did  it 
constitute  a  difference,  that  the  battlefield  was 
not  an  arena,  and  that  the  wide  plains  were  filled 
with  the  carcasses  not  of  two  gladiators,  but  of 
many  of  the  flower  of  two  nations;  and  that 
those  contests  were  viewed  not  by  the  amphi¬ 
theatre,  but  by  the  whole  world,  and  furnished  a 
profane  spectacle  both  to  those  alive  at  the  time, 
and  to  their  posterity,  so  long  as  the  fame  of  it 
is  handed  down? 

Yet  those  gods,  guardians  of  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire,  and,  as  it  were,  theatric  spectators  of  such 
contests  as  these,  were  not  satisfied  until  the 
sister  of  the  Horatii  was  added  by  her  brother’s 
sword  as  a  third  victim  from  the  Roman  side,  so 
that  Rome  herself,  though  she  won  the  day, 

1Ibid.  bk.  vi.  813.  2Ps.  10.  3. 


should  have  as  many  deaths  to  mourn.  After¬ 
wards,  as  a  fruit  of  the  victory,  Alba  was  de¬ 
stroyed,  though  it  was  there  the  Trojan  gods  had 
formed  a  third  asylum  after  Ilium  had  been 
sacked  by  the  Greeks,  and  after  they  had  left 
Lavinium,  where  ^Eneas  had  founded  a  kingdom 
in  a  land  of  banishment.  But  probably  Alba  was 
destroyed  because  from  it  too  the  gods  had  mi¬ 
grated,  in  their  usual  fashion,  as  Virgil  says: 

Gone  from  each  fane ,  each  sacred  shrine , 

Are  those  who  made  this  realm  divine .3 
Gone,  indeed,  and  from  now  their  third  asylum, 
that  Rome  might  seem  all  the  wiser  in  commit¬ 
ting  herself  to  them  after  they  had  deserted 
three  other  cities.  Alba,  whose  king  Amulius  had 
banished  his  brother,  displeased  them;  Rome, 
whose  king  Romulus  had  slain  his  brother, 
pleased  them.  But  before  Alba  was  destroyed, 
its  population,  they  say,  was  amalgamated  with 
the  inhabitants  of  Rome,  so  that  the  two  cities 
were  one.  Well,  admitting  it  was  so,  yet  the  fact 
remains  that  the  city  of  Ascanius,  the  third  re¬ 
treat  of  the  Trojan  gods,  was  destroyed  by  the 
daughter-city.  Besides,  to  effect  this  pitiful  con¬ 
glomerate  of  the  war’s  leavings,  much  blood 
was  spilt  on  both  sides.  And  how  shall  I  speak 
in  detail  of  the  same  wars,  so  often  renewed  in 
subsequent  reigns,  though  they  seemed  to  have 
been  finished  by  great  victories;  and  of  wars 
that  time  after  time  were  brought  to  an  end  by 
great  slaughters,  and  which  yet  time  after  time 
were  renewed  by  the  posterity  of  those  who  had 
made  peace  and  struck  treaties?  Of  this  calam¬ 
itous  history  we  have  no  small  proof,  in  the  fact 
that  no  subsequent  king  closed  the  gates  of  war; 
and  therefore,  with  all  their  tutelar  gods,  no  one 
of  them  reigned  in  peace. 

Chap.  15.  What  manner  of  life  and  death  the 

Roman  kings  had 

And  what  was  the  end  of  the  kings  them¬ 
selves?  Of  Romulus,  a  flattering  legend  tells  us 
that  he  was  assumed  into  heaven.  But  certain  Ro¬ 
man  historians  relate  that  he  was  torn  in  pieces 
by  the  senate  for  his  ferocity,  and  that  a  man, 
Julius  Proculus,  was  suborned  to  give  out  that 
Romulus  had  appeared  to  him,  and  through  him 
commanded  the  Roman  people  to  worship  him 
as  a  god;  and  that  in  this  way  the  people,  who 
were  beginning  to  resent  the  action  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  were  quieted  and  pacified.  For  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun  had  also  happened;  and  this  was  attrib¬ 
uted  to  the  divine  power  of  Romulus  by  the  ig¬ 
norant  multitude,  who  did  not  know  that  it  was 
brought  about  by  the  fixed  laws  of  the  sun’s 

Z/Eneid.  bk.  ii.  351-2. 


THE  CITY  OF 

course:  though  this  grief  of  the  sun  might  rather 
have  been  considered  proof  that  Romulus  had 
been  slain,  and  that  the  crime  was  indicated  by 
this  deprivation  of  the  sun’s  light ;  as,  in  truth, 
was  the  case  when  the  Lord  was  crucified 
through  the  cruelty  and  impiety  of  the  Jews. 
For  it  is  sufficiently  demonstrated  that  this  latter 
obscuration  of  the  sun  did  not  occur  by  the  nat¬ 
ural  laws  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  because  it  was 
then  the  Jewish  Passover,  which  is  held  only  at 
full  moon,  whereas  natural  eclipses  of  the  sun 
happen  only  at  the  last  quarter  of  the  moon. 
Cicero,  too,  shows  plainly  enough  that  the  apo¬ 
theosis  of  Romulus  was  imaginary  rather  than 
real,  when,  even  while  he  is  praising  him  in  one 
of  Scipio’s  remarks  in  the  De  Republica,  he 
says:  “Such  a  reputation  had  he  acquired,  that 
when  he  suddenly  disappeared  during  an  eclipse 
of  the  sun,  he  was  supposed  to  have  been  as¬ 
sumed  into  the  number  of  the  gods,  which  could 
be  supposed  of  no  mortal  who  had  not  the  high¬ 
est  reputation  for  virtue.”  By  these  words,  “he 
suddenly  disappeared,”  we  are  to  understand 
that  he  was  mysteriously  made  away  with  by  the 
violence  either  of  the  tempest  or  of  a  murderous 
assault.  For  their  other  writers  speak  not  only 
of  an  eclipse,  but  of  a  sudden  storm  also,  which 
certainly  either  afforded .  opportunity  for  the 
crime,  or  itself  made  an  end  of  Romulus.  And  of 
Tullus  Hostilius,  who  was  the  third  king  of 
Rome,  and  who  was  himself  destroyed  by  light¬ 
ning,  Cicero  in  the  same  book  says,  that  “he  was 
not  supposed  to  have  been  deified  by  this  death, 
possibly  because  the  Romans  were  unwilling  to 
vulgarize  the  promotion  they  were  assured  or 
persuaded  of  in  the  case  of  Romulus,  lest  they 
should  bring  it  into  contempt  by  gratuitously 
assigning  it  to  all  and  sundry.”  In  one  of  his  in¬ 
vectives,  too,  he  says,  in  round  terms,  “The 
founder  of  this  city,  Romulus,  we  have  raised  to 
immortality  and  divinity  by  kindly  celebrating 
his  services”;  implying  that  his  deification  was 
not  real,  but  reputed,  and  called  so  by  courtesy 
on  account  of  his  virtues.  In  the  dialogue  Hor- 
tensiusy  too,  while  speaking  of  the  regular 
eclipses  of  the  sun,  he  says  that  they  “produce 
the  same  darkness  as  covered  the  death  of  Rom¬ 
ulus,  which  happened  during  an  eclipse  of  the 
sun.”  Here  you  see  he  does  not  at  all  shrink 
from  speaking  of  his  “death,”  for  Cicero  was 
more  of  a  reasoner  than  an  eulogist. 

The  other  kings  of  Rome,  too,  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  Numa  Pompilius  and  Ancus  Marcius, 
who  died  natural  deaths,  what  horrible  ends  they 
had!  Tullus  Hostilius,  the  conqueror  and  de¬ 
stroyer  of  Alba,  was,  as  I  said,  himself  and  all 


GOD  III.  15  177 

his  house  consumed  by  lightning.  Priscus  Tar- 
quinius  was  slain  by  his  predecessor’s  sons.  Ser- 
vius  Tullius  was  foully  murdered  by  his  son-in- 
law  Tarquinius  Superbus,  who  succeeded  him 
on  the  throne.  Nor  did  so  flagrant  a  parricide 
committed  against  Rome’s  best  king  drive  from 
their  altars  and  shrines  those  gods  who  were  said 
to  have  been  moved  by  Paris’  adultery  to  treat 
poor  Troy  in  this  style,  and  abandon  it  to  the 
fire  and  sword  of  the  Greeks.  Nay.  the  very  Tar- 
quin  who  had  murdered,  was  allowed  to  succeed 
his  father-in-law.  And  this  infamous  parricide, 
during  the  reign  he  had  secured  by  murder,  was 
allowed  to  triumph  in  many  victorious  wars,  and 
to  build  the  Capitol  from  their  spoils;  the  gods 
meanwhile  not  departing,  but  abiding,  and  abet¬ 
ting.  and  suffering  their  king  Jupiter  to  preside 
and  reign  over  them  in  that  very  spendid  Capi¬ 
tol,  the  work  of  a  parricide.  For  he  did  not  build 
the  Capitol  in  the  days  of  his  innocence,  and 
then  suffer  banishment  for  subsequent  crimes; 
but  to  that  reign  during  which  he  built  the  Capi¬ 
tol,  he  won  his  way  by  unnatural  crime.  And 
when  he  was  afterwards  banished  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  forbidden  the  city,  it  was  not  for  his 
own  but  his  son’s  wickedness  in  the  affair  of  Lu- 
cretia — a  crime  perpetrated  not  only  without  his 
cognizance,  but  in  his  absence.  For  at  that  time 
he  was  besieging  Ardea,  and  fighting  Rome’s 
battles;  and  we  cannot  say  what  he  would  have 
done  had  he  been  aware  of  his  son’s  crime.  Not¬ 
withstanding,  though  his  opinion  was  neither  in¬ 
quired  into  nor  ascertained,  the  people  stripped 
him  of  royalty;  and  when  he  returned  to  Rome 
with  his  army,  it  was  admitted,  but  he  was  ex¬ 
cluded,  abandoned  by  his  troops,  and  the  gates 
shut  in  his  face.  And  yet,  after  he  had  appealed 
to  the  neighbouring  states,  and  tormented  the 
Romans  with  calamitous  but  unsuccessful  wars, 
and  when  he  was  deserted  by  the  ally  on  whom 
he  most  depended,  despairing  of  regaining  the 
kingdom,  he  lived  a  retired  and  quiet  life  for 
fourteen  years,  as  it  is  reported,  in  Tusculum,  a 
Roman  town,  where  he  grew  old  in  his  wife’s 
company,  and  at  last  terminated  his  days  in  a 
much  more  desirable  fashion  than  his  father-in- 
law,  who  had  perished  by  the  hand  of  his  son-in- 
law;  his  own  daughter  abetting,  if  report  be 
true.  And  this  Tarquin  the  Romans  called,  not 
the  Cruel,  nor  the  Infamous,  but  the  Proud; 
their  own  pride  perhaps  resenting  his  tyrannical 
airs.  So  little  did  they  make  of  his  murdering 
their  best  king,  his  own  father-in-law,  that  they 
elected  him  their  own  king.  I  wonder  if  it  was 
not  even  more  criminal  in  them  to  reward  so 
bountifully  so  great  a  criminal.  And  yet  there 


1 78  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


was  no  word  of  the  gods  abandoning  the  altars; 
unless,  perhaps,  some  one  will  say  in  defence  of 
the  gods,  that  they  remained  at  Rome  for  the 
purpose  of  punishing  the  Romans,  rather  than 
of  aiding  and  profiting  them,  seducing  them  by 
empty  victories,  and  wearing  them  out  by  severe 
wars.  Such  was  the  life  of  the  Romans  under  the 
kings  during  the  much-praised  epoch  of  the 
state  which  extends  to  the  expulsion  of  Tar- 
quinius  Superbus  in  the  243d  year,  during  which 
all  those  victories  which  were  bought  with  so 
much  blood  and  such  disasters,  hardly  pushed 
Rome’s  dominion  twenty  miles  from  the  city;  a 
territory  which  would  by  no  means  bear  com¬ 
parison  with  that  of  any  petty  Gaetulian  state. 

Chap.  16  .Of  the  first  Roman  consuls ,  the  one 
of  whom  drove  the  other  from  the  country, 
and  shortly  after  perished  at  Rome  by  the 
hand  of  a  wounded  enemy,  and  so  ended  a 
career  of  unnatural  murders 
To  this  epoch  let  us  add  also  that  of  which 
Sallust  says,  that  it  was  ordered  with  justice  .and 
moderation,  while  the  fear  of  Tarquin  and  of  a 
war  with  Etruria  was  impending.  For  so  long  as 
the  Etrurians  aided  the  efforts  of  Tarquin  to  re¬ 
gain  the  throne,  Rome  was  convulsed  with  dis¬ 
tressing  war.  And  therefore  he  says  that  the 
state  was  ordered  with  justice  and  moderation, 
through  the  pressure  of  fear,  not  through  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  equity.  And  in  this  very  brief  period, 
how  calamitous  a  year  was  that  in  which  consuls 
were  first  created,  when  the  kingly  power  was 
abolished!  They  did  not  fulfill  their  term  of  of¬ 
fice.  For  Junius  Brutus  deprived  his  colleague 
Lucius  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  and  banished  him 
from  the  city;  and  shortly  after  he  himself  fell 
in  battle,  at  once  slaying  and  slain,  having  for¬ 
merly  put  to  death  his  own  sons  and  his  broth- 
ers-in-law,  because  he  had  discovered  that  they 
were  conspiring  to  restore  Tarquin.  It  is  this 
deed  that  Virgil  shudders  to  record,  even  while 
he  seems  to  praise  it;  for  when  he  says: 

An  call  his  own  rebellious  seed 
For  menaced  liberty  to  bleed , 

he  immediately  exclaims, 

Unhappy  father!  howsoe’er 
The  deed  be  judged  by  after  days; 

that  is  to  say,  let  posterity  judge  the  deed  as 
they  please,  let  them  praise  and  extol  the  father 
who  slew  his  sons,  he  is  unhappy.  And  then  he 
adds,  as  if  to  console  so  unhappy  a  man: 

His  country’s  love  shall  all  o’erbear , 

And  unextinguished  thirst  of  praise .l 
lIbid.}  bk.  vi.  820,  etc. 


In  the  tragic  end  of  Brutus,  who  slew  his  own 
sons,  and  though  he  slew  his  enemy,  Tarquin’s 
son,  yet  could  not  survive  him,  but  was  survived 
by  Tarquin  the  elder,  does  not  the  innocence  of 
his  colleague  Collatinus  seem  to  be  vindicated, 
who,  though  a  good  citizen,  suffered  the  same 
punishment  as  Tarquin  himself,  when  that  ty¬ 
rant  was  banished?  For  Brutus  himself  is  said  to 
have  been  a  relative  of  Tarquin.  But  Collatinus 
had  the  misfortune  to  bear  not  only  the  blood 
but  the  name  of  Tarquin.  To  change  his  name, 
then,  not  his  country,  would  have  been  his  fit 
penalty:  to  abridge  his  name  by  this  word,  and 
be  called  simply  L.  Collatinus.  But  he  was  not 
compelled  to  lose  what  he  could  lose  without  de¬ 
triment,  but  was  stripped  of  the  honour  of  the 
first  consulship,  and  was  banished  from  the  land 
he  loved.  Is  this,  then,  the  glory  of  Brutus — this 
injustice,  alike  detestable  and  profitless  to  the 
republic?  Was  it  to  this  he  was  driven  by  “his 
country’s  love,  and  unextinguished  thirst  of 
praise?” 

When  Tarquin  the  tyrant  was  expelled.  L. 
Tarquinius  Collatinus,  the  husband  of  Lucretia, 
was  created  consul  along  with  Brutus.  How  just¬ 
ly  the  people  acted,  in  looking  more  to  the  char¬ 
acter  than  the  name  of  a  citizen!  How  unjustly 
Brutus  acted,  in  depriving  of  honour  and  coun¬ 
try  his  colleague  in  that  new  office,  whom  he 
might  have  deprived  of  his  name,  if  it  were  so 
offensive  to  him!  Such  were  the  ills,  such  the 
disasters,  which  fell  out  when  the  government 
was  “ordered  with  justice  and  moderation.”  Lu¬ 
cretius,  too,  who  succeeded  Brutus,  was  carried 
off  by  disease  before  the  end  of  that  same  year. 
So  P.  Valerius,  who  succeeded  Collatinus,  and 
M.  Horatius,  who  filled  the  vacancy  occasioned 
by  the  death  of  Lucretius,  completed  that  dis¬ 
astrous  and  funereal  year,  which  had  five  con¬ 
suls.  Such  was  the  year  in  which  the  Roman  re¬ 
public  inaugurated  the  new  honour  and  office  of 
the  consulship. 

Chap.  17  .Of  the  disasters  which  vexed  the  Ro¬ 
man  republic  after  the  inauguration  of  the 

consulship,  and  of  the  non-intervention  of  the 

gods  of  Rome. 

After  this,  when  their  fears  were  gradually 
diminished — not  because  the  wars  ceased,  but 
because  they  were  not  so  furious — that  period  in 
which  things  were  “ordered  with  justice  and 
moderation”  drew  to  an  end,  and  there  followed 
that  state  of  matters  which  Sallust  thus  briefly 
sketches:  “Then  began  the  patricians  to  oppress 
the  people  as  slaves,  to  condemn  them  to  death 
or  scourging,  as  the  kings  had  done,  to  drive 


THE  CITY  OF 

them  from  their  holdings,  and  to  tyrannize  over 
those  who  had  no  property  to  lose.  The  people, 
overwhelmed  by  these  oppressive  measures,  and 
most  of  all  by  usury,  and  obliged  to  contribute 
both  money  and  personal  service  to  the  constant 
wars,  at  length  took  arms  and  seceded  to  Mount 
Aventine  and  Mount  Sacer,  and  thus  secured 
for  themselves  tribunes  and  protective  laws. 
But  it  was  only  the  second  Punic  war  that  put 
an  end  on  both  sides  to  discord  and  strife.”  But 
why  should  I  spend  time  in  writing  such  things, 
or  make  others  spend  it  in  reading  them?  Let  the 
terse  summary  of  Sallust  suffice  to  intimate  the 
misery  of  the  republic  through  all  that  long  pe¬ 
riod  till  the  second  Punic  war,  how  it  was  dis¬ 
tracted  from  without  by  unceasing  wars,  and 
torn  with  civil  broils  and  dissensions.  So  that 
those  victories  they  boast  were  not  the  substan¬ 
tial  joys  of  the  happy,  but  the  empty  comforts 
of  wretched  men,  and  seductive  incitements  to 
turbulent  men  to  concoct  disasters  upon  dis¬ 
asters.  And  let  not  the  good  and  prudent  Ro¬ 
mans  be  angry  at  our  saying  this ;  and  indeed  we 
need  neither  deprecate  nor  denounce  their  an¬ 
ger,  for  we  know  they  will  harbour  none.  For  we 
speak  no  more  severely  than  their  own  authors, 
and  much  less  elaborately  and  strikingly;  yet 
they  diligently  read  these  authors,  and  compel 
their  children  to  learn  them.  But  they  who  are 
angry,  what  would  they  do  to  me  were  I  to  say 
what  Sallust  says?  “Frequent  mobs,  seditions, 
and  at  last  civil  wars,  became  common,  while  a 
few  leading  men  on  whom  the  masses  were  de¬ 
pendent,  affected  supreme  power  under  the 
seemly  pretence  of  seeking  the  good  of  senate 
and  people;  citizens  were  judged  good  or  bad 
without  reference  to  their  loyalty  to  the  repub¬ 
lic  (for  all  were  equally  corrupt) ;  but  the 
wealthy  and  dangerously  powerful  were  es¬ 
teemed  good  citizens,  because  they  maintained 
the  existing  state  of  things.”  Now,  if  those  his¬ 
torians  judged  that  an  honourable  freedom  of 
speech  required  that  they  should  not  be  silent 
regarding  the  blemishes  of  their  own  state, 
which  they  have  in  many  places  loudly  applaud¬ 
ed  in  their  ignorance  of  that  other  and  true  city 
in  which  citizenship  is  an  everlasting  dignity; 
what  does  it  become  us  to  do,  whose  liberty 
ought  to  be  so  much  greater,  as  our  hope  in  God 
is  better  and  more  assured,  when  they  impute  to 
our  Christ  the  calamities  of  this  age,  in  order 
that  men  of  the  less  instructed  and  weaker  sort 
may  be  alienated  from  that  city  in  which  alone 
eternal  and  blessed  life  can  be  enjoyed?  Nor  do 
we  utter  against  their  gods  anything  more  hor¬ 
rible  than  their  own  authors  do,  whom  they  read 


GOD  III.  16-17  179 

and  circulate.  For,  indeed,  all  that  we  have  said 
we  have  derived  from  them,  and  there  is  much 
more  to  say  of  a  worse  kind  which  we  are  unable 
to  say. 

Where,  then,  were  those  gods  who  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  justly  worshipped  for  the  slender 
and  delusive  prosperity  of  this  world,  when  the 
Romans,  who  were  seduced  to  their  service  by 
lying  wiles,  were  harassed  by  such  calamities? 
Where  were  they  when  Valerius  the  consul  was 
killed  while  defending  the  Capitol,  that  had  been 
fired  by  exiles  and  slaves?  He  was  himself  bet¬ 
ter  able  to  defend  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  than 
that  crowd  of  divinities  with  their  most  high 
and  mighty  king,  whose  temple  he  came  to  the 
rescue  of,  were  able  to  defend  him.  Where  were 
they  when  the  city,  worn  out  with  unceasing  se¬ 
ditions,  was  waiting  in  some  kind  of  calm  for 
the  return  of  the  ambassadors  who  had  been 
sent  to  Athens  to  borrow  laws,  and  was  desolat¬ 
ed  by  dreadful  famine  and  pestilence?  Where 
were  they  when  the  people,  again  distressed  with 
famine,  created  for  the  first  time  a  prefect  of 
the  market;  and  when  Spurius  Melius,  who,  as 
the  famine  increased,  distributed  corn  to  the 
famishing  masses,  was  accused  of  aspiring  to 
royalty,  and  at  the  instance  of  this  same  prefect, 
and  on  the  authority  of  the  superannuated  dic¬ 
tator  L.  Quintius,  was  put  to  death  by  Quintus 
Servilius,  master  of  the  horse — an  event  which 
occasioned  a  serious  and  dangerous  riot?  Where 
were  they  when  that  very  severe  pestilence  vis¬ 
ited  Rome,  on  account  of  which  the  people,  after 
long  and  wearisome  and  useless  supplications  of 
the  helpless  gods,  conceived  the  idea  of  celebrat¬ 
ing  Lectisternia,  which  had  never  been  done  be¬ 
fore;  that  is  to  say,  they  set  couches  in  honour 
of  the  gods,  which  accounts  for  the  name  of  this 
sacred  rite,  or  rather  sacrilege?  Where  were  they 
when,  during  ten  successive  years  of  reverses, 
the  Roman  army  suffered  frequent  and  great 
losses  among  the  Veians,  and  would  have  been 
destroyed  but  for  the  succour  of  Furius  Camillus, 
who  was  afterwards  banished  by  an  ungrateful 
country?  Where  were  they  when  the  Gauls  took, 
sacked,  burned,  and  desolated  Rome?  Where 
were  they  when  that  memorable  pestilence 
wrought  such  destruction,  in  which  Furius  Ca¬ 
millus  too  perished,  who  first  defended  the  un¬ 
grateful  republic  from  the  Veians,  and  after¬ 
wards  saved  it  from  the  Gauls?  Nay,  during  this 
plague,  they  introduced  a  new  pestilence  of 
scenic  entertainments,  which  spread  its  more 
fatal  contagion,  not  to  the  bodies,  but  the  morals 
of  the  Romans.  Where  were  they  when  another 
frightful  pestilence  visited  the  city — I  mean  the 


!  8o  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


poisonings  imputed  to  an  incredible  number  of 
noble  Roman  matrons,  whose  characters  were 
infected  with  a  disease  more  fatal  than  any 
plague?  Or  when  both  consuls  at  the  head  of  the 
army  were  beset  by  the  Samnites  in  the  Caudine 
Forks,  and  forced  to  strike  a  shameful  treaty, 
600  Roman  knights  being  kept  as  hostages; 
while  the  troops,  having  laid  down  their  arms, 
and  being  stripped  of  everything,  were  made  to 
pass  under  the  yoke  with  one  garment  each?  Or 
when,  in  the  midst  of  a  serious  pestilence,  light¬ 
ning  struck  the  Roman  camp  and  killed  many? 
Or  when  Rome  was  driven,  by  the  violence  of 
another  intolerable  plague,  to  send  to  Epidaurus 
for  ^Esculapius  as  a  god  of  medicine;  since  the 
frequent  adulteries  of  Jupiter  in  his  youth  had 
not  perhaps  left  this  king  of  all  who  so  long 
reigned  in  the  Capitol,  any  leisure  for  the  study 
of  medicine?  Or  when,  at  one  time,  the  Lucani- 
ans,  Brutians,  Samnites,  Tuscans,  and  Senonian 
Gauls  conspired  against  Rome,  and  first  slew  her 
ambassadors,  then  overthrew  an  army  under  the 
praetor,  putting  to  the  sword  13.000  men,  besides 
the  commander  and  seven  tribunes?  Or  when 
the  people,  after  the  serious  and  long-continued 
disturbances  at  Rome,  at  last  plundered  the  city 
and  withdrew  to  Janiculus;  a  danger  so  grave, 
that  Hortensius  was  created  dictator,  an  office 
which  they  had  recourse  to  only  in  extreme 
emergencies;  and  he,  having  brought  back  the 
people,  died  while  yet  he  retained  his  office,  an 
event  without  precedent  in  the  case  of  any  dicta¬ 
tor,  and  which  was  a  shame  to  those  gods  who 
had  now  .Esculapius  among  them? 

At  that  time,  indeed,  so  many  wars  were 
everywhere  engaged  in,  that  through  scarcity  of 
soldiers  they  enrolled  for  military  service  the 
proletarii,  who  received  this  name,  because,  be¬ 
ing  too  poor  to  equip  for  military  service,  they 
had  leisure  to  beget  offspring.1  Pyrrhus,  king  of 
Greece,  and  at  that  time  of  wide-spread  renown, 
was  invited  by  the  Tarentines  to  enlist  himself 
against  Rome.  It  was  to  him  that  Apollo,  when 
consulted  regarding  the  issue  of  his  enterprise, 
uttered  with  some  pleasantry  so  ambiguous  an 
oracle,  that  whichever  alternative  happened,  the 
god  himself  should  be  counted  divine.  For  he  so 
worded  the  oracle  that  whether  Pyrrhus  was 
conquered  by  the  Romans,  or  the  Romans  by 
Pyrrhus,  the  soothsaying  god  would  securely 
await  the  issue.  And  then  what  frightful  massa¬ 
cres  of  both  armies  ensued!  Yet  Pyrrhus  re¬ 
mained  conqueror,  and  would  have  been  able 
now  to  proclaim  Apollo  a  true  diviner,  as  he  un¬ 
derstood  the  oracle,  had  not  the  Romans  been 
lProletarius,  from  proles ,  offspring. 


the  conquerors  in  the  next  engagement.  And 
while  such  disastrous  wars  were  being  waged, 
a  terrible  disease  broke  out  among  the  wom¬ 
en.  For  the  pregnant  women  died  before  de¬ 
livery.  And  ^Esculapius,  I  fancy,  excused  him¬ 
self  in  this  matter  on  the  ground  that  he  pro¬ 
fessed  to  be  arch-physician,  not  midwife.  Cattle, 
too,  similarly  perished;  so  that  it  was  believed 
that  the  whole  race  of  animals  was  destined  to 
become  extinct.  Then  what  shall  I  say  of  that 
memorable  winter  in  which  the  weather  was  so 
incredibly  severe,  that  in  the  Forum  frightfully 
deep  snow  lay  for  forty  days  together,  and  the 
Tiber  was  frozen?  Had  such  things  happened  in 
our  time,  what  accusations  we  should  have 
heard  from  our  enemies!  And  that  other  great 
pestilence,  which  raged  so  long  and  carried  off  so 
many;  what  shall  I  say  of  it?  Spite  of  all  the 
drugs  of  iEsculapius,  it  only  grew  worse  in  its 
second  year,  till  at  last  recourse  was  had  to  the 
Sibylline  books — a  kind  of  oracle  which,  as  Ci¬ 
cero  says  in  his  De  Divinatione,  owes  signifi¬ 
cance  to  its  interpreters,  who  make  doubtful 
conjectures  as  they  can  or  as  they  wish.  In  this 
instance,  the  cause  of  the  plague  was  said  to  be 
that  so  many  temples  had  been  used  as  private 
residences.  And  thus  ^Esculapius  for  the  present 
escaped  the  charge  of  either  ignominious  negli¬ 
gence  or  want  of  skill.  But  why  were  so  many 
allowed  to  occupy  sacred  tenements  without  in¬ 
terference,  unless  because  supplication  had  long 
been  addressed  in  vain  to  such  a  crowd  of  gods, 
and  so  by  degrees  the  sacred  places  were  de¬ 
serted  of  worshippers,  and  being  thus  vacant, 
could  without  offence  be  put  at  least  to  some  hu¬ 
man  uses?  And  the  temples,  which  were  at  that 
time  laboriously  recognized  and  restored  that 
the  plague  might  be  stayed,  fell  afterwards  into 
disuse,  and  were  again  devoted  to  the  same  hu¬ 
man  uses.  Had  they  not  thus  lapsed  into  obscur¬ 
ity,  it  could  not  have  been  pointed  to  as  proof 
of  Varro’s  great  erudition  that  in  his  work  on 
sacred  places  he  cites  so  many  that  were  un¬ 
known.  Meanwhile,  the  restoration  of  the  tem¬ 
ples  procured  no  cure  of  the  plague,  but  only  a 
fine  excuse  for  the  gods. 

Chap.  18.  The  disasters  suffered  by  the  Romans 
in  the  Punic  wars ,  which  were  not  mitigated 
by  the  protection  of  the  gods 
In  the  Punic  wars,  again,  when  victory  hung 
so  long  in  the  balance  between  the  two  king¬ 
doms,  when  two  powerful  nations  were  strain¬ 
ing  every  nerve  and  using  all  their  resources 
against  one  another,  how  many  smaller  king¬ 
doms  were  crushed,  how  many  large  and  flour- 


THE  CITY  OF 

ishing  cities  were  demolished,  how  many  states 
were  overwhelmed  and  ruined,  how  many  dis¬ 
tricts  and  lands  far  and  near  were  desolated! 
How  often  were  the  victors  on  either  side  van¬ 
quished  !  What  multitudes  of  men,  both  of  those 
actually  in  arms  and  of  others,  were  destroyed! 
What  huge  navies,  too,  were  crippled  in  engage¬ 
ments,  or  were  sunk  by  every  kind  of  marine  dis¬ 
aster!  Were  we  to  attempt  to  recount  or  men¬ 
tion  these  calamities,  we  should  become  writers 
of  history.  At  that  period  Rome  was  mightily 
perturbed,  and  resorted  to  vain  and  ludicrous  ex¬ 
pedients.  On  the  authority  of  the  Sibylline 
books,  the  secular  games  were  re-appointed, 
which  had  been  inaugurated  a  century  before 
but  had  faded  into  oblivion  in  happier  times. 
The  games  consecrated  to  the  infernal  gods  were 
also  renewed  by  the  pontiffs;  for  they,  too,  had 
sunk  into  disuse  in  the  better  times.  And  no  won¬ 
der;  for  when  they  were  renewed,  the  great 
abundance  of  dying  men  made  all  hell  rejoice  at 
its  riches,  and  give  itself  up  to  sport:  for  cer¬ 
tainly  the  ferocious  wars,  and  disastrous  quar¬ 
rels,  and  bloody  victories — now  on  one  side,  and 
now  on  the  other — though  most  calamitous  to 
men,  afforded  great  sport  and  a  rich  banquet  to 
the  devils.  But  in  the  first  Punic  war  there  was 
no  more  disastrous  event  than  the  Roman  defeat 
in  which  Regulus  was  taken.  We  made  mention 
of  him  in  the  two  former  books  as  an  incontest¬ 
ably  great  man,  who  had  before  conquered  and 
subdued  the  Carthaginians,  and  who  would  have 
put  an  end  to  the  first  Punic  war,  had  not  an  in¬ 
ordinate  appetite  for  praise  and  glory  prompted 
him  to  impose  on  the  worn-out  Carthagians 
harder  conditions  than  they  could  bear.  If  the 
unlooked-for  captivity  and  unseemly  bondage 
of  this  man,  his  fidelity  to  his  oath,  and  his  sur¬ 
passingly  cruel  death,  do  not  bring  a  blush  to  the 
face  of  the  gods,  it  is  true  that  they  are  brazen 
and  bloodless. 

Nor  were  there  wanting  at  that  time  very 
heavy  disasters  within  the  city  itself.  For  the 
Tiber  w&s  extraordinarily  flooded,  and  destroyed 
almost  all  the  lower  parts  of  the  city;  some 
buildings  being  carried  away  by  the  violence  of 
the  torrent,  while  others  were  soaked  to  rotten¬ 
ness  by  the  water  that  stood  round  them  even 
after  the  flood  was  gone.  This  visitation  was  fol¬ 
lowed  by  a  fire  which  was  still  more  destructive, 
for  it  consumed  some  of  the  loftier  buildings 
round  the  Forum,  and  spared  not  even  its  own 
proper  temple,  that  of  Vesta,  in  which  virgins 
chosen  for  this  honour,  or  rather  for  this  punish¬ 
ment,  had  been  employed  in  conferring,  as  it 
were,  everlasting  life  on  fire,  by  ceaselessly  feed- 


GOD  III.  18-19  181 

ing  it  with  fresh  fuel.  But  at  the  time  we  speak 
of,  the  fire  in  the  temple  was  not  content  with 
being  kept  alive :  it  raged.  And  when  the  virgins, 
scared  by  its  vehemence,  were  unable  to  save 
those  fatal  images  which  had  already  brought 
destruction  on  three  cities1  in  which  they  had 
been  received,  Metellus  the  priest,  forgetful  of 
his  own  safety,  rushed  in  and  rescued  the  sacred 
things,  though  he  was  half  roasted  in  doing  so. 
For  either  the  fire  did  not  recognize  even  him,  or 
else  the  goddess  of  fire  was  there — a  goddess 
who  would  not  have  fled  from  the  fire  supposing 
she  had  been  there.  But  here  you  see  how  a  man 
could  be  of  greater  service  to  Vesta  than  she 
could  be  to  him.  Now  if  these  gods  could  not 
avert  the  fire  from  themselves,  what  help 
against  flames  or  flood  could  they  bring  to  the 
state  of  which  they  were  the  reputed  guardians? 
Facts  have  shown  that  they  were  useless.  These 
objections  of  ours  would  be  idle  if  our  adver¬ 
saries  maintained  that  their  idols  are  consecrat¬ 
ed  rather  as  symbols  of  things  eternal,  than  to 
secure  the  blessings  of  time;  and  that  thus, 
though  the  symbols,  like  all  material  and  visible 
things,  might  perish,  no  damage  thereby  resulted 
to  the  things  for  the  sake  of  which  they  had  been 
consecrated,  while,  as  for  the  images  themselves, 
they  could  be  renewed  again  for  the  same  pur¬ 
poses  they  had  formerly  served.  But  with  la¬ 
mentable  blindness,  they  suppose  that,  through 
the  intervention  of  perishable  gods,  the  earthly 
well-being  and  temporal  prosperity  of  the  state 
can  be  preserved  from  perishing.  And  so,  when 
they  are  reminded  that  even  when  the  gods  re¬ 
mained  among  them  this  well-being  and  pros¬ 
perity  were  blighted,  they  blush  to  change  the 
opinion  they  are  unable  to  defend. 

Chap.  19  .Of  the  calamity  of  the  second  Punic 
war ,  which  consumed  the  strength  of  both 
parties 

As  to  the  second  Punic  war,  it  were  tedious  to 
recount  the  disasters  it  brought  on  both  the  na¬ 
tions  engaged  in  so  protracted  and  shifting  a 
war  that  (by  the  acknowledgment  even  of  those 
writers  who  have  made  it  their  object  not  so 
much  to  narrate  the  wars  as  to  eulogize  the 
dominion  of  Rome)  the  people  who  remained 
victorious  were  less  like  conquerors  than  con¬ 
quered.  For,' when  Hannibal  poured  out  of  Spain 
over  the  Pyrenees,  and  overran  Gaul,  and  burst 
through  the  Alps,  and  during  his  whole  course 
gathered  strength  by  plundering  and  subduing 
as  he  went,  and  inundated  Italy  like  a  torrent, 
how  bloody  were  the  wars,  and  how  continuous 
^roy,  Lavinia,  Alba. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


182 

the  engagements,  that  were  fought!  How  often 
were  the  Romans  vanquished !  How  many  towns 
went  over  to  the  enemy,  and  how  many  were 
taken  and  subdued!  What  fearful  battles  there 
were,  and  how  often  did  the  defeat  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  shed  lustre  on  the  arms  of  Hannibal!  And 
what  shall  I  say  of  the  wonderfully  crushing  de¬ 
feat  at  Cannae,  where  even  Hannibal,  cruel  as  he 
was,  was  yet  sated  with  the  blood  of  his  bitterest 
enemies,  and  gave  orders  that  they  be  spared? 
From  this  field  of  battle  he  sent  to  Carthage 
three  bushels  of  gold  rings,  signifying  that  so 
much  of  the  rank  of  Rome  had  that  day  fallen, 
that  it  was  easier  to  give  an  idea  of  it  by  meas¬ 
ure  than  by  numbers  and  that  the  frightful 
slaughter  of  the  common  rank  and  file  whose 
bodies  lay  undistinguished  by  the  ring,  and  who 
were  numerous  in  proportion  to  their  meanness, 
was  rather  to  be  conjectured  than  accurately  re¬ 
ported.  In  fact,  such  was  the  scarcity  of  soldiers 
after  this,  that  the  Romans  impressed  their 
criminals  on  the  promise  of  impunity,  and  their 
slaves  by  the  bribe  of  liberty,  and  out  of  these 
infamous  classes  did  not  so  much  recruit  as 
create  an  army.  But  these  slaves,  or,  to  give 
them  all  their  titles,  these  freedmen  who  were 
enlisted  to  do  battle  for  the  republic  of  Rome, 
lacked  arms.  And  so  they  took  arms  from  the 
temples,  as  if  the  Romans  were  saying  to  their 
gods:  Lay  down  those  arms  you  have  held  so 
long  in  vain,  if  by  chance  our  slaves  may  be  able 
to  use  to  purpose  what  you,  our  gods,  have  been 
impotent  to  use.  At  that  time,  too,  the  public 
treasury  was  too  low  to  pay  the  soldiers,  and 
private  resources  were  used  for  public  purposes ; 
and  so  generously  did  individuals  contribute  of 
their  property,  that,  saving  the  gold  ring  and 
bulla  which  each  wore,  the  pitiful  mark  of  his 
rank,  no  senator,  and  much  less  any  of  the  other 
orders  and  tribes,  reserved  any  gold  for  his  own 
use.  But  if  in  our  day  they  were  reduced  to  this 
poverty,  who  would  be  able  to  endure  their  re¬ 
proaches,  barely  endurable  as  they  are  now, 
when  more  money  is  spent  on  actors  for  the  sake 
of  a  superfluous  gratification,  than  was  then  dis¬ 
bursed  to  the  legions? 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  destruction  of  the  Saguntines , 
who  received  no  help  from  the  Roman  gods, 
though  perishing  on  account  of  their  fidelity 
to  Rome 

But  among  all  the  disasters  of  the  second  Pu¬ 
nic  war,  there  occurred  none  more  lamentable, 
or  calculated  to  excite  deeper  complaint,  than 
the  fate  of  the  Saguntines.  This  city  of  Spain, 
eminently  friendly  to  Rome,  was  destroyed  by 


its  fidelity  to  the  Roman  people.  For  when  Han¬ 
nibal  had  broken  treaty  with  the  Romans,  he 
sought  occasion  for  provoking  them  to  war  and 
accordingly  made  a  fierce  assault  upon  Sagun- 
tum.  When  this  was  reported  at  Rome,  ambassa¬ 
dors  were  sent  to  Hannibal,  urging  him  to  raise 
the  siege;  and  when  this  remonstrance  was  neg¬ 
lected,  they  proceeded  to  Carthage,  lodged  com¬ 
plaint  against  the  breaking  of  the  treaty,  and  re¬ 
turned  to  Rome  without  accomplishing  their  ob¬ 
ject.  Meanwhile  the  siege  went  on;  and  in  the 
eighth  or  ninth  month,  this  opulent  but  ill-fated 
city,  dear  as  it  was  to  its  own  state  and  to  Rome, 
was  taken,  and  subjected  to  treatment  which 
one  cannot  read,  much  less  narrate,  without  hor¬ 
ror.  And  yet,  because  it  bears  directly  on  the 
matter  in  hand,  I  will  briefly  touch  upon  it. 
First,  then,  famine  wasted  the  Saguntines,  so 
that  even  human  corpses  were  eaten  by  some :  so 
at  least  it  is  recorded.  Subsequently,  when  thor¬ 
oughly  worn  out,  that  they  might  at  least  escape 
the  ignominy  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  Han¬ 
nibal,  they  publicly  erected  a  huge  funeral  pile, 
and  cast  themselves  into  its  flames,  while  at  the 
same  time  they  slew  their  children  and  them¬ 
selves  with  the  sword.  Could  these  gods,  these 
debauchees  and  gourmands,  whose  mouths  wa¬ 
ter  for  fat  sacrifices,  and  whose  lips  utter  lying 
divinations,  could  they  not  do  anything  in  a  case 
like  this?  Could  they  not  interfere  for  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  a  city  closely  allied  to  the  Roman 
people,  or  prevent  it  perishing  for  its  fidelity  to 
that  alliance  of  which  they  themselves  had  been 
the  mediators?  Saguntum,  faithfully  keeping 
the  treaty  it  had  entered  into  before  these  gods, 
and  to  which  it  had  firmly  bound  itself  by  an 
oath,  was  besieged,  taken,  and  destroyed  by  a 
perjured  person.  If  afterwards,  when  Hannibal 
was  close  to  the  walls  of  Rome,  it  was  the  gods 
who  terrified  him  with  lightning  and  tempest, 
and  drove  him  to  a  distance,  why,  I  ask,  did  they 
not  thus  interfere  before?  For  I  make  bold  to 
say,  that  this  demonstration  with  the  tempest 
would  have  been  more  honourably  made  in  de¬ 
fence  of  the  allies  of  Rome — who  were  in  dan¬ 
ger  on  account  of  their  reluctance  to  break  faith 
with  the  Romans,  and  had  no  resources  of  their 
own — than  in  defence  of  the  Romans  them¬ 
selves,  who  were  fighting  in  their  own  cause, 
and  had  abundant  resources  to  oppose  Hanni¬ 
bal.  If,  then,  they  had  been  the  guardians  of  Ro¬ 
man  prosperity  and  glory,  they  would  have  pre¬ 
served  that  glory  from  the  stain  of  this  Sagun- 
tine  disaster;  and  how  silly  it  is  to  believe  that 
Rome  was  preserved  from  destruction  at  the 
hands  of  Hannibal  by  the  guardian  care  of  those 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  III.  20-21 


gods  who  were  unable  to  rescue  the  city  of  Sa- 
guntum  from  perishing  through  its  fidelity  to 
the  alliance  of  Rome.  If  the  population  of  Sa- 
guntum  had  been  Christian,  and  had  suffered  as 
it  did  for  the  Christian  faith  (though,  of  course, 
Christians  would  not  have  used  fire  and  sword 
against  their  own  persons),  they  would  have 
suffered  with  that  hope  which  springs  from 
faith  in  Christ — the  hope  not  of  a  brief  tempor¬ 
al  reward,  but  of  unending  and  eternal  bliss. 
What  then,  will  the  advocates  and  apologists  of 
these  gods  say  in  their  defence,  when  charged 
with  the  blood  of  these  Saguntines;  for  they  are 
professedly  worshipped  and  invoked  for  this 
very  purpose  of  securing  prosperity  in  this  fleet¬ 
ing  and  transitory  life?  Can  anything  be  said  but 
what  was  alleged  in  the  case  of  Regulus’  death? 
For  though  there  is  a  difference  between  the  two 
cases,  the  one  being  an  individual,  the  other  a 
whole  community,  yet  the  cause  of  destruction 
was  in  both  cases  the  keeping  of  their  plighted 
troth.  For  it  was  this  which  made  Regulus  will¬ 
ing  to  return  to  his  enemies,  and  this  which 
made  the  Saguntines  unwilling  to  revolt  to  their 
enemies.  Does,  then,  the  keeping  of  faith  pro¬ 
voke  the  gods  to  anger?  Or  is  it  possible  that  not 
only  individuals,  but  even  entire  communities, 
perish  while  the  gods  are  propitious  to  them? 
Let  our  adversaries  choose  which  alternative 
they  will.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  those  gods  are  en¬ 
raged  at  the  keeping  of  faith,  let  them  enlist  per¬ 
jured  persons  as  their  worshippers.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  men  and  states  can  suffer  great  and 
terrible  calamities,  and  at  last  perish  while  fa¬ 
voured  by  the  gods,  then  does  their  worship  not 
produce  happiness  as  its  fruit.  Let  those,  there¬ 
fore,  who  suppose  that  they  have  fallen  into  dis¬ 
tress  because  their  religious  worship  has  been 
abolished,  lay  aside  their  anger;  for  it  were  quite 
possible  that  did  the  gods  not  only  remain  with 
them,  but  regard  them  with  favour,  they  might 
yet  be  left  to  mourn  an  unhappy  lot,  or  might, 
even  like  Regulus  and  the  Saguntines,  be  hor¬ 
ribly  tormented,  and  at  last  perish  miserably. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  ingratitude  of  Rome  to  Scipio, 
its  deliverer ,  and  of  its  manners  during  the 
period  which  Sallust  describes  as  the  best 
Omitting  many  things,  that  I  may  not  exceed 
the  limits  of  the  work  I  have  proposed  to  my¬ 
self,  I  come  to  the  epoch  between  the  second 
and  last  Punic  wars,  during  which,  according  to 
Sallust,  the  Romans  lived  with  the  greatest  vir¬ 
tue  and  concord.  Now,  in  this  period  of  virtue 
and  harmony,  the  great  Scipio,  the  liberator  of 
Rome  and  Italy,  who  had  with  surprising  ability 


183 

brought  to  a  close  the  second  Punic  war — that 
horrible,  destructive,  dangerous  contest — who 
had  defeated  Hannibal  and  subdued  Carthage, 
and  whose  whole  life  is  said  to  have  been  dedi¬ 
cated  to  the  gods  and  cherished  in  their  temples, 
this  Scipio,  after  such  a  triumph,  was  obliged 
to  yield  to  the  accusations  of  his  enemies  and  to 
leave  his  country,  which  his  valour  had  saved 
and  liberated,  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his  days 
in  the  town  of  Liternum,  so  indifferent  to  a  re¬ 
call  from  exile,  that  he  is  said  to  have  given  or¬ 
ders  that  not  even  his  remains  should  lie  in  his 
ungrateful  country.  It  was  at  that  time  also  that 
the  pro-consul  Cn.  Manlius,  after  subduing  the 
Galatians,  introduced  into  Rome  the  luxury  of 
Asia,  more  destructive  than  all  hostile  armies. 
It  was  then  that  iron  bedsteads  and  expensive 
carpets  were  first  used;  then,  too,  that  female 
singers  were  admitted  to  banquets,  and  other 
licentious  abominations  were  introduced.  But  at 
present  I  meant  to  speak  not  of  the  evils  men 
voluntarily  practise,  but  of  those  they  suffer  in 
spite  of  themselves.  So  that  the  case  of  Scipio, 
who  succumbed  to  his  enemies  and  died  in  exile 
from  the  country  he  had  rescued,  was  mentioned 
by  me  as  being  pertinent  to  the  present  discus¬ 
sion;  for  this  was  the  reward  he  received  from 
those  Roman  gods  whose  temples  he  saved  from 
Hannibal,  and  who  are  worshipped  only  for  the 
sake  of  securing  temporal  happiness.  But  since 
Sallust,  as  we  have  seen,  declares  that  the  man¬ 
ners  of  Rome  were  never  better  than  at  that 
time,  I  therefore  judged  it  right  to  mention  the 
Asiatic  luxury  then  introduced,  that  it  might  be 
seen  that  what  he  says  is  true,  only  when  that 
period  is  compared  with  the  others,  during 
which  the  morals  were  certainly  worse  and  the 
factions  more  violent.  For  at  that  time — I  mean 
between  the  second  and  third  Punic  war — that 
notorious  Lex  Voconia  was  passed,  which  pro¬ 
hibited  a  man  from  making  a  woman,  even  an 
only  daughter,  his  heir;  than  which  law  I  am  at 
a  loss  to  conceive  what  could  be  more  unjust.  It 
is  true  that  in  the  interval  between  these  two 
Punic  wars  the  misery  of  Rome  was  somewhat 
less.  Abroad,  indeed,  their  forces  were  con¬ 
sumed  by  wars,  yet  also  consoled  by  victories; 
while  at  home  there  were  not  such  disturbances 
as  at  other  times.  But  when  the  last  Punic  war 
had  terminated  in  the  utter  destruction  of 
Rome’s  rival,  which  quickly  succumbed  to  the 
other  Scipio,  who  thus  earned  for  himself  the 
surname  of  Africanus,  then  the  Roman  republic 
was  overwhelmed  with  such  a  host  of  ills,  which 
sprang  from  the  corrupt  manners  induced  by 
prosperity  and  security,  that  the  sudden  over- 


1 84  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


throw  of  Carthage  is  seen  to  have  injured  Rome 
more  seriously  than  her  long-continued  hostil¬ 
ity.  During  the  whole  subsequent  period  down 
to  the  time  of  Caesar  Augustus,  who  seems  to 
have  entirely  deprived  the  Romans  of  liberty — 
a  liberty,  indeed,  which  in  their  own  judgment 
was  no  longer  glorious,  but  full  of  broils  and 
dangers,  and  which  now  was  quite  enervated  and 
languishing — and  who  submitted  all  things 
again  to  the  will  of  a  monarch,  and  infused  as  it 
were  a  new  life  into  the  sickly  old  age  of  the 
republic,  and  inaugurated  a  fresh  regime;  dur¬ 
ing  this  whole  period.  I  say,  many  military  dis¬ 
asters  were  sustained  on  a  variety  of  occasions, 
all  of  which  I  here  pass  by.  There  was  specially 
the  treaty  of  Numantia,  blotted  as  it  was  with 
extreme  disgrace;  for  the  sacred  chickens,  they 
say.  flew  out  of  the  coop,  and  thus  augured  dis¬ 
aster  to  Mancinus  the  consul;  just  as  if,  during 
all  these  years  in  which  that  little  city  of  Nu¬ 
mantia  had  withstood  the  besieging  army  of 
Rome,  and  had  become  a  terror  to  the  republic, 
the  other  generals  had  all  marched  against  it  un¬ 
der  unfavourable  auspices. 

Chap.  22.  Of  the  edict  of  Mithridates,  com¬ 
manding  that  all  Roman  citizens  found  in 

Asia  should  be  slain 

These  things,  I  say,  I  pass  in  silence;  but  I 
can  by  no  means  be  silent  regarding  the  order 
given  by  Mithridates,  king  of  Asia,  that  on  one 
day  all  Roman  citizens  residing  anywhere  in 
Asia  (where  great  numbers  of  them  were  follow¬ 
ing  their  private  business)  should  be  put  to 
death :  and  this  order  was  executed.  How  miser¬ 
able  a  spectacle  was  then  presented,  when  each 
man  was  suddenly  and  treacherously  murdered 
wherever  he  happened  to  be,  in  the  field  or  on 
the  road,  in  the  town,  in  his  own  home,  or  in 
the  street,  in  market  or  temple,  in  bed  or  at  ta¬ 
ble!  Think  of  the  groans  of  the  dying,  the  tears 
of  the  spectators,  and  even  of  the  executioners 
themselves.  For  how  cruel  a  necessity  was  it 
that  compelled  the  hosts  of  these  victims,  not 
only  to  see  these  abominable  butcheries  in  their 
own  houses,  but  even  to  perpetrate  them:  to 
change  their  countenance  suddenly  from  the 
bland  kindliness  of  friendship,  and  in  the  midst 
of  peace  set  about  the  business  of  war;  and, 
shall  I  say.  give  and  receive  wounds,  the  slain 
being  pierced  in  body,  the  slayer  in  spirit !  Had 
all  these  murdered  persons,  then,  despised  au¬ 
guries?  Had  they  neither  public  nor  household 
gods  to  consult  when  they  left  their  homes  and 
set  out  on  that  fatal  journey?  If  they  had  not, 
our  adversaries  have  no  reason  to  complain  of 


these  Christian  times  in  this  particular,  since 
long  ago  the  Romans  despised  auguries  as  idle. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  did  consult  omens, 
let  them  tell  us  what  good  they  got  thereby,  even 
when  such  things  were  not  prohibited,  but  au¬ 
thorized,  by  human,  if  not  by  divine  law. 

Chap.  23.  Of  the  internal  disasters  which  vexed 
the  Roman  republic,  and  followed  a  porten¬ 
tous  madness  which  seized  all  the  domestic 
animals 

But  let  us  now  mention,  as  succinctly  as  pos¬ 
sible,  those  disasters  which  were  still  more  vex¬ 
ing,  because  nearer  home;  I  mean  those  discords 
which  are  erroneously  called  civil,  since  they 
destroy  civil  interests.  The  seditions  had  now 
become  urban  wars,  in  which  blood  was  freely 
shed  and  in  which  parties  raged  against  one  an¬ 
other,  not  with  wrangling  and  verbal  contention, 
but  with  physical  force  and  arms.  What  a  sea  of 
Roman  blood  was  shed,  what  desolations  and 
devastations  were  occasioned  in  Italy  by  wars 
social,  wars  servile,  wars  civil!  Before  the  Lat¬ 
ins  began  the  social  war  against  Rome,  all  the 
animals  used  in  the  service  of  man — dogs, 
horses,  asses,  oxen,  and  all  the  rest  that  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  man — suddenly  grew  wild,  and  forgot 
their  domesticated  tameness,  forsook  their  stalls 
and  wandered  at  large,  and  could  not  be  closely 
approached  either  by  strangers  or  their  own 
masters  without  danger.  If  this  was  a  portent, 
how  serious  a  calamity  must  have  been  portend¬ 
ed  by  a  plague  which,  whether  portent  or  no, 
was  in  itself  a  serious  calamity!  Had  it  happen¬ 
ed  in  our  day,  the  heathen  would  have  been 
more  rabid  against  us  than  their  animals  were 
against  them. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  civil  dissension  occasioned  by 
the  sedition  of  the  Gracchi 
The  civil  wars  originated  in  the  seditions 
which  the  Gracchi  excited  regarding  the  agrarian 
laws ;  for  they  were  minded  to  divide  among  the 
people  the  lands  which  were  wrongfully  pos¬ 
sessed  by  the  nobility.  But  to  reform  an  abuse  of 
so  long  standing  was  an  enterprise  full  of  peril, 
or  rather,  as  the  event  proved,  of  destruction. 
For  what  disasters  accompanied  the  death  of  the 
elder  Gracchus!  what  slaughter  ensued  when, 
shortly  after,  the  younger  brother  met  the  same 
fate !  For  noble  and  ignoble  were  indiscriminate¬ 
ly  massacred;  and  this  not  by  legal  authority 
and  procedure,  but  by  mobs  and  armed  rioters. 
After  the  death  of  the  younger  Gracchus,  the 
consul  Lucius  Opimius,  who  had  given  battle  to 
him  within  the  city,  and  had  defeated  and  put  to 


THE  CITY  OF 

the  sword  both  himself  and  his  confederates, 
and  had  massacred  many  of  the  citizens,  insti¬ 
tuted  a  judicial  examination  of  others,  and  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  put  to  death  as  many  as  3000 
men.  From  this  it  may  be  gathered  how  many 
fell  in  the  riotous  encounters,  when  the  result 
even  of  a  judicial  investigation  was  so  bloody. 
The  assassin  of  Gracchus  himself  sold  his  head 
to  the  consul  for  its  weight  in  gold,  such  being 
the  previous  agreement.  In  this  massacre,  too, 
Marcus  Fulvius,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  with 
all  his  children,  was  put  to  death. 

Chap.  25.  Of  the  temple  of  Concord ,  which  was 
erected  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  on  the  scene 
of  these  seditions  and  massacres 
A  pretty  decree  of  the  senate  it  was,  truly,  by 
which  the  temple  of  Concord  was  built  on  the 
spot  where  that  disastrous  rising  had  taken 
place,  and  where  so  many  citizens  of  every  rank 
had  fallen.  I  suppose  it  was  that  the  monument 
of  the  Gracchi’s  punishment  might  strike  the 
eye  and  affect  the  memory  of  the  pleaders.  But 
what  was  this  but  to  deride  the  gods,  by  build¬ 
ing  a  temple  to  that  goddess  who,  had  she  been 
in  the  city,  would  not  have  suffered  herself  to  be 
torn  by  such  dissensions?  Or  was  it  that  Con¬ 
cord  was  chargeable  with  that  bloodshed  be¬ 
cause  she  had  deserted  the  minds  of  the  citizens 
and  was  therefore  incarcerated  in  that  temple? 
For  if  they  had  any  regard  to  consistency,  why 
did  they  not  rather  erect  on  that  site  a  temple 
of  Discord?  Or  is  there  a  reason  for  Concord  be¬ 
ing  a  goddess  while  Discord  is  none?  Does  the 
distinction  of  Labeo  hold  here,  who  would  have 
made  the  one  a  good,  the  other  an  evil  deity? — 
a  distinction  which  seems  to  have  been  suggest¬ 
ed  to  him  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  observing  at 
Rome  a  temple  to  Fever  as  well  as  one  to 
Health.  But,  on  the  same  ground,  Discord  as 
well  as  Concord  ought  to  be  deified.  A  hazardous 
venture  the  Romans  made  in  provoking  so  wick¬ 
ed  a  goddess,  and  in  forgetting  that  the  destruc¬ 
tion  oil  Troy  had  been  occasioned  by  her  taking 
offence.  For,  being  indignant  that  she  was  not 
invited  with  the  other  gods,  she  created  dissen¬ 
sion  among  the  three  goddesses  by  sending  in 
the  golden  apple,  which  occasioned  strife  in 
heaven,  victory  to  Venus,  the  rape  of  Helen, 
and  the  destruction  of  Troy.  Wherefore,  if  she 
was  perhaps  offended  that  the  Romans  had  not 
thought  her  worthy  of  a  temple  among  the  other 
gods  in  their  city,  and  therefore  disturbed  the 
state  with  such  tumults,  to  how  much  fiercer 
passion  would  she  be  roused  when  she  saw  the 
temple  of  her  adversary  erected  on  the  scene  of 


GOD  III.  22-27  185 

that  massacre,  or,  in  other  words,  on  the  scene 
of  her  own  handiwork!  Those  wise  and  learned 
men  are  enraged  at  our  laughing  at  these  follies; 
and  yet,  being  worshippers  of  good  and  bad  di¬ 
vinities  alike,  they  cannot  escape  this  dilemma 
about  Concord  and  Discord:  either  they  have 
neglected  the  worship  of  these  goddesses,  and 
preferred  Fever  and  War,  to  whom  there  are 
shrines  erected  of  great  antiquity,  or  they  have 
worshipped  them,  and  after  all  Concord  has 
abandoned  them,  and  Discord  has  tempestuous¬ 
ly  hurled  them  into  civil  wars. 

Chap.  26.  Of  the  various  kinds  of  wars  which  fol¬ 
lowed  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Concord 
But  they  supposed  that,  in  erecting  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Concord  within  the  view  of  the  orators, 
as  a  memorial  of  the  punishment  and  death  of 
the  Gracchi,  they  were  raising  an  effectual  ob¬ 
stacle  to  sedition.  How  much  effect  it  had  is  in¬ 
dicated  by  the  still  more  deplorable  wars  that 
followed.  For  after  this  the  orators  endeavoured 
not  to  avoid  the  example  of  the  Gracchi,  but  to 
surpass  their  projects ;  as  did  Lucius  Saturninus, 
a  tribune  of  the  people,  and  Caius  Servilius  the 
praetor,  and,  some  time  after,  Marcus  Drusus, 
all  of  whom  stirred  seditions  which  first  of  all 
occasioned  bloodshed,  and  then  the  social  wars 
by  which  Italy  was  grievously  injured,  and  re¬ 
duced  to  a  piteously  desolate  and  wasted  condi¬ 
tion.  Then  followed  the  servile  war  and  the  civil 
wars;  and  in  them  what  battles  were  fought, 
and  what  blood  was  shed,  so  that  almost  all  the 
peoples  of  Italy,  which  formed  the  main 
strength  of  the  Roman  empire,  were  conquered 
as  if  they  were  barbarians!  Then  even  historians 
themselves  find  it  difficult  to  explain  how  the 
servile  war  was  begun  by  a  very  few,  certainly 
less  than  seventy  gladiators,  what  numbers  of 
fierce  and  cruel  men  attached  themselves  to 
these,  how  many  of  the  Roman  generals  this 
band  defeated,  and  how  it  laid  waste  many  dis¬ 
tricts  and  cities.  And  that  was  not  the  only  ser¬ 
vile  war:  the  province  of  Macedonia,  and  subse¬ 
quently  Sicily  and  the  sea-coast,  were  also  de¬ 
populated  by  bands  of  slaves.  And  who  can  ade¬ 
quately  describe  either  the  horrible  atrocities 
which  the  pirates  first  committed,  or  the  wars 
they  afterwards  maintained  against  Rome? 

Chap.  27  .Of  the  civil  war  between  Marins  and 
Sidla 

But  when  Marius,  stained  with  the  blood  of 
his  fellow-citizens,  whom  the  rage  of  party  had 
sacrificed,  was  in  his  turn  vanquished  and  driv¬ 
en  from  the  city,  it  had  scarcely  time  to  breathe 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


186 

freely,  when,  to  use  the  words  of  Cicero,  “Cinna 
and  Marius  together  returned  and  took  posses¬ 
sion  of  it.  Then,  indeed,  the  foremost  men  in  the 
state  were  put  to  death,  its  lights  quenched.  Sul¬ 
la  afterwards  avenged  this  cruel  victory;  but  we 
need  not  say  with  what  loss  of  life,  and  with 
what  ruin  to  the  republic.”  For  of  this  venge¬ 
ance,  which  was  more  destructive  than  if  the 
crimes  which  it  punished  had  been  committed 
with  impunity,  Lucan  says :  “The  cure  was  ex¬ 
cessive  and  too  closely  resembled  the  disease. 
The  guilty  perished,  but  when  none  but  the  guil¬ 
ty  survived :  and  then  private  hatred  and  anger, 
unbridled  by  law,  were  allowed  free  indul¬ 
gence.”  In  that  war  between  Marius  and  Sulla, 
besides  those  who  fell  in  the  field  of  battle,  the 
city,  too,  was  filled  with  corpses  in  its  streets, 
squares,  markets,  theatres,  and  temples;  so  that 
it  is  not  easy  to  reckon  whether  the  victors  slew 
more  before  or  after  victory,  that  they  might  be, 
or  because  they  were,  victors.  As  soon  as  Ma¬ 
rius  triumphed,  and  returned  from  exile,  besides 
the  butcheries  everywhere  perpetrated,  the  head 
of  the  consul  Octavius  was  exposed  on  the  ros¬ 
trum;  Caesar  and  Fimbria  were  assassinated  in 
their  own  houses;  the  two  Crassi,  father  and 
son,  were  murdered  in  one  another’s  sight;  Be- 
bius  and  Numitorius  were  disembowelled  by  be¬ 
ing  dragged  with  hooks;  Catulus  escaped  the 
hands  of  his  enemies  by  drinking  poison ;  Meru- 
la.  the  flamen  of  Jupiter,  cut  his  veins  and  made 
a  libation  of  his  own  blood  to  his  god.  Moreover, 
every  one  whose  salutation  Marius  did  not  an¬ 
swer  by  giving  his  hand,  was  at  once  cut  down 
before  his  face. 

Chap.  28.  Of  the  victory  of  Sulla,  the  avenger 
of  the  cruelties  0 f  Marius 
Then  followed  the  victory  of  Sulla,  the  so- 
called  avenger  of  the  cruelties  of  Marius.  But 
not  only  was  his  victory  purchased  with  great 
bloodshed;  but  when  hostilities  were  finished, 
hostility  survived,  and  the  subsequent  peace  was 
bloody  as  the  war.  To  the  former  and  still  recent 
massacres  of  the  elder  Marius,  the  younger  Ma¬ 
rius  and  Carbo,  who  belonged  to  the  same  party, 
added  greater  atrocities.  For  when  Sulla  ap¬ 
proached,  and  they  despaired  not  only  of  vic¬ 
tory  but  of  life  itself,  they  made  a  promiscuous 
massacre  of  friends  and  foes.  And,  not  satisfied 
with  staining  every  corner  of  Rome  with  blood, 
they  besieged  the  senate  and  led  forth  the  sena¬ 
tors  to  death  from  the  Curia  as  from  a  prison. 
Mucius  Scaevola  the  pontiff  was  slain  at  the  altar 
of  Vesta,  which  he  had  clung  to  because  no  spot 
in  Rome  was  more  sacred  than  her  temple ;  and 


his  blood  well-nigh  extinguished  the  fire  which 
was  kept  alive  by  the  constant  care  of  the  vir¬ 
gins.  Then  Sulla  entered  the  city  victorious,  af¬ 
ter  having  slaughtered  in  the  Villa  Publica,  not 
by  combat,  but  by  an  order,  7000  men  who  had 
surrendered,  and  were  therefore  unarmed;  so 
fierce  was  the  rage  of  peace  itself,  even  after  the 
rage  of  war  was  extinct.  Moreover,  throughout 
the  whole  city  every  partisan  of  Sulla  slew 
whom  he  pleased,  so  that  the  number  of  deaths 
went  beyond  computation,  till  it  was  suggested 
to  Sulla  that  he  should  allow  some  to  survive 
that  the  victors  might  not  be  destitute  of  sub¬ 
jects.  Then  this  furious  and  promiscuous  licence 
to  murder  was  checked,  and  much  relief  was  ex¬ 
pressed  at  the  publication  of  the  proscription 
list,  containing  though  it  did  the  death-warrant 
of  two  thousand  men  of  the  highest  ranks,  the 
senatorial  and  equestrian.  The  large  number  was 
indeed  saddening,  but  it  was  consolatory  that  a 
limit  was  fixed;  nor  was  the  grief  at  the  num¬ 
bers  slain  so  great  as  the  joy  that  the  rest  were 
secure.  But  this  very  security,  hard-hearted  as 
it  was,  could  not  but  bemoan  the  exquisite  tor¬ 
ture  applied  to  some  of  those  who  had  been 
doomed  to  die.  For  one  was  torn  to  pieces  by  the 
unarmed  hands  of  the  executioners;  men  treat¬ 
ing  a  living  man  more  savagely  than  wild  beasts 
are  used  to  tear  an  abandoned  corpse.  Another 
had  his  eyes  dug  out,  and  his  limbs  cut  away  bit 
by  bit,  and  was  forced  to  live  a  long  while,  or 
rather  to  die  a  long  while,  in  such  torture.  Some 
celebrated  cities  were  put  up  to  auction,  like 
farms;  and  one  was  collectively  condemned  to 
slaughter,  just  as  an  individual  criminal  would 
be  condemned  to  death.  These  things  were  done 
in  peace  when  the  war  was  over,  not  that  victory 
might  be  more  speedily  obtained,  but  that,  after 
being  obtained,  it  might  not  be  thought  lightly 
of.  Peace  vied  with  war  in  cruelty,  and  sur¬ 
passed  it :  for  while  war  overthrew  armed  hosts, 
peace  slew  the  defenceless.  War  gave  liberty  to 
him  who  was  attacked,  to  strike  if  he  could; 
peace  granted  to  the  survivors  not  life  but  an 
unresisting  death. 

Chap.  29.  A  comparison  of  the  disasters  which 
Rome  experienced  during  the  Gothic  and  Gal¬ 
lic  invasions,  with  those  occasioned  by  the  au¬ 
thors  of  the  civil  wars 

What  fury  of  foreign  nations,  what  barbarian 
ferocity,  can  compare  with  this  victory  of  citi¬ 
zens  over  citizens?  Which  was  more  disastrous, 
more  hideous,  more  bitter  to  Rome:  the  recent 
Gothic  and  the  old  Gallic  invasion,  or  the  cruel¬ 
ty  displayed  by  Marius  and  Sulla  and  their  par- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  III.  28-31  187 


tisans  against  men  who  were  members  of  the 
same  body  as  themselves?  The  Gauls,  indeed, 
massacred  all  the  senators  they  found  in  any 
part  of  the  city  except  the  Capitol,  which  alone 
was  defended;  but  they  at  least  sold  life  to  those 
who  were  in  the  Capitol,  though  they  might 
have  starved  them  out  if  they  could  not  have 
stormed  it.  The  Goths,  again,  spared  so  many 
senators  that  it  is  the  more  surprising  that  they 
killed  any.  But  Sulla,  while  Marius  was  still  liv¬ 
ing,  established  himself  as  conqueror  in  the  Cap¬ 
itol,  which  the  Gauls  had  not  violated,  and 
thence  issued  his  death-warrants ;  and  when  Ma¬ 
rius  had  escaped  by  flight,  though  destined  to  re¬ 
turn  more  fierce  and  bloodthirsty  than  ever, 
Sulla  issued  from  the  Capitol  even  decrees  of  the 
senate  for  the  slaughter  and  confiscation  of  the 
property  of  many  citizens.  Then,  when  Sulla 
left,  what  did  the  Marian  faction  hold  sacred  or 
spare,  when  they  gave  no  quarter  even  to  Mu- 
cius,  a  citizen,  a  senator,  a  pontiff,  and  though 
clasping  in  piteous  embrace  the  very  altar  in 
which,  they  say,  reside  the  destinies  of  Rome? 
And  that  final  proscription  list  of  Sulla’s,  not  to 
mention  countless  other  massacres,  despatched 
more  senators  than  the  Goths  could  even  plun¬ 
der. 

Chap.  30.  Of  the  connection  of  the  wars  which 
with  great  severity  and  frequency  followed 
one  another  before  the  advent  of  Christ 
With  what  effrontery,  then,  with  what  assur¬ 
ance,  with  what  impudence,  with  what  folly  or 
rather  insanity,  do  they  refuse  to  impute  these 
disasters  to  their  own  gods,  and  impute  the 
present  to  our  Christ!  These  bloody  civil  wars, 
more  distressing,  by  the  avowal  of  their  own 
historians  than  any  foreign  wars,  and  which 
were  pronounced  to  be  not  merely  calamitous, 
but  absolutely  ruinous  to  the  republic,  began 
long  before  the  coming  of  Christ  and  gave  birth 
to  one  another;  so  that  a  concatenation  of  un¬ 
justifiable  causes  led  from  the  wars  of  Marius 
and  Sulla  to  those  of  Sertorius  and  Catiline,  of 
wThom  the  one  was  proscribed,  the  other  brought 
up  by  Sulla ;  from  this  to  the  war  of  Lepidus  and 
Catulus,  of  wThom  the  one  wished  to  rescind,  the 
other  to  defend  the  acts  of  Sulla;  from  this  to 
the  war  of  Pompey  and  Caesar,  of  wThom  Pom- 
pey  had  been  a  partisan  of  Sulla,  wrhose  power 
he  equalled  or  even  surpassed,  while  Caesar  con¬ 
demned  Pompey’s  power  because  it  was  not  his 
own,  and  yet  exceeded  it  when  Pompey  was  de¬ 
feated  and  slain.  From  him  the  chain  of  civil 
wars  extended  to  the  second  Caesar,  afterwards 
called  Augustus,  and  in  whose  reign  Christ  was 


born.  For  even  Augustus  himself  waged  many 
civil  wars;  and  in  these  wars  many  of  the  fore¬ 
most  men  perished,  among  them  that  skilful 
manipulator  of  the  republic,  Cicero.  Caius  Cae¬ 
sar,  when  he  had  conquered  Pompey,  though  he 
used  his  victory  with  clemency,  and  granted  to 
men  of  the  opposite  faction  both  life  and  hon¬ 
ours,  was  suspected  of  aiming  at  royalty,  and 
was  assassinated  in  the  Curia  by  a  party  of  no¬ 
ble  senators,  who  had  conspired  to  defend  the 
liberty  of  the  republic.  His  power  was  then  cov¬ 
eted  by  Antony,  a  man  of  very  different  char¬ 
acter.  polluted  and  debased  by  every  kind  of 
vice,  who  was  strenuously  resisted  by  Cicero  on 
the  same  plea  of  defending  the  liberty  of  the  re¬ 
public.  At  this  jucture  that  other  Caesar,  the 
adopted  son  of  Caius,  and  afterwards,  as  I  said, 
known  by  the  name  of  Augustus,  had  made  his 
debut  as  a  young  man  of  remarkable  genius. 
This  youthful  Caesar  was  favoured  by  Cicero,  in 
order  that  his  influence  might  counteract  that  of 
Antony;  for  he  hoped  that  Caesar  would  over¬ 
throw  and  blast  the  power  of  Antony,  and  es¬ 
tablish  a  free  state — so  blind  and  unaware  of  the 
future  was  he :  for  that  very  young  man,  whose 
advancement  and  influence  he  was  fostering,  al¬ 
lowed  Cicero  to  be  killed  as  the  seal  of  an  alli¬ 
ance  with  Antony,  and  subjected  to  his  own  rule 
the  very  liberty  of  the  republic  in  defence  of 
which  he  had  made  so  many  orations. 

Chap.  31.  That  it  is  effrontery  to  impute  the 
present  troubles  to  Christ  and  the  prohibition 
of  polytheistic  worship,  since  even  when  the 
gods  were  worshipped  such  calamities  befell 
the  people 

Let  those  who  have  no  gratitude  to  Christ  for 
His  great  benefits,  blame  their  own  gods  for 
these  heavy  disasters.  For  certainly  when  these 
occurred  the  altars  of  the  gods  were  kept  blaz¬ 
ing,  and  there  rose  the  mingled  fragrance  of 
“Sabsean  incense  and  fresh  garlands”;1  the 
priests  were  clothed  with  honour,  the  shrines 
were  maintained  in  splendour;  sacrifices,  games, 
sacred  ecstasies,  were  common  in  the  temples; 
while  the  blood  of  the  citizens  was  being  so  free¬ 
ly  shed,  not  only  in  remote  places,  but  among 
the  very  altars  of  the  gods.  Cicero  did  not 
choose  to  seek  sanctuary  in  a  temple,  because 
Mucius  had  sought  it  there  in  vain.  But  they 
who  most  unpardonably  calumniate  this  Chris¬ 
tian  era,  are  the  very  men  who  either  themselves 
fled  for  asylum  to  the  places  specially  dedicated 
to  Christ,  or  were  led  there  by  the  barbarians 
that  they  might  be  safe.  In  short,  not  to  recapit- 
xVirgil,  JEneid,  bk.  i.  417. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


1 88 

ulate  the  many  instances  I  have  cited,  and  not 
to  add  to  their  number  others  which  it  were  tedi¬ 
ous  to  enumerate,  this  one  thing  I  am  persuaded 
of,  and  this  every  impartial  judgment  will  read¬ 
ily  acknowledge,  that  if  the  human  race  had  re¬ 
ceived  Christianity  before  the  Punic  wars,  and 
if  the  same  desolating  calamities  which  these 
wars  brought  upon  Europe  and  Africa  had  fol¬ 
lowed  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  there  is 
no  one  of  those  who  now  accuse  us  who  would 
not  have  attributed  them  to  our  religion.  How 
intolerable  would  their  accusations  have  been, 
at  least  so  far  as  the  Romans  are  concerned,  if 
the  Christian  religion  had  been  received  and  dif¬ 
fused  prior  to  the  invasion  of  the  Gauls,  or  to 
the  ruinous  floods  and  fires  which  desolated 
Rome,  or  to  those  most  calamitous  of  all  events, 
the  civil  wars !  And  those  other  disasters,  which 
were  of  so  strange  a  nature  that  they  were  reck¬ 
oned  prodigies,  had  they  happened  since  the 
Christian  era,  to  whom  but  to  the  Christians 
would  they  have  imputed  these  as  crimes?  I  do 
not  speak  of  those  things  which  were  rather  sur¬ 
prising  than  hurtful — oxen  speaking,  unborn  in¬ 
fants  articulating  some  words  in  their  mothers’ 
wombs,  serpents  flying,  hens  and  women  being 
changed  into  the  other  sex;  and  other  similar 
prodigies  which,  whether  true  or  false,  are  re¬ 
corded  not  in  their  imaginative,  but  in  their  his¬ 
torical  works,  and  which  do  not  injure,  but  only 
astonish  men.  But  when  it  rained  earth,  when  it 
rained  chalk,  when  it  rained  stones — not  hail¬ 
stones,  but  real  stones — this  certainly  was  cal¬ 
culated  to  do  serious  damage.  We  have  read  in 


their  books  that  the  fires  of  Etna,  pouring  down 
from  the  top  of  the  mountain  to  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  shore,  caused  the  sea  to  boil,  so  that  rocks 
were  burnt  up,  and  the  pitch  of  ships  began  to 
run — a  phenomenon  incredibly  surprising,  but 
at  the  same  time  no  less  hurtful.  By  the  same 
violent  heat,  they  relate  that  on  another  occa¬ 
sion  Sicily  was  filled  with  cinders,  so  that  the 
houses  of  the  city  Catina  were  destroyed  and 
buried  under  them — a  calamity  which  moved 
the  Romans  to  pity  them,  and  remit  their  trib¬ 
ute  for  that  year.  One  may  also  read  that  Africa, 
which  had  by  that  time  become  a  province  of 
Rome,  was  visited  by  a  prodigious  multitude  of 
locusts,  which,  after  consuming  the  fruit  and 
foliage  of  the  trees,  were  driven  into  the  sea  in 
one  vast  and  measureless  cloud;  so  that  when 
they  were  drowned  and  cast  upon  the  shore  the 
air  was  polluted,  and  so  serious  a  pestilence  pro¬ 
duced  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Masinissa  alone 
they  say  there  perished  800,000  persons,  besides 
a  much  greater  number  in  the  neighbouring  dis¬ 
tricts.  At  Utica  they  assure  us  that,  of  30,000 
soldiers  then  garrisoning  it,  there  survived  only 
ten.  Yet  which  of  these  disasters,  suppose  they 
happened  now,  would  not  be  attributed  to  the 
Christian  religion  by  those  who  thus  thought¬ 
lessly  accuse  us,  and  whom  we  are  compelled  to 
answer?  And  yet  to  their  own  gods  they  attrib¬ 
ute  none  of  these  things,  though  they  worship 
them  for  the  sake  of  escaping  lesser  calamities 
of  the  same  kind,  and  do  not  reflect  that  they 
who  formerly  worshipped  them  were  not  pre¬ 
served  from  these  serious  disasters. 


BOOK  IV 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  it  is  proved  that  the  extent  and  long  duration 

OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE  IS  TO  BE  ASCRIBED,  NOT  TO  JOVE  OR  THE  GODS  OF  THE  HEA¬ 
THEN,  TO  WHOM  INDIVIDUALLY  SCARCE  EVEN  SINGLE  THINGS  AND  THE  VERY  BASEST 
FUNCTIONS  WERE  BELIEVED  TO  BE  ENTRUSTED.  BUT  TO  THE  ONE  TRUE  GOD,  THE  AU¬ 
THOR  OF  FELICITY,  BY  WHOSE  POWER  AND  JUDGMENT  EARTHLY  KINGDOMS  ARE 
FOUNDED  AND  MAINTAINED. 


Chap.  1.  Of  the  things  which  have  keen  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  first  book 
Having  begun  to  speak  of  the  city  of  God,  I 
have  thought  it  necessary  first  of  all  to  reply  to 
its  enemies,  who,  eagerly  pursuing  earthly  joys 
and  gaping  after  transitory  things,  throw  the 
blame  of  all  the  sorrow  they  suffer  in  them — 
rather  through  the  compassion  of  God  in  ad¬ 
monishing  than  His  severity  in  punishing — on 
the  Christian  religion,  which  is  the  one  salutary 
and  true  religion.  And  since  there  is  among  them 


also  an  unlearned  rabble,  they  are  stirred  up  as 
by  the  authority  of  the  learned  to  hate  us  more 
bitterly,  thinking  in  their  inexperience  that 
things  which  have  happened  unwontedly  in  their 
days  were  not  wont  to  happen  in  other  times 
gone  by;  and  whereas  this  opinion  of  theirs  is 
confirmed  even  by  those  who  know  that  it  is 
false,  and  yet  dissemble  their  knowledge  in  or¬ 
der  that  they  may  seem  to  have  just  cause  for 
murmuring  against  us,  it  was  necessary,  from 
books  in  which  their  authors  recorded  and  pub- 


THE  CITY  OF 

lished  the  history  of  bygone  times  that  it  might 
be  known,  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  far  otherwise 
than  they  think;  and  at  the  same  time  to  teach 
that  the  false  gods,  whom  they  openly  wor¬ 
shipped,  or  still  worship  in  secret,  are  most  un¬ 
clean  spirits,  and  most  malignant  and  deceitful 
demons,  even  to  such  a  pitch  that  they  take  de¬ 
light  in  crimes  which,  whether  real  or  only  ficti¬ 
tious,  are  yet  their  own,  which  it  has  been  their 
will  to  have  celebrated  in  honour  of  them  at 
their  owTn  festivals;  so  that  human  infirmity 
cannot  be  called  back  from  the  perpetration  of 
damnable  deeds,  so  long  as  authority  is  fur¬ 
nished  for  imitating  them  that  seems  even  divine. 
These  things  wre  have  proved,  not  from  our  own 
conjectures,  but  partly  from  recent  memory,  be¬ 
cause  wTe  ourselves  have  seen  such  things  cele¬ 
brated.  and  to  such  deities,  partly  from  the  writ¬ 
ings  of  those  who  have  left  these  things  on  rec¬ 
ord  to  posterity,  not  as  if  in  reproach  but  as  in 
honour  of  their  own  gods.  Thus  Varro,  a  most 
learned  man  among  them,  and  of  the  weightiest 
authority,  when  he  made  separate  books  con¬ 
cerning  things  human  and  things  divine,  distrib¬ 
uting  some  among  the  human,  others  among  the 
divine,  according  to  the  special  dignity  of  each, 
placed  the  scenic  plays  not  at  all  among  things 
human,  but  among  things  divine;  though,  cer¬ 
tainly,  if  only  there  were  good  and  honest  men 
in  the  state,  the  scenic  plays  ought  not  to  be  al¬ 
lowed  even  among  things  human.  And  this  he 
did  not  on  his  own  authority,  but  because,  being 
born  and  educated  at  Rome,  he  found  them 
among  the  divine  things.  Now  as  we  briefly 
stated  in  the  end  of  the  first  book  what  we  in¬ 
tended  afterwards  to  discuss,  and  as  we  have 
disposed  of  a  part  of  this  in  the  next  two  books, 
we  see  what  our  readers  will  expect  us  now  to 
take  up. 

Chap.  2.  Of  those  things  which  are  contained  in 
books  second  and  third 
We  had  promised,  then,  that  we  would  say 
something  against  those  who  attribute  the  ca¬ 
lamities  of  the  Roman  republic  to  our  religion, 
and  that  we  would  recount  the  evils,  as  many 
and  great  as  we  could  remember  or  might  deem 
sufficient,  which  that  city,  or  the  provinces  be¬ 
longing  to  its  empire,  had  suffered  before  their 
sacrifices  were  prohibited,  all  of  which  would 
beyond  doubt  have  been  attributed  to  us,  if  our 
religion  had  either  already  shone  on  them  or  had 
thus  prohibited  their  sacrilegious  rites.  These 
things  we  have,  as  we  think,  fully  disposed  of  in 
the  second  and  third  books,  treating  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  of  evils  in  morals,  which  alone  or  chiefly  are 


GOD  IV.  1-2  189 

to  be  accounted  evils;  and  in  the  third,  of  those 
which  only  fools  dread  to  undergo — namely, 
those  of  the  body  or  of  outward  things — which 
for  the  most  part  the  good  also  suffer.  But  those 
evils  by  which  they  themselves  become  evil, 
they  take,  I  do  not  say  patiently,  but  with  pleas¬ 
ure.  And  how  few  evils  have  I  related  concern¬ 
ing  that  one  city  and  its  empire!  Not  even  all 
down  to  the  time  of  Caesar  Augustus.  What  if  I 
had  chosen  to  recount  and  enlarge  on  those 
evils,  not  which  men  have  inflicted  on  each  oth¬ 
er,  such  as  the  devastations  and  destructions  of 
war,  but  which  happen  in  earthly  things,  from 
the  elements  of  the  world  itself.  Of  such  evils 
Apuleius  speaks  briefly  in  one  passage  of  that 
book  which  he  wrote,  De  Mundo ,  saying  that  all 
earthly  things  are  subject  to  change,  overthrow, 
and  destruction.  For,  to  use  his  own  words,  by 
excessive  earthquakes  the  ground  has  burst 
asunder,  and  cities  with  their  inhabitants  have 
been  clean  destroyed:  by  sudden  rains  whole  re¬ 
gions  have  been  washed  away;  those  also  which 
formerly  had  been  continents,  have  been  insu¬ 
lated  by  strange  and  new-come  waves,  and  oth¬ 
ers,  by  the  subsiding  of  the  sea,  have  been  made 
passable  by  the  foot  of  man:  by  winds  and 
storms  cities  have  been  overthrown;  fires  have 
flashed  forth  from  the  clouds,  by  which  regions 
in  the  East  being  burnt  up  have  perished;  and 
on  the  western  coasts  the  like  destructions  have 
been  caused  by  the  bursting  forth  of  waters  and 
floods.  So,  formerly,  from  the  lofty  craters  of 
Etna,  rivers  of  fire  kindled  by  God  have  flowed 
like  a  torrent  down  the  steeps.  If  I  had  wished 
to  collect  from  history  wherever  I  could,  these 
and  similar  instances,  where  should  I  have  fin¬ 
ished  what  happened  even  in  those  times  before 
the  name  of  Christ  had  put  down  those  of  their 
idols,  so  vain  and  hurtful  to  true  salvation?  I 
promised  that  I  should  also  point  out  which  of 
their  customs,  and  for  what  cause,  the  true  God, 
in  whose  power  all  kingdoms  are,  had  deigned 
to  favour  to  the  enlargement  of  their  empire; 
and  how  those  whom  they  think  gods  can  have 
profited  them  nothing,  but  much  rather  hurt 
them  by  deceiving  and  beguiling  them;  so  that 
it  seems  to  me  I  must  now  speak  of  these  things, 
and  chiefly  of  the  increase  of  the  Roman  empire. 
For  I  have  already  said  not  a  little,  especially  in 
the  second  book,  about  the  many  evils  intro¬ 
duced  into  their  manners  by  the  hurtful  deceits 
of  the  demons  whom  they  worshipped  as  gods. 
But  throughout  all  the  three  books  already  com¬ 
pleted,  where  it  appeared  suitable,  we  have  set 
forth  how  much  succour  God,  through  the  name 
of  Christ,  to  Whom  the  barbarians  beyond  the 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


custom  of  war  paid  so  much  honour,  has  be¬ 
stowed  on  the  good  and  bad,  according  as  it  is 
written,  “Who  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the 
good  and  the  evil,  and  giveth  rain  to  the  just  and 
the  unjust.”1 

Chap.  3.  Whether  the  great  extent  of  the  em¬ 
pire,  which  has  been  acquired  only  by  wars,  is 
to  be  reckoned  among  the  good  things  either 
of  the  wise  or  the  happy 
Now,  therefore,  let  us  see  how  it  is  that  they 
dare  to  ascribe  the  very  great  extent  and  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  Roman  empire  to  those  gods  whom 
they  contend  that  they  worship  honourably, 
even  by  the  obsequies  of  vile  games  and  the 
ministry  of  vile  men :  although  I  should  like  first 
to  inquire  for  a  little  what  reason,  what  pru¬ 
dence,  there  is  in  wishing  to  glory  in  the  great¬ 
ness  and  extent  of  the  empire,  when  you  cannot 
point  out  the  happiness  of  men  who  are  always 
rolling,  with  dark  fear  and  cruel  lust,  in  warlike 
slaughters  and  in  blood,  which,  whether  shed  in 
civil  or  foreign  war,  is  still  human  blood;  so  that 
their  joy  may  be  compared  to  glass  in  its  fragile 
splendour,  of  which  one  is  horribly  afraid  lest  it 
should  be  suddenly  broken  in  pieces.  That  this 
may  be  more  easily  discerned,  let  us  not  come 
to  nought  by  being  carried  aw7ay  with  empty 
boasting,  or  blunt  the  edge  of  our  attention  by 
loud-sounding  names  of  things,  when  we  hear  of 
peoples,  kingdoms,  provinces.  But  let  us  sup¬ 
pose  a  case  of  two  men ;  for  each  individual  man, 
like  one  letter  in  a  language,  is  as  it  were  the 
element  of  a  city  or  kingdom,  however  far- 
spreading  in  its  occupation  of  the  earth.  Of  these 
two  men  let  us  suppose  that  one  is  poor,  or  rath¬ 
er  of  middling  circumstances;  the  other  very 
rich.  But  the  rich  man  is  anxious  with  fears,  pin¬ 
ing  with  discontent,  burning  with  covetousness, 
never  secure,  always  uneasy,  panting  from  the 
perpetual  strife  of  his  enemies,  adding  to  his 
patrimony  indeed  by  these  miseries  to  an  im¬ 
mense  degree,  and  by  these  additions  also  heap¬ 
ing  up  most  bitter  cares.  But  that  other  man  of 
moderate  wealth  is  contented  with  a  small  and 
compact  estate,  most  dear  to  his  own  family, 
enjoying  the  sweetest  peace  with  his  kindred 
neighbours  and  friends,  in  piety  religious,  benig¬ 
nant  in  mind,  healthy  in  body,  in  life  frugal,  in 
manners  chaste,  in  conscience  secure.  I  know 
not  whether  any  one  can  be  such  a  fool,  that  he 
dare  hesitate  which  to  prefer.  As,  therefore,  in 
the  case  of  these  two  men,  so  in  two  families,  in 
two  nations,  in  two  kingdoms,  this  test  of  tran¬ 
quillity  holds  good;  and  if  we  apply  it  vigilantly 
1Matt.  5.  45. 


and  without  prejudice,  we  shall  quite  easily  see 
where  the  mere  show  of  happiness  dwells,  and 
where  real  felicity.  Wherefore  if  the  true  God  is 
worshipped,  and  if  He  is  served  with  genuine 
rites  and  true  virtue,  it  is  advantageous  that 
good  men  should  long  reign  both  far  and  wide. 
Nor  is  this  advantageous  so  much  to  themselves 
as  to  those  over  whom  they  reign.  For,  so  far  as 
concerns  themselves,  their  piety  and  probity, 
which  are  great  gifts  of  God,  suffice  to  give  them 
true  felicity,  enabling  them  to  live  well  the  life 
that  now  is,  and  afterwards  to  receive  that 
which  is  eternal.  In  this  world,  therefore,  the 
dominion  of  good  men  is  profitable,  not  so  much 
for  themselves  as  for  human  affairs.  But  the 
dominion  of  bad  men  is  hurtful  chiefly  to  them¬ 
selves  who  rule,  for  they  destroy  their  own  souls 
by  greater  licence  in  wickedness;  while  those 
who  are  put  under  them  in  service  are  not  hurt 
except  by  their  own  iniquity.  For  to  the  just  all 
the  evils  imposed  on  them  by  unjust  rulers  are 
not  the  punishment  of  crime,  but  the  test  of  vir¬ 
tue.  Therefore  the  good  man,  although  he  is  a 
slave,  is  free ;  but  the  bad  man,  even  if  he  reigns, 
is  a  slave,  and  that  not  of  one  man,  but,  what  is 
far  more  grievous,  of  as  many  masters  as  he  has 
vices;  of  which  vices  when  the  divine  Scripture 
treats,  it  says,  “For  of  whom  any  man  is  over¬ 
come,  to  the  same  he  is  also  the  bond-slave.”  2 

Chap.  4.  How  like  kingdoms  without  justice  are 

to  robberies 

Justice  being  taken  away,  then,  what  are 
kingdoms  but  great  robberies?  For  what  are  rob¬ 
beries  themselves,  but  little  kingdoms?  The 
band  itself  is  made  up  of  men;  it  is  ruled  by  the 
authority  of  a  prince,  it  is  knit  together  by  the 
pact  of  the  confederacy;  the  booty  is  divided  by 
the  law  agreed  on.  If,  by  the  admittance  of  aban¬ 
doned  men,  this  evil  increases  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  holds  places,  fixes  abodes,  takes  posses¬ 
sion  of  cities,  and  subdues  peoples,  it  assumes 
the  more  plainly  the  name  of  a  kingdom,  be¬ 
cause  the  reality  is  now  manifestly  conferred  on 
it,  not  by  the  removal  of  covetousness,  but  by 
the  addition  of  impunity.  Indeed,  that  was  an 
apt  and  true  reply  which  was  given  to  Alexander 
the  Great  by  a  pirate  who  had  been  seized.  For 
when  that  king  had  asked  the  man  what  he 
meant  by  keeping  hostile  possession  of  the  sea, 
he  answered  with  bold  pride,  “What  thou  mean¬ 
est  by  seizing  the  w7hole  earth;  but  because  I  do 
it  with  a  petty  ship,  I  am  called  a  robber,  whilst 
thou  who  dost  it  with  a  great  fleet  art  styled  em¬ 
peror.” 

2II  Pet.  2.  19. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IV.  3-7  191 


Chap.  5.  Of  the  runaway  gladiators  whose  pow¬ 
er  became  like  that  of  royal  dignity 

I  shall  not  therefore  stay  to  inquire  what  sort 
of  men  Romulus  gathered  together,  seeing  he 
deliberated  much  about  them — how,  being  as¬ 
sumed  out  of  that  life  they  led  into  the  fellow¬ 
ship  of  his  city,  they  might  cease  to  think  of  the 
punishment  they  deserved,  the  fear  of  which  had 
driven  them  to  greater  villainies ;  so  that  hence¬ 
forth  they  might  be  made  more  peaceable  mem¬ 
bers  of  society.  But  this  I  say,  that  the  Roman 
empire,  which  by  subduing  many  nations  had  al¬ 
ready  grown  great  and  an  object  of  universal 
dread,  was  itself  greatly  alarmed,  and  only  with 
much  difficulty  avoided  a  disastrous  overthrow, 
because  a  mere  handful  of  gladiators  in  Cam¬ 
pania.  escaping  from  the  games,  had  recruited  a 
great  army,  appointed  three  generals,  and  most 
widely  and  cruelly  devastated  Italy.  Let  them 
say  what  god  aided  these  men,  so  that  from  a 
small  and  contemptible  band  of  robbers  they  at¬ 
tained  to  a  kingdom,  feared  even  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  who  had  such  great  forces  and  fortresses. 
Or  will  they  deny  that  they  were  divinely  aided 
because  they  did  not  last  long?  As  if,  indeed,  the 
life  of  any  man  whatever  lasted  long.  In  that 
case,  too,  the  gods  aid  no  one  to  reign,  since  all 
individuals  quickly  die;  nor  is  sovereign  power 
to  be  reckoned  a  benefit,  because  in  a  little  time 
in  every  man,  and  thus  in  all  of  them  one  by 
one,  it  vanishes  like  a  vapour.  For  what  does  it 
matter  to  those  who  worshipped  the  gods  under 
Romulus,  and  are  long  since  dead,  that  after 
their  death  the  Roman  empire  has  grown  so 
great,  wffiile  they  plead  their  causes  before  the 
powers  beneath?  Whether  those  causes  are  good 
or  bad,  it  matters  not  to  the  question  before  us. 
And  this  is  to  be  understood  of  all  those  who 
carry  with  them  the  heavy  burden  of  their  ac¬ 
tions,  having  in  the  few  days  of  their  life  swiftly 
and  hurriedly  passed  over  the  stage  of  the  im¬ 
perial  office,  although  the  office  itself  has  lasted 
through  long  spaces  of  time,  being  filled  by  a 
constant  succession  of  dying  men.  If,  however, 
even  those  benefits  which  last  only  for  the  short¬ 
est  time  are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  aid  of  the  gods, 
these  gladiators  were  not  a  little  aided,  who 
broke  the  bonds  of  their  servile  condition,  fled, 
escaped,  raised  a  great  and  most  powerful  army, 
obedient  to  the  will  and  orders  of  their  chiefs 
and  much  feared  by  the  Roman  majesty,  and 
remaining  unsubdued  by  several  Roman  gener¬ 
als,  seized  many  places,  and,  having  won  very 
many  victories,  enjoyed  whatever  pleasures 
they  wished,  and  did  what  their  lust  suggested, 


and,  until  at  last  they  were  conquered,  which 
was  done  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  lived  sub¬ 
lime  and  dominant.  But  let  us  come  to  greater 
matters. 

Chap.  6.  Concerning  the  covetousness  of  Ninus, 
who  was  the  first  who  made  war  on  his  neigh¬ 
bours ,  that  he  might  rule  more  widely 
Justinus,  who  wrote  Greek  or  rather  foreign 
history  in  Latin,  and  briefly,  like  Trogus  Pom- 
peius  whom  he  followed,  begins  his  work  thus: 
“In  the  beginning  of  the  affairs  of  peoples  and 
nations  the  government  was  in  the  hands  of 
kings,  who  were  raised  to  the  height  of  this  ma¬ 
jesty  not  by  courting  the  people,  but  by  the 
knowledge  good  men  had  of  their  moderation. 
The  people  were  held  bound  by  no  laws ;  the  de¬ 
cisions  of  the  princes  were  instead  of  laws.  It 
was  the  custom  to  guard  rather  than  to  extend 
the  boundaries  of  the  empire;  and  kingdoms 
were  kept  within  the  bounds  of  each  ruler’s  na¬ 
tive  land.  Ninus  king  of  the  Assyrians  first  of 
all.  through  new  lust  of  empire,  changed  the  old 
and,  as  it  were,  ancestral  custom  of  nations.  He 
first  made  war  on  his  neighbours,  and  wholly 
subdued  as  far  as  to  the  frontiers  of  Libya  the 
nations  as  yet  untrained  to  resist.”  And  a  little 
after  he  says:  “Ninus  established  by  constant 
possession  the  greatness  of  the  authority  he  had 
gained.  Having  mastered  his  nearest  neighbours, 
he  went  on  to  others,  strengthened  by  the  acces¬ 
sion  of  forces,  and  by  making  each  fresh  victory 
the  instrument  of  that  which  followed,  subdued 
the  nations  of  the  whole  East.”  Now,  with  what¬ 
ever  fidelity  to  fact  either  he  or  Trogus  may  in  gen¬ 
eral  have  written — for  that  they  sometimes  told 
lies  is  shown  by  other  more  trustworthy  writers 
— yet  it  is  agreed  among  other  authors  that  the 
kingdom  of  the  Assyrians  was  extended  far  and 
wide  by  King  Ninus.  And  it  lasted  so  long  that 
the  Roman  empire  has  not  yet  attained  the  same 
age;  for,  as  those  write  who  have  treated  of 
chronological  history,  this  kingdom  endured  for 
twelve  hundred  and  forty  years  from  the  first 
year  in  which  Ninus  began  to  reign,  until  it  was 
transferred  to  the  Medes.  But  to  make  war  on 
your  neighbours,  and  thence  to  proceed  to  oth¬ 
ers,  and  through  mere  lust  of  dominion  to  crush 
and  subdue  people  who  do  you  no  harm,  what 
else  is  this  to  be  called  than  great  robbery? 

Chap.  7.  Whether  earthly  kmgdoms  in  their  rise 
and  fall  have  been  either  aided  or  deserted  by 
the  help  of  the  gods 

If  this  kingdom  w’as  so  great  and  lasting  with¬ 
out  the  aid  of  the  gods,  why  is  the  ample  terri- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tory  and  long  duration  of  the  Roman  empire  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  Roman  gods?  For  whatever  is 
the  cause  in  it,  the  same  is  in  the  other  also.  But 
if  they  contend  that  the  prosperity  of  the  other 
also  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  aid  of  the  gods,  I 
ask  of  which?  For  the  other  nations  whom  Nin- 
us  overcame,  did  not  then  worship  other  gods. 
Or  if  the  Assyrians  had  gods  of  their  own,  who, 
so  to  speak,  were  more  skilful  workmen  in  the 
construction  and  preservation  of  the  empire, 
whether  are  they  dead,  since  they  themselves 
have  also  lost  the  empire;  or,  having  been  de¬ 
frauded  of  their  pay,  or  promised  a  greater,  have 
they  chosen  rather  to  go  over  to  the  Medes,  and 
from  them  again  to  the  Persians,  because  Cyrus 
invited  them,  and  promised  them  something 
still  more  advantageous?  This  nation,  indeed, 
since  the  time  of  the  kingdom  of  Alexander  the 
Macedonian,  which  was  as  brief  in  duration  as 
it  was  great  in  extent,  has  preserved  its  own  em¬ 
pire,  and  at  this  day  occupies  no  small  territo¬ 
ries  in  the  East.  If  this  is  so,  then  either  the  gods 
are  unfaithful,  who  desert  their  own  and  go  over 
to  their  enemies,  which  Camillus,  who  was  but 
a  man,  did  not  do,  when,  being  victor  and  sub¬ 
duer  of  a  most  hostile  state,  although  he  had  felt 
that  Rome,  for  whom  he  had  done  so  much,  was 
ungrateful,  yet  afterwards,  forgetting  the  in¬ 
jury  and  remembering  his  native  land,  he  freed 
her  again  from  the  Gauls;  or  they  are  not  so 
strong  as  gods  ought  to  be,  since  they  can  be 
overcome  by  human  skill  or  strength.  Or  if, 
when  they  carry  on  war  among  themselves,  the 
gods  are  not  overcome  by  men,  but  some  gods 
who  are  peculiar  to  certain  cities  are  perchance 
overcome  by  other  gods,  it  follows  that  they 
have  quarrels  among  themselves  which  they  up¬ 
hold,  each  for  his  own  part.  Therefore  a  city 
ought  not  to  worship  its  own  gods,  but  rather 
others  who  aid  their  own  worshippers.  Finally, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  case  as  to  this 
change  of  sides,  or  flight,  or  migration,  or  fail¬ 
ure  in  battle  on  the  part  of  the  gods,  the  name  of 
Christ  had  not  yet  been  proclaimed  in  those 
parts  of  the  earth  when  these  kingdoms  were 
lost  and  transferred  through  great  destructions 
in  war.  For  if,  after  more  than  twelve  hundred 
years,  when  the  kingdom  was  taken  away  from 
the  Assyrians,  the  Christian  religion  had  there 
already  preached  another  eternal  kingdom  and 
put  a  stop  to  the  sacrilegious  worship  of  false 
gods,  what  else  would  the  foolish  men  of  that 
nation  have  said,  but  that  the  kingdom  which 
had  been  so  long  preserved  could  be  lost  for  no 
other  cause  than  the  desertion  of  their  own  reli¬ 
gions  and  the  reception  of  Christianity?  In 


which  foolish  speech  that  might  have  been  ut¬ 
tered,  let  those  we  speak  of  observe  their  own 
likeness,  and  blush,  if  there  is  any  sense  of 
shame  in  them,  because  they  have  uttered  sim¬ 
ilar  complaints;  although  the  Roman  empire  is 
afflicted  rather  than  changed — a  thing  which  has 
befallen  it  in  other  times  also,  before  the  name 
of  Christ  was  heard,  and  it  has  been  restored 
after  such  affliction — a  thing  which  even  in  these 
times  is  not  to  be  despaired  of.  For  who  knows 
the  will  of  God  concerning  this  matter? 

Chap.  8.  Which  of  the  gods  can  the  Romans 
suppose  presided  over  the  increase  and  pres¬ 
ervation  of  their  empire ,  when  they  have  be¬ 
lieved  that  even  the  care  of  single  things  could 
scarcely  be  committed  to  single  gods? 

Next  let  us  ask,  if  they  please,  out  of  so  great 
a  crowd  of  gods  which  the  Romans  worship, 
whom  in  especial,  or  what  gods  they  believe  to 
have  extended  and  preserved  that  empire.  Now, 
surely  of  this  work,  which  is  so  excellent  and  so 
very  full  of  the  highest  dignity,  they  dare  not 
ascribe  any  part  to  the  goddess  Cloacina ;  or  to 
Volupia,  who  has  her  appelation  from  voluptu¬ 
ousness  ;  or  to  Libentina,  who  has  her  name  from 
lust;  or  to  Vaticanus,  who  presides  over  the 
screaming  of  infants;  or  to  Cunina,  who  rules 
over  their  cradles.  But  how  is  it  possible  to  re¬ 
count  in  one  part  of  this  book  all  the  names  of 
gods  or  goddesses,  which  they  could  scarcely 
comprise  in  great  volumes,  distributing  among 
these  divinities  their  peculiar  offices  about  sin¬ 
gle  things?  They  have  not  even  thought  that  the 
charge  of  their  lands  should  be  committed  to 
any  one  god:  but  they  have  entrusted  their 
farms  to  Rusina ;  the  ridges  of  the  mountains  to 
Jugatinus;  over  the  downs  they  have  set  the 
goddess  Collatina;  over  the  valleys,  Vallonia. 
Nor  could  they  even  find  one  Segetia  so  compe¬ 
tent,  that  they  could  commend  to  her  care  all 
their  corn  crops  at  once;  but  so  long  as  their 
seed-corn  was  still  under  the  ground,  they  would 
have  the  goddess  Seia  set  over  it;  then,  when¬ 
ever  it  was  above  ground  and  formed  straw, 
they  set  over  it  the  goddess  Segetia;  and  when 
the  grain  was  collected  and  stored,  they  set  over 
it  the  goddess  Tutilina,  that  it  might  be  kept 
safe.  Who  would  not  have  thought  that  goddess 
Segetia  sufficient  to  take  care  of  the  standing 
corn  until  it  had  passed  from  the  first  green 
blades  to  the  dry  ears?  Yet  she  was  not  enough 
for  men,  who  loved  a  multitude  of  gods,  that  the 
miserable  soul,  despising  the  chaste  embrace  of 
the  one  true  God,  should  be  prostituted  to  a 
crowd  of  demons.  Therefore  they  set  Proserpina 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IV.  8-10 


over  the  germinating  seeds ;  over  the  joints  and 
knots  of  the  stems,  the  god  Nodotus;  over  the 
sheaths  enfolding  the  ears,  the  goddess  Volun- 
tina;  when  the  sheaths  opened  that  the  spike 
might  shoot  forth,  it  was  ascribed  to  the  goddess 
Patelana;  when  the  stems  stood  all  equal  with 
new  ears,  because  the  ancients  described  this 
equalizing  by  the  term  hostire,  it  was  ascribed 
to  the  goddess  Hostilina ;  when  the  grain  was  in 
flower,  it  was  dedicated  to  the  goddess  Flora; 
when  full  of  milk,  to  the  god  Lacturnus;  when 
maturing,  to  the  goddess  Matuta;  when  the  crop 
was  runcated — that  is,  removed  from  the  soil — 
to  the  goddess  Runcina.  Nor  do  I  yet  recount 
them  all,  for  I  am  sick  of  all  this,  though  it  gives 
them  no  shame.  Only,  I  have  said  these  very  few 
things,  in  order  that  it  may  be  understood  they 
dare  by  no  means  say  that  the  Roman  empire 
has  been  established,  increased,  and  preserved 
by  their  deities,  who  had  all  their  own  functions 
assigned  to  them  in  such  a  way  that  no  general 
oversight  was  entrusted  to  any  one  of  them. 
When,  therefore,  could  Segetia  take  care  of  the 
empire,  who  was  not  allowed  to  take  care  of  the 
corn  and  the  trees?  When  could  Cunina  take 
thought  about  war,  whose  oversight  was  not  al¬ 
lowed  to  go  beyond  the  cradles  of  the  babies? 
When  could  Nodotus  give  help  in  battle,  who 
had  nothing  to  do  even  with  the  sheath  of  the 
ear,  but  only  with  the  knots  of  the  joints?  Every 
one  sets  a  porter  at  the  door  of  his  house,  and, 
because  he  is  a  man,  he  is  quite  sufficient;  but 
these  people  have  set  three  gods,  Forculus  to  the 
doors,  Cardea  to  the  hinge,  Limentinus  to  the 
threshold.  Thus  Forculus  could  not  at  the  same 
time  take  care  also  of  the  hinge  and  the  thresh¬ 
old. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  the  great  extent  and  long 
duration  of  the  Roman  empire  should  be  as¬ 
cribed  to  Jove ,  whom  his  worshippers  believe 
to  be  the  chief  god 

Therefore  omitting,  or  passing  by  for  a  little, 
that  crowd  of  petty  gods,  we  ought  to  inquire 
into  the  part  performed  by  the  great  gods, 
whereby  Rome  has  been  made  so  great  as  to 
reign  so  long  over  so  many  nations.  Doubtless, 
therefore,  this  is  the  work  of  Jove.  For  they  will 
have  it  that  he  is  the  king  of  all  the  gods  and 
goddesses,  as  is  shown  by  his  sceptre  and  by  the 
Capitol  on  the  lofty  hill.  Concerning  that  god 
they  publish  a  saying  which,  although  that  of  a 
poet,  is  most  apt,  “All  things  are  full  of  Jove.”1 
Varro  believes  that  this  god  is  worshipped,  al¬ 
though  called  by  another  name,  even  by  those 
Wirgil  Eclogues ,  bk.  iii.  60. 


193 

who  worship  one  God  alone  without  any  image. 
But  if  this  is  so.  why  has  he  been  so  badly  used 
at  Rome  (and  indeed  by  other  nations  too)  that 
an  image  of  him  should  be  made? — a  thing 
which  was  so  displeasing  to  Varro  himself  that 
although  he  was  overborne  by  the  perverse  cus¬ 
tom  of  so  great  a  city  he  had  not  the  least  hesi¬ 
tation  in  both  saying  and  writing  that  those  who 
have  appointed  images  for  the  people  have  both 
taken  away  fear  and  added  error. 

Chap.  10.  What  opinions  those  have  followed 
who  have  set  divers  gods  over  divers  parts  of 
the  world 

Why,  also,  is  Juno  united  to  him  as  his  wife, 
who  is  called  at  once  “sister  and  yoke-fellow”?2 
Because,  say  they,  we  have  Jove  in  the  ether, 
Juno  in  the  air;  and  these  two  elements  are 
united,  the  one  being  superior,  the  other  inferior. 
It  is  not  he,  then,  of  whom  it  is  said,  “All  things 
are  full  of  Jove,”  if  Juno  also  fills  some  part. 
Does  each  fill  either,  and  are  both  of  this  couple 
in  both  of  these  elements,  and  in  each  of  them  at 
the  same  time?  Why,  then,  is  the  ether  given  to 
Jove,  the  air  to  Juno?  Besides,  these  two  should 
have  been  enough.  Why  is  it  that  the  sea  is  as¬ 
signed  to  Neptune,  the  earth  to  Pluto?  And  that 
these  also  might  not  be  left  without  mates,  Sala- 
cia  is  joined  to  Neptune,  Proserpine  to  Pluto. 
For  they  say  that  as  Juno  possesses  the  lower 
part  of  the  heavens — that  is,  the  air — so  Salacia 
possesses  the  lower  part  of  the  sea,  and  Proser¬ 
pine  the  lower  part  of  the  earth.  They  seek  how 
they  may  patch  up  these  fables,  but  they  find  no 
way.  For  if  these  things  were  so,  their  ancient 
sages  would  have  maintained  that  there  are 
three  chief  elements  of  the  world,  not  four,  in 
order  that  each  of  the  elements  might  have  a 
pair  of  gods.  Now,  they  have  positively  affirmed 
that  the  ether  is  one  thing,  the  air  another.  But 
water,  whether  higher  or  lower,  is  surely  water. 
Suppose  it  ever  so  unlike,  can  it  ever  be  so  much 
so  as  no  longer  to  be  water?  And  the  lower 
earth,  by  whatever  divinity  it  may  be  distin¬ 
guished,  what  else  can  it  be  than  earth?  Lo,  then, 
since  the  whole  physical  world  is  complete  in 
these  four  or  three  elements,  where  shall  Min¬ 
erva  be?  What  should  she  possess,  what  should 
she  fill?  For  she  is  placed  in  the  Capitol  along 
with  these  two,  although  she  is  not  the  offspring 
of  their  marriage.  Or  if  they  say  that  she  pos¬ 
sesses  the  higher  part  of  the  ether — and  on  that 
account  the  poets  have  feigned  that  she  sprang 
from  the  head  of  Jove — why  then  is  she  not 
rather  reckoned  queen  of  the  gods,  because  she 
2Virgil,  ALneid ,  bk.  i.  47. 


104  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


is  superior  to  Jove?  Is  it  because  it  would  be  im¬ 
proper  to  set  the  daughter  before  the  father? 
Why,  then,  is  not  that  rule  of  justice  observed 
concerning  Jove  himself  toward  Saturn?  Is  it 
because  he  was  conquered?  Have  they  fought 
then?  By  no  means,  say  they;  that  is  an  old 
wife’s  fable.  Lo,  we  are  not  to  believe  fables, 
and  must  hold  more  worthy  opinions  concerning 
the  gods!  Why,  then,  do  they  not  assign  to  the 
father  of  Jove  a  seat,  if  not  of  higher,  at  least  of 
equal  honour?  Because  Saturn,  say  they,  is  length 
of  time.  Therefore  they  who  worship  Saturn 
worship  Time;  and  it  is  insinuated  that  Jupiter, 
the  king  of  the  gods,  was  born  of  Time.  For  is 
anything  unworthy  said  when  Jupiter  and  Juno 
are  said  to  have  been  sprung  from  Time,  if  he  is 
the  heaven  and  she  is  the  earth,  since  both  heav¬ 
en  and  earth  have  been  made,  and  are  therefore 
not  eternal?  For  their  learned  and  wise  men 
have  this  also  in  their  books.  Nor  is  that  saying 
taken  by  Virgil  out  of  poetic  figments,  but  out  of 
the  books  of  philosophers. 

Then  Ether ,  the  Father  Almighty,  in  copious  show¬ 
ers  descended 

Into  his  spouse’s  glad  bosom,  making  it  fertile } 

— that  is,  into  the  bosom  of  Tellus,  or  the  earth. 
Although  here,  also,  they  will  have  it  that  there 
are  some  differences,  and  think  that  in  the  earth 
herself  Terra  is  one  thing,  Tellus  another,  and 
Tellumo  another.  And  they  have  all  these  as 
gods,  called  by  their  own  names,  distinguished 
by  their  own  offices,  and  venerated  with  their 
own  altars  and  rites.  This  same  earth  also  they 
call  the  mother  of  the  gods,  so  that  even  the  fic¬ 
tions  of  the  poets  are  more  tolerable,  if,  accord¬ 
ing  not  to  their  poetical  but  sacred  books,  Juno 
is  not  only  the  sister  and  wife,  but  also  the 
mother  of  Jove.  The  same  earth  they  worship  as 
Ceres,  and  also  as  Vesta;  while  yet  they  more 
frequently  affirm  that  Vesta  is  nothing  else  than 
fire,  pertaining  to  the  hearths,  without  which  the 
city  cannot  exist ;  and  therefore  virgins  are  wont 
to  serve  her,  because  as  nothing  is  born  of  a  vir¬ 
gin,  so  nothing  is  born  of  fire;  but  all  this  non¬ 
sense  ought  to  be  completely  abolished  and  ex¬ 
tinguished  by  Him  who  is  born  of  a  virgin.  For 
who  can  bear  that,  while  they  ascribe  to  the  fire 
so  much  honour,  and,  as  it  were,  chastity,  they 
do  not  blush  sometimes  even  to  call  Vesta  Ve¬ 
nus,  so  that  honoured  virginity  may  vanish  in 
her  hand-maidens?  For  if  Vesta  is  Venus,  how 
can  virgins  rightly  serve  her  by  abstaining  from 
venery?  Are  there  two  Venuses,  the  one  a  vir¬ 
gin,  the  other  not  a  maid?  Or  rather,  are  there 
Wirgil,  Georgies,  bk.  ii,  325,  326. 


three,  one  the  goddess  of  virgins,  who  is  also 
called  Vesta,  another  the  goddess  of  wives,  and 
another  of  harlots?  To  her  also  the  Phoenicians 
offered  a  gift  by  prostituting  their  daughters  be¬ 
fore  they  united  them  to  husbands.  Which  of 
these  is  the  wife  of  Vulcan?  Certainly  not  the 
virgin,  since  she  has  a  husband.  Far  be  it  from 
us  to  say  it  is  the  harlot,  lest  we  should  seem  to 
wrong  the  son  of  Juno  and  fellow-worker  of 
Minerva.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
she  belongs  to  the  married  people ;  but  we  would 
not  wish  them  to  imitate  her  in  what  she  did 
with  Mars.  “Again,”  say  they,  “you  return  to 
fables.”  What  sort  of  justice  is  that,  to  be  angry 
with  us  because  we  say  such  things  of  their  gods, 
and  not  to  be  angry  with  themselves,  who  in 
their  theatres  most  willingly  behold  the  crimes 
of  their  gods?  And — a  thing  incredible,  if  it 
were  not  thoroughly  well  proved — these  very 
theatric  representations  of  the  crimes  of  their 
gods  have  been  instituted  in  honour  of  these 
same  gods. 

Chap.  ii.  Concerning  the  many  gods  whom  the 
pagan  doctors  defend  as  being  one  and  the 
same  Jove 

Let  them  therefore  assert  as  many  things  as 
ever  they  please  in  physical  reasonings  and  dis¬ 
putations.  One  while  let  Jupiter  be  the  soul  of 
this  corporeal  world,  who  fills  and  moves  that 
whole  mass,  constructed  and  compacted  out  of 
four,  or  as  many  elements  as  they  please;  an¬ 
other  while,  let  him  yield  to  his  sister  and  broth¬ 
ers  their  parts  of  it:  now  let  him  be  the  ether, 
that  from  above  he  may  embrace  Juno,  the  air 
spread  out  beneath;  again,  let  him  be  the  whole 
heaven  along  with  the  air,  and  impregnate  with 
fertilizing  showers  and  seeds  the  earth,  as  his 
wife,  and,  at  the  same  time,  his  mother  (for  this 
is  not  vile  in  divine  beings)  ;  and  yet  again  (that 
it  may  not  be  necessary  to  run  through  them 
all),  let  him,  the  one  god,  of  whom  many  think 
it  has  been  said  by  a  most  noble  poet, 

For  God  pervadeth  all  things, 

All  lands,  and  the  tracts  of  the  sea ,  and  the  depth 
of  the  heavens .2 

Let  it  be  him  who  in  the  ether  is  Jupiter;  in  the 
air.  Juno;  in  the  sea,  Neptune;  in  the  lower 
parts  of  the  sea,  Salacia;  in  the  earth,  Pluto;  in 
the  lower  part  of  the  earth,  Proserpine;  on  the 
domestic  hearths,  Vesta;  in  the  furnace  of  the 
workmen,  Vulcan;  among  the  stars,  Sol  and 
Luna,  and  the  Stars;  in  divination,  Apollo;  in 
merchandise,  Mercury;  in  Janus,  the  initiator; 
in  Terminus,  the  terminator;  Saturn,  in  time; 
Hbid.,  bk.  iv.  221,  222. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Mars  and  Bellona.  in  war;  Liber,  in  vineyards; 
Ceres,  in  cornfields;  Diana,  in  forests;  Minerva, 
in  learning.  Finally,  let  it  be  him  who  is  in  that 
crowd,  as  it  were,  of  plebeian  gods:  let  him  pre¬ 
side  under  the  name  of  Liber  over  the  seed  of 
men,  and  under  that  of  Libera  over  that  of 
women:  let  him  be  Diespiter,  who  brings  forth 
the  birth  to  the  light  of  day:  let  him  be  the  god¬ 
dess  Mena,  whom  they  set  over  the  menstrua¬ 
tion  of  women:  let  him  be  Lucina,  who  is  in¬ 
voked  by  women  in  childbirth:  let  him  bring 
help  to  those  who  are  being  born,  by  taking  them 
up  from  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  and  let  him  be 
called  Opis :  let  him  open  the  mouth  in  the  cry¬ 
ing  babe,  and  be  called  the  god  Vaticanus:  let 
him  lift  it  from  the  earth,  and  be  called  the  god¬ 
dess  Levana ;  let  him  watch  over  cradles,  and  be 
called  the  goddess  Cunina:  let  it  be  no  other 
than  he  who  is  in  those  goddesses,  who  sing  the 
fates  of  the  new  born,  and  are  called  Carmentes : 
let  him  preside  over  fortuitous  events,  and  be 
called  Fortuna:  in  the  goddess  Rumina,  let  him 
milk  out  the  breast  to  the  little  one,  because  the 
ancients  termed  the  breast  ntma:  in  the  goddess 
Potina,  let  him  administer  drink :  in  the  goddess 
Educa,  let  him  supply  food:  from  the  terror  of 
infants,  let  him  be  styled  Paventia:  from  the 
hope  which  comes,  Venilia:  from  voluptuous¬ 
ness,  Volupia:  from  action.  Agenor:  from  the 
stimulants  by  which  man  is  spurred  on  to  much 
action,  let  him  be  named  the  goddess  Stimula: 
let  him  be  the  goddess  Strenia,  for  making  stren¬ 
uous;  Numeria,  who  teaches  to  number;  Ca- 
moena,  who  teaches  to  sing:  let  him  be  both  the 
god  Consus  for  granting  counsel,  and  the  god¬ 
dess  Sentia  for  inspiring  sentences:  let  him  be 
the  goddess  Juventas,  who,  after  the  robe  of 
boyhood  is  laid  aside,  takes  charge  of  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  youthful  age:  let  him  be  Fortuna 
Barbata,  who  endues  adults  with  a  beard, 
whom  they  have  not  chosen  to  honour;  so 
that  this  divinity,  whatever  it  may  be,  should 
at  least  be  a  male  god,  named  either  Barbatus, 
from  bprba,  like  Nodotus,  from  nodus ;  or,  cer¬ 
tainly,  not  Fortuna,  but  because  he  has  beards, 
Fortunius:  let  him,  in  the  god  Jugatinus,  yoke 
couples  in  marriage;  and  when  the  girdle  of  the 
virgin  wife  is  loosed,  let  him  be  invoked  as  the 
goddess  Virginiensis :  let  him  be  Mutunus  or 
Tuternus,  who,  among  the  Greeks,  is  called  Pri- 
apus.  If  they  are  not  ashamed  of  it,  let  all  these 
which  I  have  named,  and  whatever  others  I  have 
not  named  (for  I  have  not  thought  fit  to  name 
all),  let  all  these  gods  and  goddesses  be  that  one 
Jupiter,  whether,  as  some  will  have  it,  all  these 
are  parts  of  him,  or  are  his  powers,  as  those 


GOD  IV.  11-12  195 

think  who  are  pleased  to  consider  him  the  soul 
of  the  world,  which  is  the  opinion  of  most  of 
their  doctors,  and  these  the  greatest.  If  these 
things  are  so  (how  evil  they  may  be  I  do  not  yet 
meanwhile  inquire),  what  would  they  lose,  if 
they,  by  a  more  prudent  abridgment,  should 
worship  one  god?  For  what  part  of  him  could 
be  contemned  if  he  himself  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped?  But  if  they  are  afraid  lest  parts  of  him 
should  be  angry  at  being  passed  by  or  neglected, 
then  it  is  not  the  case,  as  they  will  have  it,  that 
this  whole  is  as  the  life  of  one  living  being, 
which  contains  all  the  gods  together,  as  if  they 
were  its  virtues,  or  members,  or  parts;  but  each 
part  has  its  own  life  separate  from  the  rest,  if 
it  is  so  that  one  can  be  angered,  appeased,  or 
stirred  up  more  than  another.  But  if  it  is  said 
that  all  together — that  is,  the  whole  Jove  him¬ 
self — would  be  offended  if  his  parts  were  not 
also  worshipped  singly  and  minutely,  it  is  fool¬ 
ishly  spoken.  Surely  none  of  them  could  be 
passed  by  if  he  who  singly  possesses  them  all 
should  be  worshipped.  For,  to  omit  other  things 
which  are  innumerable,  when  they  say  that  all 
the  stars  are  parts  of  Jove,  and  are  all  alive,  and 
have  rational  souls,  and  therefore  without  con¬ 
troversy  are  gods,  can  they  not  see  how  many 
they  do  not  worship,  to  how  many  they  do  not 
build  temples  or  set  up  altars,  and  to  how  very 
few,  in  fact,  of  the  stars  they  have  thought  of 
setting  them  up  and  offering  sacrifice?  If,  there¬ 
fore,  those  are  displeased  who  are  not  severally 
worshipped,  do  they  not  fear  to  live  with  only  a 
few  appeased,  while  all  heaven  is  displeased? 
But  if  they  worship  all  the  stars  because  they 
are  part  of  Jove  whom  they  worship,  by  the 
same  compendious  method  they  could  suppli¬ 
cate  them  all  in  him  alone.  For  in  this  way  no 
one  would  be  displeased,  since  in  him  alone  all 
would  be  supplicated.  No  one  would  be  con¬ 
temned,  instead  of  there  being  just  cause  of  dis¬ 
pleasure  given  to  the  much  greater  number  who 
are  passed  by  in  the  worship  offered  to  some; 
especially  when  Priapus,  stretched  out  in  vile 
nakedness,  is  preferred  to  those  who  shine  from 
their  supernal  abode. 

Chap.  12.  Concerning  the  opinion  of  those  who 
have  thought  that  God  is  the  soul  of  the 
world ,  and  the  world  is  the  body  of  God 
Ought  not  men  of  intelligence,  and  indeed 
men  of  every  kind,  to  be  stirred  up  to  examine 
the  nature  of  this  opinion?  For  there  is  no  need 
of  excellent  capacity  for  this  task,  that  putting 
away  the  desire  of  contention,  they  may  observe 
that  if  God  is  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  the 


196  ST.  AUGUSTINE 

world  is  as  a  body  to  Him,  who  is  the  soul,  He  also  be  so,  if  Victory  is  a  goddess?  Or  what  need 


must  be  one  living  being  consisting  of  soul  and 
body,  and  that  this  same  God  is  a  kind  of  womb 
of  nature  containing  all  things  in  Himself,  so 
that  the  lives  and  souls  of  all  living  things  are 
taken,  according  to  the  manner  of  each  one’s 
birth,  out  of  His  soul  which  vivifies  that  whole 
mass,  and  therefore  nothing  at  all  remains  which 
is  not  a  part  of  God.  And  if  this  is  so,  who  can¬ 
not  see  what  impious  and  irreligious  conse¬ 
quences  follow  such  as  that  whatever  one  may 
trample,  he  must  trample  a  part  of  God,  and  in 
slaying  any  living  creature,  a  part  of  God  must 
be  slaughtered?  But  I  am  unwilling  to  utter  all 
that  may  occur  to  those  who  think  of  it,  yet  can¬ 
not  be  spoken  without  irreverence. 

Chap.  13.  Concerning  those  who  assert  that  only 
rational  animals  are  parts  of  the  one  God 
But  if  they  contend  that  only  rational  ani¬ 
mals,  such  as  men,  are  parts  of  God,  I  do  not 
really  see  how,  if  the  whole  world  is  God,  they 
can  separate  beasts  from  being  parts  of  Him. 
But  what  need  is  there  of  striving  about  that? 
Concerning  the  rational  animal  himself — that 
is,  man — what  more  unhappy  belief  can  be  en¬ 
tertained  than  that  a  part  of  God  is  whipped 
when  a  boy  is  whipped?  And  who,  unless  he  is 
quite  mad,  could  bear  the  thought  that  parts  of 
God  can  become  lascivious,  iniquitous,  impious, 
and  altogether  damnable?  In  brief,  why  is  God 
angry  at  those  who  do  not  worship  Him,  since 
these  offenders  are  parts  of  Himself?  It  remains, 
therefore,  that  they  must  say  that  all  the  gods 
have  their  own  lives;  that  each  one  lives  for 
himself,  and  none  of  them  is  a  part  of  any  one; 
but  that  all  are  to  be  worshipped — at  least  as 
many  as  can  be  known  and  worshipped;  for  they 
are  so  many  it  is  impossible  that  all  can  be  so. 
And  of  all  these,  I  believe  that  Jupiter,  because 
he  presides  as  king,  is  thought  by  them  to  have 
both  established  and  extended  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire.  For  if  he  has  not  done  it,  what  other  god 
do  they  believe  could  have  attempted  so  great 
a  work,  when  they  must  all  be  occupied  with 
their  own  offices  and  works,  nor  can  one  intrude 
on  that  of  another?  Could  the  kingdom  of  men 
then  be  propagated  and  increased  by  the  king  of 
the  gods? 

Chap.  14.  The  enlargement  of  kingdoms  is  un¬ 
suitably  ascribed  to  Jove;  for  if,  as  they  will 
have  it,  Victoria  is  a  goddess ,  she  alone  would 
suffice  for  this  business. 

Here,  first  of  all,  I  ask,  why  even  the  kingdom 
itself  is  not  some  god.  For  why  should  not  it 


is  there  of  Jove  himself  in  this  affair,  if  victory 
favours  and  is  propitious,  and  always  goes  to 
those  whom  she  wishes  to  be  victorious?  With 
this  goddess  favourable  and  propitious,  even  if 
Jove  was  idle  and  did  nothing,  what  nations 
could  remain  unsubdued,  what  kingdom  would 
not  yield?  But  perhaps  it  is  displeasing  to  good 
men  to  fight  with  most  wicked  unrighteousness, 
and  provoke  with  voluntary  war  neighbours  who 
are  peaceable  and  do  no  wrong,  in  order  to  en¬ 
large  a  kingdom?  If  they  feel  thus,  I  entirely 
approve  and  praise  them. 

Chap.  15.  Whether  it  is  suitable  for  good  men 
to  wish  to  ride  more  widely 
Let  them  ask,  then,  whether  it  is  quite  fitting 
for  good  men  to  rejoice  in  extended  empire.  For 
the  iniquity  of  those  with  whom  just  wars  are 
carried  on  favours  the  growth  of  a  kingdom, 
which  would  certainly  have  been  small  if  the 
peace  and  justice  of  neighbours  had  not  by  any 
wrong  provoked  the  carrying  on  of  war  against 
them ;  and  human  affairs  being  thus  more  happy, 
all  kingdoms  would  have  been  small,  rejoicing 
in  neighbourly  concord;  and  thus  there  would 
have  been  very  many  kingdoms  of  nations  in  the 
world,  as  there  are  very  many  houses  of  citizens 
in  a  city.  Therefore,  to  carry  on  war  and  extend 
a  kingdom  over  wholly  subdued  nations  seems 
to  bad  men  to  be  felicity,  to  good  men  necessity. 
But  because  it  would  be  worse  that  the  injuri¬ 
ous  should  rule  over  those  who  are  more  right¬ 
eous,  therefore  even  that  is  not  unsuitably  called 
felicity.  But  beyond  doubt  it  is  greater  felicity 
to  have  a  good  neighbour  at  peace,  than  to  con¬ 
quer  a  bad  one  by  making  war.  Your  wishes  are 
bad,  when  you  desire  that  one  whom  you  hate 
or  fear  should  be  in  such  a  condition  that  you 
can  conquer  him.  If,  therefore,  by  carrying  on 
wars  that  were  just,  not  impious  or  unrighteous, 
the  Romans  could  have  acquired  so  great  an  em¬ 
pire,  ought  they  not  to  worship  as  a  goddess 
even  the  injustice  of  foreigners?  For  we  see  that 
this  has  co-operated  much  in  extending  the  em¬ 
pire,  by  making  foreigners  so  unjust  that  they 
became  people  with  whom  just  wars  might  be 
carried  on  and  the  empire  increased.  And  why 
may  not  injustice,  at  least  that  of  foreign  na¬ 
tions,  also  be  a  goddess,  if  Fear  and  Dread  and 
Ague  have  deserved  to  be  Roman  gods?  By 
these  two,  therefore — that  is,  by  foreign  injus¬ 
tice,  and  the  goddess  Victoria,  for  injustice  stirs 
up  causes  of  wars,  and  Victoria  brings  these 
same  wars  to  a  happy  termination — the  empire 
has  increased,  even  although  Jove  has  been  idle. 


THE  CITY  OF 

For  what  part  could  Jove  have  here,  when  those 
things  which  might  be  thought  to  be  his  benefits 
are  held  to  be  gods,  called  gods,  worshipped  as 
gods,  and  are  themselves  invoked  for  their  own 
parts?  He  also  might  have  some  part  here,  if  he 
himself  might  be  called  Empire,  just  as  she  is 
called  Victory.  Or  if  empire  is  the  gift  of  Jove, 
why  may  not  victory  also  be  held  to  be  his  gift? 
And  it  certainly  would  have  been  held  to  be  so, 
had  he  been  recognized  and  worshipped,  not  as 
a  stone  in  the  Capitol,  but  as  the  true  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 

Chap.  16.  What  was  the  reason  that  the  Romans 
in  detailing  separate  gods  for  all  things  and  all 
movements  of  the  mind,  chose  to  have  the 
Temple  of  Quiet  outside  the  gates 
But  I  wonder  very  much,  that  while  they  as¬ 
signed  to  separate  gods  single  things,  and  (well 
nigh)  all  movements  of  the  mind;  that  while 
they  invoked  the  goddess  Agenoria,  who  should 
excite  to  action;  the  goddess  Stimula,  who 
should  stimulate  to  unusual  action;  the  goddess 
Murcia,  who  should  not  move  men  beyond 
measure,  but  make  them,  as  Pomponius  says, 
murcid — that  is,  too  slothful  and  inactive;  the 
goddess  Strenua,  who  should  make  them  strenu¬ 
ous  ;  and  that  while  they  offered  to  all  these  gods 
and  goddesses  solemn  and  public  worship,  they 
should  yet  have  been  unwilling  to  give  public 
acknowledgment  to  her  whom  they  name  Quies 
because  she  makes  men  quiet,  but  built  her  tem¬ 
ple  outside  the  Colline  gate.  Whether  was  this  a 
symptom  of  an  unquiet  mind,  or  rather  was  it 
thus  intimated  that  he  who  should  persevere  in 
worshipping  that  crowd,  not,  to  be  sure,  of  gods, 
but  of  demons,  could  not  dwell  with  quiet;  to 
which  the  true  Physician  calls,  saying,  “Learn 
of  me.  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  ye 
shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls”? 

Chap.  17.  Whether ,  if  the  highest  power  belongs 
to  Jove ,  Victoria  also  ought  to  be  worshipped 
Or  (Jo  they  say.  perhaps,  that  Jupiter  sends 
the  goddess  Victoria,  and  that  she,  as  it  were, 
acting  in  obedience  to  the  king  of  the  gods, 
comes  to  those  to  whom  he  may  have  despatched 
her,  and  takes  up  her  quarters  on  their  side? 
This  is  truly  said,  not  of  Jove,  whom  they,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  own  imagination,  feign  to  be 
king  of  the  gods,  but  of  Him  who  is  the  true 
eternal  King,  because  he  sends,  not  Victory, 
who  is  no  person,  but  His  angel,  and  causes 
whom  He  pleases  to  conquer;  whose  counsel 
may  be  hidden,  but  cannot  be  unjust.  For  if  Vic¬ 
tory  is  a  goddess,  why  is  not  Triumph  also  a  god, 


GOD  IV.  13-18  197 

and  joined  to  Victory  either  as  husband,  or 
brother,  or  son?  Indeed,  they  have  imagined 
such  things  concerning  the  gods  that  if  the  poets 
had  feigned  the  like,  and  they  should  have  been 
discussed  by  us.  they  would  have  replied  that 
they  were  laughable  figments  of  the  poets  not  to 
be  attributed  to  true  deities.  And  yet  they  them¬ 
selves  did  not  laugh  when  they  were,  not  reading 
in  the  poets,  but  worshipping  in  the  temples  such 
doting  follies.  Therefore  they  should  entreat 
Jove  alone  for  all  things,  and  supplicate  him 
only.  For  if  Victory  is  a  goddess,  and  is  under 
him  as  her  king,  wherever  he  might  have  sent 
her.  she  could  not  dare  to  resist  and  do  her  own 
will  rather  than  his. 

Chap.  18.  With  what  reason  they  who  think 

Felicity  and  Fortune  goddesses  have  distin¬ 
guished  them 

What  shall  we  say,  besides,  of  the  idea  that 
Felicity  also  is  a  goddess?  She  has  received  a 
temple;  she  has  merited  an  altar;  suitable  rites 
of  worship  are  paid  to  her.  She  alone,  then, 
should  be  worshipped.  For  where  she  is  present, 
what  good  thing  can  be  absent?  But  what  does  a 
man  wish  that  he  thinks  Fortune  also  a  goddess 
and  worships  her?  Is  felicity  one  thing,  fortune 
another?  Fortune,  indeed,  may  be  bad  as  well  as 
good;  but  felicity,  if  it  could  be  bad,  would  not 
be  felicity.  Certainly  we  ought  to  think  all  the 
gods  of  either  sex  (if  they  also  have  sex)  are 
only  good.  This  says  Plato ;  this  say  other  philos¬ 
ophers;  this  say  all  estimable  rulers  of  the  re¬ 
public  and  the  nations.  How  is  it,  then,  that  the 
goddess  Fortune  is  sometimes  good,  sometimes 
bad?  Is  it  perhaps  the  case  that  when  she  is  bad 
she  is  not  a  goddess,  but  is  suddenly  changed 
into  a  malignant  demon?  How  many  Fortunes 
are  there  then?  Just  as  many  as  there  are  men 
who  are  fortunate,  that  is,  of  good  fortune.  But 
since  there  must  also  be  very  many  others  who 
at  the  very  same  time  are  men  of  bad  fortune, 
could  she,  being  one  and  the  same  Fortune,  be 
at  the  same  time  both  bad  and  good — the  one  to 
these,  the  other  to  those?  She  who  is  the  god¬ 
dess,  is  she  always  good?  Then  she  herself  is 
felicity.  Why,  then,  are  two  names  given  her? 
Yet  this  is  tolerable;  for  it  is  customary  that  one 
thing  should  be  called  by  two  names.  But  why 
different  temples,  different  altars,  different  rit¬ 
uals?  There  is  a  reason,  say  they,  because  Feli¬ 
city  is  she  whom  the  good  have  by  previous 
merit;  but  fortune,  which  is  termed  good  with¬ 
out  any  trial  of  merit,  befalls  both  good  and  bad 
men  fortuitously,  whence  also  she  is  named 
Fortune.  How,  therefore,  is  she  good,  who  with- 


igS  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


out  any  discernment  comes  both  to  the  good 
and  to  the  bad?  Why  is  she  worshipped,  who  is 
thus  blind,  running  at  random  on  any  one  what¬ 
ever,  so  that  for  the  most  part  she  passes  by  her 
worshippers  and  cleaves  to  those  who  despise 
her?  Or  if  her  worshippers  profit  somewhat,  so 
that  they  are  seen  by  her  and  loved,  then  she  fol¬ 
lows  merit  and  does  not  come  fortuitously. 
What,  then,  becomes  of  that  definition  of  for¬ 
tune?  What  becomes  of  the  opinion  that  she  has 
received  her  very  name  from  fortuitous  events? 
For  it  profits  one  nothing  to  worship  her  if  she 
is  truly  fortune.  But  if  she  distinguishes  her 
worshippers,  so  that  she  may  benefit  them,  she 
is  not  fortune.  Or  does  Jupiter  send  her  too, 
whither  he  pleases?  Then  let  him  alone  be  wor¬ 
shipped;  because  Fortune  is  not  able  to  resist 
him  when  he  commands  her,  and  sends  her 
where  he  pleases.  Or.  at  least,  let  the  bad  wor¬ 
ship  her,  who  do  not  choose  to  have  merit  by 
which  the  goddess  Felicity  might  be  invited. 

Chap.  19.  Concerning  Fortuna  Muliebris 
To  this  supposed  deity,  whom  they  call  For¬ 
tuna.  they  ascribe  so  much,  indeed,  that  they 
have  a  tradition  that  the  image  of  her,  which 
was  dedicated  by  the  Roman  matrons,  and  called 
Fortuna  Muliebris ,  has  spoken,  and  has  said, 
once  and  again,  that  the  matrons  pleased  her  by 
their  homage;  which,  indeed,  if  it  is  true,  ought 
not  to  excite  our  wonder.  For  it  is  not  so  diffi¬ 
cult  for  malignant  demons  to  deceive,  and  they 
ought  the  rather  to  advert  to  their  wits  and 
wiles,  because  it  is  that  goddess  who  comes  by 
haphazard  who  has  spoken,  and  not  she  who 
comes  to  reward  merit.  For  Fortuna  was  loqua¬ 
cious,  and  Felicitas  mute;  and  for  what  other 
reason  but  that  men  might  not  care  to  live  right¬ 
ly.  having  made  Fortuna  their  friend,  who  could 
make  them  fortunate  without  any  good  desert? 
And  truly,  if  Fortuna  speaks,  she  should  at  least 
speak,  not  with  a  womanly,  but  with  a  manly 
voice ;  lest  they  themselves  who  have  dedicated 
the  image  should  think  so  great  a  miracle  has 
been  wrought  by  feminine  loquacity. 

Chap.  20.  Concerning  Virtue  and  Faith,  which 
the  pagans  have  honoured  with  temples  and 
sacred  rites,  passing  by  other  good  qualities 
which  ought  likewise  to  have  been  wor¬ 
shipped,  if  deity  was  rightly  attributed  to 
these 

They  have  made  Virtue  also  a  goddess,  which, 
indeed,  if  it  could  be  a  goddess,  had  been  prefer¬ 
able  to  many.  And  now,  because  it  is  not  a  god¬ 
dess,  but  a  gift  of  God,  let  it  be  obtained  by 


prayer  from  Him,  by  whom  alone  it  can  be 
given,  and  the  whole  crowd  of  false  gods  van¬ 
ishes.  But  why  is  Faith  believed  to  be  a  goddess, 
and  why  does  she  herself  receive  temple  and 
altar?  For  whoever  prudently  acknowledges  her 
makes  his  own  self  an  abode  for  her.  But  how  do 
they  know  what  faith  is,  of  which  it  is  the  prime 
and  greatest  function  that  the  true  God  may  be 
believed  in?  But  why  had  not  virtue  sufficed? 
Does  it  not  include  faith  also?  Forasmuch  as 
they  have  thought  proper  to  distribute  virtue 
into  four  divisions — prudence,  justice,  fortitude, 
and  temperance — and  as  each  of  these  divisions 
has  its  own  virtues,  faith  is  among  the  parts  of 
justice,  and  has  the  chief  place  with  as  many  of 
us  as  know  what  that  saying  means,  “The  just 
shall  live  by  faith.”1  But  if  Faith  is  a  goddess,  I 
wonder  why  these  keen  lovers  of  a  multitude  of 
gods  have  wronged  so  many  other  goddesses,  by 
passing  them  by,  when  they  could  have  dedicat¬ 
ed  temples  and  altars  to  them  likewise.  Why  has 
temperance  not  deserved  to  be  a  goddess,  when 
some  Roman  princes  have  obtained  no  small 
glory  on  account  of  her?  Why,  in  fine,  is  forti¬ 
tude  not  a  goddess,  who  aided  Mucius  when  he 
thrust  his  right  hand  into  the  flames;  who  aided 
Curtius,  when  for  the  sake  of  his  country  he 
threw  himself  headlong  into  the  yawning  earth; 
who  aided  Decius  the  sire,  and  Decius  the  son, 
when  they  devoted  themselves  for  the  army? 
though  we  might  question  whether  these  men 
had  true  fortitude,  if  this  concerned  our  present 
discussion.  Why  have  prudence  and  wisdom 
merited  no  place  among  the  gods?  Is  it  because 
they  are  all  worshipped  under  the  general  name 
of  Virtue  itself?  Then  they  could  thus  worship 
the  true  God  also,  of  whom  all  the  other  gods 
are  thought  to  be  parts.  But  in  that  one  name  of 
virtue  is  comprehended  both  faith  and  chastity, 
which  yet  have  obtained  separate  altars  in  tem¬ 
ples  of  their  own. 

Chap.  21.  That  although  not  understanding 
them  to  be  the  gifts  of  God,  they  ought  at 
least  to  have  been  content  with  virtue  and 
felicity 

These,  not  verity  but  vanity  has  made  god¬ 
desses.  For  these  are  gifts  of  the  true  God,  not 
themselves  goddesses.  However,  where  virtue 
and  felicity  are,  what  else  is  sought  for?  What 
can  suffice  the  man  whom  virtue  and  felicity  do 
not  suffice?  For  surely  virtue  comprehends  all 
things  we  need  do,  felicity  all  things  we  need 
wish  for.  If  Jupiter,  then,  was  worshipped  in 
order  that  he  might  give  these  two  things — be- 
^ab.  2.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF 

cause,  if  extent  and  duration  of  empire  is  some¬ 
thing  good,  it  pertains  to  this  same  felicity — 
why  is  it  not  understood  that  they  are  not  god¬ 
desses,  but  the  gifts  of  God?  But  if  they  are 
judged  to  be  goddesses,  then  at  least  that  other 
great  crowd  of  gods  should  not  be  sought  after. 
For,  having  considered  all  the  offices  which  their 
fancy  has  distributed  among  the  various  gods 
and  goddesses,  let  them  find  out,  if  they  can, 
anything  which  could  be  bestowed  by  any  god 
whatever  on  a  man  possessing  virtue,  possessing 
felicity.  What  instruction  could  be  sought  either 
from  Mercury  or  Minerva,  when  Virtue  already 
possessed  all  in  herself?  Virtue,  indeed,  is  de¬ 
fined  by  the  ancients  as  itself  the  art  of  living 
well  and  rightly.  Hence,  because  virtue  is  called 
in  Greek  apery,  it  has  been  thought  the  Lat¬ 
ins  have  derived  from  it  the  term  art.  But  if  Vir¬ 
tue  cannot  come  except  to  the  clever,  what  need 
was  there  of  the  god  Father  Catius,  who  should 
make  men  cautious,  that  is,  acute,  when  Felicity 
could  confer  this?  Because,  to  be  born  clever 
belongs  to  felicity.  Whence,  although  goddess 
Felicity  could  not  be  worshipped  by  one  not  yet 
born,  in  order  that,  being  made  his  friend,  she 
might  bestow  this  on  him,  yet  she  might  confer 
this  favour  on  parents  who  were  her  worship¬ 
pers,  that  clever  children  should  be  born  to 
them.  What  need  had  women  in  childbirth  to 
invoke  Lucina,  when,  if  Felicity  should  be  pres¬ 
ent,  they  would  have,  not  only  a  good  delivery, 
but  good  children  too?  What  need  was  there  to 
commend  the  children  to  the  goddess  Ops  when 
they  were  being  born;  to  the  god  Vaticanus  in 
their  birthcry;  to  the  goddess  Cunina  when  ly¬ 
ing  cradled ;  to  the  goddess  Rumina  when  suck¬ 
ing;  to  the  god  Statilinus  when  standing;  to  the 
goddess  Adeona  when  coming;  to  Abeona  when 
going  away;  to  the  goddess  Mens  that  they 
might  have  a  good  mind;  to  the  god  Volumnus, 
and  the  goddess  Volumna,  that  they  might  wish 
for  good  things;  to  the  nuptial  gods,  that  they 
might  make  good  matches;  to  the  rural  gods, 
and  chiefly  to  the  goddess  Fructesca  herself,  that 
they  might  receive  the  most  abundant  fruits;  to 
Mars  and  Bellona,  that  they  might  carry  on  war 
well;  to  the  goddess  Victoria,  that  they  might 
be  victorious ;  to  the  god  Honor,  that  they  might 
be  honoured;  to  the  goddess  Pecunia,  that  they 
might  have  plenty  of  money;  to  the  god  Aescu- 
lanus,  and  his  son  Argentinus,  that  they  might 
have  brass  and  silver  coin?  For  they  set  down 
Aesculanus  as  the  father  of  Argentinus  for  this 
reason,  that  brass  coin  began  to  be  used  before 
silver.  But  I  wonder  Argentinus  has  not  begot¬ 
ten  Aurinus,  since  gold  coin  also  has  followed. 


GOD  IV.  19-22  199 

Could  they  have  him  for  a  god,  they  would  pre¬ 
fer  Aurinus  both  to  his  father  Argentinus  and 
his  grandfather  Aesculanus,  just  as  they  set  Jove 
before  Saturn.  Therefore,  what  necessity  was 
there  on  account  of  these  gifts,  either  of  soul, 
or  body,  or  outward  estate,  to  worship  and  in¬ 
voke  so  great  a  crowd  of  gods,  all  of  whom  I 
have  not  mentioned,  nor  have  they  themselves 
been  able  to  provide  for  all  human  benefits,  min¬ 
utely  and  singly  methodized,  minute  and  single 
gods,  when  the  one  goddess  Felicity  was  able, 
with  the  greatest  ease,  compendiously  to  bestow 
the  whole  of  them?  nor  should  any  other  be 
sought  after,  either  for  the  bestowing  of  good 
things,  or  for  the  averting  of  evil.  For  why 
should  they  invoke  the  goddess  Fessonia  for  the 
weary;  for  driving  away  enemies,  the  goddess 
Pellonia;  for  the  sick,  as  a  physician,  either 
Apollo  or  ^Esculapius,  or  both  together  if  there 
should  be  great  danger?  Neither  should  the  god 
Spiniensis  be  entreated  that  he  might  root  out 
the  thorns  from  the  fields;  nor  the  goddess  Ru- 
bigo  that  the  mildew  might  not  come — Felicitas 
alone  being  present  and  guarding,  either  no  evils 
would  have  arisen,  or  they  would  have  been 
quite  easily  driven  away.  Finally,  since  we  treat 
of  these  two  goddesses,  Virtue  and  Felicity,  if 
felicity  is  the  reward  of  virtue,  she  is  not  a  god¬ 
dess,  but  a  gift  of  God.  But  if  she  is  a  goddess, 
why  may  she  not  be  said  to  confer  virtue  itself, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  great  felicity  to  attain  virtue? 

Chap.  22.  Concerning  the  knowledge  of  the  wor¬ 
ship  due  to  the  gods,  which  Varro  glories  in 
having  himself  conferred  on  the  Romans 
What  is  it,  then,  that  Varro  boasts  he  has  be¬ 
stowed  as  a  very  great  benefit  on  his  fellow- 
citizens,  because  he  not  only  recounts  the  gods 
who  ought  to  be  worshipped  by  the  Romans,  but 
also  tells  what  pertains  to  each  of  them?  “Just 
as  it  is  of  no  advantage,”  he  says,  “to  know  the 
name  and  appearance  of  any  man  who  is  a  phy¬ 
sician,  and  not  know  that  he  is  a  physician,  so,” 
he  says,  “it  is  of  no  advantage  to  know  well  that 
^Esculapius  is  a  god,  if  you  are  not  aware  that 
he  can  bestow  the  gift  of  health,  and  conse¬ 
quently  do  not  know  why  you  ought  to  suppli¬ 
cate  him.”  He  also  affirms  this  by  another  com¬ 
parison,  saying,  “No  one  is  able,  not  only  to  live 
well,  but  even  to  live  at  all,  if  he  does  not  know 
who  is  a  smith,  who  a  baker,  who  a  weaver,  from 
whom  he  can  seek  any  utensil,  whom  he  may 
take  for  a  helper,  whom  for  a  leader,  whom  for  a 
teacher”;  asserting,  “that  in  this  way  it  can  be 
doubtful  to  no  one,  that  thus  the  knowledge  of 
the  gods  is  useful,  if  one  can  know  what  force, 


200 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  faculty,  or  power  any  god  may  have  in  any 
thing.  For  from  this  we  may  be  able,”  he  says, 
“to  know  what  god  we  ought  to  call  to,  and  in¬ 
voke  for  any  cause;  lest  we  should  do  as  too 
many  are  wont  to  do,  and  desire  water  from 
Liber,  and  wine  from  Lymphs.”  Very  useful, 
forsooth!  Who  would  not  give  this  man  thanks 
if  he  could  show  true  things,  and  if  he  could 
teach  that  the  one  true  God,  from  whom  all 
good  things  are,  is  to  be  worshipped  by  men? 

Chap.  23.  Concerning  Felicity ,  whom  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  who  venerate  many  gods,  for  a  long 
time  did  not  worship  with  divine  honour, 
though  she  alone  would  have  sufficed  instead 
of  all 

But  how  does  it  happen,  if  their  books  and 
rituals  are  true,  and  Felicity  is  a  goddess,  that 
she  herself  is  not  appointed  as  the  only  one  to  be 
worshipped,  since  she  could  confer  all  things, 
and  all  at  once  make  men  happy?  For  who 
wishes  anything  for  any  other  reason  than  that 
he  may  become  happy?  Why  was  it  left  to  Lu- 
cullus  to  dedicate  a  temple  to  so  great  a  goddess 
at  so  late  a  date,  and  after  so  many  Roman  rul¬ 
ers?  Why  did  Romulus  himself,  ambitious  as  he 
was  of  founding  a  fortunate  city,  not  erect  a 
temple  to  this  goddess  before  all  others?  Why 
did  he  supplicate  the  other  gods  for  anything, 
since  he  would  have  lacked  nothing  had  she 
been  with  him?  For  even  he  himself  would  nei¬ 
ther  have  been  first  a  king,  then  afterwards,  as 
they  think,  a  god,  if  this  goddess  had  not  been 
propitious  to  him.  Why,  therefore,  did  he  ap¬ 
point  as  gods  for  the  Romans,  Janus,  Jove, 
Mars,  Picus,  Faunus,  Tibernus.  Hercules,  and 
others,  if  there  were  more  of  them?  Why  did 
Titus  Tatius  add  Saturn,  Ops,  Sun,  Moon,  Vul¬ 
can,  Light,  and  whatever  others  he  added, 
among  whom  was  even  the  goddess  Cloacina, 
while  Felicity  was  neglected?  Why  did  Numa 
appoint  so  many  gods  and  so  many  goddesses 
without  this  one?  Was  it  perhaps  because  he 
could  not  see  her  among  so  great  a  crowd?  Cer¬ 
tainly  king  Hostilius  would  not  have  introduced 
the  new  gods  Fear  and  Dread  to  be  propitiated, 
if  he  could  have  known  or  might  have  wor¬ 
shipped  this  goddess.  For,  in  presence  of  Feli¬ 
city,  Fear  and  Dread  would  have  disappeared — 
I  do  not  say  propitiated,  but  put  to  flight.  Next, 
I  ask,  how  is  it  that  the  Roman  empire  had  al¬ 
ready  immensely  increased  before  any  one  wor¬ 
shipped  Felicity?  Was  the  empire,  therefore, 
more  great  than  happy?  For  how  could  true 
felicity  be  there,  where  there  was  not  true  piety? 
For  piety  is  the  genuine  worship  of  the  true  God, 


and  not  the  worship  of  as  many  demons  as  there 
are  false  gods.  Yet  even  afterwards,  when  Feli¬ 
city  had  already  been  taken  into  the  number  of 
the  gods,  the  great  infelicity  of  the  civil  wars 
ensued.  Was  Felicity  perhaps  justly  indignant, 
both  because  she  was  invited  so  late,  and  was  in¬ 
vited  not  to  honour,  but  rather  to  reproach,  be¬ 
cause  along  with  her  were  worshipped  Priapus, 
and  Cloacina,  and  Fear  and  Dread,  and  Ague, 
and  others  which  were  not  gods  to  be  worshipped, 
but  the  crimes  of  the  worshippers?  Last  of  all, 
if  it  seemed  good  to  worship  so  great  a  goddess 
along  with  a  most  unworthy  crowd,  why  at  least 
was  she  not  worshipped  in  a  more  honourable 
way  than  the  rest?  For  is  it  not  intolerable  that 
Felicity  is  placed  neither  among  the  gods  Con - 
sentes,  whom  they  allege  to  be  admitted  into  the 
council  of  Jupiter,  nor  among  the  gods  whom 
they  term  Select?  Some  temple  might  be  made 
for  her  which  might  be  pre-eminent,  both  in 
loftiness  of  site  and  dignity  of  style.  Why,  in¬ 
deed,  not  something  better  than  is  made  for  Ju¬ 
piter  himself?  For  who  gave  the  kingdom  even 
to  Jupiter  but  Felicity?  I  am  supposing  that 
when  he  reigned  he  was  happy.  Felicity,  how¬ 
ever,  is  certainly  more  valuable  than  a  kingdom. 
For  no  one  doubts  that  a  man  might  easily  be 
found  who  may  fear  to  be  made  a  king;  but  no 
one  is  found  who  is  unwilling  to  be  happy. 
Therefore,  if  it  is  thought  they  can  be  consulted 
by  augury,  or  in  any  other  way,  the  gods  them¬ 
selves  should  be  consulted  about  this  thing, 
whether  they  may  wish  to  give  place  to  Felicity. 
If,  perchance,  the  place  should  already  be  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  temples  and  altars  of  others,  where 
a  greater  and  more  lofty  temple  might  be  built 
to  Felicity,  even  Jupiter  himself  might  give  way, 
so  that  Felicity  might  rather  obtain  the  very 
pinnacle  of  the  Capitoline  Hill.  For  there  is  not 
any  one  who  would  resist  Felicity,  except,  which 
is  impossible,  one  who  might  wish  to  be  unhap¬ 
py.  Certainly,  if  he  should  be  consulted,  Jupiter 
would  in  no  case  do  what  those  three  gods,  Mars, 
Terminus,  and  Juventas,  did,  who  positively  re¬ 
fused  to  give  place  to  their  superior  and  king. 
For,  as  their  books  record,  when  king  Tarquin 
wished  to  construct  the  Capitol,  and  perceived 
that  the  place  which  seemed  to  him  to  be  the 
most  worthy  and  suitable  was  preoccupied  by 
other  gods,  not  daring  to  do  anything  contrary 
to  their  pleasure,  and  believing  that  they  would 
willingly  give  place  to  a  god  who  was  so  great, 
and  was  their  own  master,  because  there  were 
many  of  them  there  when  the  Capitol  was 
founded,  he  inquired  by  augury  whether  they 
chose  to  give  place  to  Jupiter,  and  they  were  all 


201 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IV.  23-25 


willing  to  remove  thence  except  those  whom  I 
have  named,  Mars,  Terminus,  and  Juventas; 
and  therefore  the  Capitol  was  built  in  such  a 
way  that  these  three  also  might  be  within  it,  yet 
with  such  obscure  signs  that  even  the  most 
learned  men  could  scarcely  know  this.  Surely, 
then,  Jupiter  himself  would  by  no  means  despise 
Felicity,  as  he  was  himself  despised  by  Termi¬ 
nus,  Mars,  and  Juventas.  But  even  they  them¬ 
selves  who  had  not  given  place  to  Jupiter,  would 
certainly  give  place  to  Felicity,  who  had  made 
Jupiter  king  over  them.  Or  if  they  should  not 
give  place,  they  would  act  thus  not  out  of  con¬ 
tempt  of  her,  but  because  they  chose  rather  to 
be  obscure  in  the  house  of  Felicity,  than  to  be 
eminent  without  her  in  their  own  places. 

Thus  the  goddess  Felicity  being  established  in 
the  largest  and  loftiest  place,  the  citizens  should 
learn  whence  the  furtherance  of  every  good  de¬ 
sire  should  be  sought.  And  so,  by  the  persuasion 
of  nature  herself,  the  superfluous  multitude  of 
other  gods  being  abandoned,  Felicity  alone 
would  be  worshipped,  prayer  would  be  made  to 
her  alone,  her  temple  alone  would  be  frequented 
by  the  citizens  who  wished  to  be  happy,  which 
no  one  of  them  would  not  wish;  and  thus  felic¬ 
ity,  who  was  sought  for  from  all  the  gods, 
would  be  sought  for  only  from  her  own  self.  For 
who  wishes  to  receive  from  any  god  anything 
else  than  felicity,  or  what  he  supposes  to  tend  to 
felicity?  Wherefore,  if  Felicity  has  it  in  her  pow¬ 
er  to  be  with  what  man  she  pleases  (and  she  has 
it  if  she  is  a  goddess),  what  folly  is  it,  after  all, 
to  seek  from  any  other  god  her  whom  you  can 
obtain  by  request  from  her  own  self!  Therefore 
they  ought  to  honour  this  goddess  above  other 
gods,  even  by  dignity  of  place.  For,  as  we  read 
in  their  own  authors,  the  ancient  Romans  paid 
greater  honours  to  I  know  not  what  Summanus, 
to  whom  they  attributed  nocturnal  thunder¬ 
bolts,  than  to  Jupiter,  to  whom  diurnal  thunder¬ 
bolts  were  held  to  pertain.  But,  after  a  famous 
and  conspicuous  temple  had  been  built  to  Jupi¬ 
ter,  owing  to  the  dignity  of  the  building,  the 
multitude  resorted  to  him  in  so  great  numbers 
that  scarce  one  can  be  found  who  remembers 
even  to  have  read  the  name  of  Summanus, 
which  now  he  cannot  once  hear  named.  But  if 
Felicity  is  not  a  goddess,  because,  as  is  true,  it  is 
a  gift  of  God,  that  god  must  be  sought  who  has 
power  to  give  it,  and  that  hurtful  multitude  of 
false  gods  must  be  abandoned  which  the  vain 
multitude  of  foolish  men  follows  after,  making 
gods  to  itself  of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  offending 
Himself  Whose  gifts  they  are  by  the  stubborn¬ 
ness  of  a  proud  will.  For  he  cannot  be  free  from 


infelicity  who  worships  Felicity  as  a  goddess, 
and  forsakes  God,  the  giver  of  felicity;  just  as 
he  cannot  be  free  from  hunger  who  licks  a  paint¬ 
ed  loaf  of  bread,  and  does  not  buy  it  of  the  man 
who  has  a  real  one. 

Chap.  24.  The  reasons  by  which  the  pagans  at - 
tempt  to  defend  their  worshipping  among  the 
gods  the  divine  gifts  themselves 
We  may,  however,  consider  their  reasons.  Is 
it  to  be  believed,  say  they,  that  our  forefathers 
were  besotted  even  to  such  a  degree  as  not  to 
know  that  these  things  are  divine  gifts,  and  not 
gods?  But  as  they  knew  that  such  things  are 
granted  to  no  one,  except  by  some  god  freely  be¬ 
stowing  them,  they  called  the  gods  whose  names 
they  did  not  find  out  by  the  names  of  those 
things  which  they  deemed  to  be  given  by  them ; 
sometimes  slightly  altering  the  name  for  that 
purpose,  as,  for  example,  from  war  they  have 
named  Bellona,  not  bellum;  from  cradles,  Cu- 
nina,  not  ounce;  from  standing  corn,  Segetia,  not 
seges;  from  apples,  Pomona,  not  pomum;  from 
oxen,  Bubona,  not  bos.  Sometimes,  again,  with 
no  alteration  of  the  word,  just  as  the  things 
themselves  are  named,  so  that  the  goddess  who 
gives  money  is  called  Pecunia,  and  money  is  not 
thought  to  be  itself  a  goddess :  so  of  Virtus,  who 
gives  virtue;  Honor,  who  gives  honour;  Con¬ 
cordia,  who  gives  concord;  Victoria,  who  gives 
victory.  So,  they  say,  when  Felicitas  is  called  a 
goddess,  what  is  meant  is  not  the  thing  itself 
which  is  given,  but  that  deity  by  whom  felicity 
is  given. 

Chap.  25.  Concerning  the  one  God  only  to  be 
worshipped,  who,  although  his  name  is  un¬ 
known, is  yet  deemed  to  be  the  giver  of  felicity 
Having  had  that  reason  rendered  to  us,  we 
shall  perhaps  much  more  easily  persuade,  as  we 
wish,  those  whose  heart  has  not  become  too 
much  hardened.  For  if  now  human  infirmity  has 
perceived  that  felicity  cannot  be  given  except 
by  some  god ;  if  this  was  perceived  by  those  who 
worshipped  so  many  gods,  at  whose  head  they 
set  Jupiter  himself;  if,  in  their  ignorance  of  the 
name  of  Him  by  whom  felicity  was  given,  they 
agreed  to  call  Him  by  the  name  of  that  very 
thing  which  they  believed  He  gave;  then  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  they  thought  that  felicity  could  not  be 
given  even  by  Jupiter  himself,  whom  they  al¬ 
ready  worshipped,  but  certainly  by  him  whom 
they  thought  fit  to  worship  under  the  name  of 
Felicity  itself.  I  thoroughly  affirm  the  statement 
that  they  believed  felicity  to  be  given  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  God  whom  they  knew  not :  let  Him  there- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


202 

fore  be  sought  after,  let  Him  be  worshipped,  and 
it  is  enough.  Let  the  train  of  innumerable  de¬ 
mons  be  repudiated,  and  let  this  God  suffice  ev¬ 
ery  man  whom  his  gift  suffices.  For  him,  I  say, 
God  the  giver  of  felicity  will  not  be  enough  to 
worship,  for  whom  felicity  itself  is  not  enough 
to  receive.  But  let  him  for  whom  it  suffices  (and 
man  has  nothing  more  he  ought  to  wish  for) 
serve  the  one  God,  the  giver  of  felicity.  This 
God  is  not  he  whom  they  call  Jupiter.  For  if 
they  acknowledged  him  to  be  the  giver  of  feli¬ 
city,  they  would  not  seek,  under  the  name  of 
Felicity  itself,  for  another  god  or  goddess  by 
whom  felicity  might  be  given;  nor  could  they 
tolerate  that  Jupiter  himself  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  such  infamous  attributes.  For  he  is 
said  to  be  the  debaucher  of  the  wives  of  others ; 
he  is  the  shameless  lover  and  ravisher  of  a  beau¬ 
tiful  boy. 

Chap.  26  .Of  the  scenic  plays ,  the  celebration  of 
which  the  gods  have  exacted  from  their  wor¬ 
shippers 

“But,”  says  Cicero,  ‘‘Horner  invented  these 
things,  and  transferred  things  human  to  the 
gods:  I  would  rather  transfer  things  divine  to 
us.”  The  poet,  by  ascribing  such  crimes  to  the 
gods,  has  justly  displeased  the  grave  man.  Why, 
then,  are  the  scenic  plays,  where  these  crimes 
are  habitually  spoken  of,  acted,  exhibited,  in 
honour  of  the  gods,  reckoned  among  things  di¬ 
vine  by  the  most  learned  men?  Cicero  should  ex¬ 
claim.  not  against  the  inventions  of  the  poets, 
but  against  the  customs  of  the  ancients.  Would 
not  they  have  exclaimed  in  reply,  What  have  we 
done?  The  gods  themselves  have  loudly  de¬ 
manded  that  these  plays  should  be  exhibited  in 
their  honour,  have  fiercely  exacted  them,  have 
menaced  destruction  unless  this  was  performed, 
have  avenged  its  neglect  with  great  severity,  and 
have  manifested  pleasure  at  the  reparation  of 
such  neglect.  Among  their  virtuous  and  wonder¬ 
ful  deeds  the  following  is  related.  It  was  an¬ 
nounced  in  a  dream  to  Titus  Latinius,  a  Roman 
rustic,  that  he  should  go  to  the  senate  and  tell 
them  to  recommence  the  games  of  Rome,  be¬ 
cause  on  the  first  day  of  their  celebration  a  con¬ 
demned  criminal  had  been  led  to  punishment  in 
sight  of  the  people,  an  incident  so  sad  as  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  gods  who  were  seeking  amusement 
from  the  games.  And  when  the  peasant  who  had 
received  this  intimation  was  afraid  on  the  fol¬ 
lowing  day  to  deliver  it  to  the  senate,  it  was  re¬ 
newed  next  night  in  a  severer  form :  he  lost  his 
son.  because  of  his  neglect.  On  the  third  night  he 
was  warned  that  a  yet  graver  punishment  was 


impending,  if  he  should  still  refuse  obedience. 
When  even  thus  he  did  not  dare  to  obey,  he  fell 
into  a  virulent  and  horrible  disease.  But  then,  on 
the  advice  of  his  friends,  he  gave  information  to 
the  magistrates,  and  was  carried  in  a  litter  into 
the  senate,  and  having,  on  declaring  his  dream, 
immediately  recovered  strength,  went  away  on 
his  own  feet  whole.  The  senate,  amazed  at  so 
great  a  miracle,  decreed  that  the  games  should 
be  renewed  at  fourfold  cost.  What  sensible  man 
does  not  see  that  men,  being  put  upon  by  malig¬ 
nant  demons,  from  whose  domination  nothing 
save  the  grace  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  sets  free,  have  been  compelled  by  force  to 
exhibit  to  such  gods  as  these,  plays  which,  if  well 
advised,  they  should  condemn  as  shameful? 
Certain  it  is  that  in  these  plays  the  poetic  crimes 
of  the  gods  are  celebrated,  yet  they  are  plays 
which  were  re-established  by  decree  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  under  compulsion  of  the  gods.  In  these 
plays  the  most  shameless  actors  celebrated  Ju¬ 
piter  as  the  corrupter  of  chastity,  and  thus  gave 
him  pleasure.  If  that  was  a  fiction,  he  would 
have  been  moved  to  anger;  but  if  he  was  de¬ 
lighted  with  the  representation  of  his  crimes, 
even  although  fabulous,  then,  when  he  happened 
to  be  worshipped,  who  but  the  devil  could  be 
served?  Is  it  so  that  he  could  found,  extend, 
and  preserve  the  Roman  empire,  who  was  more 
vile  than  any  Roman  man  whatever,  to  whom 
such  things  were  displeasing?  Could  he  give  feli¬ 
city  who  was  so  infelicitously  worshipped,  and 
who,  unless  he  should  be  thus  worshipped,  was 
yet  more  infelicitously  provoked  to  anger? 

Chap.  27.  Concerning  the  three  kinds  of  gods 
about  which  the  pontiff  Sccevola  has  dis¬ 
coursed 

It  is  recorded  that  the  very  learned  pontiff 
Scaevola  had  distinguished  about  three  kinds  of 
gods — one  introduced  by  the  poets,  another  by 
the  philosophers,  another  by  the  statesmen.  The 
first  kind  he  declares  to  be  trifling,  because  many 
unworthy  things  have  been  invented  by  the 
poets  concerning  the  gods;  the  second  does  not 
suit  states,  because  it  contains  some  things  that 
are  superfluous,  and  some,  too,  which  it  would 
be  prejudicial  for  the  people  to  know.  It  is  no 
great  matter  about  the  superfluous  things,  for  it 
is  a  common  saying  of  skillful  lawyers,  “Super¬ 
fluous  things  do  no  harm.”  But  what  are  those 
things  which  do  harm  when  brought  before  the 
multitude?  “These,”  he  says,  “that  Hercules, 
iEsculapius,  Castor  and  Pollux,  are  not  gods; 
for  it  is  declared  by  learned  men  that  these  were 
but  men,  and  yielded  to  the  common  lot  of  mor- 


THE  CITY  OF 

tals.”  What  else?  “That  states  have  not  the  true 
images  of  the  gods;  because  the  true  God  has 
neither  sex,  nor  age,  nor  definite  corporeal  mem¬ 
bers.”  The  pontiff  is  not  willing  that  the  people 
should  know  these  things;  for  he  does  not  think 
they  are  false.  He  thinks  it  expedient,  therefore, 
that  states  should  be  deceived  in  matters  of  re¬ 
ligion  ;  which  Varro  himself  does  not  even  hesi¬ 
tate  to  say  in  his  books  about  things  divine.  Ex¬ 
cellent  religion !  to  which  the  weak,  who  requires 
to  be  delivered,  may  flee  for  succour;  and  when 
he  seeks  for  the  truth  by  which  he  may  be  de¬ 
livered.  it  is  believed  to  be  expedient  for  him 
that  he  be  deceived.  And,  truly,  in  these  same 
books,  Scaevola  is  not  silent  as  to  his  reason  for 
rejecting  the  poetic  sort  of  gods,  to  wit,  “be¬ 
cause  they  so  disfigure  the  gods  that  they  could 
not  bear  comparison  even  with  good  men,  when 
they  make  one  to  commit  theft,  another  adul¬ 
tery;  or,  again,  to  say  or  do  something  else  base¬ 
ly  and  foolishly;  as  that  three  goddesses  con¬ 
tested  (with  each  other)  the  prize  of  beauty,  and 
the  two  vanquished  by  Venus  destroyed  Troy; 
that  Jupiter  turned  himself  into  a  bull  or  swan 
that  he  might  copulate  with  some  one;  that  a 
goddess  married  a  man,  and  Saturn  devoured 
his  children;  that,  in  fine,  there  is  nothing  that 
could  be  imagined,  either  of  the  miraculous  or 
vicious,  which  may  not  be  found  there,  and  yet 
is  far  removed  from  the  nature  of  the  gods.”  0 
chief  pontiff  Scaevola,  take  away  the  plays  if 
thou  art  able ;  instruct  the  people  that  they  may 
not  offer  such  honours  to  the  immortal  gods,  in 
which,  if  they  like,  they  may  admire  the  crimes 
of  the  gods,  and,  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  may,  if 
they  please,  imitate  them.  But  if  the  people  shall 
have  answered  thee,  “You,  0  pontiff,  have 
brought  these  things  in  among  us,”  then  ask  the 
gods  themselves  at  whose  instigation  you  have 
ordered  these  things,  that  they  may  not  order 
such  things  to  be  offered  to  them.  For  if  they  are 
bad,  and  therefore  in  no  way  to  be  believed  con¬ 
cerning  the  majority  of  the  gods,  the  greater  is 
the  wrong  done  the  gods  about  whom  they  are 
feigned  with  impunity.  But  they  do  not  hear 
thee,  they  are  demons,  they  teach  wicked  things, 
they  rejoice  in  vile  things;  not  only  do  they  not 
count  it  a  wrong  if  these  things  are  feigned 
about  them,  but  it  is  a  wrong  they  are  quite  un¬ 
able  to  bear  if  they  are  not  acted  at  their  stated 
festivals.  But  now,  if  thou  wouldst  call  on  Jupi¬ 
ter  against  them,  chiefly  for  that  reason  that 
more  of  his  crimes  are  wont  to  be  acted  in  the 
scenic  plays,  is  it  not  the  case  that,  although  you 
call  him  god  Jupiter,  by  whom  this  whole  world 
is  ruled  and  administered,  it  is  he  to  whom  the 


GOD  IV.  26-29  203 

greatest  wrong  is  done  by  you,  because  you  have 
thought  he  ought  to  be  worshipped  along  with 
them,  and  have  styled  him  their  king? 

Chap.  28.  Whether  the  worship  of  the  gods  has 
been  of  service  to  the  Romans  in  obtaining 
and  extending  the  empire 
Therefore  such  gods,  who  are  propitiated  by 
such  honours,  or  rather  are  impeached  by  them 
(for  it  is  a  greater  crime  to  delight  in  having 
such  things  said  of  them  falsely  than  even  if 
they  could  be  said  truly),  could  never  by  any 
means  have  been  able  to  increase  and  preserve 
the  Roman  empire.  For  if  they  could  have  done 
it,  they  would  rather  have  bestowed  so  grand  a 
gift  on  the  Greeks,  who,  in  this  kind  of  divine 
things — that  is,  in  scenic  plays — have  wor¬ 
shipped  them  more  honourably  and  worthily,  al¬ 
though  they  have  not  exempted  themselves  from 
those  slanders  of  the  poets,  by  whom  they  saw 
the  gods  torn  in  pieces,  giving  them  licence  to  ill- 
use  any  man  they  pleased,  and  have  not  deemed 
the  scenic  players  themselves  to  be  base,  but 
have  held  them  worthy  even  of  distinguished 
honour.  But  just  as  the  Romans  were  able  to 
have  gold  money,  although  they  did  not  worship 
a  god  Aurinus,  so  also  they  could  have  silver  and 
brass  coin,  and  yet  worship  neither  Argentinus 
nor  his  father  /Esculanus;  and  so  of  all  the  rest, 
which  it  would  be  irksome  for  me  to  detail.  It 
follows,  therefore,  both  that  they  could  not  by 
any  means  attain  such  dominion  if  the  true  God 
was  unwilling;  and  that  if  these  gods,  false  and 
many,  were  unknown  or  contemned,  and  He 
alone  was  known  and  worshipped  with  sincere 
faith  and  virtue,  they  would  both  have  a  better 
kingdom  here,  whatever  might  be  its  extent, 
and,  whether  they  might  have  one  here  or  not, 
would  afterwards  receive  an  eternal  kingdom. 

Chap.  29  .Of  the  falsity  of  the  augury  by  which 
the  strength  and  stability  of  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire  was  considered  to  be  indicated 
For  what  kind  of  augury  is  that  which  they 
have  declared  to  be  most  beautiful,  and  to  which 
I  referred  a  little  ago,  that  Mars,  and  Terminus, 
and  Juventas  would  not  give  place  even  to  Jove, 
the  king  of  the  gods?  For  thus,  they  say,  it  was 
signified  that  the  nation  dedicated  to  Mars — 
that  is,  the  Roman — should  yield  to  none  the 
place  it  once  occupied;  likewise,  that  on  account 
of  the  god  Terminus,  no  one  would  be  able  to 
disturb  the  Roman  frontiers;  and  also  that  the 
Roman  youth,  because  of  the  goddess  Juventas, 
should  yield  to  no  one.  Let  them  see,  therefore, 
how  they  can  hold  him  to  be  the  king  of  their 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


gods,  and  the  giver  of  their  own  kingdom,  if 
these  auguries  set  him  down  for  an  adversary, 
to  whom  it  would  have  been  honourable  not  to 
yield.  However,  if  these  things  are  true,  they 
need  not  be  at  all  afraid.  For  they  are  not  going 
to  confess  that  the  gods  who  would  not  yield  to 
Jove  have  yielded  to  Christ.  For,  without  alter¬ 
ing  the  boundaries  of  the  empire.  Jesus  Christ 
has  proved  Himself  able  to  drive  them,  not  only 
from  their  temples,  but  from  the  hearts  of  their 
worshippers.  But,  before  Christ  came  in  the 
flesh,  and,  indeed,  before  these  things  which  we 
have  quoted  from  their  books  could  have  been 
written,  but  yet  after  that  auspice  was  made  un¬ 
der  king  Tarquin,  the  Roman  army  has  been 
divers  times  scattered  or  put  to  flight,  and  has 
shown  the  falseness  of  the  auspice,  which  they 
derived  from  the  fact  that  the  goddess  Juventas 
had  not  given  place  to  Jove;  and  the  nation  ded¬ 
icated  to  Mars  was  trodden  down  in  the  city  it¬ 
self  by  the  invading  and  triumphant  Gauls;  and 
the  boundaries  of  the  empire,  through  the  fall¬ 
ing  away  of  many  cities  to  Hannibal,  had  been 
hemmed  into  a  narrow  space.  Thus  the  beauty 
of  the  auspices  is  made  void,  and  there  has  re¬ 
mained  only  the  contumacy  against  Jove,  not  of 
gods,  but  of  demons.  For  it  is  one  thing  not  to 
have  yielded,  and  another  to  have  returned 
whither  you  have  yielded.  Besides,  even  after¬ 
wards,  in  the  oriental  regions,  the  boundaries  of 
the  Roman  empire  were  changed  by  the  will  of 
Hadrian;  for  he  yielded  up  to  the  Persian  em¬ 
pire  those  three  noble  provinces,  Armenia.  Me¬ 
sopotamia,  and  Assyria.  Thus  that  god  Termi¬ 
nus,  who  according  to  these  books  was  the 
guardian  of  the  Roman  frontiers,  and  by  that 
most  beautiful  auspice  had  not  given  place  to 
Jove,  would  seem  to  have  been  more  afraid  of 
Hadrian,  a  king  of  men,  than  of  the  king  of  the 
gods.  The  aforesaid  provinces  having  also  been 
taken  back  again,  almost  within  our  own  recol¬ 
lection  the  frontier  fell  back,  when  Julian,  given 
up  to  the  oracles  of  their  gods,  with  immoderate 
daring  ordered  the  victualling  ships  to  be  set  on 
fire.  The  army  being  thus  left  destitute  of  provi¬ 
sions,  and  he  himself  also  being  presently  killed 
by  the  enemy,  and  the  legions  being  hard 
pressed,  while  dismayed  by  the  loss  of  their 
commander,  they  were  reduced  to  such  extremi¬ 
ties  that  no  one  could  have  escaped,  unless  by 
articles  of  peace  the  boundaries  of  the  empire 
had  then  been  established  where  they  still  re¬ 
main;  not,  indeed,  with  so  great  a  loss  as  was 
suffered  by  the  concession  of  Hadrian,  but  still 
at  a  considerable  sacrifice.  It  was  a  vain  augury, 
then,  that  the  god  Terminus  did  not  yield  to 


Jove,  since  he  yielded  to  the  will  of  Hadrian,  and 
yielded  also  to  the  rashness  of  Julian,  and  the 
necessity  of  Jovian.  The  more  intelligent  and 
grave  Romans  have  seen  these  things,  but  have 
had  little  power  against  the  custom  of  the  state, 
which  was  bound  to  observe  the  rites  of  the  de¬ 
mons;  because  even  they  themselves,  although 
they  perceived  that  these  things  were  vain,  yet 
thought  that  the  religious  worship  which  is  due 
to  God  should  be  paid  to  the  nature  of  things 
which  is  established  under  the  rule  and  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  one  true  God,  “serving,”  as  saith 
the  apostle,  “the  creature  more  than  the  Crea¬ 
tor,  who  is  blessed  for  evermore.”1  The  help  of 
this  true  God  was  necessary  to  send  holy  and 
truly  pious  men,  who  would  die  for  the  true  reli¬ 
gion  that  they  might  remove  the  false  from 
among  the  living. 

Chap.  30.  What  kind  of  things  even  their  wor¬ 
shippers  have  owned  they  have  thought  about 
the  gods  of  the  nations 

Cicero  the  augur  laughs  at  auguries,  and  re¬ 
proves  men  for  regulating  the  purposes  of  life 
by  the  cries  of  crows  and  jackdaws.  But  it  will 
be  said  that  an  academic  philosopher,  who  ar¬ 
gues  that  all  things  are  uncertain,  is  unworthy  to 
have  any  authority  in  these  matters.  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  book  of  his  De  Natura  Deorum ,  he  intro¬ 
duces  Lucilius  Balbus,  who,  after  showing  that 
superstitions  have  their  origin  in  physical  and 
philosophical  truths,  expresses  his  indignation 
at  the  setting  up  of  images  and  fabulous  no¬ 
tions,  speaking  thus:  “Do  you  not  therefore  see 
that  from  true  and  useful  physical  discoveries 
the  reason  may  be  drawn  away  to  fabulous  and 
imaginary  gods?  This  gives  birth  to  false  opin¬ 
ions,  and  turbulent  errors,  and  superstitions 
well-nigh  old-wifeish.  For  both  the  forms  of  the 
gods,  and  their  ages,  and  clothing,  and  orna¬ 
ments,  are  made  familiar  to  us;  their  genealo¬ 
gies,  too,  their  marriages,  kinships,  and  all 
things  about  them,  are  debased  to  the  likeness  of 
human  weakness.  They  are  even  introduced  as 
having  perturbed  minds;  for  we  have  accounts 
of  the  lusts,  cares,  and  angers  of  the  gods.  Nor, 
indeed,  as  the  fables  go,  have  the  gods  been 
without  their  wars  and  battles.  And  that  not 
only  when,  as  in  Homer,  some  gods  on  either 
side  have  defended  two  opposing  armies,  but 
they  have  even  carried  on  wars  on  their  own  ac¬ 
count,  as  with  the  Titans  or  with  the  Giants. 
Such  things  it  is  quite  absurd  either  to  say  or  to 
believe :  they  are  utterly  frivolous  and  ground¬ 
less.”  Behold,  now,  what  is  confessed  by  those 
^om.  1.  25. 


THE  CITY  OF 

who  defend  the  gods  of  the  nations.  Afterwards 
he  goes  on  to  say  that  some  things  belong  to  su¬ 
perstition,  but  others  to  religion,  which  he 
thinks  good  to  teach  according  to  the  Stoics. 
“For  not  only  the  philosophers,”  he  says,  “but 
also  our  forefathers,  have  made  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  superstition  and  religion.  For  those,”  he 
says,  “who  spent  whole  days  in  prayer,  and  of¬ 
fered  sacrifice,  that  their  children  might  outlive 
them,  are  called  superstitious.”  Who  does  not 
see  that  he  is  trying,  while  he  fears  the  public 
prejudice,  to  praise  the  religion  of  the  ancients, 
and  that  he  wishes  to  disjoin  it  from  supersti¬ 
tion,  but  cannot  find  out  how  to  do  so?  For  if 
those  who  prayed  and  sacrificed  all  day  were 
called  superstitious  by  the  ancients,  were  those 
also  called  so  who  instituted  (what  he  blames) 
the  images  of  the  gods  of  diverse  age  and  dis¬ 
tinct  clothing,  and  invented  the  genealogies  of 
gods,  their  marriages,  and  kinships?  When, 
therefore,  these  things  are  found  fault  with  as 
superstitious,  he  implicates  in  that  fault  the  an¬ 
cients  who  instituted  and  worshipped  such  im¬ 
ages.  Nay,  he  implicates  himself,  who,  with 
whatever  eloquence  he  may  strive  to  extricate 
himself  and  be  free,  was  yet  under  the  necessity 
of  venerating  these  images;  nor  dared  he  so 
much  as  whisper  in  a  discourse  to  the  people 
what  in  this  disputation  he  plainly  sounds  forth. 
Let  us  Christians,  therefore,  give  thinks  to  the 
Lord  our  God — not  to  heaven  and  earth,  as  that 
author  argues,  but  to  Him  who  has  made  heaven 
and  earth;  because  these  superstitions,  which 
that  Balbus,  like  a  babbler,1  scarcely  reprehends, 
He,  by  the  most  deep  lowliness  of  Christ,  by  the 
preaching  of  the  apostles,  by  the  faith  of  the 
martyrs  dying  for  the  truth  and  living  with  the 
truth,  has  overthrown,  not  only  in  the  hearts  of 
the  religious,  but  even  in  the  temples  of  the  su¬ 
perstitious,  by  their  own  free  service. 

Chap.  31.  Concerning  the  opinions  of  Varro, 
who,  while  reprobating  the  popular  belief, 
thought  that  their  worship  should  be  confined 
to  one  god ,  though  he  was  unable  to  discover 
the  true  God . 

What  says  Varro  himself,  whom  we  grieve  to 
have  found,  although  not  by  his  own  judgment, 
placing  the  scenic  plays  among  things  divine? 
When  in  many  passages  he  is  exhorting,  like  a 
religious  man,  to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  does  he 
not  in  doing  so  admit  that  he  does  not  in  his  own 
judgment  believe  those  things  which  he  relates 
that  the  Roman  state  has  instituted;  so  that  he 
does  not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  if  he  were  found- 
lBalbus,  from  balbutiens ,  stammering,  babbling. 


GOD  IV.  30-31  205 

ing  a  new  state,  he  could  enumerate  the  gods  and 
their  names  better  by  the  rule  of  nature?  But 
being  born  into  a  nation  already  ancient,  he  says 
that  he  finds  himself  bound  to  accept  the  tradi¬ 
tional  names  and  surnames  of  the  gods  and  the 
histories  connected  with  them,  and  that  his  pur¬ 
pose  in  investigating  and  publishing  these  details 
is  to  incline  the  people  to  worship  the  gods  and 
not  to  despise  them.  By  which  words  this  most 
acute  man  sufficiently  indicates  that  he  does  not 
publish  all  things,  because  they  would  not  only 
have  been  contemptible  to  himself,  but  would 
have  seemed  despicable  even  to  the  rabble,  un¬ 
less  they  had  been  passed  over  in  silence.  I 
should  be  thought  to  conjecture  these  things, 
unless  he  himself,  in  another  passage,  had  open¬ 
ly  said,  in  speaking  of  religious  rites,  that,  many 
things  are  true  which  it  is  not  only  not  useful  for 
the  common  people  to  know,  but  that  it  is  expe¬ 
dient  that  the  people  should  think  otherwise, 
even  though  falsely,  and  therefore  the  Greeks 
have  shut  up  the  religious  ceremonies  and  mys¬ 
teries  in  silence  and  within  walls.  In  this  he  no 
doubt  expresses  the  policy  of  the  so-called  wise 
men  by  whom  states  and  peoples  are  ruled.  Yet 
by  this  crafty  device  the  malign  demons  are 
wonderfully  delighted,  who  possess  alike  the  de¬ 
ceivers  and  the  deceived,  and  from  whose  tyran¬ 
ny  nothing  sets  free  save  the  grace  of  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

The  same  most  acute  and  learned  author  also 
says,  that  those  alone  seem  to  him  to  have  per¬ 
ceived  what  God  is,  who  have  believed  Him  to 
be  the  soul  of  the  world,  governing  it  by  design 
and  reason.  And  by  this,  it  appears,  that  al¬ 
though  he  did  not  attain  to  the  truth — for  the 
true  God  is  not  a  soul,  but  the  maker  and  au¬ 
thor  of  the  soul — yet  if  he  could  have  been  free 
to  go  against  the  prejudices  of  custom,  he  could 
have  confessed  and  counselled  others  that  the 
one  God  ought  to  be  worshipped,  who  governs 
the  world  by  design  and  reason ;  so  that  on  this 
subject  only  this  point  would  remain  to  be  de¬ 
bated  with  him,  that  he  had  called  Him  a  soul, 
and  not  rather  the  creator  of  the  soul.  He  says, 
also,  that  the  ancient  Romans,  for  more  than  a 
hundred  and  seventy  years,  worshipped  the  gods 
without  an  image.2  “And  if  this  custom,”  he 
says,  “could  have  remained  till  now,  the  gods 
would  have  been  more  purely  worshipped.”  In 
favour  of  this  opinion,  he  cites  as  a  witness 
among  others  the  Jewish  nation;  nor  does  he 
hesitate  to  conclude  that  passage  by  saying  of 
those  who  first  consecrated  images  for  the  peo¬ 
ple  that  they  have  both  taken  away  religious 
2Plutarch,  Nutna. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


206 

fear  from  their  fellow-citizens  and  increased  er¬ 
ror,  wisely  thinking  that  the  gods  easily  fall  into 
contempt  when  exhibited  under  the  stolidity  of 
images.  But  as  he  does  not  say  they  have  trans¬ 
mitted  error,  but  that  they  have  increased  it,  he 
therefore  wishes  it  to  be  understood  that  there 
was  error  already  when  there  were  no  images. 
Wherefore,  when  he  says  they  alone  have  per¬ 
ceived  what  God  is  who  have  believed  Him  to  be 
the  governing  soul  of  the  world,  and  thinks  that 
the  rites  of  religion  would  have  been  more  pure¬ 
ly  observed  without  images,  who  fails  to  see  how 
near  he  has  come  to  the  truth?  For  if  he  had 
been  able  to  do  anything  against  so  inveterate 
an  error,  he  would  certainly  have  given  it  as  his 
opinion  both  that  the  one  God  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped,  and  that  He  should  be  worshipped 
without  an  image;  and  having  so  nearly  discov¬ 
ered  the  truth,  perhaps  he  might  easily  have 
been  put  in  mind  of  the  mutability  of  the  soul 
and  might  thus  have  perceived  that  the  true  God 
is  that  immutable  nature  which  made  the  soul 
itself.  Since  these  things  are  so,  whatever  ridi¬ 
cule  such  men  have  poured  in  their  writings 
against  the  plurality  of  the  gods,  they  have  done 
so  rather  as  compelled  by  the  secret  will  of  God 
to  confess  them  than  as  trying  to  persuade  oth¬ 
ers.  If,  therefore,  any  testimonies  are  adduced 
by  us  from  these  writings,  they  are  adduced  for 
the  confutation  of  those  who  are  unwilling  to 
consider  from  how  great  and  malignant  a  power 
of  the  demons  the  singular  sacrifice  of  the  shed¬ 
ding  of  the  most  holy  blood,  and  the  gift  of  the 
imparted  Spirit,  can  set  us  free. 

Chap.  32  .In  what  interest  the  princes  of  the 
nations  wished  false  religions  to  continue 
among  the  people  subject  to  them 
Varro  says  also,  concerning  the  generations  of 
the  gods,  that  the  people  have  inclined  to  the 
poets  rather  than  to  the  natural  philosophers; 
and  that  therefore  their  forefathers — that  is,  the 
ancient  Romans — believed  both  in  the  sex  and 
the  generations  of  the  gods,  and  settled  their 
marriages;  which  certainly  seems  to  have  been 
done  for  no  other  cause  except  that  it  was  the 
business  of  such  men  as  were  prudent  and  wise 
to  deceive  the  people  in  matters  of  religion,  and 
in  that  very  thing  not  only  to  worship,  but  also 
to  imitate  the  demons,  whose  greatest  lust  is  to 
deceive.  For  just  as  the  demons  cannot  possess 
any  but  those  whom  they  have  deceived  with 
guile,  so  also  men  in  princely  office,  not  indeed 
being  just,  but  like  demons,  have  persuaded  the 
people  in  the  name  of  religion  to  receive  as  true 
those  things  which  they  themselves  knew  to  be 


false;  in  this  way,  as  it  were  binding  them  up 
more  firmly  in  civil  society,  so  that  they  might  in 
like  manner  possess  them  as  subjects.  But  who 
that  was  weak  and  unlearned  could  escape  the 
deceits  of  both  the  princes  of  the  state  and  the 
demons? 

Chap.  33.  That  the  times  of  all  kings  and  king¬ 
doms  are  ordained  by  the  judgment  and  power 
0}  the  true  God 

Therefore  that  God,  the  author  and  giver  of 
felicity,  because  He  alone  is  the  true  God,  Him¬ 
self  gives  earthly  kingdoms  both  to  good  and 
bad.  Neither  does  He  do  this  rashly,  and,  as  it 
were,  fortuitously — because  He  is  God  not  for¬ 
tune — but  according  to  the  order  of  things  and 
times,  which  is  hidden  from  us,  but  thoroughly 
known  to  Himself;  which  same  order  of  times, 
however,  He  does  not  serve  as  subject  to  it,  but 
Himself  rules  as  lord  and  appoints  as  governor. 
Felicity  He  gives  only  to  the  good.  Whether  a 
man  be  a  subject  or  a  king  makes  no  difference; 
he  may  equally  either  possess  or  not  possess  it. 
And  it  shall  be  full  in  that  life  where  kings  and 
subjects  exist  no  longer.  And  therefore  earthly 
kingdoms  are  given  by  Him  both  to  the  good  and 
the  bad;  lest  His  worshippers,  still  under  the 
conduct  of  a  very  weak  mind,  should  covet 
these  gifts  from  Him  as  some  great  things.  And 
this  is  the  mystery  of  the  Old  Testament,  in 
which  the  New  was  hidden,  that  there  even 
earthly  gifts  are  promised:  those  who  were 
spiritual  understanding  even  then,  although 
not  yet  openly  declaring,  both  the  eternity 
which  was  symbolized  by  these  earthly  things, 
and  in  what  gifts  of  God  true  felicity  could  be 
found. 

Chap.  34.  Concerning  the  kingdom  of  the  Jews , 
which  was  founded  by  the  one  and  true  God , 
and  preserved  by  Him  as  long  as  they  re¬ 
mained  in  the  true  religion 
Therefore,  that  it  might  be  known  that  these 
earthly  good  things,  after  which  those  pant  who 
cannot  imagine  better  things,  remain  in  the 
power  of  the  one  God  Himself,  not  of  the  many 
false  gods  whom  the  Romans  have  formerly  be¬ 
lieved  worthy  of  worship,  He  multiplied  His 
people  in  Egypt  from  being  very  few  and  deliv¬ 
ered  them  out  of  it  by  wonderful  signs.  Nor  did 
their  women  invoke  Lucina  when  their  offspring 
was  being  incredibly  multiplied;  and  that  nation 
having  increased  incredibly,  He  Himself  deliv¬ 
ered.  He  Himself  saved  them  from  the  hands  of 
the  Egyptians,  who  persecuted  them  and  wished 
to  kill  all  their  infants.  Without  the  goddess  Ru- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IV.  32-34,  V.  1  207 


mina  they  sucked;  without  Cunina  they  were 
cradled,  without  Educa  and  Potina  they  took 
food  and  drink;  without  all  those  puerile  gods 
they  were  educated;  without  the  nuptial  gods 
they  were  married;  without  the  worship  of  Pria- 
pus  they  had  conjugal  intercourse;  without  in¬ 
vocation  of  Neptune  the  divided  sea  opened  up 
a  way  for  them  to  pass  over,  and  overwhelmed 
with  its  returning  waves  their  enemies  who  pur¬ 
sued  them.  Neither  did  they  consecrate  any  god¬ 
dess  Mannia  when  they  received  manna  from 
heaven ;  nor,  when  the  smitten  rock  poured  forth 
water  to  them  when  they  thirsted,  did  they  wor¬ 
ship  Nymphs  and  Lymphs.  Without  the  mad 
rites  of  Mars  and  Bellona  they  carried  on  war; 
and  while,  indeed,  they  did  not  conquer  without 
victory,  yet  they  did  not  hold  it  to  be  a  goddess, 
but  the  gift  of  their  God.  Without  Segetia  they 
had  harvests;  without  Bubona,  oxen;  honey 
without  Mellona;  apples  without  Pomona:  and. 
in  a  word,  everything  for  which  the  Romans 


thought  they  must  supplicate  so  great  a  crowd 
of  false  gods,  they  received  much  more  happily 
from  the  one  true  God.  And  if  they  had  not 
sinned  against  Him  with  impious  curiosity, 
which  seduced  them  like  magic  arts,  and  drew 
them  to  strange  gods  and  idols,  and  at  last  led 
them  to  kill  Christ,  their  kingdom  would  have 
remained  to  them  and  would  have  been,  if  not 
more  spacious,  yet  more  happy  than  that  of 
Rome.  And  now  that  they  are  dispersed  through 
almost  all  lands  and  nations,  it  is  through  the 
providence  of  that  one  true  God;  that  whereas 
the  images,  altars,  groves,  and  temples  of  the 
false  gods  are  everywhere  overthrown,  and  their 
sacrifices  prohibited,  it  may  be  shown  from  their 
books  how  this  has  been  foretold  by  their  proph¬ 
ets  so  long  before;  lest,  perhaps,  when  they 
should  be  read  in  ours,  they  might  seem  to  be 
invented  by  us.  But  now,  reserving  what  is  to 
follow  for  the  following  book,  we  must  here  set 
a  bound  to  the  prolixity  of  this  one. 


BOOK  V1 

ARGUMENT.  Augustine  first  discusses  the  doctrine  of  fate,  for  the  sake 

OF  CONFUTING  THOSE  WHO  ARE  DISPOSED  TO  REFER  TO  FATE  THE  POWER  AND  IN¬ 
CREASE  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  -WHICH  COULD  NOT  BE  ATTRIBUTED  TO  FALSE  GODS,  AS 
HAS  BEEN  SHOWN  IN  THE  PRECEDING  BOOK.  AFTER  THAT,  HE  PROVES  THAT  THERE  IS 
NO  CONTRADICTION  BETWEEN  GOD’S  PRESCIENCE  AND  OUR  FREE  WILL.  He  THEN 
SPEAKS  OF  THE  MANNERS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  ROMANS,  AND  SHOWS  IN  WHAT  SENSE  IT 
WAS  DUE  TO  THE  VIRTUE  OF  THE  ROMANS  THEMSELVES,  AND  IN  HOW  FAR  TO  THE 
COUNSEL  OF  GOD,  THAT  HE  INCREASED  THEIR  DOMINION,  THOUGH  THEY  DID  NOT 

worship  him.  Finally,  he  explains  what  is  to  be  accounted  the  true  happi¬ 
ness  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  EMPERORS. 

Preface 

Since,  then,  it  is  established  that  the  com¬ 
plete  attainment  of  all  we  desire  is  that  which 
constitutes  felicity,  which  is  no  goddess,  but  a 
gift  of  God,  and  that  therefore  men  can  wor¬ 
ship  no  god  save  Him  who  is  able  to  make  them 
happy — and  were  Felicity  herself  a  goddess,  she 
would  jwith  reason  be  the  only  object  of  worship 
— since,  I  say,  this  is  established,  let  us  now  go 
on  to  consider  why  God,  who  is  able  to  give  with 
all  other  things  those  good  gifts  which  can  be 
possessed  by  men  who  are  not  good,  and  conse¬ 
quently  not  happy,  has  seen  fit  to  grant  such  ex¬ 
tended  and  long-continued  dominion  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  empire;  for  that  this  was  not  effected  by 
that  multitude  of  false  gods  which  they  wor¬ 
shipped,  we  have  both  already  adduced,  and 
shall,  as  occasion  offers,  yet  adduce  considerable 
proof. 

Written  in  415. 


Chap.  1.  That  the  cause  of  the  Roman  empire , 
and  of  all  kingdoms ,  is  neither  fortuitous  nor 
consists  in  the  position  of  the  stars 
The  cause,  then,  of  the  greatness  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  empire  is  neither  fortuitous  nor  fatal,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  judgment  or  opinion  of  those 
who  call  those  things  fortuitous  which  either 
have  no  causes,  or  such  causes  as  do  not  proceed 
from  some  intelligible  order,  and  those  things 
fatal  which  happen  independently  of  the  will  of 
God  and  man,  by  the  necessity  of  a  certain 
order .  In  a  word,  human  kingdoms  are  estab¬ 
lished  by  divine  providence.  And  if  any  one  at¬ 
tributes  their  existence  to  fate,  because  he  calls 
the  will  or  the  power  of  God  itself  by  the  name 
of  fate,  let  him  keep  his  opinion,  but  correct  his 
language.  For  why  does  he  not  say  at  first  what 
he  will  say  afterwards,  when  some  one  shall  put 
the  question  to  him.  What  he  means  by  fate? 
For  when  men  hear  that  word,  according  to  the 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


208 

ordinary  use  of  the  language,  they  simply  under¬ 
stand  by  it  the  virtue  of  that  particular  position 
of  the  stars  which  may  exist  at  the  time  when 
any  one  is  born  or  conceived,  which  some  sep¬ 
arate  altogether  from  the  will  of  God,  whilst 
others  affirm  that  this  also  is  dependent  on  that 
will.  But  those  who  are  of  opinion  that,  apart 
from  the  will  of  God,  the  stars  determine  what 
we  shall  do,  or  what  good  things  we  shall  pos¬ 
sess,  or  what  evils  we  shall  suffer,  must  be  re¬ 
fused  a  hearing  by  all,  not  only  by  those  who 
hold  the  true  religion,  but  by  those  who  wish  to 
be  the  worshippers  of  any  gods  whatsoever, 
even  false  gods.  For  what  does  this  opinion 
really  amount  to  but  this,  that  no  god  whatever 
is  to  be  worshipped  or  prayed  to?  Against  these, 
however,  our  present  disputation  is  not  intended 
to  be  directed,  but  against  those  who,  in  defence 
of  those  whom  they  think  to  be  gods,  oppose  the 
Christian  religion.  They,  however,  who  make  the 
position  of  the  stars  depend  on  the  divine  will, 
and  in  a  manner  decree  what  character  each  man 
shall  have,  and  what  good  or  evil  shall  happen 
to  him,  if  they  think  that  these  same  stars  have 
that  power  conferred  upon  them  by  the  supreme 
power  of  God,  in  order  that  they  may  determine 
these  things  according  to  their  will,  do  a  great 
injury  to  the  celestial  sphere,  in  whose  most 
brilliant  senate,  and  most  splendid  senate-house, 
as  it  were,  they  suppose  that  wicked  deeds  are 
decreed  to  be  done — such  deeds  as  that,  if  any 
terrestrial  state  should  decree  them,  it  would  be 
condemned  to  overthrow  by  the  decree  of  the 
whole  human  race.  What  judgment,  then,  is 
left  to  God  concerning  the  deeds  of  men,  who 
is  Lord  both  of  the  stars  and  of  men,  when  to 
these  deeds  a  celestial  necessity  is  attributed? 
Or.  if  they  do  not  say  that  the  stars,  though  they 
have  indeed  received  a  certain  power  from  God, 
who  is  supreme,  determine  those  things  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  own  discretion,  but  simply  that  His 
commands  are  fulfilled  by  them  instrumentally 
in  the  application  and  enforcing  of  such  necessi¬ 
ties.  are  we  thus  to  think  concerning  God  even 
what  it  seemed  unworthy  that  we  should  think 
concerning  the  will  of  the  stars?  But,  if  the  stars 
are  said  rather  to  signify  these  things  than  to 
effect  them,  so  that  that  position  of  the  stars  is, 
as  it  were,  a  kind  of  speech  predicting,  not  caus¬ 
ing  future  things — for  this  has  been  the  opinion 
of  men  of  no  ordinary  learning — certainly  the 
mathematicians  are  not  wont  so  to  speak,  say¬ 
ing.  for  example.  Mars  in  such  or  such  a  position 
signifies  a  homicide,  but  makes  a  homicide.  But, 
nevertheless,  though  we  grant  that  they  do  not 
speak  as  they  ought,  and  that  we  ought  to  ac¬ 


cept  as  the  proper  form  of  speech  that  employed 
by  the  philosophers  in  predicting  those  things 
which  they  think  they  discover  in  the  position  of 
the  stars,  how  comes  it  that  they  have  never 
been  able  to  assign  any  cause  why,  in  the  life  of 
twins,  in  their  actions,  in  the  events  which  be¬ 
fall  them,  in  their  professions,  arts,  honours, 
and  other  things  pertaining  to  human  life,  also 
in  their  very  death,  there  is  often  so  great  a  dif¬ 
ference  that,  as  far  as  these  things  are  con¬ 
cerned.  many  entire  strangers  are  more  like 
them  than  they  are  like  each  other,  though  sep¬ 
arated  at  birth  by  the  smallest  interval  of  time, 
but  at  conception  generated  by  the  same  act  of 
copulation,  and  at  the  same  moment? 

Chap.  2.  On  the  difference  in  the  health  of  twins 
Cicero  says  that  the  famous  physician  Hippo¬ 
crates  has  left  in  writing  that  he  had  suspected 
that  a  certain  pair  of  brothers  were  twins,  from 
the  fact  that  they  both  took  ill  at  once,  and  their 
disease  advanced  to  its  crisis  and  subsided  in  the 
same  time  in  each  of  them.  Posidonius  the  Stoic, 
who  was  much  given  to  astrology,  used  to  ex¬ 
plain  the  fact  by  supposing  that  they  had  been 
born  and  conceived  under  the  same  constella¬ 
tion.  In  this  question  the  conjecture  of  the  phy¬ 
sician  is  by  far  more  worthy  to  be  accepted,  and 
approaches  much  nearer  to  credibility,  since, 
according  as  the  parents  were  affected  in  body 
at  the  time  of  copulation,  so  might  the  first  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  foetuses  have  been  affected,  so  that 
all  that  wras  necessary  for  their  growth  and  de¬ 
velopment  up  till  birth  having  been  supplied 
from  the  body  of  the  same  mother,  they  might 
be  born  with  like  constitutions.  Thereafter, 
nourished  in  the  same  house,  on  the  same  kinds 
of  food,  where  they  would  have  also  the  same 
kinds  of  air,  the  same  locality,  the  same  quality 
of  water — which,  according  to  the  testimony  of 
medical  science,  have  a  very  great  influence, 
good  or  bad,  on  the  condition  of  bodily  health — 
and  where  they  would  also  be  accustomed  to  the 
same  kinds  of  exercise,  they  would  have  bodily 
constitutions  so  similar  that  they  would  be  sim¬ 
ilarly  affected  with  sickness  at  the  same  time 
and  by  the  same  causes.  But,  to  wish  to  adduce 
that  particular  position  of  the  stars  which  exist¬ 
ed  at  the  time  when  they  were  born  or  conceived 
as  the  cause  of  their  being  simultaneously  af¬ 
fected  with  sickness,  manifests  the  greatest  ar¬ 
rogance,  when  so  many  beings  of  most  diverse 
kinds,  in  the  most  diverse  conditions,  and  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  most  diverse  events,  may  have  been 
conceived  and  born  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the 
same  district,  lying  under  the  same  sky.  But  we 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  2-4 


know  that  twins  do  not  only  act  differently,  and 
travel  to  very  different  places,  but  that  they  also 
suffer  from  different  kinds  of  sickness;  for  which 
Hippocrates  would  give  what  is  in  my  opinion 
the  simplest  reason,  namely,  that,  through  di¬ 
versity  of  food  and  exercise,  which  arises  not 
from  the  constitution  of  the  body,  but  from  the 
inclination  of  the  mind,  they  may  have  come  to 
be  different  from  each  other  in  respect  of  health. 
Moreover,  Posidonius,  or  any  other  asserter  of 
the  fatal  influence  of  the  stars,  will  have  enough 
to  do  to  find  anything  to  say  to  this,  if  he  be  un¬ 
willing  to  impose  upon  the  minds  of  the  unin¬ 
structed  in  things  of  which  they  are  ignorant. 
But,  as  to  what  they  attempt  to  make  out  from 
that  very  small  interval  of  time  elapsing  be¬ 
tween  the  births  of  twins,  on  account  of  that 
point  in  the  heavens  where  the  mark  of  the  natal 
hour  is  placed,  and  which  they  call  the  “horo¬ 
scope,”  it  is  either  disproportionately  small  to 
the  diversity  which  is  found  in  the  dispositions, 
actions,  habits,  and  fortunes  of  twins,  or  it  is 
disproportionately  great  when  compared  with 
the  estate  of  twins,  whether  low  or  high,  which 
is  the  same  for  both  of  them,  the  cause  for 
whose  greatest  difference  they  place,  in  every 
case,  in  the  hour  on  which  one  is  born;  and,  for 
this  reason,  if  the  one  is  born  so  immediately 
after  the  other  that  there  is  no  change  in  the 
horoscope,  I  demand  an  entire  similarity  in  all 
that  respects  them  both,  which  can  never  be 
found  in  the  case  of  any  twins.  But  if  the  slow¬ 
ness  of  the  birth  of  the  second  give  time  for  a 
change  in  the  horoscope,  I  demand  different  par¬ 
ents,  which  twins  can  never  have. 

Chap.  3.  Concerning  the  arguments  which  Nigi- 
dius  the  mathematician  drew  from  the  pot¬ 
ter’s  wheel,  in  the  question  about  the  birth  of 
twins 

It  is  to  no  purpose,  therefore,  that  that  fa¬ 
mous  fiction  about  the  potter’s  wheel  is  brought 
forward,  which  tells  of  the  answer  which  Nigidi- 
us  is  said  to  have  given  when  he  was  perplexed 
with  this  question,  and  on  account  of  which  he 
was  called  Figulus.1  For,  having  whirled  round 
the  potter’s  wheel  with  all  his  strength  he 
marked  it  with  ink,  striking  it  twice  with  the  ut¬ 
most  rapidity,  so  that  the  strokes  seemed  to  fall 
on  the  very  same  part  of  it.  Then,  when  the  ro¬ 
tation  had  ceased,  the  marks  which  he  had  made 
were  found  upon  the  rim  of  the  wheel  at  no 
small  distance  apart.  Thus,  said  he,  considering 
the  great  rapidity  with  which  the  celestial  sphere 
revolves,  even  though  twins  were  born  with  as 
vi.  e.  the  potter. 


short  an  interval  between  their  births  as  there 
was  between  the  strokes  which  I  gave  this  wheel, 
that  brief  interval  of  time  is  equivalent  to  a 
very  great  distance  in  the  celestial  sphere. 
Hence,  said  he,  come  whatever  dissimilitudes 
may  be  remarked  in  the  habits  and  fortunes  of 
twins.  This  argument  is  more  fragile  than  the 
vessels  which  are  fashioned  by  the  rotation  of 
that  wheel.  For  if  there  is  so  much  significance 
in  the  heavens  which  cannot  be  comprehended 
by  observation  of  the  constellations,  that,  in  the 
case  of  twins,  an  inheritance  may  fall  to  the  one 
and  not  to  the  other,  why,  in  the  case  of  others 
who  are  not  twins,  do  they  dare,  having  exam¬ 
ined  their  constellations,  to  declare  such  things 
as  pertain  to  that  secret  which  no  one  can  com¬ 
prehend.  and  to  attribute  them  to  the  precise 
moment  of  the  birth  of  each  individual?  Now, 
if  such  predictions  in  connection  with  the  natal 
hours  of  others  who  are  not  twins  are  to  be  vin¬ 
dicated  on  the  ground  that  they  are  founded  on 
the  observation  of  more  extended  spaces  in  the 
heavens,  whilst  those  very  small  moments  of 
time  which  separated  the  births  of  twins,  and 
correspond  to  minute  portions  of  celestial  space, 
are  to  be  connected  with  trifling  things  about 
which  the  mathematicians  are  not  wont  to  be 
consulted — for  who  would  consult  them  as  to 
when  he  is  to  sit,  when  to  walk  abroad,  when 
and  on  what  he  is  to  dine? — how  can  we  be  jus¬ 
tified  in  so  speaking,  when  we  can  point  out  such 
manifold  diversity  both  in  the  habits,  doings, 
and  destinies  of  twins? 

Chap.  4.  Concerning  the  twins  Esau  and  Jacob, 
who  were  very  unlike  each  other  both  in  their 
character  and  actions 

In  the  time  of  the  ancient  fathers,  to  speak 
concerning  illustrious  persons,  there  were  born 
two  twin  brothers,  the  one  so  immediately  after 
the  other,  that  the  first  took  hold  of  the  heel  of 
the  second.  So  great  a  difference  existed  in  their 
lives  and  manners,  so  great  a  dissimilarity  in 
their  actions,  so  great  a  difference  in  their  par¬ 
ents’  love  for  them  respectively,  that  the  very 
contrast  between  them  produced  even  a  mutual 
hostile  antipathy.  Do  we  mean,  when  we  say 
that  they  were  so  unlike  each  other,  that  when 
the  one  was  walking  the  other  was  sitting,  when 
the  one  was  sleeping  the  other  was  waking — 
which  differences  are  such  as  are  attributed  to 
those  minute  portions  of  space  which  cannot  be 
appreciated  by  those  who  note  down  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  stars  which  exists  at  the  moment  of 
one’s  birth,  in  order  that  the  mathematicians 
may  be  consulted  concerning  it?  One  of  these 


210 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


twins  was  for  a  long  time  a  hired  servant;  the 
other  never  served.  One  of  them  was  beloved  by 
his  mother;  the  other  was  not  so.  One  of  them 
lost  that  honour  which  was  so  much  valued 
among  their  people;  the  other  obtained  it.  And 
what  shall  we  say  of  their  wives,  their  children, 
and  their  possessions?  How  different  they  were 
in  respect  to  all  these!  If,  therefore,  such  things 
as  these  are  connected  with  those  minute  inter¬ 
vals  of  time  which  elapse  between  the  births  of 
twins,  and  are  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  con¬ 
stellations,  wherefore  are  they  predicted  in  the 
case  of  others  from  the  examination  of  their 
constellations?  And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  these 
things  are  said  to  be  predicted,  because  they  are 
connected,  not  with  minute  and  inappreciable 
moments,  but  with  intervals  of  time  which  can 
be  observed  and  noted  down,  what  purpose  is 
that  potter’s  wheel  to  serve  in  this  matter,  ex¬ 
cept  it  be  to  whirl  round  men  who  have  hearts 
of  clay,  in  order  that  they  may  be  prevented 
from  detecting  the  emptiness  of  the  talk  of  the 
mathematicians? 

Chap.  5.  In  what  manner  the  mathematicians 
are  convicted  of  professing  a  vain  science 
Do  not  those  very  persons  whom  the  medical 
sagacity  of  Hippocrates  led  him  to  suspect  to  be 
twins,  because  their  disease  was  observed  by 
him  to  develop  to  its  crisis  and  to  subside  again 
in  the  same  time  in  each  of  them — do  not  these, 
I  say,  serve  as  a  sufficient  refutation  of  those 
who  wish  to  attribute  to  the  influence  of  the 
stars  that  which  was  owing  to  a  similarity  of 
bodily  constitution?  For  wherefore  were  they 
both  sick  of  the  same  disease,  and  at  the  same 
time,  and  not  the  one  after  the  other  in  the  or¬ 
der  of  their  birth?  (for  certainly  they  could  not 
both  be  born  at  the  same  time).  Or,  if  the  fact 
of  their  having  been  born  at  different  times  by 
no  means  necessarily  implies  that  they  must  be 
sick  at  different  times,  why  do  they  contend  that 
the  difference  in  the  time  of  their  births  was  the 
cause  of  their  difference  in  other  things?  Why 
could  they  travel  in  foreign  parts  at  different 
times,  marry  at  different  times,  beget  children 
at  different  times,  and  do  many  other  things  at 
different  times,  by  reason  of  their  having  been 
born  at  different  times,  and  yet  could  not,  for 
the  same  reason,  also  be  sick  at  different  times? 
For  if  a  difference  in  the  moment  of  birth 
changed  the  horoscope,  and  occasioned  dissim¬ 
ilarity  in  all  other  things,  why  has  that  simul¬ 
taneousness  which  belonged  to  their  conception 
remained  in  their  attacks  of  sickness?  Or,  if  the 
destinies  of  health  are  involved  in  the  time  of 


conception,  but  those  of  other  things  be  said  to 
be  attached  to  the  time  of  birth,  they  ought  not 
to  predict  anything  concerning  health  from  ex¬ 
amination  of  the  constellations  of  birth,  when 
the  hour  of  conception  is  not  also  given,  that  its 
constellations  may  be  inspected.  But  if  they  say 
that  they  predict  attacks  of  sickness  without  ex¬ 
amining  the  horoscope  of  conception,  because 
these  are  indicated  by  the  moments  of  birth, 
how  could  they  inform  either  of  these  twins 
when  he  would  be  sick,  from  the  horoscope  of 
his  birth,  when  the  other  also,  who  had  not  the 
same  horoscope  of  birth,  must  of  necessity  fall 
sick  at  the  same  time?  Again,  I  ask,  if  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  time  between  the  births  of  twins  is  so 
great  as  to  occasion  a  difference  of  their  constel¬ 
lations  on  account  of  the  difference  of  their 
horoscopes,  and  therefore  of  all  the  cardinal 
points  to  which  so  much  influence  is  attributed, 
that  even  from  such  change  there  comes  a  dif¬ 
ference  of  destiny,  how  is  it  possible  that  this 
should  be  so,  since  they  cannot  have  been  con¬ 
ceived  at  different  times?  Or,  if  two  conceived 
at  the  same  moment  of  time  could  have  different 
destinies  with  respect  to  their  births,  why  may 
not  also  two  born  at  the  same  moment  of  time 
have  different  destinies  for  life  and  for  death? 
For  if  the  one  moment  in  which  both  were  con¬ 
ceived  did  not  hinder  that  the  one  should  be 
born  before  the  other,  why,  if  two  are  born  at 
the  same  moment,  should  anything  hinder  them 
from  dying  at  the  same  moment?  If  a  simul¬ 
taneous  conception  allows  of  twins  being  differ¬ 
ently  affected  in  the  womb ,  why  should  not 
simultaneousness  of  birth  allow  of  any  two  in¬ 
dividuals  having  different  fortunes  in  the  world? 
and  thus  would  all  the  fictions  of  this  art,  or 
rather  delusion,  be  swept  away.  What  strange 
circumstance  is  this,  that  two  children  con¬ 
ceived  at  the  same  time,  nay,  at  the  same  mo¬ 
ment,  under  the  same  position  of  the  stars,  have 
different  fates  which  bring  them  to  different 
hours  of  birth,  whilst  two  children,  born  of  two 
different  mothers,  at  the  same  moment  of  time, 
under  one  and  the  same  position  of  the  stars, 
cannot  have  different  fates  which  shall  conduct 
them  by  necessity  to  diverse  manners  of  life 
and  of  death?  Are  they  at  conception  as  yet 
without  destinies,  because  they  can  only  have 
them  if  they  be  born?  What,  therefore,  do  they 
mean  when  they  say  that,  if  the  hour  of  the  con¬ 
ception  be  found,  many  things  can  be  predicted 
by  these  astrologers?  from  which  also  arose  that 
story  which  is  reiterated  by  some,  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  sage  chose  an  hour  in  which  to  lie  with  his 
wife,  in  order  to  secure  his  begetting  an  illustri- 


21 1 


THE  CITY  OF 

ous  son.  From  this  opinion  also  came  that  an¬ 
swer  of  Posidonius,  the  great  astrologer  and  also 
philosopher,  concerning  those  twins  who  were 
attacked  with  sickness  at  the  same  time,  namely, 
‘That  this  had  happened  to  them  because  they 
were  conceived  at  the  same  time  and  born  at  the 
same  time.”  For  certainly  he  added  “concep¬ 
tion,”  lest  it  should  be  said  to  him  that  they 
could  not  both  be  born  at  the  same  time,  know¬ 
ing  that  at  any  rate  they  must  both  have  been 
conceived  at  the  same  time;  wishing  thus  to 
show  that  he  did  not  attribute  the  fact  of  their 
being  similarly  and  simultaneously  affected  with 
sickness  to  the  similarity  of  their  bodily  consti¬ 
tutions  as  its  proximate  cause,  but  that  he  held 
that  even  in  respect  of  the  similarity  of  their 
health  they  were  bound  together  by  a  sidereal 
connection.  If,  therefore,  the  time  of  concep¬ 
tion  has  so  much  to  do  with  the  similarity  of  des¬ 
tinies,  these  same  destinies  ought  not  to  be 
changed  by  the  circumstances  of  birth;  or,  if 
the  destinies  of  twins  be  said  to  be  changed  be¬ 
cause  they  are  born  at  different  times,  why 
should  we  not  rather  understand  that  they  had 
been  already  changed  in  order  that  they  might 
be  born  at  different  times?  Does  not,  then,  the 
will  of  men  living  in  the  world  change  the  des¬ 
tinies  of  birth,  when  the  order  of  birth  can 
change  the  destinies  they  had  at  conception? 

Chap.  6.  Concerning  twins  of  different  sexes 
But  even  in  the  very  conception  of  twins, 
which  certainly  occurs  at  the  same  moment  in 
the  case  of  both,  it  often  happens  that  the  one 
is  conceived  a  male,  and  the  other  a  female.  I 
know  two  of  different  sexes  who  are  twins.  Both 
of  them  are  alive,  and  in  the  flower  of  their  age ; 
and  though  they  resemble  each  other  in  body, 
as  far  as  difference  of  sex  will  permit,  still  they 
are  very  different  in  the  whole  scope  and  pur¬ 
pose  of  their  lives  (consideration  being  had  of 
those  differences  which  necessarily  exist  be¬ 
tween  the  lives  of  males  and  females),  the  one 
holding;  the  office  of  a  count,  and  being  almost 
constantly  away  from  home  with  the  army  in 
foreign  service,  the  other  never  leaving  her 
country’s  soil  or  her  native  district.  Still  more — 
and  this  is  more  incredible,  if  the  destinies  of  the 
stars  are  to  be  believed  in,  though  it  is  not  won¬ 
derful  if  we  consider  the  wills  of  men  and  the 
free  gifts  of  God — he  is  married,  she  is  a  sacred 
virgin:  he  has  begotten  a  numerous  offspring, 
she  has  never  even  married.  But  is  not  the  virtue 
of  the  horoscope  very  great?  I  think  I  have  said 
enough  to  show  the  absurdity  of  that.  But,  say 
those  astrologers,  whatever  be  the  virtue  of  the 


GOD  V.  5-7 

horoscope  in  other  respects,  it  is  certainly  of 
significance  with  respect  to  birth.  But  why  not 
also  with  respect  to  conception,  which  takes 
place  undoubtedly  with  one  act  of  copulation? 
And,  indeed,  so  great  is  the  force  of  nature  that 
after  a  woman  has  once  conceived,  she  ceases 
to  be  liable  to  conception.  Or  were  they,  per¬ 
haps,  changed  at  birth,  either  he  into  a  male, 
or  she  into  a  female,  because  of  the  difference 
in  their  horoscopes?  But,  whilst  it  is  not  alto¬ 
gether  absurd  to  say  that  certain  sidereal  influ¬ 
ences  have  some  power  to  cause  differences  in 
bodies  alone — as,  for  instance,  we  see  that  the 
seasons  of  the  year  come  round  by  the  approach¬ 
ing  and  receding  of  the  sun,  and  that  certain  kinds 
of  things  are  increased  in  size  or  diminished  by 
the  waxings  and  wanings  of  the  moon,  such  as 
sea-urchins,  oysters,  and  the  wonderful  tides  of 
the  ocean — it  does  not  follow  that  the  wills  of 
men  are  to  be  made  subject  to  the  position  of 
the  stars.  The  astrologers,  however,  when  they 
wish  to  bind  our  actions  also  to  the  constella¬ 
tions,  only  set  us  on  investigating  whether,  even 
in  these  bodies,  the  changes  may  not  be  attrib¬ 
utable  to  some  other  than  a  sidereal  cause.  For 
what  is  there  which  more  intimately  concerns  a 
body  than  its  sex?  And  yet,  under  the  same  po¬ 
sition  of  the  stars,  twins  of  different  sexes  may 
be  conceived.  Wherefore,  what  greater  absurd¬ 
ity  can  be  affirmed  or  believed  than  that  the  po¬ 
sition  of  the  stars,  which  was  the  same  for  both 
of  them  at  the  time  of  conception,  could  not 
cause  that  the  one  child  should  not  have  been 
of  a  different  sex  from  her  brother,  with  whom 
she  had  a  common  constellation,  whilst  the  po¬ 
sition  of  the  stars  which  existed  at  the  hour  of 
their  birth  could  cause  that  she  should  be  sep¬ 
arated  from  him  by  the  great  distance  between 
marriage  and  holy  virginity? 

Chap.  7.  Concerning  the  choosing  of  a  day  for 
marriage,  or  for  planting,  or  sowing 
Now,  will  any  one  bring  forward  this,  that  in 
choosing  certain  particular  days  for  particular 
actions,  men  bring  about  certain  new  destinies 
for  their  actions?  That  man,  for  instance,  ac¬ 
cording  to  this  doctrine,  was  not  born  to  have 
an  illustrious  son,  but  rather  a  contemptible 
one,  and  therefore,  being  a  man  of  learning,  he 
chose  an  hour  in  which  to  lie  with  his  wife.  He 
made,  therefore,  a  destiny  which  he  did  not  have 
before,  and  from  that  destiny  of  his  own  making 
something  began  to  be  fatal  which  was  not  con¬ 
tained  in  the  destiny  of  his  natal  hour.  Oh,  sin¬ 
gular  stupidity!  A  day  is  chosen  on  which  to 
marry;  and  for  this  reason,  I  believe,  that  unless 


212 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


a  day  be  chosen,  the  marriage  may  fall  on  an 
unlucky  day,  and  turn  out  an  unhappy  one. 
What  then  becomes  of  what  the  stars  have  al¬ 
ready  decreed  at  the  hour  of  birth?  Can  a  man 
be  said  to  change  by  an  act  of  choice  that  which 
has  already  been  determined  for  him,  whilst  that 
which  he  himself  has  determined  in  the  choos¬ 
ing  of  a  day  cannot  be  changed  by  another  pow¬ 
er?  Thus,  if  men  alone,  and  not  all  things  under 
heaven,  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  stars, 
why  do  they  choose  some  days  as  suitable  for 
planting  vines  or  trees,  or  for  sowing  grain, 
other  days  as  suitable  for  taming  beasts  on,  or 
for  putting  the  males  to  the  females,  that  the 
cows  and  mares  may  be  impregnated,  and  for 
such-like  things?  If  it  be  said  that  certain  cho¬ 
sen  days  have  an  influence  on  these  things,  be¬ 
cause  the  constellations  rule  over  all  terrestrial 
bodies,  animate  and  inanimate,  according  to 
differences  in  moments  of  time,  let  it  be  con¬ 
sidered  what  innumerable  multitudes  of  beings 
are  born  or  arise,  or  take  their  origin  at  the  very 
same  instant  of  time,  which  come  to  ends  so  dif¬ 
ferent,  that  they  may  persuade  any  little  boy 
that  these  observations  about  days  are  ridicu¬ 
lous.  For  who  is  so  mad  as  to  dare  affirm  that  all 
trees,  all  herbs,  all  beasts,  serpents,  birds,  fishes, 
worms,  have  each  separately  their  own  mo¬ 
ments  of  birth  or  commencement?  Neverthe¬ 
less,  men  are  wont,  in  order  to  try  the  skill  of 
the  mathematicians,  to  bring  before  them  the 
constellations  of  dumb  animals,  the  constella¬ 
tions  of  whose  birth  they  diligently  observe  at 
home  with  a  view  to  this  discovery;  and  they 
prefer  those  mathematicians  to  all  others,  who 
say  from  the  inspection  of  the  constellations 
that  they  indicate  the  birth  of  a  beast  and  not 
of  a  man.  They  also  dare  tell  what  kind  of  beast 
it  is,  whether  it  is  a  wool-bearing  beast,  or  a 
beast  suited  for  carrying  burthens,  or  one  fit  for 
the  plough,  or  for  watching  a  house;  for  the  as¬ 
trologers  are  also  tried  with  respect  to  the  fates 
of  dogs,  and  their  answers  concerning  these  are 
followed  by  shouts  of  admiration  on  the  part  of 
those  who  consult  them.  They  so  deceive  men 
as  to  make  them  think  that  during  the  birth  of 
a  man  the  births  of  all  other  beings  are  suspend¬ 
ed.  so  that  not  even  a  fly  comes  to  life  at  the 
same  time  that  he  is  being  born,  under  the  same 
region  of  the  heavens.  And  if  this  be  admitted 
with  respect  to  the  fly,  the  reasoning  cannot 
stop  there,  but  must  ascend  from  flies  till  it  lead 
them  up  to  camels  and  elephants.  Nor  are  they 
willing  to  attend  to  this  that,  when  a  day  has 
been  chosen  whereon  to  sow  a  field,  so  many 
grains  fall  into  the  ground  simultaneously,  ger¬ 


minate  simultaneously,  spring  up,  come  to  per¬ 
fection,  and  ripen  simultaneously;  and  yet.  of 
all  the  ears  which  are  coeval,  and,  so  to  speak, 
congerminal,  some  are  destroyed  by  mildew, 
some  are  devoured  by  the  birds,  and  some  are 
pulled  by  men.  How  can  they  say  that  all  these 
had  their  different  constellations,  which  they  see 
coming  to  so  different  ends?  Will  they  confess 
that  it  is  folly  to  choose  days  for  such  things, 
and  to  affirm  that  they  do  not  come  within  the 
sphere  of  the  celestial  decree,  whilst  they  sub¬ 
ject  men  alone  to  the  stars,  on  whom  alone  in 
the  world  God  has  bestowed  free  wills?  All  these 
things  being  considered,  we  have  good  reason  to 
believe  that,  when  the  astrologers  give  very 
many  wonderful  answers,  it  is  to  be  attributed 
to  the  occult  inspiration  of  spirits  not  of  the 
best  kind,  whose  care  it  is  to  insinuate  into  the 
minds  of  men,  and  to  confirm  in  them,  those 
false  and  noxious  opinions  concerning  the  fatal 
influence  of  the  stars,  and  not  to  their  marking 
and  inspecting  of  horoscopes,  according  to  some 
kind  of  art  which  in  reality  has  no  existence. 

Chap.  8.  Concerning  those  who  call  by  the  name 
of  fate ,  not  the  position  of  the  stars ,  but  the 
connexion  of  causes  which  depends  on  the 
will  of  God 

But,  as  to  those  who  call  by  the  name  of  fate, 
not  the  disposition  of  the  stars  as  it  may  exist 
when  any  creature  is  conceived,  or  born,  or 
commences  its  existence,  but  the  whole  connex¬ 
ion  and  train  of  causes  which  makes  everything 
become  what  it  does  become,  there  is  no  need 
that  I  should  labour  and  strive  with  them  in  a 
merely  verbal  controversy,  since  they  attribute 
the  so-called  order  and  connexion  of  causes  to 
the  will  and  power  of  God  most  high,  who  is 
most  rightly  and  most  truly  believed  to  know 
all  things  before  they  come  to  pass,  and  to  leave 
nothing  unordained;  from  whom  are  all  powers, 
although  the  wills  of  all  are  not  from  Him.  Now, 
that  it  is  chiefly  the  will  of  God  most  high, 
whose  power  extends  itself  irresistibly  through 
all  things  which  they  call  fate,  is  proved  by  the 
following  verses,  of  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  An¬ 
naeus  Seneca  is  the  author: — 

Father  supreme,  Thou  ruler  of  the  lofty  heavens, 
Lead  me  where'er  it  is  Thy  pleasure ;  I  will  give 
A  prompt  obedience,  making  no  delay, 

Lol  here  I  am.  Promptly  1  come  to  do  Thy  sover¬ 
eign  will ; 

If  Thy  command  shall  thwart  my  inclination,  I  will 
still 

Follow  Thee  groaning,  and  the  work  assigned, 

With  all  the  suffering  of  a  mind  repugnant, 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  8-9  213 


Will  perform,  being  evil;  which,  had  I  been  good, 

I  should  have  undertaken  and  performed,  though 
hard, 

With  virtuous  cheerfulness. 

The  Fates  do  lead  the  man  that  follows  willing; 
But  the  man  that  is  unwilling,  him  they  drag. 

Most  evidently,  in  this  last  verse,  he  calls  that 
“fate”  which  he  had  before  called  “the  will  of 
the  Father  supreme,”  whom,  he  says,  he  is  ready 
to  obey  that  he  may  be  led,  being  willing,  not 
dragged,  being  unwilling,  since  “the  Fates  do 
lead  the  man  that  follows  willing,  but  the  man 
that  is  unwilling,  him  they  drag.” 

The  following  Homeric  lines,  which  Cicero 
translates  into  Latin,  also  favour  this  opinion : — 

Such  are  the  minds  of  men,  as  is  the  light 
Which  Father  Jove  himself  doth  pour 
Illustrious  o'er  the  fruitful  earth.1 

Not  that  Cicero  wishes  that  a  poetical  senti¬ 
ment  should  have  any  weight  in  a  question  like 
this;  for  when  he  says  that  the  Stoics  when  as¬ 
serting  the  power  of  fate,  were  in  the  habit  of 
using  these  verses  from  Homer,  he  is  not  treat¬ 
ing  concerning  the  opinion  of  that  poet,  but 
concerning  that  of  those  philosophers,  since  by 
these  verses,  which  they  quote  in  connexion 
with  the  controversy  which  they  hold  about 
fate,  is  most  distinctly  manifested  what  it  is 
which  they  reckon  fate,  since  they  call  by  the 
name  of  Jupiter  him  whom  they  reckon  the  su¬ 
preme  god.  from  whom,  they  say,  hangs  the 
whole  chain  of  fates. 

Chap.  9.  Concerning  the  foreknowledge  of  God 
and  the  free  will  of  man,  in  opposition  to  the 
definition  of  Cicero 

The  manner  in  which  Cicero  addresses  him¬ 
self  to  the  task  of  refuting  the  Stoics,  shows  that 
he  did  not  think  he  could  effect  anything  against 
them  in  argument  unless  he  had  first  demol¬ 
ished  divination.  And  this  he  attempts  to  accom¬ 
plish  by  denying  that  there  is  any  knowledge  of 
future  things,  and  maintains  with  all  his  might 
that  there  is  no  such  knowledge  either  in  God 
or  man,  and  that  there  is  no  prediction  of  events. 
Thus  he  both  denies  the  foreknowledge  of  God 
and  attempts  by  vain  arguments,  and  by  oppos¬ 
ing  to  himself  certain  oracles  very  easy  to  be 
refuted,  to  overthrow  all  prophecy,  even  such 
as  is  clearer  than  the  light  (though  even  these 
oracles  are  not  refuted  by  him). 

But,  in  refuting  these  conjectures  of  the 
mathematicians,  his  argument  is  triumphant, 
because  truly  these  are  such  as  destroy  and  re- 
lOdyssey,  bk.  xviii.  136,  137 


fute  themselves.  Nevertheless,  they  are  far  more 
tolerable  who  assert  the  fatal  influence  of  the 
stars  than  they  who  deny  the  foreknowledge  of 
future  events.  For,  to  confess  that  God  exists, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  deny  that  He  has  fore¬ 
knowledge  of  future  things,  is  the  most  manifest 
folly.  This  Cicero  himself  saw  and  therefore  at¬ 
tempted  to  assert  the  doctrine  embodied  in  the 
words  of  Scripture,  “The  fool  hath  said  in  his 
heart,  There  is  no  God.”2  That,  however,  he  did 
not  do  in  his  own  person,  for  he  saw  how  odious 
and  offensive  such  an  opinion  would  be;  and 
therefore,  in  his  book  on  the  nature  of  the  gods, 
he  makes  Cotta  dispute  concerning  this  against 
the  Stoics,  and  preferred  to  give  his  own  opin¬ 
ion  in  favour  of  Lucilius  Balbus.  to  whom  he  as¬ 
signed  the  defence  of  the  Stoical  position,  rather 
than  in  favour  of  Cotta,  who  maintained  that  no 
divinity  exists.  However,  in  his  book  on  divina¬ 
tion,  he  in  his  own  person  most  openly  opposes 
the  doctrine  of  the  prescience  of  future  things. 
But  all  this  he  seems  to  do  in  order  that  he  may 
not  grant  the  doctrine  of  fate  and  by  so  doing 
destroy  free  will.  For  he  thinks  that,  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  future  things  being  once  conceded,  fate 
follows  as  so  necessary  a  consequence  that  it 
cannot  be  denied. 

But,  let  these  perplexing  debatings  and  dis¬ 
putations  of  the  philosophers  go  on  as  they  may, 
we,  in  order  that  we  may  confess  the  most  high 
and  true  God  Himself,  do  confess  His  will,  su¬ 
preme  power,  and  prescience.  Neither  let  us  be 
afraid  lest,  after  all,  we  do  not  do  by  will  that 
which  we  do  by  will,  because  He,  Whose  fore¬ 
knowledge  is  infallible,  foreknew  that  we  would 
do  it.  It  was  this  which  Cicero  was  afraid  of, 
and  therefore  opposed  foreknowledge.  The  Sto¬ 
ics  also  maintained  that  all  things  do  not  come 
to  pass  by  necessity,  although  they  contended 
that  all  things  happen  according  to  destiny. 
What  is  it,  then,  that  Cicero  feared  in  the  pre¬ 
science  of  future  things?  Doubtless  it  was  this 
— that  if  all  future  things  have  been  foreknown, 
they  will  happen  in  the  order  in  which  they  have 
been  foreknown;  and  if  they  come  to  pass  in 
this  order,  there  is  a  certain  order  of  things  fore¬ 
known  by  God;  and  if  a  certain  order  of  things, 
then  a  certain  order  of  causes,  for  nothing  can 
happen  which  is  not  preceded  by  some  efficient 
cause.  But  if  there  is  a  certain  order  of  causes 
according  to  which  everything  happens  which 
does  happen,  then  by  fate,  says  he,  all  things 
happen  which  do  happen.  But  if  this  be  so,  then 
is  there  nothing  in  our  own  power,  and  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  freedom  of  will;  and  if  we 
2Ps.  15.  1. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


grant  that,  says  he,  the  whole  economy  of  hu¬ 
man  life  is  subverted.  In  vain  are  laws  enacted. 
In  vain  are  reproaches,  praises,  chidings,  ex¬ 
hortations  had  recourse  to;  and  there  is  no  jus¬ 
tice  whatever  in  the  appointment  of  rewards  for 
the  good,  and  punishments  for  the  wicked.  And 
that  consequences  so  disgraceful,  and  absurd, 
and  pernicious  to  humanity  may  not  follow,  Ci¬ 
cero  chooses  to  reject  the  foreknowledge  of  fu¬ 
ture  things,  and  shuts  up  the  religious  mind  to 
this  alternative,  to  make  choice  between  two 
things,  either  that  something  is  in  our  own  pow¬ 
er,  or  that  there  is  foreknowledge,  both  of  which 
cannot  be  true;  but  if  the  one  is  affirmed,  the 
other  is  thereby  denied.  He  therefore,  like  a 
truly  great  and  wise  man,  and  one  who  consulted 
very  much  and  very  skilfully  for  the  good  of 
humanity,  of  those  two  chose  the  freedom  of 
the  will,  to  confirm  which  he  denied  the  fore¬ 
knowledge  of  future  things;  and  thus,  wishing  to 
make  men  free,  he  makes  them  sacrilegious.  But 
the  religious  mind  chooses  both,  confesses  both, 
and  maintains  both  by  the  faith  of  piety.  But 
how  so?  says  Cicero;  for  the  knowledge  of  "fu¬ 
ture  things  being  granted,  there  follows  a  chain 
of  consequences  which  ends  in  this,  that  there 
can  be  nothing  depending  on  our  own  free  wills. 
And  further,  if  there  is  anything  depending  on 
our  wills,  we  must  go  backwards  by  the  same 
steps  of  reasoning  till  we  arrive  at  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  there  is  no  foreknowledge  of  future 
things.  For  we  go  backwards  through  all  the 
steps  in  the  following  order:  If  there  is  free  will, 
all  things  do  not  happen  according  to  fate;  if 
all  things  do  not  happen  according  to  fate,  there 
is  not  a  certain  order  of  causes;  and  if  there  is 
not  a  certain  order  of  causes,  neither  is  there  a 
certain  order  of  things  foreknown  by  God — for 
things  cannot  come  to  pass  except  they  are  pre¬ 
ceded  by  efficient  causes — but,  if  there  is  no 
fixed  and  certain  order  of  causes  foreknown  by 
God,  all  things  cannot  be  said  to  happen  accord¬ 
ing  as  He  foreknew  that  they  would  happen. 
And  further,  if  it  is  not  true  that  all  things  hap¬ 
pen  just  as  they  have  been  foreknown  by  Him, 
there  is  not,  says  he,  in  God  any  foreknowledge 
of  future  events. 

Now,  against  the  sacrilegious  and  impious 
darings  of  reason,  we  assert  both  that  God 
knows  all  things  before  they  come  to  pass  and 
that  we  do  by  our  free  will  whatsoever  we  know 
and  feel  to  be  done  by  us  only  because  we  will 
it.  But  that  all  things  come  to  pass  by  fate,  we 
do  not  say;  nay  we  affirm  that  nothing  comes  to 
pass  by  fate;  for  we  demonstrate  that  the  name 
of  fate,  as  it  is  wont  to  be  used  by  those  who 


speak  of  fate,  meaning  thereby  the  position  of 
the  stars  at  the  time  of  each  one’s  conception  or 
birth,  is  an  unmeaning  word,  for  astrology  itself 
is  a  delusion.  But  an  order  of  causes  in  which  the 
highest  efficiency  is  attributed  to  the  will  of 
God,  we  neither  deny  nor  do  we  designate  it  by 
the  name  of  fate,  unless,  perhaps,  we  may  under¬ 
stand  fate  to  mean  that  which  is  spoken,  deriv¬ 
ing  it  from  fari,  to  speak;  for  we  cannot  deny 
that  it  is  written  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  “God 
hath  spoken  once;  these  two  things  have  I 
heard,  that  power  belongeth  unto  God.  Also 
unto  Thee.  0  God,  belongeth  mercy:  for  Thou 
wilt  render  unto  every  man  according  to  his 
works.”1  Now  the  expression,  “Once  hath  He 
spoken,”  is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  “im¬ 
movably,”  that  is,  unchangeably  hath  He  spok¬ 
en.  inasmuch  as  He  knows  unchangeably  all 
things  which  shall  be  and  all  things  which  He 
will  do.  We  might,  then,  use  the  word  fate  in  the 
sense  it  bears  when  derived  from  fari ,  to  speak, 
had  it  not  already  come  to  be  understood  in  an¬ 
other  sense,  into  which  I  am  unwilling  that  the 
hearts  of  men  should  unconsciously  slide.  But 
it  does  not  follow  that,  though  there  is  for  God 
a  certain  order  of  all  causes,  there  must  there¬ 
fore  be  nothing  depending  on  the  free  exercise 
of  our  own  wills,  for  our  wills  themselves  are 
included  in  that  order  of  causes  which  is  certain 
to  God  and  is  embraced  by  His  foreknowledge, 
for  human  wills  are  also  causes  of  human  ac¬ 
tions;  and  He  Who  foreknew  all  the  causes  of 
things  would  certainly  among  those  causes  not 
have  been  ignorant  of  our  wills.  For  even  that 
very  concession  which  Cicero  himself  makes  is 
enough  to  refute  him  in  this  argument.  For  what 
does  it  help  him  to  say  that  nothing  takes  place 
without  a  cause,  but  that  every  cause  is  not 
fatal,  there  being  a  fortuitous  cause,  a  natural 
cause,  and  a  voluntary  cause?  It  is  sufficient  that 
he  confesses  that  whatever  happens  must  be 
preceded  by  a  cause.  For  we  say  that  those 
causes  which  are  called  fortuitous  are  not  a 
mere  name  for  the  absence  of  causes,  but  are 
only  latent,  and  we  attribute  them  either  to  the 
will  of  the  true  God,  or  to  that  of  spirits  of  some 
kind  or  other.  And  as  to  natural  causes,  we  by 
no  means  separate  them  from  the  will  of  Him 
who  is  the  author  and  framer  of  all  nature.  But 
now  as  to  voluntary  causes.  They  are  referable 
either  to  God,  or  to  angels,  or  to  men,  or  to  ani¬ 
mals  of  whatever  description,  if  indeed  those  in¬ 
stinctive  movements  of  animals  devoid  of  rea¬ 
son,  by  which,  in  accordance  with  their  own  na¬ 
ture,  they  seek  or  shun  various  things,  are  to  be 

1PS.  6 2.  II,  12.  i 


, 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  io  215 


called  wills.  And  when  I  speak  of  the  wills  of 
angels.  I  mean  either  the  wills  of  good  angels, 
whom  we  call  the  angels  of  God.  or  of  the  wick¬ 
ed  angels,  whom  we  call  the  angels  of  the  devil, 
or  demons.  Also  by  the  wills  of  men  I  mean  the 
wills  either  of  the  good  or  of  the  wicked.  And 
from  this  we  conclude  that  there  are  no  efficient 
causes  of  all  things  which  come  to  pass  unless 
voluntary  causes,  that  is,  such  as  belong  to  that 
nature  which  is  the  spirit  of  life.  For  the  air  or 
wind  is  called  spirit,  but,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a 
body,  it  is  not  the  spirit  of  life.  The  spirit  of  life, 
therefore,  which  quickens  all  things,  and  is  the 
creator  of  every  body  and  of  every  created  spirit, 
is  God  Himself,  the  uncreated  spirit.  In  His  su¬ 
preme  will  resides  the  power  which  acts  on  the 
wills  of  all  created  spirits,  helping  the  good, 
judging  the  evil,  controlling  all.  granting  power 
to  some,  not  granting  it  to  others.  For,  as  He  is 
the  creator  of  all  natures,  so  also  is  He  the  be- 
stower  of  all  powers,  not  of  all  wills;  for  wicked 
wills  are  not  from  Him,  being  contrary  to  na¬ 
ture,  which  is  from  Him.  As  to  bodies,  they  are 
more  subject  to  wills:  some  to  our  wills,  by 
which  I  mean  the  wills  of  all  living  mortal  crea¬ 
tures,  but  more  to  the  wills  of  men  than  of 
beasts.  But  all  of  them  are  most  of  all  subject 
to  the  will  of  God,  to  Whom  all  wills  also  are 
subject,  since  they  have  no  power  except  what 
He  has  bestowed  upon  them.  The  cause  of 
things,  therefore,  which  makes  but  is  not  made, 
is  God;  but  all  other  causes  both  make  and  are 
made.  Such  are  all  created  spirits,  and  especially 
the  rational.  Material  causes,  therefore,  which 
may  rather  be  said  to  be  made  than  to  make,  are 
not  to  be  reckoned  among  efficient  causes,  be¬ 
cause  they  can  only  do  what  the  wills  of  spirits 
do  by  them.  How,  then,  does  an  order  of  causes 
which  is  certain  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God 
necessitate  that  there  should  be  nothing  which 
is  dependent  on  our  wills,  when  our  wills  them¬ 
selves  have  a  very  important  place  in  the  order 
of  causes?  Cicero,  then,  contends  with  those 
who  call  this  order  of  causes  fatal,  or  rather 
designate  this  order  itself  by  the  name  of  fate; 
to  which  we  have  an  abhorrence,  especially  on 
account  of  the  word,  which  men  have  become 
accustomed  to  understand  as  meaning  what  is 
not  true.  But,  whereas  he  denies  that  the  order 
of  all  causes  is  most  certain  and  perfectly  clear 
to  the  prescience  of  God,  we  detest  his  opinion 
more  than  the  Stoics  do.  For  he  either  denies 
that  God  exists — which,  indeed,  in  an  assumed 
personage,  he  has  laboured  to  do,  in  his  book 
De  Natura  Deorum — or  if  he  confesses  that  He 
exists,  but  denies  that  He  is  prescient  of  future 


things,  what  is  that  but  just  “the  fool  saying  in 
his  heart  there  is  no  God”?  For  one  who  is  not 
prescient  of  all  future  things  is  not  God.  Where¬ 
fore  our  wills  also  have  just  so  much  power  as 
God  willed  and  foreknew  that  they  should  have; 
and  therefore  whatever  power  they  have,  they 
have  it  within  most  certain  limits;  and  what¬ 
ever  they  are  to  do,  they  are  most  assuredly  to 
do,  for  He  whose  foreknowledge  is  infallible 
foreknew  that  they  would  have  the  power  to  do 
it  and  would  do  it.  Wherefore,  if  I  should  choose 
to  apply  the  name  of  fate  to  anything  at  all,  I 
should  rather  say  that  fate  belongs  to  the  weak¬ 
er  of  two  parties,  will  to  the  stronger,  who  has 
the  other  in  his  power,  than  that  the  freedom  of 
our  will  is  excluded  by  that  order  of  causes, 
which,  by  an  unusual  application  of  the  word 
peculiar  to  themselves,  the  Stoics  call  Fate. 

Chap.  io.  Whether  our  wills  are  ruled  by  neces¬ 
sity 

Wherefore,  neither  is  that  necessity  to  be 
feared,  for  dread  of  which  the  Stoics  laboured 
to  make  such  distinctions  among  the  causes  of 
things  as  should  enable  them  to  rescue  certain 
things  from  the  dominion  of  necessity,  and  to 
subject  others  to  it.  Among  those  things  which 
they  wished  not  to  be  subject  to  necessity  they 
placed  our  wills,  knowing  that  they  would  not 
be  free  if  subjected  to  necessity.  For  if  that  is  to 
be  called  our  necessity  which  is  not  in  our  pow¬ 
er,  but  even  though  we  be  unwilling  effects  what 
it  can  effect — as,  for  instance,  the  necessity  of 
death — it  is  manifest  that  our  wills  by  which  we 
live  uprightly  or  wickedly  are  not  under  such  a 
necessity;  for  we  do  many  things  which,  if  we 
were  not  willing,  we  should  certainly  not  do. 
This  is  primarily  true  of  the  act  of  willing  itself 
— for  if  we  will,  it  is;  if  we  will  not,  it  is  not — 
for  we  should  not  will  if  we  were  unwilling.  But 
if  we  define  necessity  to  be  that  according  to 
which  we  say  that  it  is  necessary  that  anything 
be  of  such  or  such  a  nature,  or  be  done  in  such 
and  such  a  manner,  I  know  not  why  we  should 
have  any  dread  of  that  necessity  taking  away 
the  freedom  of  our  will.  For  we  do  not  put  the 
life  of  God  or  the  foreknowledge  of  God  under 
necessity  if  we  should  say  that  it  is  necessary 
that  God  should  live  forever,  and  foreknow  all 
things;  as  neither  is  His  power  diminished  when 
we  say  that  He  cannot  die  or  fall  into  error,  for 
this  is  in  such  a  way  impossible  to  Him,  that  if 
it  were  possible  for  Him,  He  would  be  of  less 
power.  But  assuredly  He  is  rightly  called  om¬ 
nipotent,  though  He  can  neither  die  nor  fall  into 
error.  For  He  is  called  omnipotent  on  account 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


216 

of  His  doing  what  He  wills,  not  on  account  of 
His  suffering  what  He  wills  not;  for  if  that 
should  befall  Him.  He  would  by  no  means  be 
omnipotent.  Wherefore,  He  cannot  do  some 
things  for  the  very  reason  that  He  is  omnipo¬ 
tent.  So  also,  when  we  say  that  it  is  necessary 
that,  when  we  will,  we  will  by  free  choice,  in  so 
saying  we  both  affirm  what  is  true  beyond  doubt 
and  do  not  still  subject  our  wills  thereby  to  a 
necessity  which  destroys  liberty.  Our  wills, 
therefore,  exist  as  wills  and  do  themselves  what¬ 
ever  we  do  by  willing,  and  which  would  not  be 
done  if  we  were  unwilling.  But  when  any  one 
suffers  anything,  being  unwilling,  by  the  will  of 
another,  even  in  that  case  will  retains  its  essen¬ 
tial  validity — wTe  do  not  mean  the  will  of  the 
party  who  inflicts  the  suffering,  for  we  resolve 
it  into  the  power  of  God.  For  if  a  will  should 
simply  exist,  but  not  be  able  to  do  what  it  wills, 
it  would  be  overborne  by  a  more  powerful  will. 
Nor  would  this  be  the  case  unless  there  had  ex¬ 
isted  will,  and  that  not  the  will  of  the  other  par¬ 
ty,  but  the  will  of  him  who  willed,  but  was  not 
able  to  accomplish  what  he  willed.  Therefore, 
whatsoever  a  man  suffers  contrary  to  his  own 
will,  he  ought  not  to  attribute  to  the  will  of 
men,  or  of  angels,  or  of  any  created  spirit,  but 
rather  to  His  will  who  gives  power  to  wills.  It  is 
not  the  case,  therefore,  that  because  God  fore¬ 
knew  what  would  be  in  the  power  of  our  wills, 
there  is  for  that  reason  nothing  in  the  power  of 
our  wills.  For  He  Who  foreknew  this  did  not  fore¬ 
know  nothing.  Moreover,  if  He  Who  foreknew 
what  would  be  in  the  power  of  our  wills  did  not 
foreknow  nothing,  but  something,  assuredly, 
even  though  He  did  foreknow,  there  is  some¬ 
thing  in  the  power  of  our  wills.  Therefore  we  are 
by  no  means  compelled,  either,  retaining  the 
prescience  of  God,  to  take  away  the  freedom  of 
the  will,  or,  retaining  the  freedom  of  the  will,  to 
deny  that  He  is  prescient  of  future  things,  which 
is  impious.  But  we  embrace  both.  We  faithfully 
and  sincerely  confess  both.  The  former,  that  we 
may  believe  well;  the  latter,  that  we  may  live 
well.  For  he  lives  ill  who  does  not  believe  well 
concerning  God.  Wherefore,  be  it  far  from  us, 
in  order  to  maintain  our  freedom,  to  deny  the 
prescience  of  Him  by  Whose  help  we  are  or  shall 
be  free.  Consequently,  it  is  not  in  vain  that  laws 
are  enacted,  and  that  reproaches,  exhortations, 
praises,  and  vituperations  are  had  recourse  to; 
for  these  also  He  foreknew,  and  they  are  of 
great  avail,  even  as  great  as  He  foreknew  that 
they  would  be  of.  Prayers,  also,  are  of  avail  to 
procure  those  things  which  He  foreknew  that  He 
would  grant  to  those  who  offered  them ;  and  with 


justice  have  rewards  been  appointed  for  good 
deeds  and  punishments  for  sins.  For  a  man  does 
not  therefore  sin  because  God  foreknew  that  he 
would  sin.  Nay,  it  cannot  be  doubted  but  that  it 
is  the  man  himself  who  sins  when  he  does  sin, 
because  He,  Whose  foreknowledge  is  infallible, 
foreknew  not  that  fate,  or  fortune,  or  something 
else  would  sin,  but  that  the  man  himself  would 
sin,  who,  if  he  wills  not,  sins  not.  But  if  he  shall 
not  will  to  sin,  even  this  did  God  foreknow. 

Chap.  ii.  Concerning  the  universal  providence 
of  God  in  the  laws  of  which  all  things  are  com¬ 
prehended 

Therefore  God  supreme  and  true,  with  His 
Word  and  Holy  Spirit  (which  three  are  one), 
one  God  omnipotent,  creator  and  maker  of  ev¬ 
ery  soul  and  of  every  body;  by  Whose  gift  all 
are  happy  who  are  happy  through  verity  and  not 
through  vanity ;  Who  made  man  a  rational  ani¬ 
mal  consisting  of  soul  and  body,  Who,  when  he 
sinned,  neither  permitted  him  to  go  unpunished, 
nor  left  him  without  mercy;  Who  has  given  to 
the  good  and  to  the  evil,  being  in  common  with 
stones,  vegetable  life  in  common  with  trees, 
sensuous  life  in  common  with  brutes,  intellec¬ 
tual  life  in  common  with  angels  alone;  from 
Whom  is  every  mode,  every  species,  every  order ; 
from  Whom  are  measure,  number,  weight;  from 
Whom  is  everything  which  has  an  existence  in 
nature,  of  whatever  kind  it  be  and  of  whatever 
value;  from  Whom  are  the  seeds  of  forms  and 
the  forms  of  seeds,  and  the  motion  of  seeds  and 
of  forms ;  Who  gave  also  to  flesh  its  origin,  beau¬ 
ty,  health,  reproductive  fecundity,  disposition 
of  members,  and  the  salutary  concord  of  its 
parts ;  Who  also  to  the  irrational  soul  has  given 
memory,  sense,  appetite,  but  to  the  rational 
soul,  in  addition  to  these,  has  given  intelligence 
and  will ;  Who  has  not  left,  not  to  speak  of  heav¬ 
en  and  earth,  angels  and  men,  but  not  even  the 
entrails  of  the  smallest  and  most  contemptible 
animal,  or  the  feather  of  a  bird,  or  the  little 
flower  of  a  plant,  or  the  leaf  of  a  tree,  without 
an  harmony,  and,  as  it  were,  a  mutual  peace 
among  all  its  parts — that  God  can  never  be  be¬ 
lieved  to  have  left  the  kingdoms  of  men,  their 
dominations  and  servitudes,  outside  of  the  laws 
of  His  providence. 

Chap.  12.  By  what  virtues  the  ancient  Romans 
merited  that  the  true  God,  although  they  did 
not  worship  him,  should  enlarge  their  empire 
Wherefore  let  us  go  on  to  consider  what  vir¬ 
tues  of  the  Romans  they  were  which  the  true 
God,  in  Whose  power  are  also  the  kingdoms  of 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  11-12 


the  earth,  condescended  to  help  in  order  to  raise 
the  empire,  and  also  for  what  reason  He  did  so. 
And.  in  order  to  discuss  this  question  on  clearer 
ground,  we  have  written  the  former  books,  to 
show  that  the  power  of  those  gods,  who,  they 
thought,  were  to  be  worshipped  with  such  tri¬ 
fling  and  silly  rites,  had  nothing  to  do  in  this 
matter;  and  also  what  we  have  already  accom¬ 
plished  of  the  present  volume,  to  refute  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  fate,  lest  any  one  who  might  have  been 
already  persuaded  that  the  Roman  empire  was 
not  extended  and  preserved  by  the  worship  of 
these  gods,  might  still  be  attributing  its  exten¬ 
sion  and  preservation  to  some  kind  of  fate,  rath¬ 
er  than  to  the  most  powerful  will  of  God  most 
high.  The  ancient  and  primitive  Romans,  there¬ 
fore,  though  their  history  shows  us  that,  like  all 
the  other  nations,  with  the  sole  exception  of  the 
Hebrews,  they  worshipped  false  gods,  and  sacri¬ 
ficed  victims,  not  to  God,  but  to  demons,  have 
nevertheless  this  commendation  bestowed  on 
them  by  their  historian,  that  they  were  “greedy 
of  praise,  prodigal  of  wealth,  desirous  of  great 
glory,  and  content  with  a  moderate  fortune.” 
Glory  they  most  ardently  loved:. for  it  they 
wished  to  live,  for  it  they  did  not  hesitate  to  die. 
Every  other  desire  was  repressed  by  the  strength 
of  their  passion  for  that  one  thing.  At  length 
their  country  itself,  because  it  seemed  inglorious 
to  serve  but  glorious  to  rule  and  to  command, 
they  first  earnestly  desired  to  be  free,  and  then 
to  be  mistress.  Hence  it  was  that,  not  enduring 
the  domination  of  kings,  they  put  the  govern¬ 
ment  into  the  hands  of  two  chiefs,  holding  of¬ 
fice  for  a  year,  who  were  called  consuls,  not 
kings  or  lords.1  But  royal  pomp  seemed  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  administration  of  a  ruler  ( re - 
gentis),  or  the  benevolence  of  one  who  consults 
(that  is,  for  the  public  good)  (consulentis) ,  but 
rather  with  the  haughtiness  of  a  lord  ( dominan - 
tis ).  King  Tarquin,  therefore,  having  been  ban¬ 
ished,  and  the  consular  government  having  been 
instituted,  it  followed,  as  the  same  author  al¬ 
ready  alluded  to  says  in  his  praises  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  that  “the  state  grew  with  amazing  rapid¬ 
ity  after  it  had  obtained  liberty,  so  great  a  de¬ 
sire  of  glory  had  taken  possession  of  it.”  That 
eagerness  for  praise  and  desire  of  glory,  then, 
was  that  which  accomplished  those  many  won¬ 
derful  things,  laudable,  doubtless,  and  glorious 
according  to  human  judgment.  The  same  Sal¬ 
lust  praises  the  great  men  of  his  own  time,  Mar¬ 
cus  Cato  and  Caius  Caesar,  saying  that  for  a 

Augustine  notes  that  the  name  consul  is  derived  from 
considere,  and  thus  signifies  a  more  benign  rule  than  that 
of  a  rex  (from  regere),  or  dominus  (from  dominari). 


217 

long  time  the  republic  had  no  one  great  in  vir¬ 
tue,  but  that  within  his  memory  there  had  been 
these  two  men  of  eminent  virtue,  and  very  dif¬ 
ferent  pursuits.  Now,  among  the  praises  which 
he  pronounces  on  Caesar  he  put  this,  that  he 
wished  for  a  great  empire,  an  army,  and  a  new 
war,  that  he  might  have  a  sphere  where  his  ge¬ 
nius  and  virtue  might  shine  forth.  Thus  it  was 
ever  the  prayer  of  men  of  heroic  character  that 
Bellona  would  excite  miserable  nations  to  war 
and  lash  them  into  agitation  with  her  bloody 
scourge,  so  that  there  might  be  occasion  for  the 
display  of  their  valour.  This,  forsooth,  is  what 
that  desire  of  praise  and  thirst  for  glory  did. 
Wherefore,  by  the  love  of  liberty  in  the  first 
place,  afterwards  also  by  that  of  domination 
and  through  the  desire  of  praise  and  glory,  they 
achieved  many  great  things ;  and  their  most  em¬ 
inent  poet  testifies  to  their  having  been  prompt¬ 
ed  by  all  these  motives: 

P  or  senna  there ,  with  pride  elate, 

Bids  Rome  to  Tarquin  ope  her  gate; 

With  arms  he  hems  the  city  in, 

JEneas’  sons  stand  firm  to  win.2 
At  that  time  it  was  their  greatest  ambition  either 
to  die  bravely  or  to  live  free;  but  when  liberty 
was  obtained,  so  great  a  desire  of  glory  took  pos¬ 
session  of  them,  that  liberty  alone  was  not 
enough  unless  domination  also  should  be  sought, 
their  great  ambition  being  that  which  the  same 
poet  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Jupiter: 

Nay,  Juno’s  self,  whose  wild  alarms 
Set  ocean,  earth,  and  heaven  in  arms, 

Shall  change  for  smiles  her  moody  frown, 
And  vie  with  me  in  zeal  to  crown 
Rome’s  sons,  the  nation  of  the  gown. 

So  stands  my  will.  There  comes  a  day, 
While  Rome’s  great  ages  hold  their  way, 
When  old  Assaracus’s  sons 
Shall  quit  them  on  the  myrmidons, 

O’er  Phthia  and  Mycenae  reign, 

And  humble  Argos  to  their  chain.3 

Which  things,  indeed,  Virgil  makes  Jupiter 
predict  as  future,  whilst,  in  reality,  he  was  only 
himself  passing  in  review  in  his  own  mind  things 
which  were  already  done  and  which  were  beheld 
by  him  as  present  realities.  But  I  have  men¬ 
tioned  them  with  the  intention  of  showing  that, 
next  to  liberty,  the  Romans  so  highly  esteemed 
domination,  that  it  received  a  place  among  those 
things  on  which  they  bestowed  the  greatest 
praise.  Hence  also  it  is  that  that  poet,  prefer¬ 
ring  to  the  arts  of  other  nations  those  arts  which 
peculiarly  belong  to  the  Romans,  namely,  the 
arts  of  ruling  and  commanding,  and  of  subju- 

2Virgil,  Mneid,  bk.  viii.  646.  3Ibid.,  bk.  i.  279. 


218  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


gating  and  vanquishing  nations,  says, 

Others ,  belike ,  with  happier  grace , 

From  bronze  or  stone  shall  call  the  face, 
Plead  doubtful  causes,  map  the  skies, 

And  tell  when  planets  set  or  rise ; 

But  Roman  thou,  do  thou  control 
The  nations  far  and  wide; 

Be  this  thy  genius,  to  impose 

The  rule  of  peace  on  vanquished  foes, 

Show  pity  to  the  humble  soul, 

And  crush  the  sons  of  pride.1 

These  arts  they  exercised  with  the  more  skill  the 
less  they  gave  themselves  up  to  pleasures,  and 
to  enervation  of  body  and  mind  in  coveting  and 
amassing  riches,  and  through  these  corrupting 
morals,  by  extorting  them  from  the  miserable 
citizens  and  lavishing  them  on  base  stage-play¬ 
ers.  Hence  these  men  of  base  character,  who 
abounded  when  Sallust  wrote  and  Virgil  sang 
these  things,  did  not  seek  after  honours  and 
glory  by  these  arts,  but  by  treachery  and  deceit. 
Wherefore  the  same  says,  “But  at  first  it  was 
rather  ambition  than  avarice  that  stirred  the 
minds  of  men,  which  vice,  however,  is  nearer  to 
virtue.  For  glory,  honour,  and  power  are  desired 
alike  by  the  good  man  and  by  the  ignoble ;  but 
the  former,”  he  says,  “strives  onward  to  them 
by  the  true  way,  whilst  the  other,  knowing  noth¬ 
ing  of  the  good  arts,  seeks  them  by  fraud  and 
deceit.”  And  what  is  meant  by  seeking  the  at¬ 
tainment  of  glory,  honour,  and  power  by  good 
arts,  is  to  seek  them  by  virtue,  and  not  by  de¬ 
ceitful  intrigue;  for  the  good  and  the  ignoble 
man  alike  desire  these  things,  but  the  good  man 
strives  to  overtake  them  by  the  true  way.  The 
way  is  virtue,  along  which  he  presses  as  to  the 
goal  of  possession — namely,  to  glory,  honour, 
and  power.  Now  that  this  was  a  sentiment  en¬ 
grained  in  the  Roman  mind,  is  indicated  even 
by  the  temples  of  their  gods;  for  they  built  in 
very  close  proximity  the  temples  of  Virtue  and 
Honor,  worshipping  as  gods  the  gifts  of  God. 
Hence  we  can  understand  what  they  who  were 
good  thought  to  be  the  end  of  virtue,  and  to 
what  they  ultimately  referred  it,  namely,  to  hon¬ 
our;  for,  as  to  the  bad,  they  had  no  virtue 
though  they  desired  honour,  and  strove  to  pos¬ 
sess  it  by  fraud  and  deceit.  Praise  of  a  higher 
kind  is  bestowed  upon  Cato,  for  he  says  of  him, 
“The  less  he  sought  glory,  the  more  it  followed 
him.”  We  say  praise  of  a  higher  kind;  for  the 
glory  with  the  desire  of  which  the  Romans 
burned  is  the  judgment  of  men  thinking  well  of 
men.  And  therefore  virtue  is  better,  which  is 
content  with  no  human  judgment  save  that  of 
lIbid.,  bk.  vi.  847. 


one’s  own  conscience.  Whence  the  apostle  says, 
“For  this  is  our  glory,  the  testimony  of  our  con¬ 
science.”  2  And  in  another  place  he  says,  “But  let 
every  one  prove  his  own  work,  and  then  he  shall 
have  glory  in  himself  and  not  in  another.”3  That 
glory,  honour,  and  power,  therefore,  which  they 
desired  for  themselves,  and  to  which  the  good 
sought  to  attain  by  good  arts,  should  not  be 
sought  after  by  virtue,  but  virtue  by  them.  For 
there  is  no  true  virtue  except  that  which  is  di¬ 
rected  towards  that  end  in  which  is  the  highest 
and  ultimate  good  of  man.  Wherefore  even  the 
honours  which  Cato  sought  he  ought  not  to  have 
sought,  but  the  state  ought  to  have  conferred 
them  on  him  unsolicited,  on  account  of  his  vir¬ 
tues. 

But,  of  the  two  great  Romans  of  that  time, 
Cato  was  he  whose  virtue  was  by  far  the  nearest 
to  the  true  idea  of  virtue.  Wherefore,  let  us  refer 
to  the  opinion  of  Cato  himself,  to  discover  what 
was  the  judgment  he  had  formed  concerning 
the  condition  of  the  state  both  then  and  in  for¬ 
mer  times.  “I  do  not  think,”  he  says,  “that  it 
was  by  arms  that  our  ancestors  made  the  repub¬ 
lic  great  from  being  small.  Had  that  been  the 
case,  the  republic  of  our  day  would  have  been  by 
far  more  flourishing  than  that  of  their  times,  for 
the  number  of  our  allies  and  citizens  is  far  great¬ 
er;  and,  besides,  we  possess  a  far  greater  abun¬ 
dance  of  armour  and  of  horses  than  they  did. 
But  it  was  other  things  than  these  that  made 
them  great,  and  we  have  none  of  them :  industry 
at  home,  just  government  without,  a  mind  free 
in  deliberation,  addicted  neither  to  crime  nor  to 
lust.  Instead  of  these,  we  have  luxury  and  ava¬ 
rice,  poverty  in  the  state,  opulence  among  citi¬ 
zens;  we  laud  riches,  we  follow  laziness;  there 
is  no  difference  made  between  the  good  and  the 
bad;  all  the  rewards  of  virtue  are  got  possession 
of  by  intrigue.  And  no  wonder,  when  every  in¬ 
dividual  consults  only  for  his  own  good,  when 
ye  are  the  slaves  of  pleasure  at  home,  and,  in 
public  affairs,  of  money  and  favour,  no  wonder 
that  an  onslaught  is  made  upon  the  unprotected 
republic.” 

He  who  hears  these  words  of  Cato  or  of  Sal¬ 
lust  probably  thinks  that  such  praise  bestowed 
on  the  ancient  Romans  was  applicable  to  all  of 
them,  or,  at  least,  to  very  many  of  them.  It  is 
not  so ;  otherwise  the  things  which  Cato  himself 
writes,  and  which  I  have  quoted  in  the  second 
book  of  this  work,  would  not  be  true.  In  that 
passage  he  says  that  even  from  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  state  wrongs  were  committed  by  the 
more  powerful,  which  led  to  the  separation  of 
2II  Cor.  1. 12.  3Gal.  6.  4. 


219 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  13 


the  people  from  the  fathers,  besides  which  there 
were  other  internal  dissensions;  and  the  only 
time  at  which  there  existed  a  just  and  moderate 
administration  was  after  the  banishment  of  the 
kings,  and  that  no  longer  than  whilst  they  had 
cause  to  be  afraid  of  Tarquin  and  were  carrying 
on  the  grievous  war  which  had  been  undertaken 
on  his  account  against  Etruria;  but  afterwards 
the  fathers  oppressed  the  people  as  slaves, 
flogged  them  as  the  kings  had  done,  drove  them 
from  their  land,  and,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  oth¬ 
ers,  held  the  government  in  their  own  hands 
alone.  And  to  these  discords,  whilst  the  fathers 
were  wishing  to  rule,  and  the  people  were  unwill¬ 
ing  to  serve,  the  second  Punic  war  put  an  end; 
for  again  great  fear  began  to  press  upon  their 
disquieted  minds,  holding  them  back  from  those 
distractions  by  another  and  greater  anxiety,  and 
bringing  them  back  to  civil  concord.  But  the 
great  things  which  were  then  achieved  were  ac¬ 
complished  through  the  administration  of  a  few 
men,  who  were  good  in  their  own  way.  And  by 
the  wisdom  and  forethought  of  these  few  good 
men,  which  first  enabled  the  republic  to  endure 
these  evils  and  mitigated  them,  it  waxed  greater 
and  greater.  And  this  the  same  historian  affirms, 
when  he  says  that,  reading  and  hearing  of  the 
many  illustrious  achievements  of  the  Roman 
people  in  peace  and  in  war,  by  land  and  by  sea, 
he  wished  to  understand  what  it  was  by  which 
these  great  things  were  specially  sustained.  For 
he  knew  that  very  often  the  Romans  had  with  a 
small  company  contended  with  great  legions  of 
the  enemy;  and  he  knew  also  that  with  small  re¬ 
sources  they  had  carried  on  wars  with  opulent 
kings.  And  he  says  that,  after  having  given  the 
matter  much  consideration,  it  seemed  evident 
to  him  that  the  pre-eminent  virtue  of  a  few  citi¬ 
zens  had  achieved  the  whole,  and  that  that  ex¬ 
plained  how  poverty  overcame  wealth,  and  small 
numbers  great  multitudes.  But,  he  adds,  after 
that  the  state  had  been  corrupted  by  luxury  and 
indolence,  again  the  republic,  by  its  own  great¬ 
ness,  was  able  to  bear  the  vices  of  its  magis¬ 
trates  and  generals.  Wherefore  even  the  praises 
of  Cato  are  only  applicable  to  a  few;  for  only  a 
few  were  possessed  of  that  virtue  which  leads 
men  to  pursue  after  glory,  honour,  and  power 
by  the  true  way — that  is,  by  virtue  itself.  This 
industry  at  home,  of  which  Cato  speaks,  was  the 
consequence  of  a  desire  to  enrich  the  public 
treasury,  even  though  the  result  should  be  pov¬ 
erty  at  home;  and  therefore,  when  he  speaks  of 
the  evil  arising  out  of  the  corruption  of  morals, 
he  reverses  the  expression,  and  says,  “Poverty 
in  the  state,  riches  at  home.” 


Chap.  13.  Concerning  the  love  of  praise,  which , 
though  it  is  a  vice,  is  reckoned  a  virtue,  be¬ 
cause  by  it  greater  vice  is  restrained 

Wherefore,  when  the  kingdoms  of  the  East 
had  been  illustrious  for  a  long  time,  it  pleased 
God  that  there  should  also  arise  a  Western  em¬ 
pire,  which,  though  later  in  time,  should  be  more 
illustrious  in  extent  and  greatness.  And,  in  or¬ 
der  that  it  might  overcome  the  grievous  evils 
which  existed  among  other  nations,  He  purpose¬ 
ly  granted  it  to  such  men  as,  for  the  sake  of  hon¬ 
our,  and  praise,  and  glory,  consulted  well  for 
their  country,  in  whose  glory  they  sought  their 
own,  and  whose  safety  they  did  not  hesitate  to 
prefer  to  their  own,  suppressing  the  desire  of 
wealth  and  many  other  vices  for  this  one  vice, 
namely,  the  love  of  praise.  For  he  has  the  sound¬ 
est  perception  who  recognizes  that  even  the  love 
of  praise  is  a  vice;  nor  has  this  escaped  the  per¬ 
ception  of  the  poet  Horace,  who  says, 

You’re  bloated  by  ambition?  take  advice: 

Yon  book  will  ease  you  if  you  read  it  thrice . 

And  the  same  poet,  in  a  lyric  song,  hath  thus 
spoken  with  the  desire  of  repressing  the  passion 
for  domination : 

Rule  an  ambitious  spirit,  and  thou  hast 
A  wider  kingdom  than  if  thou  shouldst  join 
To  distant  Cades  Lybia,  and  thus 
Shouldst  hold  in  service  either  Carthaginian . 

Nevertheless,  they  who  restrain  baser  lusts, 
not  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  obtained  by 
the  faith  of  piety,  or  by  the  love  of  intelligible 
beauty,  but  by  desire  of  human  praise,  or,  at  all 
events,  restrain  them  better  by  the  love  of  such 
praise,  are  not  indeed  yet  holy,  but  only  less 
base.  Even  Tully  was  not  able  to  conceal  this 
fact :  for,  in  the  same  books  which  he  wrote,  De 
Republica,  when  speaking  concerning  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  a  chief  of  the  state,  who  ought,  he  says, 
to  be  nourished  on  glory,  goes  on  to  say  that 
their  ancestors  did  many  wonderful  and  illustri¬ 
ous  things  through  desire  of  glory.  So  far,  there¬ 
fore,  from  resisting  this  vice,  they  even  thought 
that  it  ought  to  be  excited  and  kindled  up,  sup¬ 
posing  that  that  would  be  beneficial  to  the  re¬ 
public.  But  not  even  in  his  books  on  philosophy 
does  Tully  dissimulate  this  poisonous  opinion, 
for  he  there  avows  it  more  clearly  than  day.  For 
when  he  is  speaking  of  those  studies  which  are  to 
be  pursued  with  a  view  to  the  true  good,  and  not 
with  the  vainglorious  desire  of  human  praise,  he 
introduces  the  following  universal  and  general 
statement: 


220 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Honour  nourishes  the  arts,  and  all  are  stimulated 
to  the  prosecution  of  studies  by  glory;  and  those 
pursuits  are  always  neglected  which  are  generally 
discredited. 

Chap.  14.  Concerning  the  eradication  of  the 
love  of  human  praise ,  because  all  the  glory  of 
the  righteous  is  in  God 

It  is,  therefore,  doubtless  far  better  to  resist 
this  desire  than  to  yield  to  it,  for  the  purer  one 
is  from  this  defilement,  the  liker  is  he  to  God; 
and,  though  this  vice  be  not  thoroughly  eradi¬ 
cated  from  his  heart — for  it  does  not  cease  to 
tempt  even  the  minds  of  those  who  are  making 
good  progress  in  virtue — at  any  rate,  let  the  de¬ 
sire  of  glory  be  surpassed  by  the  love  of  right¬ 
eousness,  so  that,  if  there  be  seen  anywhere  “ly¬ 
ing  neglected  things  which  are  generally  discred¬ 
ited,”  if  they  are  good,  if  they  are  right,  even  the 
love  of  human  praise  may  blush  and  yield  to  the 
love  of  truth.  For  so  hostile  is  this  vice  to  pious 
faith,  if  the  love  of  glory  be  greater  in  the  heart 
than  the  fear  or  love  of  God,  that  the  Lord  said, 
“How  can  ye  believe,  who  look  for  glory  from 
one  another,  and  do  not  seek  the  glory  which  is 
from  God  alone?”1  Also,  concerning  some  who 
had  believed  on  Him,  but  were  afraid  to  confess 
Him  openly,  the  evangelist  says,  “They  loved 
the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God”  ;2 
which  did  not  the  holy  apostles,  who,  when  they 
proclaimed  the  name  of  Christ  in  those  places 
where  it  was  not  only  discredited,  and  therefore 
neglected — according  as  Cicero  says,  “Those 
things  are  always  neglected  which  are  generally 
discredited” — but  was  even  held  in  the  utmost 
detestation,  holding  to  what  they  had  heard 
from  the  Good  Master,  who  was  also  the  physi¬ 
cian  of  minds,  “If  any  one  shall  deny  me  before 
men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  Who 
is  in  heaven,  and  before  the  angels  of  God,”3 
amidst  maledictions  and  reproaches,  and  most 
grievous  persecutions  and  cruel  punishments, 
were  not  deterred  from  the  preaching  of  hu¬ 
man  salvation  by  the  noise  of  human  indigna¬ 
tion.  And  when,  as  they  did  and  spake  divine 
things,  and  lived  divine  lives,  conquering,  as  it 
were,  hard  hearts,  and  introducing  into  them 
the  peace  of  righteousness,  great  glory  followed 
them  in  the  church  of  Christ,  they  did  not  rest 
in  that  as  in  the  end  of  their  virtue,  but,  refer¬ 
ring  that  glory  itself  to  the  glory  of  God,  by 
whose  grace  they  were  what  they  were,  they 
sought  to  kindle,  also  by  that  same  flame,  the 
minds  of  those  for  whose  good  they  consulted, 
to  the  love  of  Him,  by  Whom  they  could  be  made 
\John,  5.  44.  2John,  12.  43.  3Matt.  10.  33. 


to  be  what  they  themselves  were.  For  their  Mas¬ 
ter  had  taught  them  not  to  seek  to  be  good  for 
the  sake  of  human  glory,  saying,  “Take  heed 
that  ye  do  not  your  righteousness  before  men  to 
be  seen  of  them,  or  otherwise  ye  shall  not  have 
a  reward  from  your  Father  Who  is  in  heaven.”4 
But  again,  lest,  understanding  this  wrongly,  they 
should,  through  fear  of  pleasing  men,  be  less 
useful  through  concealing  their  goodness,  show¬ 
ing  for  what  end  they  ought  to  make  it  known. 
He  says,  “Let  your  works  shine  before  men,  that 
they  may  see  your  good  deeds,  and  glorify  your 
Father  Who  is  in  heaven.”5  Not,  observe,  “that 
ye  may  be  seen  by  them,  that  is,  in  order  that 
their  eyes  may  be  directed  upon  you” — for  of 
yourselves  ye  are  nothing — but  “that  they  may 
glorify  your  Father  Who  is  in  heaven,”  by  fixing 
their  regards  on  whom  they  may  become  such 
as  ye  are.  These  the  martyrs  followed,  who  sur¬ 
passed  the  Scaevolas,  and  the  Curtiuses,  and  the 
Deciuses,  both  in  true  virtue,  because  in  true 
piety,  and  also  in  the  greatness  of  their  number. 
But  since  those  Romans  were  in  an  earthly  city 
and  had  before  them,  as  the  end  of  all  the  offices 
undertaken  in  its  behalf,  its  safety,  and  a  king¬ 
dom,  not  in  heaven,  but  in  earth — not  in  the 
sphere  of  eternal  life,  but  in  the  sphere  of  de¬ 
mise  and  succession,  where  the  dead  are  suc¬ 
ceeded  by  the  dying — what  else  but  glory  should 
they  love,  by  which  they  wished  even  after  death 
to  live  in  the  mouths  of  their  admirers? 

Chap.  15.  Concerning  the  temporal  reward 
which  God  granted  to  the  virtues  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans 

Now,  therefore,  with  regard  to  those  to  whom 
God  did  not  purpose  to  give  eternal  life  with 
His  holy  angels  in  His  own  celestial  city,  to  the 
society  of  which  that  true  piety  which  does  not 
render  the  service  of  religion,  which  the  Greeks 
call  \arpeia,  to  any  save  the  true  God  con¬ 
ducts,  if  He  had  also  withheld  from  them  the 
terrestrial  glory  of  that  most  excellent  empire, 
a  reward  would  not  have  been  rendered  to  their 
good  arts — that  is,  their  virtues — by  which  they 
sought  to  attain  so  great  glory.  For  as  to  those 
who  seem  to  do  some  good  that  they  may  re¬ 
ceive  glory  from  men,  the  Lord  also  says,  “Veri¬ 
ly  I  say  unto  you,  they  have  received  their  re¬ 
ward.”6  So  also  these  despised  their  own  private 
affairs  for  the  sake  of  the  republic,  and  for  its 
treasury  resisted  avarice,  consulted  for  the  good 
of  their  country  with  a  spirit  of  freedom,  ad¬ 
dicted  neither  to  what  their  laws  pronounced  to 
be  crime  nor  to  lust.  By  all  these  acts,  as  by  the 
4Matt.  6.  1.  BMatt.  5.  10.  6Matt.  6.  2. 


221 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  14-17 


true  way,  they  pressed  forward  to  honours,  pow¬ 
er,  and  glory;  they  were  honoured  among  al¬ 
most  all  nations;  they  imposed  the  laws  of  their 
empire  upon  many  nations ;  and  at  this  day,  both 
in  literature  and  history,  they  are  glorious 
among  almost  all  nations.  There  is  no  reason 
why  they  should  complain  against  the  justice  of 
the  supreme  and  true  God — “they  have  received 
their  reward.” 

Chap.  16.  Concerning  the  reward  of  the  holy 
citizens  of  the  celestial  city,  to  whom  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  virtues  of  the  Romans  are  useful 
But  the  reward  of  the  saints  is  far  different, 
who  even  here  endured  reproaches  for  that  city 
of  God  which  is  hateful  to  the  lovers  of  this 
world.  That  city  is  eternal.  There  none  are  born, 
for  none  die.  There  is  true  and  full  felicity — not 
a  goddess,  but  a  gift  of  God.  Thence  we  receive 
the  pledge  of  faith,  whilst  on  our  pilgrimage  we 
sigh  for  its  beauty.  There  rises  not  the  sun  on 
the  good  and  the  evil,  but  the  Sun  of  Righteous¬ 
ness  protects  the  good  alone.  There  no  great  in¬ 
dustry  shall  be  expended  to  enrich  the  public 
treasury  by  suffering  privations  at  home,  for 
there  is  the  common  treasury  of  truth.  And, 
therefore,  it  was  not  only  for  the  sake  of  recom¬ 
pensing  the  citizens  of  Rome  that  her  empire 
and  glory  had  been  so  -signally  extended,  but 
also  that  the  citizens  of  that  eternal  city,  during 
their  pilgrimage  here,  might  diligently  and  so¬ 
berly  contemplate  these  examples  and  see  what  a 
love  they  owe  to  the  supernal  country  on  ac¬ 
count  of  life  eternal,  if  the  terrestrial  country 
was  so  much  beloved  by  its  citizens  on  account 
of  human  glory. 

Chap.  17  .To  what  profit  the  Romans  carried  on 
wars,  and  how  much  they  contributed  to  the 
well-being  of  those  whom  they  conquered 
For,  as  far  as  this  life  of  mortals  is  concerned, 
which  is  spent  and  ended  in  a  few  days,  what 
does  it  matter  under  whose  government  a  dying 
man  lives,  if  they  who  govern  do  not  force  him 
to  impiety  and  iniquity?  Did  the  Romans  at  all 
harm  those  nations,  on  whom,  when  subjugated, 
they  imposed  their  laws,  except  in  as  far  as  that 
was  accomplished  with  great  slaughter  in  war? 
Now,  had  it  been  done  with  consent  of  the  na¬ 
tions,  it  would  have  been  done  with  greater  suc¬ 
cess,  but  there  would  have  been  no  glory  of  con¬ 
quest,  for  neither  did  the  Romans  themselves 
live  exempt  from  those  laws  which  they  imposed 
on  others.  Had  this  been  done  without  Mars  and 
Bellona,  so  that  there  should  have  been  no  place 
for  victory,  no  one  conquering  where  no  one  had 


fought,  would  not  the  condition  of  the  Romans 
and  of  the  other  nations  have  been  one  and  the 
same,  especially  if  that  had  been  done  at  once 
which  afterwards  was  done  most  humanely  and 
most  acceptably,  namely,  the  admission  of  all  to 
the  rights  of  Roman  citizens  who  belonged  to 
the  Roman  empire,  and  if  that  had  been  made 
the  privilege  of  all  which  was  formerly  the  privi¬ 
lege  of  a  few,  with  this  one  condition,  that  the 
humbler  class  who  had  no  lands  of  their  own 
should  live  at  the  public  expense — an  alimenta¬ 
ry  impost,  which  would  have  been  paid  with  a 
much  better  grace  by  them  into  the  hands  of 
good  administrators  of  the  republic,  of  which 
they  were  members,  by  their  own  hearty  con¬ 
sent,  than  it  would  have  been  paid  with  had  it  to 
be  extorted  from  them  as  conquered  men?  For  I 
do  not  see  what  it  makes  for  the  safety,  good 
morals,  and  certainly  not  for  the  dignity,  of 
men,  that  some  have  conquered  and  others  have 
been  conquered,  except  that  it  yields  them  that 
most  insane  pomp  of  human  glory,  in  which 
“they  have  received  their  reward”  who  burned 
with  excessive  desire  of  it  and  carried  on  most 
eager  wars.  For  do  not  their  lands  pay  tribute? 
Have  they  any  privilege  of  learning  what  the 
others  are  not  privileged  to  learn?  Are  there 
not  many  senators  in  the  other  countries  who  do 
not  even  know  Rome  by  sight?  Take  away  out¬ 
ward  show,  and  what  are  all  men  after  all  but 
men?  But  even  though  the  perversity  of  the  age 
should  permit  that  all  the  better  men  should  be 
more  highly  honoured  than  others,  neither  thus 
should  human  honour  be  held  at  a  great  price, 
for  it  is  smoke  which  has  no  weight.  But  let  us 
avail  ourselves  even  in  these  things  of  the  kind¬ 
ness  of  God.  Let  us  consider  how  great  things 
they  despised,  how  great  things  they  endured, 
what  lusts  they  subdued  for  the  sake  of  human 
glory,  who  merited  that  glory,  as  it  were,  in  re¬ 
ward  for  such  virtues;  and  let  this  be  useful  to 
us  even  in  suppressing  pride,  so  that,  as  that  city 
in  which  it  has  been  promised  us  to  reign  as  far 
surpasses  this  one  as  heaven  is  distant  from  the 
earth,  as  eternal  life  surpasses  temporal  joy, 
solid  glory  empty  praise,  or  the  society  of  angels 
the  society  of  mortals,  or  the  glory  of  Him  Who 
made  the  sun  and  moon  the  light  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  the  citizens  of  so  great  a  country  may  not 
seem  to  themselves  to  have  done  anything  very 
great,  if,  in  order  to  obtain  it,  they  have  done 
some  good  works  or  endured  some  evils,  when 
those  men  for  this  terrestrial  country  already 
obtained,  did  such  great  things,  suffered  such 
great  things.  And  especially  are  all  these  things 
to  be  considered  because  the  remission  of  sins 


222 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


which  collects  citizens  to  the  celestial  country 
has  something  in  it  to  which  a  shadowy  resem¬ 
blance  is  found  in  the  asylum  of  Romulus, 
whither  escape  from  the  punishment  of  all  man¬ 
ner  of  crimes  congregated  that  multitude  with 
which  the  state  was  to  be  founded. 

Chap,  i 8.  How  far  Christians  ought  to  he  from 
boasting ,  if  they  have  done  anything  for  the 
love  of  the  eternal  country ,  when  the  Romans 
did  such  great  things  for  human  glory  and  a 
terrestrial  city 

What  great  thing,  therefore,  is  it  for  that  eter¬ 
nal  and  celestial  city  to  despise  all  the  charms  of 
this  world,  however  pleasant,  if  for  the  sake  of 
this  terrestrial  city  Brutus  could  even  put  to 
death  his  son — a  sacrifice  which  the  heavenly 
city  compels  no  one  to  make?  But  certainly  it  is 
more  difficult  to  put  to  death  one’s  sons  than  to 
do  what  is  required  to  be  done  for  the  heavenly 
country,  even  to  distribute  to  the  poor  those 
things  which  were  looked  upon  as  things  to  be 
amassed  and  laid  up  for  one’s  children,  or  to  let 
them  go,  if  there  arise  any  temptation  which 
compels  us  to  do  so,  for  the  sake  of  faith  and 
righteousness.  For  it  is  not  earthly  riches  which 
make  us  or  our  sons  happy;  for  they  must  either 
be  lost  by  us  in  our  lifetime,  or  be  possessed 
when  we  are  dead,  by  whom  we  know  not,  or 
perhaps  by  whom  we  would  not.  But  it  is  God 
Who  makes  us  happy,  Who  is  the  true  riches  of 
minds.  But  of  Brutus,  even  the  poet  who  cele¬ 
brates  his  praises  testifies  that  it  was  the  occa¬ 
sion  of  unhappiness  to  him  that  he  slew  his  son, 
for  he  says, 

And  call  his  own  rebellious  seed 
For  menaced  liberty  to  bleed. 

Unhappy  father  l  howsoe’er 
The  deed  be  judged  by  after  days.1 
But  in  the  following  verse  he  consoles  him  in  his 
unhappiness,  saying. 

His  country’s  love  shall  all  o’erbear. 

There  are  those  two  things,  namely,  liberty  and 
the  desire  of  human  praise,  which  compelled  the 
Romans  to  admirable  deeds.  If,  therefore,  for 
the  liberty  of  dying  men  and  for  the  desire  of 
human  praise  which  is  sought  after  by  mortals, 
sons  could  be  put  to  death  by  a  father,  what 
great  thing  is  it,  if,  for  the  true  liberty  which 
has  made  us  free  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and 
death,  and  the  devil — not  through  the  desire  of 
human  praise,  but  through  the  earnest  desire  of 
freeing  men,  not  from  King  Tarquin,  but  from 
demons  and  the  prince  of  the  demons — we 
should,  I  do  not  say  put  to  death  our  sons,  but 
1Virgil,  AEneid,  bk.  vi.  820. 


reckon  among  our  sons  Christ’s  poor  ones?  If, 
also,  another  Roman  chief,  surnamed  Torqua- 
tus,  slew  his  son,  not  because  he  fought  against 
his  country,  but  because,  being  challenged  by  an 
enemy,  he  through  youthful  impetuosity  fought, 
though  for  his  country,  yet  contrary  to  orders 
which  he  his  father  had  given  as  general;  and 
this  he  did,  notwithstanding  that  his  son  was 
victorious,  lest  there  should  be  more  evil  in  the 
example  of  authority  despised  than  good  in  the 
glory  of  slaying  an  enemy;  if,  I  say,  Torquatus 
acted  thus,  wherefore  should  they  boast  them¬ 
selves,  who,  for  the  laws  of  a  celestial  country, 
despise  all  earthly  good  things,  which  are  loved 
far  less  than  sons?  If  Furius  Camillus,  who  was 
condemned  by  those  who  envied  him,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  he  had  thrown  off  from  the  necks 
of  his  countrymen  the  yoke  of  their  most  bitter 
enemies,  the  Veientes,  again  delivered  his  un¬ 
grateful  country  from  the  Gauls,  because  he 
had  no  other  in  which  he  could  have  better  op¬ 
portunities  for  living  a  life  of  glory;  if  Camillus 
did  thus,  why  should  he  be  extolled  as  having 
done  some  great  thing,  who,  having,  it  may  be, 
suffered  in  the  Church  at  the  hands  of  carnal  en¬ 
emies  most  grievous  and  dishonouring  injury, 
has  not  betaken  himself  to  heretical  enemies,  or 
himself  raised  some  heresy  against  her,  but  has 
rather  defended  her,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  from 
the  most  pernicious  perversity  of  heretics,  since 
there  is  not  another  church,  I  say  not  in  which 
one  can  live  a  life  of  glory,  but  in  which  eternal 
life  can  be  obtained?  If  Mucius,  in  order  that 
peace  might  be  made  with  King  Porsenna,  who 
was  pressing  the  Romans  with  a  most  grievous 
war,  when  he  did  not  succeed  in  slaying  Por¬ 
senna,  but  slew  another  by  mistake  for  him, 
reached  forth  his  right  hand  and  laid  it  on  a  red- 
hot  altar,  saying  that  many  such  as  he  saw  him 
to  be  had  conspired  for  his  destruction,  so  that 
Porsenna,  terrified  at  his  daring,  and  at  the 
thought  of  a  conspiracy  of  such  as  he,  without 
any  delay  recalled  all  his  warlike  purposes,  and 
made  peace ;  if,  I  say,  Mucius  did  this,  who  shall 
speak  of  his  meritorious  claims  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  if  for  it  he  may  have  given  to  the 
flames  not  one  hand,  but  even  his  whole  body, 
and  that  not  by  his  own  spontaneous  act,  but  be¬ 
cause  he  was  persecuted  by  another?  If  Curtius, 
spurring  on  his  steed,  threw  himself  all  armed 
into  a  precipitous  gulf,  obeying  the  oracles  of 
their  gods,  which  had  commanded  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  should  throw  into  that  gulf  the  best  thing 
which  they  possessed,  and  they  could  only  un¬ 
derstand  thereby  that,  since  they  excelled  in 
men  and  arms,  the  gods  had  commanded  that 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  18  223 


an  armed  man  should  be  cast  headlong  into  that 
destruction;  if  he  did  this,  shall  we  say  that  that 
man  has  done  a  great  thing  for  the  eternal  city 
who  may  have  died  by  a  like  death,  not,  how¬ 
ever,  precipitating  himself  spontaneously  into  a 
gulf,  but  having  suffered  this  death  at  the  hands 
of  some  enemy  of  his  faith,  more  especially 
when  he  has  received  from  his  Lord,  who  is  also 
King  of  his  country,  a  more  certain  oracle,  “Fear 
not  them  who  kill  the  body,  but  cannot  kill  the 
soul?”  1  If  the  Decii  dedicated  themselves  to 
death,  consecrating  themselves  in  a  form  of 
words,  as  it  were,  that  falling,  and  pacifying  by 
their  blood  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  they  might  be 
the  means  of  delivering  the  Roman  army;  if 
they  did  this,  let  not  the  holy  martyrs  carry 
themselves  proudly,  as  though  they  had  done 
some  meritorious  thing  for  a  share  in  that  coun¬ 
try  where  are  eternal  life  and  felicity,  if  even  to 
the  shedding  of  their  blood,  loving  not  only  the 
brethren  for  whom  it  was  shed,  but,  according  as 
had  been  commanded  them,  even  their  enemies 
by  whom  it  was  being  shed,  they  have  vied  with 
one  another  in  faith  of  love  and  love  of  faith.  If 
Marcus  Pulvillus,  when  engaged  in  dedicating  a 
temple  to  Jupiter,  Juno,  and  Minerva,  received 
with  such  indifference  the  false  intelligence 
which  was  brought  to  him  of  the  death  of  his 
son,  with  the  intention  of  so  agitating  him  that 
he  should  go  away,  and  thus  the  glory  of  dedi¬ 
cating  the  temple  should  fall  to  his  colleague;  if 
he  received  that  intelligence  with  such  indiffer¬ 
ence  that  he  even  ordered  that  his  son  should  be 
cast  out  unburied,  the  love  of  glory  having  over¬ 
come  in  his  heart  the  grief  of  bereavement,  how 
shall  any  one  affirm  that  he  had  done  a  great 
thing  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  by  which 
the  citizens  of  the  heavenly  city  are  delivered 
from  divers  errors  and  gathered  together  from 
divers  wanderings,  to  whom  his  Lord  has  said, 
when  anxious  about  the  burial  of  his  father, 
“Follow  me,  and  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead”?2 
Regulus,  in  order  not  to  break  his  oath,  even 
with  his  most  cruel  enemies,  returned  to  them 
from  Rome  itself,  because  (as  he  is  said  to  have 
replied  to  the  Romans  when  they  wished  to  re¬ 
tain  him)  he  could  not  have  the  dignity  of  an 
honourable  citizen  at  Rome  after  having  been  a 
slave  to  the  Africans,  and  the  Carthaginians  put 
him  to  death  with  the  utmost  tortures,  because 
he  had  spoken  against  them  in  the  senate.  If 
Regulus  acted  thus,  what  tortures  are  not  to  be 
despised  for  the  sake  of  good  faith  toward  that 
country  to  whose  beatitude  faith  itself  leads? 
Or  what  will  a  man  have  rendered  to  the  Lord 
xMatt  10.  28.  2Matt.  8.  22. 


for  all  He  has  bestowed  upon  him,  if.  for  the 
faithfulness  he  owes  to  Him,  he  shall  have  suf¬ 
fered  such  things  as  Regulus  suffered  at  the 
hands  of  his  most  ruthless  enemies  for  the  good 
faith  which  he  owed  to  them?  And  how  shall  a 
Christian  dare  vaunt  himself  of  his  voluntary 
poverty,  which  he  has  chosen  in  order  that  dur¬ 
ing  the  pilgrimage  of  this  life  he  may  walk  the 
more  disencumbered  on  the  way  which  leads  to 
the  country  where  the  true  riches  are,  even  God 
Himself ;  how,  I  say,  shall  he  vaunt  himself  for 
this,  when  he  hears  or  reads  that  Lucius  Valeri¬ 
us,  who  died  when  he  was  holding  the  office  of 
consul,  was  so  poor  that  his  funeral  expenses 
were  paid  with  money  collected  by  the  people? 
— or  when  he  hears  that  Quintius  Cincinnatus, 
who,  possessing  only  four  acres  of  land,  and  cul¬ 
tivating  them  with  his  own  hands,  was  taken 
from  the  plough  to  be  made  dictator — an  office 
more  honourable  even  than  that  of  consul — and 
that,  after  having  won  great  glory  by  conquer¬ 
ing  the  enemy,  he  preferred  notwithstanding  to 
continue  in  his  poverty?  Or  how  shall  he  boast 
of  having  done  a  great  thing,  who  has  not  been 
prevailed  upon  by  the  offer  of  any  reward  of 
this  world  to  renounce  his  connexion  with  that 
heavenly  and  eternal  country,  when  he  hears 
that  Fabricius  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  for¬ 
sake  the  Roman  city  by  the  great  gifts  offered 
to  him  by  Pyrrhus  king  of  the  Epirots,  who 
promised  him  the  fourth  part  of  his  kingdom, 
but  preferred  to  abide  there  in  his  poverty  as  a 
private  individual?  For  if,  when  their  republic — 
that  is,  the  interest  of  the  people,  the  interest  of 
the  country,  the  common  interest — was  most 
prosperous  and  wealthy,  they  themselves  were 
so  poor  in  their  own  houses  that  one  of  them, 
who  had  already  been  twice  a  consul,  was  ex¬ 
pelled  from  that  senate  of  poor  men  by  the  cen¬ 
sor,  because  he  was  discovered  to  possess  ten 
pounds  weight  of  silver-plate — since,  I  say, 
those  very  men  by  whose  triumphs  the  public 
treasury  was  enriched  were  so  poor,  ought  not 
all  Christians,  who  make  common  property  of 
their  riches  with  a  far  nobler  purpose,  even  that 
(according  to  what  is  written  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles)  they  may  distribute  to  each  one  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  need,  and  that  no  one  may  say 
that  anything  is  his  own,  but  that  all  things  may 
be  their  common  possession3 — ought  they  not  to 
understand  that  they  should  not  vaunt  them¬ 
selves,  because  they  do  that  to  obtain  the  society 
of  angels,  when  those  men  did  well-nigh  the 
same  thing  to  preserve  the  glory  of  the  Romans? 

How  could  these,  and  whatever  like  things 

3Acts,  2.  45. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


are  found  in  the  Roman  history,  have  become  so 
widely  known,  and  have  been  proclaimed  by  so 
great  a  fame,  had  not  the  Roman  empire,  ex¬ 
tending  far  and  wide,  been  raised  to  its  greatness 
by  magnificent  successes?  Wherefore,  through 
that  empire,  so  extensive  and  of  so  long  continu¬ 
ance,  so  illustrious  and  glorious  also  through  the 
virtues  of  such  great  men,  the  reward  which 
they  sought  was  rendered  to  their  earnest  aspira¬ 
tions,  and  also  examples  are  set  before  us, 
containing  necessary  admonition,  in  order  that 
we  may  be  stung  with  shame  if  we  shall  see  that 
we  have  not  held  fast  those  virtues  for  the  sake 
of  the  most  glorious  city  of  God,  which  are,  in 
whatever  way,  resembled  by  those  virtues  which 
they  held  fast  for  the  sake  of  the  glory  of  a  ter¬ 
restrial  city,  and  that,  too,  if  we  shall  feel  con¬ 
scious  that  we  have  held  them  fast,  we  may  not 
be  lifted  up  with  pride,  because,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “The  sufferings  of  the  present  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  glory  which  shall 
be  revealed  in  us.”1  But  so  far  as  regards  human 
and  temporal  glory,  the  lives  of  these  ancient 
Romans  were  reckoned  sufficiently  worthy. 
Therefore,  also,  we  see,  in  the  light  of  that  truth 
which,  veiled  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  revealed 
in  the  New,  namely,  that  it  is  not  in  view  of  ter¬ 
restrial  and  temporal  benefits,  which  divine 
providence  grants  promiscuously  to  good  and 
evil,  that  God  is  to  be  worshipped,  but  in  view 
of  eternal  life,  everlasting  gifts,  and  of  the  so¬ 
ciety  of  the  heavenly  city  itself;  in  the  light  of 
this  truth  we  see  that  the  Jews  were  most  right¬ 
eously  given  as  a  trophy  to  the  glory  of  the 
Romans;  for  we  see  that  these  Romans,  who 
rested  on  earthly  glory,  and  sought  to  obtain 
it  by  virtues,  such  as  they  were,  conquered 
those  who,  in  their  great  depravity,  slew  and 
rejected  the  giver  of  true  glory,  and  of  the  eter¬ 
nal  city. 

Chap.  19.  Concerning  the  difference  between 
true  glory  and  the  desire  of  domination 
There  is  assuredly  a  difference  between  the 
desire  of  human  glory  and  the  desire  of  dom¬ 
ination;  for,  though  he  who  has  an  overweening 
delight  in  human  glory  will  be  also  very  prone 
to  aspire  earnestly  after  domination,  neverthe¬ 
less  they  who  desire  the  true  glory  even  of  hu¬ 
man  praise  strive  not  to  displease  those  who 
judge  well  of  them.  For  there  are  many  good 
moral  qualities,  of  which  many  are  competent 
judges,  although  they  are  not  possessed  by 
many;  and  by  those  good  moral  qualities  those 
men  press  on  to  glory,  honour  and  domination, 
1Rom.  8.  18. 


of  whom  Sallust  says,  “But  they  press  on  by  the 
true  way.” 

But  whosoever,  without  possessing  that  de¬ 
sire  of  glory  which  makes  one  fear  to  displease 
those  who  judge  his  conduct,  desires  domina¬ 
tion  and  power,  very  often  seeks  to  obtain  what 
he  loves  by  most  open  crimes.  Therefore  he  who 
desires  glory  presses  on  to  obtain  it  either  by  the 
true  way,  or  certainly  by  deceit  and  artifice, 
wishing  to  appear  good  when  he  is  not.  There¬ 
fore  to  him  who  possesses  virtues  it  is  a  great 
virtue  to  despise  glory;  for  contempt  of  it  is 
seen  by  God,  but  is  not  manifest  to  human 
judgment.  For  whatever  any  one  does  before 
the  eyes  of  men  in  order  to  show  himself  to  be  a 
despiser  of  glory,  if  they  suspect  that  he  is  doing 
it  in  order  to  get  greater  praise — that  is,  greater 
glory — he  has  no  means  of  demonstrating  to  the 
perceptions  of  those  who  suspect  him  that  the 
case  is  really  otherwise  than  they  suspect  it  to 
be.  But  he  who  despises  the  judgment  of  prais- 
ers,  despises  also  the  rashness  of  suspectors. 
Their  salvation,  indeed,  he  does  not  despise,  if 
he  is  truly  good;  for  so  great  is  the  righteous¬ 
ness  of  that  man  who  receives  his  virtues  from 
the  Spirit  of  God  that  he  loves  his  very  enemies, 
and  so  loves  them  that  he  desires  that  his  haters 
and  detractors  may  be  turned  to  righteousness 
and  become  his  associates,  and  that  not  in  an 
earthly  but  in  a  heavenly  country.  But  with  re¬ 
spect  to  his  praisers,  though  he  sets  little  value 
on  their  praise,  he  does  not  set  little  value  on 
their  love;  neither  does  he  elude  their  praise, 
lest  he  should  forfeit  their  love.  And,  therefore, 
he  strives  earnestly  to  have  their  praises  direct¬ 
ed  to  Him  from  Whom  every  one  receives  what¬ 
ever  in  him  is  truly  praiseworthy.  But  he  who  is 
a  despiser  of  glory,  but  is  greedy  of  domination, 
exceeds  the  beasts  in  the  vices  of  cruelty  and 
luxuriousness.  Such,  indeed,  were  certain  of  the 
Romans,  who,  wanting  the  love  of  esteem,  want¬ 
ed  not  the  thirst  for  domination;  and  that  there 
were  many  such,  history  testifies.  But  it  was 
Nero  Caesar  who  was  the  first  to  reach  the  sum¬ 
mit  and,  as  it  were,  the  citadel  of  this  vice;  for 
so  great  was  his  luxuriousness  that  one  would 
have  thought  there  was  nothing  manly  to  be 
dreaded  in  him,  and  such  his  cruelty  that,  had 
not  the  contrary  been  known,  no  one  would  have 
thought  there  was  anything  effeminate  in  his 
character.  Nevertheless  power  and  domination 
are  not  given  even  to  such  men  save  by  the 
providence  of  the  most  high  God,  when  He 
judges  that  the  state  of  human  affairs  is  worthy 
of  such  lords.  The  divine  utterance  is  clear  on 
this  matter;  for  the  Wisdom  of  God  thus 


THE  CITY  OF 

speaks:  “By  me  kings  reign,  and  tyrants  pos¬ 
sess  the  land.”  1  But,  that  it  may  not  be  thought 
that  by  “tyrants”  is  meant,  not  wicked  and  im¬ 
pious  kings,  but  brave  men,  in  accordance  with 
the  ancient  use  of  the  word,  as  when  Virgil  says. 
For  know  that  treaty  may  not  stand 
Where  king  greets  king  and  joins  not  hand,2 

in  another  place  it  is  most  unambiguously  said 
of  God  that  He  “maketh  the  man  who  is  an  hyp¬ 
ocrite  to  reign  on  account  of  the  perversity  of 
the  people.”3  Wherefore,  though  I  have,  accord¬ 
ing  to  my  ability,  shown  for  what  reason  God, 
who  alone  is  true  and  just,  helped  forward  the 
Romans,  who  were  good  according  to  a  certain 
standard  of  an  earthly  state,  to  the  acquirement 
of  the  glory  of  so  great  an  empire,  there  may  be, 
nevertheless,  a  more  hidden  cause,  known  better 
to  God  than  to  us,  depending  on  the  diversity  of 
the  merits  of  the  human  race.  Among  all  who 
are  truly  pious,  it  is  at  all  events  agreed  that  no 
one  without  true  piety — that  is,  true  worship  of 
the  true  God — can  have  true  virtue;  and  that 
it  is  not  true  virtue  which  is  the  slave  of  human 
praise.  Though,  nevertheless,  they  who  are  not 
citizens  of  the  eternal  city,  which  is  called  the 
city  of  God  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  are  more 
useful  to  the  earthly  city  when  they  possess  even 
that  virtue  than  if  they  had  not  even  that.  But 
there  could  be  nothing  mbre  fortunate  for  hu¬ 
man  affairs  than  that,  by  the  mercy  of  God, they 
who  are  endowed  with  true  piety  of  life,  if  they 
have  the  skill  for  ruling  people,  should  also  have 
the  power.  But  such  men,  however  great  virtues 
they  may  possess  in  this  life,  attribute  it  solely 
to  the  grace  of  God  that  He  has  bestowed  it  on 
them — willing,  believing,  seeking.  And,  at  the 
same  time,  they  understand  how  far  they  are 
short  of  that  perfection  of  righteousness  which 
exists  in  the  society  of  those  holy  angels  for 
which  they  are  striving  to  fit  themselves.  But 
however  much  that  virtue  may  be  praised  and 
cried  up,  which  without  true  piety  is  the  slave  of 
human  glory,  it  is  not  at  all  to  be  compared  even 
to  the  feeble  beginnings  of  the  virtue  of  the 
saints,  whose  hope  is  placed  in  the  grace  and 
mercy  of  the  true  God. 

Chap.  20.  That  it  is  as  shameful  for  the  virtues 
to  serve  human  glory  as  bodily  pleasure 
Philosophers — who  place  the  end  of  human 
good  in  virtue  itself,  in  order  to  put  to  shame 
certain  other  philosophers,  who  indeed  approve 
of  the  virtues,  but  measure  them  all  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  end  of  bodily  pleasure  and  think  that 
this  pleasure  is  to  be  sought  for  its  own  sake,  but 
lProv.  8.  15.  2rfineidt  bk.  vii.  266.  3Job,  34.  30. 


GOD  V.  19-20  225 

the  virtues  on  account  of  pleasure — are  wont  to 
paint  a  kind  of  word-picture,  in  which  Pleasure 
sits  like  a  luxurious  queen  on  a  royal  seat  and  all 
the  virtues  are  subjected  to  her  as  slaves,  watch¬ 
ing  her  nod  that  they  may  do  whatever  she  shall 
command.  She  commands  Prudence  to  be  ever 
on  the  watch  to  discover  how  Pleasure  may  rule, 
and  be  safe.  Justice  she  orders  to  grant  what 
benefits  she  can,  in  order  to  secure  those  friend¬ 
ships  which  are  necessary  for  bodily  pleasure; 
to  do  wrong  to  no  one,  lest,  on  account  of  the 
breaking  of  the  laws,  Pleasure  be  not  able  to  live 
in  security.  Fortitude  she  orders  to  keep  her 
mistress,  that  is,  Pleasure,  bravely  in  her  mind, 
if  any  affliction  befall  her  body  which  does  not 
occasion  death,  in  order  that  by  remembrance 
of  former  delights  she  may  mitigate  the  poign¬ 
ancy  of  present  pain.  Temperance  she  com¬ 
mands  to  take  only  a  certain  quantity  even  of 
the  most  favourite  food,  lest,  through  immoder¬ 
ate  use,  anything  prove  hurtful  by  disturbing 
the  health  of  the  body,  and  thus  Pleasure,  which 
the  Epicureans  make  to  consist  chiefly  in  the 
health  of  the  body,  be  grievously  offended.  Thus 
the  virtues, with  the  whole  dignity  of  their  glory, 
will  be  the  slaves  of  Pleasure,  as  of  some  im¬ 
perious  and  disreputable  woman. 

There  is  nothing,  say  our  philosophers,  more 
disgraceful  and  monstrous  than  this  picture,  and 
which  the  eyes  of  good  men  can  less  endure. 
And  they  say  the  truth.  But  I  do  not  think  that 
the  picture  would  be  sufficiently  becoming,  even 
if  it  were  made  so  that  the  virtues  should  be 
represented  as  the  slaves  of  human  glory;  for. 
though  that  glory  be  not  a  luxurious  woman,  it 
is  nevertheless  puffed  up,  and  has  much  vanity 
in  it.  Wherefore  it  is  unworthy  of  the  solidity 
and  firmness  of  the  virtues  to  represent  them  as 
serving  this  glory,  so  that  Prudence  shall  pro¬ 
vide  nothing,  Justice  distribute  nothing,  Tem¬ 
perance  moderate  nothing,  except  to  the  end 
that  men  may  be  pleased  and  vain  glory  served. 
Nor  will  they  be  able  to  defend  themselves  from 
the  charge  of  such  baseness,  whilst  they,  by  way 
of  being  despisers  of  glory,  disregard  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  other  men,  seem  to  themselves  wise, 
and  please  themselves.  For  their  virtue — if,  in¬ 
deed,  it  is  virtue  at  all — is  only  in  another  way 
subjected  to  human  praise;  for  he  who  seeks  to 
please  himself  seeks  still  to  please  man.  But  he 
who,  with  true  piety  towards  God,  whom  he 
loves,  believes,  and  hopes  in,  fixes  his  attention 
more  on  those  things  in  which  he  displeases  him¬ 
self  than  on  those  things,  if  there  are  any  such, 
which  please  himself,  or  rather,  not  himself,  but 
the  truth,  does  not  attribute  that  by  which  he 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


226 

can  now  please  the  truth  to  anything  but  to  the 
mercy  of  Him  Whom  he  has  feared  to  displease, 
giving  thanks  for  what  in  him  is  healed,  and 
pouring  out  prayers  for  the  healing  of  that  which 
is  yet  unhealed. 

Chap.  21.  That  the  Roman  dominion  was  grant¬ 
ed  by  Him  from  Whom  is  all  power ,  and  by 

Whose  providence  all  things  are  ruled 

These  things  being  so,  we  do  not  attribute  the 
power  of  giving  kingdoms  and  empires  to  any 
save  to  the  true  God,  Who  gives  happiness  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  the  pious  alone,  but  gives 
kingly  power  on  earth  both  to  the  pious  and  the 
impious,  as  it  may  please  Him,  Whose  good 
pleasure  is  always  just.  For  though  we  have  said 
something  about  the  principles  which  guide  His 
administration,  in  so  far  as  it  has  seemed  good 
to  Him  to  explain  it,  nevertheless  it  is  too  much 
for  us,  and  far  surpasses  our  strength,  to  discuss 
the  hidden  things  of  men’s  hearts  and  by  a  clear 
examination  to  determine  the  merits  of  various 
kingdoms.  He,  therefore,  Who  is  the  one  Jrue 
God,  Who  never  leaves  the  human  race  without 
just  judgment  and  help,  gave  a  kingdom  to  the 
Romans  when  He  would,  and  as  great  as  He 
would,  as  He  did  also  to  the  Assyrians,  and  even 
the  Persians,  by  whom,  as  their  own  books  testi¬ 
fy,  only  two  gods  are  worshipped,  the  one  good 
and  the  other  evil — to  say  nothing  concerning 
the  Hebrew  people,  of  whom  I  have  already 
spoken  as  much  as  seemed  necessary,  who,  as 
long  as  they  were  a  kingdom,  worshipped  none 
save  the  true  God.  The  same,  therefore,  Who 
gave  to  the  Persians  harvests,  though  they  did 
not  worship  the  goddess  Segetia,  Who  gave  the 
other  blessings  of  the  earth,  though  they  did  not 
worship  the  many  gods  which  the  Romans  sup¬ 
posed  to  preside,  each  one  over  some  particular 
thing,  or  even  many  of  them  over  each  several 
thing,  He,  I  say,  gave  the  Persians  dominion, 
though  they  worshipped  none  of  those  gods  to 
whom  the  Romans  believed  themselves  indebted 
for  the  empire.  And  the  same  is  true  in  respect 
of  men  as  well  as  nations.  He  Who  gave  power 
to  Marius  gave  it  also  to  Caius  Caesar;  He  Who 
gave  it  to  Augustus  gave  it  also  to  Nero;  He 
also  Who  gave  it  to  the  most  benignant  emper¬ 
ors,  the  Vespasians,  father  and  son,  gave  it  also 
to  the  cruel  Domitian ;  and,  finally,  to  avoid  the 
necessity  of  going  over  them  all,  He  Who  gave 
it  to  the  Christian  Constantine  gave  it  also  to 
the  apostate  Julian,  whose  gifted  mind  was  de¬ 
ceived  by  a  sacrilegious  and  detestable  curios¬ 
ity,  stimulated  by  the  love  of  power.  And  it  was 
because  he  was  addicted  through  curiosity  to 


vain  oracles  that,  confident  of  victory,  he  burned 
the  ships  which  were  laden  with  the  provisions 
necessary  for  his  army,  and  therefore,  engaging 
with  hot  zeal  in  rashly  audacious  enterprises,  he 
was  soon  slain,  as  the  just  consequence  of  his 
recklessness,  and  left  his  army  unprovisioned  in 
an  enemy’s  country,  and  in  such  a  predicament 
that  it  never  could  have  escaped,  save  by  alter¬ 
ing  the  boundaries  of  the  Roman  empire,  in  vi¬ 
olation  of  that  omen  of  the  god  Terminus  of 
which  I  spoke  in  the  preceding  book;  for  the 
god  Terminus  yielded  to  necessity,  though  he 
had  not  yielded  to  Jupiter.  Manifestly  these 
things  are  ruled  and  governed  by  the  one  God 
according  as  He  pleases;  and  if  His  motives  are 
hid,  are  they  therefore  unjust? 

Chap.  22.  The  durations  and  issues  of  war  de¬ 
pend  on  the  will  of  God 

Thus  also  the  durations  of  wars  are  deter¬ 
mined  by  Him  as  He  may  see  meet,  according 
to  His  righteous  will,  and  pleasure,  and  mercy, 
to  afflict  or  to  console  the  human  race,  so  that 
they  are  sometimes  of  longer,  sometimes  of 
shorter  duration.  The  war  of  the  Pirates  and  the 
third  Punic  war  were  terminated  with  incredible 
celerity.  Also  the  war  of  the  fugitive  gladiators, 
though  in  it  many  Roman  generals  and  the  con¬ 
suls  were  defeated,  and  Italy  was  terribly 
wasted  and  ravaged,  was  nevertheless  ended  in 
the  third  year,  having  itself  been,  during  its  con¬ 
tinuance,  the  end  of  much.  The  Picentes,  the 
Marsi,  and  the  Peligni,  not  distant  but  Italian 
nations,  after  a  long  and  most  loyal  servitude 
under  the  Roman  yoke,  attempted  to  raise  their 
heads  into  liberty,  though  many  nations  had 
now  been  subjected  to  the  Roman  power,  and 
Carthage  had  been  overthrown.  In  this  Italian 
war  the  Romans  were  very  often  defeated,  and 
two  consuls  perished,  besides  other  noble  sena¬ 
tors;  nevertheless  this  calamity  was  not  pro¬ 
tracted  over  a  long  space  of  time,  for  the  fifth 
year  put  an  end  to  it.  But  the  second  Punic  war, 
lasting  for  the  space  of  eighteen  years,  and  oc¬ 
casioning  the  greatest  disasters  and  calamities 
to  the  republic,  wore  out  and  well-nigh  con¬ 
sumed  the  strength  of  the  Romans;  for  in  two 
battles1  about  seventy  thousand  Romans  fell. 
The  first  Punic  war  was  terminated  after  having 
been  waged  for  three-and-twenty  years.  The 
Mithridatic  war  was  waged  for  forty  years.  And 
that  no  one  may  think  that  in  the  early  and 
much  belauded  times  of  the  Romans  they  were 
far  braver  and  more  able  to  bring  wars  to  a 
speedy  termination,  the  Samnite  war  was  pro- 

lOf  the  Thrasymene  Lake  and  Cannae. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  V.  21-24  227 


tracted  for  nearly  fifty  years;  and  in  this  war 
the  Romans  were  so  beaten  that  they  were  even 
put  under  the  yoke.  But  because  they  did  not 
love  glory  for  the  sake  of  justice,  but  seemed 
rather  to  have  loved  justice  for  the  sake  of 
glory,  they  broke  the  peace  and  the  treaty  which 
had  been  concluded.  These  things  I  mention,  be¬ 
cause  many,  ignorant  of  past  things,  and  some 
also  dissimulating  what  they  know,  if  in  Chris¬ 
tian  times  they  see  any  war  protracted  a  little 
longer  than  they  expected,  straightway  make  a 
fierce  and  insolent  attack  on  our  religion,  ex¬ 
claiming  that,  but  for  it,  the  deities  would  have 
been  supplicated  still,  according  to  ancient  rites; 
and  then,  by  that  bravery  of  the  Romans,  which, 
with  the  help  of  Mars  and  Bellona,  speedily 
brought  to  an  end  such  great  wars,  this  war  also 
would  be  speedily  terminated.  Let  them,  there¬ 
fore,  who  have  read  history  recollect  what  long- 
continued  wars,  having  various  issues  and  en¬ 
tailing  woeful  slaughter,  were  waged  by  the  an¬ 
cient  Romans,  in  accordance  with  the  general 
truth  that  the  earth,  like  the  tempestuous  deep, 
is  subject  to  agitations  from  tempests — tem¬ 
pests  of  such  evils,  in  various  degrees — and  let 
them  sometimes  confess  what  they  do  not  like  to 
own,  and  not,  by  madly  speaking  against  God, 
destroy  themselves  and  deceive  the  ignorant. 

Chap.  23.  Concerning  the  war  in  which  Rada¬ 
gaisus,  king  of  the  Goths,  a  worshipper  of 
demons ,  was  conquered  in  one  day,  with  all 
his  mighty  forces 

Nevertheless  they  do  not  mention  with  thanks¬ 
giving  what  God  has  very  recently,  and  within 
our  own  memory,  wonderfully  and  mercifully 
done,  but  as  far  as  in  them  lies  they  attempt,  if 
possible,  to  bury  it  in  universal  oblivion.  But 
should  we  be  silent  about  these  things,  we  should 
be  in  like  manner  ungrateful.  When  Radagaisus, 
king  of  the  Goths,  having  taken  up  his  position 
very  near  to  the  city,  with  a  vast  and  savage 
army,  ’jvas  already  close  upon  the  Romans,  he 
was  in  one  day  so  speedily  and  so  thoroughly 
beaten  that,  whilst  not  even  one  Roman  was 
wounded  much  less  slain,  far  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  of  his  army  were  prostrated,  and 
he  himself  and  his  sons,  having  been  captured, 
were  forthwith  put  to  death,  suffering  the  pun¬ 
ishment  they  deserved.  For  had  so  impious  a 
man,  with  so  great  and  so  impious  a  host,  en¬ 
tered  the  city,  whom  would  he  have  spared? 
what  tombs  of  the  martyrs  would  he  have  re¬ 
spected?  in  his  treatment  of  what  person  would 
he  have  manifested  the  fear  of  God?  whose 
blood  would  he  have  refrained  from  shedding? 


whose  chastity  would  he  have  wished  to  pre¬ 
serve  inviolate?  But  how  loud  would  they  not 
have  been  in  the  praises  of  their  gods!  How  in¬ 
sultingly  they  would  have  boasted,  saying  that 
Radagaisus  had  conquered,  that  he  had  been 
able  to  achieve  such  great  things,  because  he 
propitiated  and  won  over  the  gods  by  daily  sac¬ 
rifices — a  thing  which  the  Christian  religion  did 
not  allow  the  Romans  to  do!  For  when  he  was 
approaching  to  those  places  where  he  was  over¬ 
whelmed  at  the  nod  of  the  Supreme  Majesty,  as 
his  fame  was  everywhere  increasing,  it  was  be¬ 
ing  told  us  at  Carthage  that  the  pagans  were  be¬ 
lieving,  publishing,  and  boasting,  that  he,  on 
account  of  the  help  and  protection  of  the  gods 
friendly  to  him,  because  of  the  sacrifices  which 
he  was  said  to  be  daily  offering  to  them,  would 
certainly  not  be  conquered  by  those  who  were 
not  performing  such  sacrifices  to  the  Roman 
gods,  and  did  not  even  permit  that  they  should 
be  offered  by  any  one.  And  now  these  wretched 
men  do  not  give  thanks  to  God  for  His  great 
mercy,  Who,  having  determined  to  chastise  the 
corruption  of  men,  which  was  worthy  of  far 
heavier  chastisement  than  the  corruption  of  the 
barbarians,  tempered  His  indignation  with  such 
mildness  as,  in  the  first  instance,  to  cause  that 
the  king  of  the  Goths  should  be  conquered  in  a 
wonderful  manner,  lest  glory  should  accrue  to 
demons,  whom  he  was  known  to  be  supplicating, 
and  thus  the  minds  of  the  weak  should  be  over¬ 
thrown;  and  then,  afterwards,  to  cause  that, 
when  Rome  was  to  be  taken,  it  should  be  taken 
by  those  barbarians  who,  contrary  to  any  cus¬ 
tom  of  all  former  wars,  protected,  through  rev¬ 
erence  for  the  Christian  religion,  those  who  fled 
for  refuge  to  the  sacred  places  and  who  so  op¬ 
posed  the  demons  themselves,  and  the  rites  of 
impious  sacrifices,  that  they  seemed  to  be  car¬ 
rying  on  a  far  more  terrible  war  with  them  than 
with  men.  Thus  did  the  true  Lord  and  Governor 
of  things  both  scourge  the  Romans  mercifully 
and,  by  the  marvellous  defeat  of  the  worship¬ 
pers  of  demons,  show  that  those  sacrifices  were 
not  necessary  even  for  the  safety  of  present 
things;  so  that,  by  those  who  do  not  obstinately 
hold  out,  but  prudently  consider  the  matter,  true 
religion  may  not  be  deserted  on  account  of  the 
urgencies  of  the  present  time,  but  may  be  more 
clung  to  in  most  confident  expectation  of  eter¬ 
nal  life. 

Chap.  24.  What  was  the  happiness  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  emperors ,  and  how  far  it  was  true  happi¬ 
ness 

For  neither  do  we  say  that  certain  Christian 
emperors  were  therefore  happy  because  they 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


228 

ruled  a  long  time,  or,  dying  a  peaceful  death, 
left  their  sons  to  succeed  them  in  the  empire,  or 
subdued  the  enemies  of  the  republic,  or  were 
able  both  to  guard  against  and  to  suppress  the 
attempt  of  hostile  citizens  rising  against  them. 
These  and  other  gifts  or  comforts  of  this  sor¬ 
rowful  life  even  certain  worshippers  of  demons 
have  merited  to  receive,  who  do  not  belong  to 
the  kingdom  of  God  to  which  these  belong;  and 
this  is  to  be  traced  to  the  mercy  of  God,  Who 
would  not  have  those  who  believe  in  Him  desire 
such  things  as  the  highest  good.  But  we  say  that 
they  are  happy  if  they  rule  justly;  if  they  are 
not  lifted  up  amid  the  praises  of  those  who  pay 
them  sublime  honours  and  the  obsequiousness 
of  those  who  salute  them  with  an  excessive  hu¬ 
mility,  but  remember  that  they  are  men;  if  they 
make  their  power  the  handmaid  of  His  majesty 
by  using  it  for  the  greatest  possible  extension  of 
His  worship;  if  they  fear,  love,  worship  God;  if 
more  than  their  own  they  love  that  kingdom  in 
which  they  are  not  afraid  to  have  partners;  if 
they  are  slow  to  punish,  ready  to  pardon ;  if  they 
apply  that  punishment  as  necessary  to  govern¬ 
ment  and  defence  of  the  republic,  and  not  in  or¬ 
der  to  gratify  their  own  enmity;  if  they  grant 
pardon,  not  that  iniquity  may  go  unpunished, 
but  with  the  hope  that  the  transgressor  may 
amend  his  ways;  if  they  compensate  with  the 
lenity  of  mercy  and  the  liberality  of  benevolence 
for  whatever  severity  they  may  be  compelled  to 
decree;  if  their  luxury  is  as  much  restrained  as 
it  might  have  been  unrestrained;  if  they  prefer 
to  govern  depraved  desires  rather  than  any  na¬ 
tion  whatever;  and  if  they  do  all  these  things, 
not  through  ardent  desire  of  empty  glory,  but 
through  love  of  eternal  felicity,  not  neglecting 
to  offer  to  the  true  God,  who  is  their  God,  for 
their  sins,  the  sacrifices  of  humility,  contrition, 
and  prayer.  Such  Christian  emperors,  we  say, 
are  happy  in  the  present  time  by  hope,  and  are 
destined  to  be  so  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  reality 
itself,  when  that  which  we  wait  for  shall  have  ar¬ 
rived. 

Chap.  25.  Concerning  the  prosperity  which  God 
granted  to  the  Christian  Emperor  Constantine 
For  the  good  God,  lest  men,  who  believe  that 
He  is  to  be  worshipped  with  a  view  to  eternal 
life,  should  think  that  no  one  could  attain  to  all 
this  high  estate,  and  to  this  terrestrial  dominion, 
unless  he  should  be  a  worshipper  of  the  demons 
— supposing  that  these  spirits  have  great  power 
with  respect  to  such  things — for  this  reason  He 
gave  to  the  Emperor  Constantine,  who  was  not 
a  worshipper  of  demons,  but  of  the  true  God 


Himself,  such  fullness  of  earthly  gifts  as  no  one 
would  even  dare  wish  for.  To  him  also  He  grant¬ 
ed  the  honour  of  founding  a  city,1  a  companion 
to  the  Roman  empire,  the  daughter,  as  it  were, 
of  Rome  itself,  but  without  any  temple  or  image 
of  the  demons.  He  reigned  for  a  long  period  as 
sole  emperor  and  unaided  held  and  defended  the 
whole  Roman  world.  In  conducting  and  carrying 
on  wars  he  was  most  victorious ;  in  overthrowing 
tyrants  he  was  most  successful.  He  died  at  a 
great  age,  of  sickness  and  old  age,  and  left  his 
sons  to  succeed  him  in  the  empire.2  But  again, 
lest  any  emperor  should  become  a  Christian  in 
order  to  merit  the  happiness  of  Constantine, 
when  every  one  should  be  a  Christian  for  the 
sake  of  eternal  life,  God  took  away  Jovian  far 
sooner  than  Julian,  and  permitted  that  Gratian 
should  be  slain  by  the  sword  of  a  tyrant.  But 
in  his  case  there  was  far  more  mitigation  of  the 
calamity  than  in  the  case  of  the  great  Pompey, 
for  he  could  not  be  avenged  by  Cato,  whom  he 
had  left,  as  it  were,  heir  to  the  civil  war.  But 
Gratian,  though  pious  minds  require  not  such 
consolations,  was  avenged  by  Theodosius,  whom 
he  had  associated  with  himself  in  the  empire, 
though  he  had  a  little  brother  of  his  own,  being 
more  desirous  of  a  faithful  alliance  than  of  ex¬ 
tensive  power. 

Chap.  26.  On  the  faith  and  piety  of  Theodosius 

Augustus 

And  on  this  account,  Theodosius  not  only  pre¬ 
served  during  the  lifetime  of  Gratian  that  fidel¬ 
ity  which  was  due  to  him,  but  also,  after  his 
death,  he,  like  a  true  Christian,  took  his  little 
brother  Valentinianus  under  his  protection,  as 
joint  emperor,  after  he  had  been  expelled  by 
Maximus,  the  murderer  of  his  father.  He  guard¬ 
ed  him  with  paternal  affection,  though  he  might 
without  any  difficulty  have  got  rid  of  him,  being 
entirely  destitute  of  all  resources,  had  he  been 
animated  with  the  desire  of  extensive  empire 
and  not  with  the  ambition  of  being  a  benefactor. 
It  was  therefore  a  far  greater  pleasure  to  him, 
when  he  had  adopted  the  boy  and  preserved  to 
him  his  imperial  dignity,  to  console  him  by  his 
very  humanity  and  kindness.  Afterwards,  when 
that  success  was  rendering  Maximus  terrible, 
Theodosius,  in  the  midst  of  his  perplexing  anxi¬ 
eties,  was  not  drawn  away  to  follow  the  sug¬ 
gestions  of  a  sacrilegious  and  unlawful  curiosity, 
but  sent  to  John,  whose  abode  was  in  the  desert 
of  Egypt — for  he  had  learned  that  this  servant 

Constantinople. 

Constantius,  Constantine,  and  Constans. 


THE  CITY  OF 

of  God  (whose  fame  was  spreading  abroad)  was 
endowed  with  the  gift  of  prophecy — and  from 
him  he  received  assurance  of  victory.  Immedi¬ 
ately  the  slayer  of  the  tyrant  Maximus,  with  the 
deepest  feelings  of  compassion  and  respect,  re¬ 
stored  the  boy  Valentinianus  to  his  share  in  the 
empire  from  which  he  had  been  driven.  Valen¬ 
tinianus  being  soon  after  slain  by  secret  assas¬ 
sination,  or  by  some  other  plot  or  accident,  The¬ 
odosius,  having  again  received  a  response  from 
the  prophet,  and  placing  entire  confidence  in  it, 
marched  against  the  tyrant  Eugenius,  who  had 
been  unlawfully  elected  to  succeed  that  emper¬ 
or,  and  defeated  his  very  powerful  army,  more 
by  prayer  than  by  the  sword.  Some  soldiers  who 
were  at  the  battle  reported  to  me  that  all  the 
missiles  they  were  throwing  were  snatched  from 
their  hands  by  a  vehement  wind,  which  blew 
from  the  direction  of  Theodosius’  army  upon  the 
enemy;  nor  did  it  only  drive  with  greater  veloc¬ 
ity  the  darts  which  were  hurled  against  them, 
but  also  turned  back  upon  their  own  bodies  the 
darts  which  they  themselves  were  throwing.  And 
therefore  the  poet  Claudian,  although  an  alien 
from  the  name  of  Christ,  nevertheless  says  in 
his  praises  of  him,  “0  prince,  too  much  beloved 
by  God,  for  thee  ^olus  pours  armed  tempests 
from  their  caves;  for  thee  the  air  fights,  and  the 
winds  with  one  accord  obey  thy  bugles.”  But  the 
victor,  as  he  had  believed  and  predicted,  over¬ 
threw  the  statues  of  Jupiter,  which  had  been,  as 
it  were,  consecrated  by  I  know  not  what  kind  of 
rites  against  him  and  set  up  in  the  Alps.  And  the 
thunderbolts  of  these  statues,  which  were  made 
of  gold,  he  mirthfully  and  graciously  presented 
to  his  couriers,  who  (as  the  joy  of  the  occasion 
permitted)  were  jocularly  saying  that  they 
would  be  most  happy  to  be  struck  by  such  thun¬ 
derbolts.  The  sons  of  his  own  enemies,  whose 
fathers  had  been  slain  not  so  much  by  his  orders 
as  by  the  vehemence  of  war,  having  fled  for  ref¬ 
uge  to  a  church,  though  they  were  not  yet  Chris¬ 
tians,  he  was  anxious,  taking  advantage  of  the 
occasion,  to  bring  over  to  Christianity,  and 
treated1  them  with  Christian  love.  Nor  did  he  de¬ 
prive  them  of  their  property,  but,  besides  allow¬ 
ing  them  to  retain  it,  bestowed  on  them  addi¬ 
tional  honours.  He  did  not  permit  private  ani¬ 
mosities  to  affect  the  treatment  of  any  man  after 
the  war.  He  was  not  like  Cinna,  and  Marius,  and 
Sulla,  and  other  such  men,  who  wished  not  to 
finish  civil  wars  even  when  they  were  finished, 
but  rather  grieved  that  they  had  arisen  at  all, 
than  wished  that  when  they  were  finished  they 
should  harm  any  one.  Amid  all  these  events, 
from  the  very  commencement  of  his  reign,  he 


GOD  V.  25-26  229 

did  not  cease  to  help  the  troubled  Church  against 
the  impious  by  most  just  and  merciful  laws, 
which  the  heretical  Valens,  favouring  the  Ari- 
ans,  had  vehemently  afflicted.  Indeed,  he  re¬ 
joiced  more  to  be  a  member  of  this  Church  than 
he  did  to  be  a  king  upon  the  earth.  The  idols  of 
the  Gentiles  he  everywhere  ordered  to  be  over¬ 
thrown,  understanding  well  that  not  even  ter¬ 
restrial  gifts  are  placed  in  the  power  of  demons, 
but  in  that  of  the  true  God.  And  what  could  be 
more  admirable  than  his  religious  humility, 
when,  compelled  by  the  urgency  of  certain  of  his 
intimates,  he  avenged  the  grievous  crime  of  the 
Thessalonians,  which  at  the  prayer  of  the  bish¬ 
ops  he  had  promised  to  pardon,  and,  being  laid 
hold  of  by  the  discipline  of  the  Church,  did  pen¬ 
ance  in  such  a  way  that  the  sight  of  his  imperial 
loftiness  prostrated  made  the  people  who  were 
interceding  for  him  weep  more  than  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  offence  had  made  them  fear  it 
when  enraged?  These  and  other  similar  good 
works,  which  it  would  be  long  to  tell,  he  carried 
with  him  from  this  world  of  time,  where  the 
greatest  human  nobility  and  loftiness  are  but  va¬ 
pour.  Of  these  works  the  reward  is  eternal  hap¬ 
piness,  of  which  God  is  the  giver,  though  only  to 
those  who  are  sincerely  pious.  But  all  other 
blessings  and  privileges  of  this  life,  as  the  world 
itself,  light,  air,  earth,  water,  fruits,  and  the  soul 
of  man  himself,  his  body,  senses,  mind,  life,  He 
lavishes  on  good  and  bad  alike.  And  among 
these  blessings  is  also  to  be  reckoned  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  an  empire,  whose  extent  He  regulates 
according  to  the  requirements  of  His  providen¬ 
tial  government  at  various  times.  Whence,  I  see 
we  must  now  answer  those  who,  being  confuted 
and  convicted  by  the  most  manifest  proofs,  by 
which  it  is  shown  that  for  obtaining  these  terres¬ 
trial  things,  which  are  all  the  foolish  desire  to 
have,  that  multitude  of  false  gods  is  of  no  use, 
attempt  to  assert  that  the  gods  are  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  a  view  to  the  interest,  not  of  the 
present  life,  but  of  that  which  is  to  come  after 
death.  For  as  to  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  the 
friendship  of  this  world,  are  willing  to  worship 
vanities  and  do  not  grieve  that  they  are  left  to 
their  puerile  understandings,  I  think  they  have 
been  sufficiently  answered  in  these  five  books; 
of  which  books,  when  I  had  published  the  first 
three,  and  they  had  begun  to  come  into  the 
hands  of  many,  I  heard  that  certain  persons 
were  preparing  against  them  an  answer  of  some 
kind  or  other  in  writing.  Then  it  was  told  me 
that  they  had  already  written  their  answer,  but 
were  waiting  a  time  when  they  could  publish  it 
without  danger.  Such  persons  I  would  advise  not 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  desire  what  cannot  be  of  any  advantage  to 
them;  for  it  is  very  easy  for  a  man  to  seem  to 
himself  to  have  answered  arguments,  when  he 
has  only  been  unwilling  to  be  silent.  For  what  is 
more  loquacious  than  vanity?  And  though  it  be 
able,  if  it  like,  to  shout  more  loudly  than  the 
truth,  it  is  not,  for  all  that,  more  powerful  than 
the  truth.  But  let  men  consider  diligently  all  the 
things  that  we  have  said,  and  if,  perchance, 
judging  without  party  spirit,  they  shall  clearly 
perceive  that  they  are  such  things  as  may  rather 
be  shaken  than  torn  up  by  their  most  impudent 
garrulity,  and,  as  it  were,  satirical  and  mimic 
levity,  let  them  restrain  their  absurdities,  and 
let  them  choose  rather  to  be  corrected  by  the 


wise  than  to  be  lauded  by  the  foolish.  For  if 
they  are  waiting  an  opportunity,  not  for  liberty 
to  speak  the  truth,  but  for  licence  to  revile,  may 
not  that  befall  them  which  Tully  says  concern¬ 
ing  some  one,  “Oh,  wretched  man!  who  was  at 
liberty  to  sin”?  Wherefore,  whoever  he  be  who 
deems  himself  happy  because  of  licence  to  re¬ 
vile.  he  would  be  far  happier  if  that  were  not 
allowed  him  at  all;  for  he  might  all  the  while, 
laying  aside  empty  boast,  be  contradicting  those 
to  whose  views  he  is  opposed  by  way  of  free 
consultation  with  them  and  be  listening,  as  it 
becomes  him,  honourably,  gravely,  candidly,  to 
all  that  can  be  adduced  by  those  whom  he  con¬ 
sults  by  friendly  disputation. 


BOOK  VI 

ARGUMENT.  Hitherto  the  argument  has  been  conducted  against  those 

WHO  BELIEVE  THAT  THE  GODS  ARE  TO  BE  WORSHIPPED  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  TEMPORAL 

advantages;  now  it  is  directed  against  those  who  believe  that  they  are  to 

BE  WORSHIPPED  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  ETERNAL  LIFE.  AUGUSTINE  DEVOTES  THE  FIVE 
FOLLOWING  BOOKS  TO  THE  CONFUTATION  OF  THIS  LATTER  BELIEF,  AND  FIRST  OF  ALL 
SHOWS  HOW  MEAN  AN  OPINION  OF  THE  GODS  WAS  HELD  BY  VARRO  HIMSELF,  THE 
MOST  ESTEEMED  WRITER  ON  HEATHEN  THEOLOGY.  Of  THIS  THEOLOGY  AUGUSTINE 
ADOPTS  VARRO’S  DIVISION  INTO  THREE  KINDS,  MYTHICAL,  NATURAL,  AND  CIVIL;  AND 
AT  ONCE  DEMONSTRATES  THAT  NEITHER  THE  MYTHICAL  NOR  THE  CIVIL  CAN  CON¬ 


TRIBUTE  ANYTHING  TO  THE  HAPPINESS  OF 


Preface 

In  the  five  former  books,  I  think  I  have  suffi¬ 
ciently  disputed  against  those  who  believe  that 
the  many  false  gods,  which  the  Christian  truth 
shows  to  be  useless  images,  or  unclean  spirits 
and  pernicious  demons,  or  certainly  creatures, 
not  the  Creator,  are  to  be  worshipped  for  the 
advantage  of  this  mortal  life,  and  of  terrestrial 
affairs,  with  that  rite  and  service  which  the 
Greeks  call  Xarpeta,  and  which  is  due  to  the 
one  true  God.  And  who  does  not  know  that,  in 
the  face  of  excessive  stupidity  and  obstinacy, 
neither  these  five  nor  any  other  number  of  books 
whatsoever  could  be  enough,  when  it  is  esteemed 
the  glory  of  vanity  to  yield  to  no  amount  of 
strength  on  the  side  of  truth — certainly  to  his 
destruction  over  whom  so  heinous  a  vice  tyran¬ 
nizes?  For,  notwithstanding  all  the  assiduity  of 
the  physician  who  attempts  to  effect  a  cure,  the 
disease  remains  unconquered,  not  through  any 
fault  of  his,  but  because  of  the  incurableness  of 
the  sick  man.  But  those  who  thoroughly  weigh 
the  things  which  they  read,  having  understood 
and  considered  them,  without  any,  or  with  no 
great  and  excessive  degree  of  that  obstinacy 


THE  FUTURE  LIFE. 

which  belongs  to  a  long-cherished  error,  will 
more  readily  judge  that,  in  the  five  books  al¬ 
ready  finished,  we  have  done  more  than  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  the  question  demanded,  than  that  we 
have  given  it  less  discussion  than  it  required. 
And  they  cannot  have  doubted  but  that  all  the 
hatred  which  the  ignorant  attempt  to  bring  up¬ 
on  the  Christian  religion  on  account  of  the  dis¬ 
asters  of  this  life,  and  the  destruction  and 
change  which  befall  terrestrial  things,  whilst  the 
learned  do  not  merely  dissimulate,  but  encour¬ 
age  that  hatred,  contrary  to  their  own  con¬ 
sciences,  being  possessed  by  a  mad  impiety; 
they  cannot  have  doubted,  I  say,  but  that  this 
hatred  is  devoid  of  right  reflection  and  reason, 
and  full  of  most  light  temerity,  and  most  perni¬ 
cious  animosity. 

Chap.  i.  Of  those  who  maintain  that  they  wor¬ 
ship  the  gods  not  for  the  sake  of  temporal  hut 
eternal  advantages 

Now,  as,  in  the  next  place  (as  the  promised 
order  demands),  those  are  to  be  refuted  and 
taught  who  contend  that  the  gods  of  the  nations, 
which  the  Christian  truth  destroys,  are  to  be 
worshipped  not  on  account  of  this  life,  but  on 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  i  231 


account  of  that  which  is  to  be  after  death,  I 
shall  do  well  to  commence  my  disputation  with 
the  truthful  oracle  of  the  holy  psalm,  “Blessed 
is  the  man  whose  hope  is  the  Lord  God,  and 
who  respecteth  not  vanities  and  lying  follies.”1 
Nevertheless,  in  all  vanities  and  lying  follies  the 
philosophers  are  to  be  listened  to  with  far  more 
toleration,  who  have  repudiated  those  opinions 
and  errors  of  the  people ;  for  the  people  set  up 
images  to  the  deities,  and  either  feigned  con¬ 
cerning  those  whom  they  call  immortal  gods 
many  false  and  unworthy  things,  or  believed 
them,  already  feigned,  and,  when  believed, 
mixed  them  up  with  their  worship  and  sacred 
rites. 

With  those  men  who,  though  not  by  free 
avowal  of  their  convictions,  do  still  testify  that 
they  disapprove  of  those  things  by  their  mutter¬ 
ing  disapprobation  during  disputations  on  the 
subject,  it  may  not  be  very  far  amiss  to  discuss 
the  following  question:  Whether,  for  the  sake 
of  the  life  "which  is  to  be  after  death,  we  ought 
to  worship,  not  the  one  God,  Who  made  all  crea¬ 
tures  spiritual  and  corporeal,  but  those  many 
gods  who,  as  some  of  these  philosophers  hold, 
were  made  by  that  one  God,  and  placed  by  Him 
in  their  respective  sublime  spheres,  and  are 
therefore  considered  more  excellent  and  more 
noble  than  all  the  others?2  But  who  will  assert 
that  it  must  be  affirmed  and  contended  that 
those  gods,  certain  of  whom  I  have  mentioned 
in  the  fourth  book,3  to  whom  are  distributed, 
each  to  each,  the  charges  of  minute  things,  do 
bestow  eternal  life?  But  will  those  most  skilled 
and  most  acute  men,  who  glory  in  having  writ¬ 
ten  for  the  great  benefit  of  men,  to  teach  on 
what  account  each  god  is  to  be  worshipped,  and 
what  is  to  be  sought  from  each,  lest  with  most 
disgraceful  absurdity,  such  as  a  mimic  is  wont 
for  the  sake  of  merriment  to  exhibit,  water 
should  be  sought  from  Liber,  wine  from  the 
Lymphs — will  those  men  indeed  affirm  to  any 
man  supplicating  the  immortal  gods,  that  when 
he  shall  have  asked  wine  from  the  Lymphs,  and 
they  shall  have  answered  him,  “We  have  water, 
seek  wine  from  Liber,”  he  may  rightly  say,  “If 
ye  have  not  wine,  at  least  give  me  eternal  life”? 
What  more  monstrous  than  this  absurdity?  Will 
not  these  Lymphs — for  they  are  wont  to  be  very 
easily  made  laugh4 — laughing  loudly  (if  they  do 
not  attempt  to  deceive  like  demons),  answer  the 
suppliant,  “0  man,  dost  thou  think  that  we  have 
life  ( vitam )  in  our  power,  who  thou  hearest 
have  not  even  the  vine  ( vitem )  ?”  It  is  therefore 

lPs.  40.  4.  2Plato,  in  the  Timceus. 

3Chaps.  11  and  21.  4See  Virgil,  Eclogues ,  nr.  9. 


most  impudent  folly  to  seek  and  hope  for  eter¬ 
nal  life  from  such  gods  as  are  asserted  so  to  pre¬ 
side  over  the  separate  minute  concernments  of 
this  most  sorrowful  and  short  life,  and  whatever 
is  useful  for  supporting  and  propping  it,  as  that 
if  anything  which  is  under  the  care  and  power 
of  one  be  sought  from  another,  it  is  so  incongru¬ 
ous  and  absurd  that  it  appears  very  like  to  mimic 
drollery — which,  when  it  is  done  by  mimics 
knowing  what  they  are  doing,  is  deservedly 
laughed  at  in  the  theatre,  but  when  it  is  done  by 
foolish  persons,  who  do  not  know  better,  is  more 
deservedly  ridiculed  in  the  world.  Wherefore,  as 
concerns  those  gods  which  the  states  have  es¬ 
tablished,  it  has  been  cleverly  invented  and 
handed  down  to  memory  by  learned  men,  what 
god  or  goddess  is  to  be  supplicated  in  relation  to 
every  particular  thing — what,  for  instance,  is  to 
be  sought  from  Liber,  what  from  the  Lymphs, 
what  from  Vulcan,  and  so  of  all  the  rest,  some 
of  whom  I  have  mentioned  in  the  fourth  book, 
and  some  I  have  thought  right  to  omit.  Further, 
if  it  is  an  error  to  seek  wine  from  Ceres,  bread 
from  Liber,  water  from  Vulcan,  fire  from  the 
Lymphs,  how  much  greater  absurdity  ought  it 
to  be  thought,  if  supplication  be  made  to  any 
one  of  these  for  eternal  life? 

Wherefore,  if,  when  we  were  inquiring  what 
gods  or  goddesses  are  to  be  believed  to  be  able 
to  confer  earthly  kingdoms  upon  men,  all  things 
having  been  discussed,  it  was  shown  to  be  very 
far  from  the  truth  to  think  that  even  terrestrial 
kingdoms  are  established  by  any  of  those  many 
false  deities,  is  it  not  most  insane  impiety  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  eternal  life,  which  is,  without  any 
doubt  or  comparison,  to  be  preferred  to  all  ter¬ 
restrial  kingdoms,  can  be  given  to  any  one  by 
any  of  these  gods?  For  the  reason  why  such  gods 
seemed  to  us  not  to  be  able  to  give  even  an 
earthly  kingdom,  was  not  because  they  are  very 
great  and  exalted,  whilst  that  is  something  small 
and  abject,  which  they,  in  their  so  great  sub¬ 
limity,  would  not  condescend  to  care  for,  but 
because,  however  deservedly  any  one  may,  in 
consideration  of  human  frailty,  despise  the  fall¬ 
ing  pinnacles  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  these  gods 
have  presented  such  an  appearance  as  to  seem 
most  unworthy  to  have  the  granting  and  pre¬ 
serving  of  even  those  entrusted  to  them;  and 
consequently,  if  (as  we  have  taught  in  the  two 
last  books  of  our  work,  where  this  matter  is 
treated  of)  no  god  out  of  all  that  crowd,  either 
belonging  to,  as  it  were,  the  plebeian  or  to  the 
noble  gods,  is  fit  to  give  mortal  kingdoms  to 
mortals,  how  much  less  is  he  able  to  make  im¬ 
mortals  of  mortals? 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


And  more  than  this,  if,  according  to  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  those  with  whom  we  are  now  arguing,  the 
gods  are  to  be  worshipped,  not  on  account  of  the 
present  life,  but  of  that  which  is  to  be  after 
death,  then,  certainly,  they  are  not  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  on  account  of  those  particular  things 
which  are  distributed  and  portioned  out  (not  by 
any  law  of  rational  truth,  but  by  mere  vain  con¬ 
jecture)  to  the  power  of  such  gods,  as  they  be¬ 
lieve  they  ought  to  be  worshipped,  who  contend 
that  their  worship  is  necessary  for  all  the  desir¬ 
able  things  of  this  mortal  life,  against  whom  I 
have  disputed  sufficiently,  as  far  I  was  able,  in 
the  five  preceding  books.  These  things  being  so, 
if  the  age  itself  of  those  who  worshipped  the 
goddess  Juventas  should  be  characterized  by  re¬ 
markable  vigour,  whilst  her  despisers  should 
either  die  within  the  years  of  youth,  or  should, 
during  that  period,  grow  cold  as  with  the  torpor 
of  old  age;  if  bearded  Fortuna  should  cover  the 
cheeks  of  her  worshippers  more  handsomely  and 
more  gracefully  than  all  others,  whilst  we  should 
see  those  by  whom  she  was  despised  either  alto¬ 
gether  beardless  or  ill-bearded;  even  then* we 
should  most  rightly  say  that  thus  far  these  sev¬ 
eral  gods  had  power,  limited  in  some  way  by 
their  functions,  and  that,  consequently,  neither 
ought  eternal  life  to  be  sought  from  Juventas, 
who  could  not  give  a  beard,  nor  ought  any  good 
thing  after  this  life  to  be  expected  from  Fortuna 
Barbata,  who  has  no  power  even  in  this  life  to 
give  the  age  itself  at  which  the  beard  grows.  But 
now,  when  their  worship  is  necessary  not  even 
on  account  of  those  very  things  which  they  think 
are  subjected  to  their  power — for  many  wor¬ 
shippers  of  the  goddess  Juventas  have  not  been 
at  all  vigorous  at  that  age,  and  many  who  do  not 
worship  her  rejoice  in  youthful  strength;  and 
also  many  suppliants  of  Fortuna  Barbata  have 
either  not  been  able  to  attain  to  any  beard  at  all, 
not  even  an  ugly  one,  although  they  who  adore 
her  in  order  to  obtain  a  beard  are  ridiculed  by 
her  bearded  despisers — is  the  human  heart  really 
so  foolish  as  to  believe  that  that  worship  of  the 
gods,  which  it  acknowledges  to  be  vain  and  ridic¬ 
ulous  with  respect  to  those  very  temporal  and 
swiftly  passing  gifts,  over  each  of  which  one  of 
these  gods  is  said  to  preside,  is  fruitful  in  results 
with  respect  to  eternal  life?  And  that  they  are 
able  to  give  eternal  life  has  not  been  affirmed 
even  by  those  who,  that  they  might  be  wor¬ 
shipped  by  the  silly  populace,  distributed  in 
minute  division  among  them  these  temporal  oc¬ 
cupations,  that  none  of  them  might  sit  idle;  for 
they  had  supposed  the  existence  of  an  exceed¬ 
ingly  great  number. 


Chap.  2.  What  we  are  to  believe  that  Varro 
thought  concerning  the  gods  of  the  nations , 
whose  various  kinds  and  sacred  rites  he  has 
shown  to  be  such  that  he  would  have  acted 
more  reverently  towards  them  had  he  been 
altogether  silent  concerning  them 

Who  has  investigated  those  things  more  care¬ 
fully  than  Marcus  Varro?  Who  has  discovered 
them  more  learnedly?  Who  has  considered  them 
more  attentively?  Who  has  distinguished  them 
more  acutely?  Who  has  written  about  them 
more  diligently  and  more  fully? — who,  though 
he  is  less  pleasing  in  his  eloquence,  is  neverthe¬ 
less  so  full  of  instruction  and  wisdom,  that  in  all 
the  erudition  which  we  call  secular,  but  they 
liberal,  he  will  teach  the  student  of  things  as 
much  as  Cicero  delights  the  student  of  words. 
And  even  Tully  himself  renders  him  such  testi¬ 
mony,  as  to  say  in  his  Academic  books  that  he 
had  held  that  disputation  which  is  there  carried 
on  with  Marcus  Varro,  “a  man,”  he  adds,  “un¬ 
questionably  the  acutest  of  all  men.  and,  with¬ 
out  any  doubt,  the  most  learned.”  He  does  not 
say  the  most  eloquent  or  the  most  fluent,  for  in 
reality  he  was  very  deficient  in  this  faculty,  but  he 
says,  “of  all  men  the  most  acute.”  And  in  those 
books — that  is,  the  Academic — where  he  con¬ 
tends  that  all  things  are  to  be  doubted,  he  adds 
of  him,  “without  any  doubt  the  most  learned.” 
In  truth,  he  was  so  certain  concerning  this  thing, 
that  he  laid  aside  that  doubt  which  he  is  wont  to 
have  recourse  to  in  all  things,  as  if,  when  about 
to  dispute  in  favour  of  the  doubt  of  the  Academ¬ 
ics,  he  had.  with  respect  to  this  one  thing,  for¬ 
gotten  that  he  was  an  Academic.  But  in  the  first 
book,  when  he  extols  the  literary  works  of  the 
same  Varro,  he  says,  “Us  straying  and  wander¬ 
ing  in  our  own  city  like  strangers,  thy  books,  as 
it  were,  brought  home  that  at  length  we  might 
come  to  know  of  who  we  were  and  where  we 
were.  Thou  has  opened  up  to  us  the  age  of  the 
country,  the  distribution  of  seasons,  the  laws  of 
sacred  things,  and  of  the  priests;  thou  hast 
opened  up  to  us  domestic  and  public  discipline; 
thou  hast  pointed  out  to  us  the  proper  places  for 
religious  ceremonies,  and  hast  informed  us  con¬ 
cerning  sacred  places.  Thou  hast  shown  us  the 
names,  kinds,  offices,  causes  of  all  divine  and 
human  things.” 

This  man,  then,  of  so  distinguished  and  excel¬ 
lent  acquirements,  and,  as  Terentian  briefly  says 
of  him  in  a  most  elegant  verse, 

Varro,  a  man  universally  informed 
who  read  so  much  that  we  wonder  when  he  had 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  2-4  233 


time  to  write,  wrote  so  much  that  we  can  scarce¬ 
ly  believe  any  one  could  have  read  it  all — this 
man,  I  say,  so  great  in  talent,  so  great  in  learn¬ 
ing,  had  he  been  an  opposer  and  destroyer 
of  the  so-called  divine  things  of  which  he  wrote 
and  had  he  said  that  they  pertained  to  supersti¬ 
tion  rather  than  to  religion,  might  perhaps,  even 
in  that  case,  not  have  written  so  many  things 
which  are  ridiculous,  contemptible,  detestable. 
But  when  he  so  worshipped  these  same  gods  and 
so  vindicated  their  worship  as  to  say.  in  that 
same  literary  work  of  his,  that  he  wras  afraid  lest 
they  should  perish,  not  by  an  assault  by  enemies, 
but  by  the  negligence  of  the  citizens,  and  that 
from  this  ignominy  they  are  being  delivered  by 
him,  and  are  being  laid  up  and  preserved  in  the 
memory  of  the  good  by  means  of  such  books, 
with  a  zeal  far  more  beneficial  than  that  through 
which  Metellus  is  declared  to  have  rescued  the 
sacred  things  of  Vesta  from  the  flames,  and 
iEneas  to  have  rescued  the  Penates  from  the 
burning  of  Troy;  and  when  he,  nevertheless, 
gives  forth  such  things  to  be  read  by  succeeding 
ages  as  are  deservedly  judged  by  wise  and  un¬ 
wise  to  be  unfit  to  be  read  and  to  be  most  hostile 
to  the  truth  of  religion,  what  ought  we  to  think 
but  that  a  most  acute  and  learned  man — not, 
however,  made  free  by  the  Holy  Spirit — was 
overpowered  by  the  custom  and  laws  of  his  state 
and,  not  being  able  to  be  silent  about  those 
things  by  which  he  was  influenced,  spoke  of 
them  under  pretence  of  commending  religion? 

Chap.  3.  Varro's  distribution  of  his  book  which 
he  composed  concerning  the  antiquities  of 
human  and  divine  things 
He  wrote  forty-one  books  of  antiquities. 
These  he  divided  into  human  and  divine  things. 
Twenty-five  he  devoted  to  human  things,  six¬ 
teen  to  divine  things ;  following  this  plan  in  that 
division — namely,  to  give  six  books  to  each  of 
the  four  divisions  of  human  things.  For  he  di¬ 
rects  his  attention  to  these  considerations :  who 
perform,  wiiere  they  perform,  when  they  per¬ 
form,  what  they  perform.  Therefore  in  the  first 
six  books  he  wrote  concerning  men ;  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  six,  concerning  places ;  in  the  third  six,  con¬ 
cerning  times;  in  the  fourth  and  last  six,  con¬ 
cerning  things.  Four  times  six,  however,  make 
only  twenty-four.  But  he  placed  at  the  head  of 
them  one  separate  work,  which  spoke  of  all  these 
things  conjointly. 

In  divine  things,  the  same  order  he  preserved 
throughout,  as  far  as  concerns  those  things 
which  are  performed  to  the  gods.  For  sacred 
things  are  performed  by  men  in  places  and 


times.  These  four  things  I  have  mentioned  he 
embraced  in  twelve  books,  allotting  three  to 
each.  For  he  wrote  the  first  three  concerning 
men.  the  following  three  concerning  places,  the 
third  three  concerning  times,  and  the  fourth 
three  concerning  sacred  rites — showing  who 
should  perform,  where  they  should  perform, 
when  they  should  perform,  what  they  should 
perform,  with  most  subtle  distinction.  But  be¬ 
cause  it  was  necessary  to  say — and  that  espe¬ 
cially  was  expected — to  whom  they  should  per¬ 
form  sacred  rites,  he  wrote  concerning  the  gods 
themselves  the  last  three  books ;  and  these  five 
times  three  made  fifteen.  But  they  are  in  all,  as 
we  have  said,  sixteen.  For  he  put  also  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  these  one  distinct  book,  speaking  by 
way  of  introduction  of  all  which  follows;  which 
being  finished,  he  proceeded  to  subdivide  the 
first  three  in  that  five-fold  distribution  which 
pertain  to  men,  making  the  first  concerning  high 
priests,  the  second  concerning  augurs,  the  third 
concerning  the  fifteen  men  presiding  over  the 
sacred  ceremonies.  The  second  three  he  made 
concerning  places,  speaking  in  one  of  them  con¬ 
cerning  their  chapels,  in  the  second  concern¬ 
ing  their  temples,  and  in  the  third  concern¬ 
ing  religious  places.  The  next  three  which  follow 
these  and  pertain  to  times — that  is,  to  festival 
days — he  distributed  so  as  to  make  one  concern¬ 
ing  holidays,  the  other  concerning  the  circus 
games,  and  the  third  concerning  scenic  plays. 
Of  the  fourth  three,  pertaining  to  sacred  things, 
he  devoted  one  to  consecrations,  another  to  pri¬ 
vate,  the  last  to  public,  sacred  rites.  In  the  three 
which  remain,  the  gods  themselves  follow  this 
pompous  train,  as  it  were,  for  whom  all  this  cul¬ 
ture  has  been  expended.  In  the  first  book  are  the 
certain  gods,  in  the  second  the  uncertain,  in  the 
third,  and  last  of  all,  the  chief  and  select  gods. 

Chap.  4.  That  from  the  disputation  of  Varro,  it 
follows  that  the  worshippers  of  the  gods  re¬ 
gard  human  things  as  more  ancient  than  di¬ 
vine  things 

In  this  whole  series  of  most  beautiful  and 
most  subtle  distributions  and  distinctions,  it  will 
most  easily  appear  evident  from  the  things  we 
have  said  already  and  from  what  is  to  be  said 
hereafter,  to  any  man  who  is  not,  in  the  obsti¬ 
nacy  of  his  heart,  an  enemy  to  himself,  that  it  is 
vain  to  seek  and  to  hope  for  and  even  most  im¬ 
pudent  to  wish  for  eternal  life.  For  these  insti¬ 
tutions  are  either  the  work  of  men  or  of  demons 
— not  of  those  whom  they  call  good  demons, 
but,  to  speak  more  plainly,  of  unclean,  and. 
without  controversy,  malign  spirits,  who  with 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


wonderful  slyness  and  secretness  suggest  to  the 
thoughts  of  the  impious,  and  sometimes  openly 
present  to  their  understandings,  noxious  opin¬ 
ions,  by  which  the  human  mind  grows  more  and 
more  foolish,  and  becomes  unable  to  adapt  itself 
to  and  abide  in  the  immutable  and  eternal  truth, 
and  seek  to  confirm  these  opinions  by  every 
kind  of  fallacious  attestation  in  their  power. 
This  very  same  Varro  testifies  that  he  wrote  first 
concerning  human  things,  but  afterwards  con¬ 
cerning  divine  things,  because  the  states  existed 
first,  and  afterward  these  things  were  instituted 
by  them.  But  the  true  religion  was  not  instituted 
by  any  earthly  state,  but  plainly  it  established 
the  celestial  city.  It,  however,  is  inspired  and 
taught  by  the  true  God,  the  giver  of  eternal  life 
to  His  true  worshippers. 

The  following  is  the  reason  Varro  gives  when 
he  confesses  that  he  had  written  first  concern¬ 
ing  human  things  and  afterwards  of  divine 
things,  because  these  divine  things  were  insti¬ 
tuted  by  men:  “As  the  painter  is  before  the 
painted  tablet,  the  mason  before  the  edifice,  so 
states  are  before  those  things  which  are  insti¬ 
tuted  by  states.”  But  he  says  that  he  would  have 
written  first  concerning  the  gods,  afterwards 
concerning  men,  if  he  had  been  writing  concern¬ 
ing  the  whole  nature  of  the  gods — as  if  he  were 
really  writing  concerning  some  portion  of,  and 
not  all,  the  nature  of  the  gods;  or  as  if,  indeed, 
some  portion  of,  though  not  all,  the  nature  of 
the  gods  ought  not  to  be  put  before  that  of  men. 
How,  then,  comes  it  that  in  those  three  last 
books,  when  he  is  diligently  explaining  the  cer¬ 
tain,  uncertain  and  select  gods,  he  seems  to  pass 
over  no  portion  of  the  nature  of  the  gods?  Why, 
then,  does  he  say,  “If  we  had  been  writing  on 
the  whole  nature  of  the  gods,  we  would  first  have 
finished  the  divine  things  before  we  touched  the 
human”?  For  he  either  writes  concerning  the 
whole  nature  of  the  gods,  or  concerning  some 
portion  of  it,  or  concerning  no  part  of  it  at  all. 
If  concerning  it  all,  it  is  certainly  to  be  put  be¬ 
fore  human  things;  if  concerning  some  part  of 
it,  why  should  it  not,  from  the  very  nature  of 
the  case,  precede  human  things?  Is  not  even 
some  part  of  the  gods  to  be  preferred  to  the 
whole  of  humanity?  But  if  it  is  too  much  to  pre¬ 
fer  a  part  of  the  divine  to  all  human  things,  that 
part  is  certainly  worthy  to  be  preferred  to  the 
Romans  at  least.  For  he  writes  the  books  con¬ 
cerning  human  things,  not  with  reference  to  the 
whole  world,  but  only  to  Rome ;  which  books  he 
says  he  had  properly  placed,  in  the  order  of 
writing,  before  the  books  on  divine  things,  like 
a  painter  before  the  painted  tablet,  or  a  mason 


before  the  building,  most  openly  confessing  that, 
as  a  picture  or  a  structure,  even  these  divine 
things  were  instituted  by  men.  There  remains 
only  the  third  supposition,  that  he  is  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  to  have  written  concerning  no  divine 
nature,  but  that  he  did  not  wish  to  say  this  open¬ 
ly,  but  left  it  to  the  intelligent  to  infer ;  for  when 
one  says  “not  all,”  usage  understands  that  to 
mean  “some,”  but  it  may  be  understood  as 
meaning  none,  because  that  which  is  none  is 
neither  all  nor  some.  In  fact,  as  he  himself  says, 
if  he  had  been  writing  concerning  all  the  nature 
of  the  gods,  its  due  place  would  have  been  be¬ 
fore  human  things  in  the  order  of  writing.  But, 
as  the  truth  declares,  even  though  Varro  is  si¬ 
lent,  the  divine  nature  should  have  taken  pre¬ 
cedence  of  Roman  things,  though  it  were  not 
all,  but  only  some.  But  it  is  properly  put  after, 
therefore  it  is  none.  His  arrangement,  therefore, 
was  due,  not  to  a  desire  to  give  human  things 
priority  to  divine  things,  but  to  his  unwilling¬ 
ness  to  prefer  false  things  to  true.  For  in  what 
he  wrote  on  human  things,  he  followed  the  his¬ 
tory  of  affairs;  but  in  what  he  wrote  concerning 
those  things  which  they  call  divine,  what  else 
did  he  follow  but  mere  conjectures  about  vain 
things?  This,  doubtless,  is  what,  in  a  subtle 
manner,  he  wished  to  signify;  not  only  writing 
concerning  divine  things  after  the  human,  but 
even  giving  a  reason  why  he  did  so ;  for  if  he  had 
suppressed  this,  some,  perchance,  would  have 
defended  his  doing  so  in  one  way,  and  some  in 
another.  But  in  that  very  reason  he  has  ren¬ 
dered,  he  has  left  nothing  for  men  to  conjecture 
at  will,  and  has  sufficiently  proved  that  he  pre¬ 
ferred  men  to  the  institutions  of  men,  not  the 
nature  of  men  to  the  nature  of  the  gods.  Thus 
he  confessed  that,  in  writing  the  books  concern¬ 
ing  divine  things,  he  did  not  write  concerning 
the  truth  which  belongs  to  nature,  but  the  false¬ 
ness  which  belongs  to  error ;  which  he  has  else¬ 
where  expressed  more  openly  (as  I  have  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  fourth  book),1  saying  that,  had  he 
been  founding  a  new  city  himself,  he  would  have 
written  according  to  the  order  of  nature ;  but  as 
he  had  only  found  an  old  one,  he  could  not  but 
follow  its  custom. 

Chap.  5.  Concerning  the  three  kinds  of  theology 
according  to  Varro,  namely ,  one  fabulous,  the 
other  natural,  the  third  civil 
Now  what  are  we  to  say  of  this  proposition  of 
his,  namely,  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  the¬ 
ology,  that  is,  of  the  account  which  is  given  of 
the  gods ;  and  of  these,  the  one  is  called  myth- 
^hap.  31. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  5  235 


ical,  the  other  physical,  and  the  third  civil?  Did 
the  Latin  usage  permit,  we  should  call  the  kind 
which  he  has  placed  first  in  order  fabular ,  but 
let  us  call  it  fabulous ,  for  mythical  is  derived 
from  the  Greek  /jlvSos,  a  fable;  but  that  the 
second  should  be  called  natural,  the  usage  of 
speech  now  admits;  the  third  he  himself  has 
designated  in  Latin,  calling  it  civil.  Then  he 
says,  “they  call  that  kind  mythical  which  the 
poets  chiefly  use;  physical,  that  which  the  phi¬ 
losophers  use;  civil,  that  which  the  people  use. 
As  to  the  first  I  have  mentioned,”  says  he,  “in  it 
are  many  fictions,  which  are  contrary  to  the  dig¬ 
nity  and  nature  of  the  immortals.  For  we  find  in 
it  that  one  god  has  been  born  from  the  head,  an¬ 
other  from  the  thigh,  another  from  drops  of 
blood;  also,  in  this  we  find  that  gods  have  stolen, 
committed  adultery,  served  men ;  in  a  word,  in 
this  all  manner  of  things  are  attributed  to  the 
gods,  such  as  may  befall,  not  merely  any  man, 
but  even  the  most  contemptible  man.”  He  cer¬ 
tainly,  where  he  could,  where  he  dared,  where 
he  thought  he  could  do  it  with  impunity,  has 
manifested,  without  any  of  the  haziness  of  am¬ 
biguity,  how  great  injury  was  done  to  the  nature 
of  the  gods  by  lying  fables;  for  he  was  speaking, 
not  concerning  natural  theology,  not  concern¬ 
ing  civil,  but  concerning  fabulous  theology, 
which  he  thought  he  could  freely  find  fault 
with. 

Let  us  see,  now,  what  he  says  concerning  the 
second  kind.  “The  second  kind  which  I  have  ex¬ 
plained,”  he  says,  “is  that  concerning  which  phi¬ 
losophers  have  left  many  books,  in  which  they 
treat  such  questions  as  these:  what  gods  there 
are,  where  they  are,  of  what  kind  and  character 
they  are,  since  what  time  they  have  existed,  or 
if  they  have  existed  from  eternity;  whether  they 
are  of  fire,  as  Heraclitus  believes;  or  of  number, 
as  Pythagoras;  or  of  atoms,  as  Epicurus  says; 
and  other  such  things,  which  men’s  ears  can 
more  easily  hear  inside  the  walls  of  a  school  than 
outside  in  the  Forum.”  He  finds  fault  with  noth¬ 
ing  in  ttys  kind  of  theology  which  they  call  phy¬ 
sical,  and  which  belongs  to  philosophers,  except 
that  he  has  related  their  controversies  among 
themselves,  through  which  there  has  arisen  a 
multitude  of  dissentient  sects.  Nevertheless  he 
has  removed  this  kind  from  the  Forum,  that  is, 
from  the  populace,  but  he  has  shut  it  up  in 
schools.  But  that  first  kind,  most  false  and  most 
base,  he  has  not  removed  from  the  citizens.  Oh, 
the  religious  ears  of  the  people,  and  among  them 
even  those  of  the  Romans,  that  are  not  able  to 
bear  what  the  philosophers  dispute  concerning 
the  gods!  But  when  the  poets  sing  and  stage- 


players  act  such  things  as  are  derogatory  to  the 
dignity  and  the  nature  of  the  immortals,  such 
as  may  befall  not  a  man  merely,  but  the  most 
contemptible  man,  they  not  only  bear,  but  will¬ 
ingly  listen  to.  Nor  is  this  all,  but  they  even  con¬ 
sider  that  these  things  please  the  gods,  and  that 
they  are  propitiated  by  them. 

But  some  one  may  say,  “Let  us  distinguish 
these  two  kinds  of  theology,  the  mythical  and 
the  physical — that  is,  the  fabulous  and  the  nat¬ 
ural — from  this  civil  kind  about  which  we  are 
now  speaking.”  Anticipating  this,  he  himself  has 
distinguished  them.  Let  us  see  now  how  he  ex¬ 
plains  the  civil  theology  itself.  I  see,  indeed,  why 
it  should  be  distinguished  as  fabulous,  even  be¬ 
cause  it  is  false,  because  it  is  base,  because  it  is 
unworthy.  But  to  wish  to  distinguish  the  natural 
from  the  civil,  what  else  is  that  but  to  confess 
that  the  civil  itself  is  false?  For  if  that  be  nat¬ 
ural,  what  fault  has  it  that  it  should  be  exclud¬ 
ed?  And  if  this  which  is  called  civil  be  not  nat¬ 
ural,  what  merit  has  it  that  it  should  be  admit¬ 
ted?  This,  in  truth,  is  the  cause  why  he  wrote 
first  concerning  human  things,  and  afterwards 
concerning  divine  things;  since  in  divine  things 
he  did  not  follow  nature,  but  the  institution  of 
men.  Let  us  look  at  this  civil  theology  of  his. 
“The  third  kind,”  says  he,  “is  that  which  citi¬ 
zens  in  cities,  and  especially  the  priests,  ought 
to  know  and  to  administer.  From  it  is  to  be 
known  what  god  each  one  may  suitably  worship, 
what  sacred  rites  and  sacrifices  each  one  may 
suitably  perform.”  Let  us  still  attend  to  what 
follows.  “The  first  theology,”  he  says,  “is  espe¬ 
cially  adapted  to  the  theatre,  the  second  to  the 
world,  the  third  to  the  city.”  Who  does  not  see 
to  which  he  gives  the  palm?  Certainly  to  the 
second,  which  he  said  above  is  that  of  the  phi¬ 
losophers.  For  he  testifies  that  this  pertains  to 
the  world,  than  which  they  think  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  better.  But  those  two  theologies,  the  first  and 
the  third — to  wit,  those  of  the  theatre  and  of  the 
city — has  he  distinguished  them  or  united  them? 
For  although  we  see  that  the  city  is  in  the  world, 
we  do  not  see  that  it  follows  that  any  things  be¬ 
longing  to  the  city  pertain  to  the  world.  For  it  is 
possible  that  such  things  may  be  worshipped  and 
believed  in  the  city,  according  to  false  opinions, 
as  have  no  existence  either  in  the  world  or  out 
of  it.  But  where  is  the  theatre  but  in  the  city? 
Who  instituted  the  theatre  but  the  state?  For 
what  purpose  did  it  constitute  it  but  for  scenic 
plays?  And  to  what  class  of  things  do  scenic 
plays  belong  but  to  those  divine  things  concern¬ 
ing  which  these  books  of  Varro’s  are  written 
with  so  much  ability? 


236 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  6.  Concerning  the  mythic ,  that  is,  the  fab¬ 
ulous,  theology,  and  the  civil,  against  Varro 

0  Marcus  Varro !  thou  art  the  most  acute,  and 
without  doubt  the  most  learned,  but  still  a  man, 
not  God — now  lifted  up  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
see  and  to  announce  divine  things,  thou  seest, 
indeed,  that  divine  things  are  to  be  separated 
from  human  trifles  and  lies,  but  thou  fearest  to 
offend  those  most  corrupt  opinions  of  the  popu¬ 
lace  and  their  customs  in  public  superstitions, 
which  thou  thyself,  when  thou  considerest  them 
on  all  sides,  perceivest,  and  all  your  literature 
loudly  pronounces  to  be  abhorrent  from  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  gods,  even  of  such  gods  as  the  frailty 
of  the  human  mind  supposes  to  exist  in  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  this  world.  What  can  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  human  talent  do  here?  What  can  human 
learning,  though  manifold,  avail  thee  in  this 
perplexity?  Thou  desirest  to  worship  the  nat¬ 
ural  gods;  thou  art  compelled  to  worship  the 
civil.  Thou  hast  found  some  of  the  gods  to  be 
fabulous,  on  whom  thou  vomitest  forth  very 
freely  what  thou  thinkest,  and,  whether  thou 
wiliest  or  not,  thou  wettest  therewith  even  the 
civil  gods.  Thou  sayest,  forsooth,  that  the  fab¬ 
ulous  are  adapted  to  the  theatre,  the  natural  to 
the  world,  and  the  civil  to  the  city;  though  the 
world  is  a  divine  work,  but  cities  and  theatres 
are  the  works  of  men.  and  though  the  gods  who 
are  laughed  at  in  the  theatre  are  not  other  than 
those  who  are  adored  in  the  temples;  and  ye  do 
not  exhibit  games  in  honour  of  other  gods  than 
those  to  whom  ye  immolate  victims.  How  much 
more  freely  and  more  subtly  wouldst  thou  have 
decided  these  hadst  thou  said  that  some  gods 
are  natural,  others  established  by  men;  and  con¬ 
cerning  those  who  have  been  so  established,  the 
literature  of  the  poets  gives  one  account,  and 
that  of  the  priests  another — both  of  which  are, 
nevertheless,  so  friendly  the  one  to  the  other, 
through  fellowship  in  falsehood,  that  they  are 
both  pleasing  to  the  demons,  to  whom  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  the  truth  is  hostile. 

That  theology,  therefore,  which  they  call  nat¬ 
ural,  being  put  aside  for  a  moment,  as  it  is  after¬ 
wards  to  be  discussed,  we  ask  if  any  one  is  really 
content  to  seek  a  hope  for  eternal  life  from  poet¬ 
ical,  theatrical,  scenic  gods?  Perish  the  thought! 
The  true  God  avert  so  wild  and  sacrilegious  a 
madness!  What,  is  eternal  life  to  be  asked  from 
those  gods  whom  these  things  pleased  and  whom 
these  things  propitiate,  in  which  their  own 
crimes  are  represented?  No  one,  as  I  think,  has 
arrived  at  such  a  pitch  of  headlong  and  furious 
impiety.  So  then,  neither  by  the  fabulous  nor  by 


the  civil  theology  does  any  one  obtain  eternal 
life.  For  the  one  sows  base  things  concerning  the 
gods  by  feigning  them,  the  other  reaps  by  cher¬ 
ishing  them ;  the  one  scatters  lies,  the  other  gath¬ 
ers  them  together;  the  one  pursues  divine  things 
with  false  crimes,  the  other  incorporates  among 
divine  things  the  plays  which  are  made  up  of 
these  crimes;  the  one  sounds  abroad  in  human 
songs  impious  fictions  concerning  the  gods,  the 
other  consecrates  these  for  the  festivities  of  the 
gods  themselves;  the  one  sings  the  misdeeds  and 
crimes  of  the  gods,  the  other  loves  them;  the 
one  gives  forth  or  feigns,  the  other  either  attests 
the  true  or  delights  in  the  false.  Both  are  base; 
both  are  damnable.  But  the  one  which  is  theatri¬ 
cal  teaches  public  abomination,  and  that  one 
which  is  of  the  city  adorns  itself  with  that 
abomination.  Shall  eternal  life  be  hoped  for 
from  these,  by  which  this  short  and  temporal 
life  is  polluted?  Does  the  society  of  wicked  men 
pollute  our  life  if  they  insinuate  themselves  into 
our  affections  and  win  our  assent?  and  does  not 
the  society  of  demons  pollute  the  life,  who  are 
worshipped  with  their  own  crimes? — if  with  true 
crimes,  how  wicked  the  demons!  if  with  false, 
how  wicked  the  worship! 

When  we  say  these  things,  it  may  perchance 
seem  to  some  one  who  is  very  ignorant  of  these 
matters  that  only  those  things  concerning  the 
gods  which  are  sung  in  the  songs  of  the  poets 
and  acted  on  the  stage  are  unworthy  of  the  di¬ 
vine  majesty,  and  ridiculous,  and  too  detestable 
to  be  celebrated,  whilst  those  sacred  things 
which  not  stage-players  but  priests  perform  are 
pure  and  free  from  all  unseemliness.  Had  this 
been  so,  never  would  any  one  have  thought  that 
these  theatrical  abominations  should  be  cele¬ 
brated  in  their  honour,  never  would  the  gods 
themselves  have  ordered  them  to  be  performed 
to  them.  But  men  are  in  nowise  ashamed  to  per¬ 
form  these  things  in  the  theatres,  because  simi¬ 
lar  things  are  carried  on  in  the  temples.  In  short, 
when  the  fore-mentioned  author  attempted  to 
distinguish  the  civil  theology  from  the  fabulous 
and  natural,  as  a  sort  of  third  and  distinct  kind, 
he  wished  it  to  be  understood  to  be  rather  tem¬ 
pered  by  both  than  separated  from  either.  For 
he  says  that  those  things  which  the  poets  write 
are  less  than  the  people  ought  to  follow,  whilst 
what  the  philosophers  say  is  more  than  it  is  ex¬ 
pedient  for  the  people  to  pry  into.  “Which,” 
says  he,  “differ  in  such  a  way,  that  nevertheless 
not  a  few  things  from  both  of  them  have  been 
taken  to  the  account  of  the  civil  theology; 
wherefore  we  will  indicate  what  the  civil  theol¬ 
ogy  has  in  common  with  that  of  the  poet,  though 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  6-7  237 


it  ought  to  be  more  closely  connected  with  the 
theology  of  philosophers.”  Civil  theology  is 
therefore  not  quite  disconnected  from  that  of 
the  poets.  Nevertheless,  in  another  place,  con¬ 
cerning  the  generations  of  the  gods,  he  says  that 
the  people  are  more  inclined  toward  the  poets 
than  toward  the  physical  theologists.  For  in  this 
place  he  said  what  ought  to  be  done;  in  that 
other  place,  what  was  really  done.  He  said  that 
the  latter  had  written  for  the  sake  of  utility,  but 
the  poets  for  the  sake  of  amusement.  And  hence 
the  things  from  the  poets’  writings,  which  the 
people  ought  not  to  follow,  are  the  crimes  of  the 
gods;  which,  nevertheless,  amuse  both  the  peo¬ 
ple  and  the  gods.  For,  for  amusement’s  sake,  he 
says,  the  poets  write,  and  not  for  that  of  utility; 
nevertheless  they  write  such  things  as  the  gods 
will  desire,  and  the  people  perform. 

Chap.  7.  Concerning  the  likeness  and  agreement 
of  the  fabulous  and  civil  theologies 
That  theology,  therefore,  which  is  fabulous, 
theatrical,  scenic,  and  full  of  all  baseness  and 
unseemliness,  is  taken  up  into  the  civil  theol¬ 
ogy;  and  part  of  that  theology,  which  in  its  to¬ 
tality  is  deservedly  judged  to  be  worthy  of  rep¬ 
robation  and  rejection,  is  pronounced  worthy  to 
be  cultivated  and  observed — not  at  all  an  incon¬ 
gruous  part,  as  I  have  undertaken  to  show,  and 
one  which,  being  alien  to  the  whole  body,  was 
unsuitably  attached  to  and  suspended  from  it, 
but  a  part  entirely  congruous  with,  and  most 
harmoniously  fitted  to  the  rest,  as  a  member  of 
the  same  body.  For  what  else  do  those  images, 
forms,  ages,  sexes,  characteristics  of  the  gods 
show?  If  the  poets  have  Jupiter  with  a  beard, 
and  Mercury  beardless,  have  not  the  priests  the 
same?  Is  the  Priapus  of  the  priests  less  obscene 
than  the  Priapus  of  the  players?  Does  he  receive 
the  adoration  of  worshippers  in  a  different  form 
from  that  in  which  he  moves  about  the  stage  for 
the  amusement  of  spectators?  Is  not  Saturn  old 
and  Apollo  young  in  the  shrines  where  their 
images  stand,  as  well  as  when  represented  by 
actors’ 'masks?  Why  are  Forculus,  who  presides 
over  doors,  and  Limentinus,  who  presides  over 
thresholds  and  lintels,  male  gods,  and  Cardea 
between  them  feminine,  who  presides  over 
hinges?  Are  not  those  things  found  in  books  on 
divine  things,  which  grave  poets  have  deemed 
unworthy  of  their  verses?  Does  the  Diana  of  the 
theatre  carry  arms,  whilst  the  Diana  of  the  city 
is  simply  a  virgin?  Is  the  stage  Apollo  a  lyrist, 
but  the  Delphic  Apollo  ignorant  of  this  art?  But 
these  things  are  decent  compared  with  the  more 
shameful  things.  What  was  thought  of  Jupiter 


himself  by  those  who  placed  his  wet  nurse  in  the 
Capitol?  Did  they  not  bear  witness  to  Euhem- 
erus,  who,  not  with  the  garrulity  of  a  fable-tel¬ 
ler,  but  with  the  gravity  of  an  historian  who  had 
diligently  investigated  the  matter,  wrote  that 
all  such  gods  had  been  men  and  mortals?  And 
they  who  appointed  the  Epulones  as  parasites  at 
the  table  of  Jupiter,  what  else  did  they  wish  for 
but  mimic  sacred  rites?  For  if  any  mimic  had 
said  that  parasites  of  Jupiter  were  made  use  of 
at  his  table,  he  would  assuredly  have  appeared 
to  be  seeking  to  call  forth  laughter.  Varro  said  it 
— not  when  he  was  mocking,  but  when  he  was 
commending  the  gods  did  he  say  it.  His  books  on 
divine,  not  on  human,  things  testify  that  he 
wrote  this — not  where  he  set  forth  the  scenic 
games,  but  where  he  explained  the  Capitoline 
laws.  In  a  word,  he  is  conquered,  and  confesses 
that,  as  they  made  the  gods  with  a  human  form, 
so  they  believed  that  they  are  delighted  with  hu¬ 
man  pleasures. 

For  also  malign  spirits  were  not  so  wanting 
to  their  own  business  as  not  to  confirm  noxious 
opinions  in  the  minds  of  men  by  converting 
them  into  sport.  Whence  also  is  that  story  about 
the  sacristan  of  Hercules,  which  says  that,  hav¬ 
ing  nothing  to  do,  he  took  to  playing  at  dice  as  a 
pastime,  throwing  them  alternately  with  the  one 
hand  for  Hercules,  with  the  other  for  himself, 
with  this  understanding,  that  if  he  should  win, 
he  should  from  the  funds  of  the  temple  prepare 
himself  a  supper,  and  hire  a  mistress ;  but  if  Her¬ 
cules  should  win  the  game,  he  himself  should,  at 
his  own  expense,  provide  the  same  for  the  pleas¬ 
ure  of  Hercules.  Then,  when  he  had  been  beaten 
by  himself,  as  though  by  Hercules,  he  gave  to 
the  god  Hercules  the  supper  he  owed  him,  and 
also  the  most  noble  harlot  Larentina.  But  she. 
having  fallen  asleep  in  the  temple,  dreamed  that 
Hercules  had  had  intercourse  with  her,  and  had 
said  to  her  that  she  would  find  her  payment  with 
the  youth  whom  she  should  first  meet  on  leaving 
the  temple,  and  that  she  was  to  believe  this  to  be 
paid  to  her  by  Hercules.  And  so  the  first  youth 
that  met  her  on  going  out  was  the  wealthy  Taru- 
tius,  who  kept  her  a  long  time,  and  when  he  died 
left  her  his  heir.  She,  having  obtained  a  most 
ample  fortune,  that  she  should  not  seem  un¬ 
grateful  for  the  divine  hire,  in  her  turn  made  the 
Roman  people  her  heir,  which  she  thought  to  be 
most  acceptable  to  the  deities ;  and,  having  dis¬ 
appeared,  the  will  was  found.  By  which  meri¬ 
torious  conduct  they  say  that  she  gained  divine 
honours. 

Now  had  these  things  been  feigned  by  the 
poets  and  acted  by  the  mimics,  they  would  with- 


238  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


out  any  doubt  have  been  said  to  pertain  to  the 
fabulous  theology  and  would  have  been  judged 
worthy  to  be  separated  from  the  dignity  of  the 
civil  theology.  But  when  these  shameful  things 
— not  of  the  poets,  but  of  the  people;  not  of  the 
mimics,  but  of  the  sacred  things;  not  of  the  the¬ 
atres,  but  of  the  temples,  that  is,  not  of  the  fabu¬ 
lous,  but  of  the  civil  theology — are  reported  by 
so  great  an  author,  not  in  vain  do  the  actors  rep¬ 
resent  with  theatrical  art  the  baseness  of  the 
gods,  which  is  so  great;  but  surely  in  vain  do  the 
priests  attempt,  by  rites  called  sacred,  to  repre¬ 
sent  their  nobleness  of  character,  which  has  no 
existence.  There  are  sacred  rites  of  Juno;  and 
these  are  celebrated  in  her  beloved  island,  Sa¬ 
mos,  where  she  was  given  in  marriage  to  Jupiter. 
There  are  sacred  rites  of  Ceres,  in  which  Proser¬ 
pine  is  sought  for,  having  been  carried  off  by 
Pluto.  There  are  sacred  rites  of  Venus,  in  which, 
her  beloved  Adonis  being  slain  by  a  boar’s 
tooth,  the  lovely  youth  is  lamented.  There  are 
sacred  rites  of  the  mother  of  the  gods,  in  which 
the  beautiful  youth  Atys,  loved  by  her,  and  cas¬ 
trated  by  her  through  a  woman’s  jealousy,  i^de- 
plored  by  men  who  have  suffered  the  like  calam¬ 
ity,  whom  they  call  Galli.  Since,  then,  these 
things  are  more  unseemly  than  all  scenic  abomi¬ 
nation,  why  is  it  that  they  strive  to  separate,  as 
it  were,  the  fabulous  fictions  of  the  poet  con¬ 
cerning  the  gods,  as,  forsooth,  pertaining  to  the 
theatre,  from  the  civil  theology  which  they  wish 
to  belong  to  the  city,  as  though  they  were  sepa¬ 
rating  from  noble  and  worthy  things,  things  un¬ 
worthy  and  base?  Wherefore  there  is  more  rea¬ 
son  to  thank  the  stage-actors,  who  have  spared 
the  eyes  of  men  and  have  not  laid  bare  by  the¬ 
atrical  exhibition  all  the  things  which  are  hid  by 
the  walls  of  the  temples.  What  good  is  to  be 
thought  of  their  sacred  rites  which  are  concealed 
in  darkness,  when  those  which  are  brought 
forth  into  the  light  are  so  detestable?  And  cer¬ 
tainly  they  themselves  have  seen  what  they 
transact  in  secret  through  the  agency  of  muti¬ 
lated  and  effeminate  men.  Yet  they  have  not 
been  able  to  hide  those  same  men  miserably  and 
vilely  enervated  and  corrupted.  Let  them  per¬ 
suade  whom  they  can  that  they  transact  any¬ 
thing  holy  through  such  men,  who,  they  cannot 
deny,  are  numbered,  and  live  among  their  sa¬ 
cred  things.  We  know  not  what  they  transact, 
but  we  know  through  whom  they  transact;  for 
we  know  what  things  are  transacted  on  the  stage, 
where  never,  even  in  a  chorus  of  harlots,  hath 
one  who  is  mutilated  or  an  effeminate  appeared. 
And.  nevertheless,  even  these  things  are  acted 
by  vile  and  infamous  characters;  for,  indeed, 


they  ought  not  to  be  acted  by  men  of  good  char¬ 
acter.  What,  then,  are  those  sacred  rites,  for  the 
performance  of  which  holiness  has  chosen  such 
men  as  not  even  the  obscenity  of  the  stage  has 
admitted? 

Chap.  8.  Concerning  the  interpretations ,  con - 
sis  ting  of  natural  explanations,  which  the  pa¬ 
gan  teachers  attempt  to  show  for  their  gods 
But  all  these  things,  they  say,  have  certain 
physical,  that  is,  natural  interpretations,  show¬ 
ing  their  natural  meaning;  as  though  in  this  dis¬ 
putation  we  were  seeking  physics  and  not  theol¬ 
ogy,  which  is  the  account,  not  of  nature,  but  of 
God.  For  although  He  Who  is  the  true  God  is 
God,  not  by  opinion,  but  by  nature,  nevertheless 
all  nature  is  not  God;  for  there  is  certainly  a 
nature  of  man,  of  a  beast,  of  a  tree,  of  a  stone — 
none  of  which  is  God.  For  if,  when  the  question 
is  concerning  the  mother  of  the  gods,  that  from 
which  the  whole  system  of  interpretation  starts 
certainly  is  that  the  mother  of  the  gods  is  the 
earth,  why  do  we  make  further  inquiry?  why  do 
we  carry  our  investigation  through  all  the  rest 
of  it?  What  can  more  manifestly  favour  them 
who  say  that  all  those  gods  were  men?  For  they 
are  earth-born  in  the  sense  that  the  earth  is  their 
mother.  But  in  the  true  theology  the  earth  is  the 
work,  not  the  mother,  of  God.  But  in  whatever 
way  their  sacred  rites  may  be  interpreted,  and 
whatever  reference  they  may  have  to  the  nature 
of  things,  it  is  not  according  to  nature,  but  con¬ 
trary  to  nature,  that  men  should  be  effeminates. 
This  disease,  this  crime,  this  abomination,  has  a 
recognized  place  among  those  sacred  things, 
though  even  depraved  men  will  scarcely  be  com¬ 
pelled  by  torments  to  confess  they  are  guilty  of 
it.  Again,  if  these  sacred  rites,  which  are  proved 
to  be  fouler  than  scenic  abominations,  are  ex¬ 
cused  and  justified  on  the  ground  that  they  have 
their  own  interpretations,  by  which  they  are 
shown  to  symbolize  the  nature  of  things,  why 
are  not  the  poetical  things  in  like  manner  ex¬ 
cused  and  justified?  For  many  have  interpreted 
even  these  in  like  fashion,  to  such  a  degree  that 
even  that  which  they  say  is  the  most  monstrous 
and  most  horrible — namely,  that  Saturn  de¬ 
voured  his  own  children — has  been  interpreted 
by  some  of  them  to  mean  that  length  of  time, 
which  is  signified  by  the  name  of  Saturn,  con¬ 
sumes  whatever  it  begets;  or  that,  as  the  same 
Varro  thinks,  Saturn  belongs  to  seeds  which  fall 
back  again  into  the  earth  from  whence  they 
spring.  And  so  one  interprets  it  in  one  way,  and 
one  in  another.  And  the  same  is  to  be  said  of  all 
the  rest  of  this  theology. 


THE  CITY  OF 

And,  nevertheless,  it  is  called  the  fabulous 
theology,  and  is  censured,  cast  off,  rejected,  to¬ 
gether  with  all  such  interpretations  belonging  to 
it.  And  not  only  by  the  natural  theology,  which 
is  that  of  the  philosophers,  but  also  by  this  civil 
theology,  concerning  which  we  are  speaking, 
which  is  asserted  to  pertain  to  cities  and  peoples, 
it  is  judged  worthy  of  repudiation,  because  it 
has  invented  unworthy  things  concerning  the 
gods.  Of  which,  I  wot,  this  is  the  secret:  that 
those  most  acute  and  learned  men,  by  whom 
those  things  were  written,  understood  that  both 
theologies  ought  to  be  rejected — to  wit,  both 
that  fabulous  and  this  civil  one — but  the  former 
they  dared  to  reject,  the  latter  they  dared  not; 
the  former  they  set  forth  to  be  censured,  the  lat¬ 
ter  they  showed  to  be  very  like  it;  not  that  it 
might  be  chosen  to  be  held  in  preference  to  the 
other,  but  that  it  might  be  understood  to  be 
worthy  of  being  rejected  together  with  it.  And 
thus,  without  danger  to  those  who  feared  to  cen¬ 
sure  the  civil  theology,  both  of  them  being 
brought  into  contempt,  that  theology  which 
they  call  natural  might  find  a  place  in  better  dis¬ 
posed  minds;  for  the  civil  and  the  fabulous  are 
both  fabulous  and  both  civil.  He  who  shall  wise¬ 
ly  inspect  the  vanities  and  obscenities  of  both 
will  find  that  they  are  both  fabulous;  and  he 
who  shall  direct  his  attention  to  the  scenic  plays 
pertaining  to  the  fabulous  theology  in  the  festi¬ 
vals  of  the  civil  gods,  and  in  the  divine  rites  of 
the  cities,  will  find  they  are  both  civil.  How, 
then,  can  the  power  of  giving  eternal  life  be  at¬ 
tributed  to  any  of  those  gods  whose  own  images 
and  sacred  rites  convict  them  of  being  most  like 
to  the  fabulous  gods,  which  are  most  openly 
reprobated,  in  forms,  ages,  sex,  characteristics, 
marriages,  generations,  rites;  in  all  which  things 
they  are  understood  either  to  have  been  men, 
and  to  have  had  their  sacred  rites  and  solemni¬ 
ties  instituted  in  their  honour  according  to  the 
life  or  death  of  each  of  them,  the  demons  sug¬ 
gesting  and  confirming  this  error,  or  certainly 
most  foul  spirits,  who,  taking  advantage  of  some 
occasiori  or  other,  have  stolen  into  the  minds  of 
men  to  deceive  them? 

Chap.  9.  Concerning  the  special  offices  of  the 

gods 

And  as  to  those  very  offices  of  the  gods,  so 
meanly  and  so  minutely  portioned  out,  so  that 
they  say  that  they  ought  to  be  supplicated,  each 
one  according  to  his  special  function — about 
which  we  have  spoken  much  already,  though  not 
all  that  is  to  be  said  concerning  it — are  they  not 
more  consistent  with  mimic  buffoonery  than  di- 


GOI)  VI.  8—9  239 

vine  majesty?  If  any  one  should  use  two  nurses 
for  his  infant,  one  of  whom  should  give  nothing 
but  food,  the  other  nothing  but  drink,  as  these 
make  use  of  two  goddesses  for  this  purpose,  Ed- 
uca  and  Potina,  he  should  certainly  seem  to  be 
foolish,  and  to  do  in  his  house  a  thing  worthy  of 
a  mimic.  They  would  have  Liber  to  have  been 
named  from  “liberation,”  because  through  him 
males  at  the  time  of  copulation  are  liberated  by 
the  emission  of  the  seed.  They  also  say  that  Li¬ 
bera  (the  same  in  their  opinion  as  Venus)  exer¬ 
cises  the  same  function  in  the  case  of  women, 
because  they  say  that  they  also  emit  seed;  and 
they  also  say  that  on  this  account  the  same  part 
of  the  male  and  of  the  female  is  placed  in  the 
temple,  that  of  the  male  to  Liber,  and  that  of 
the  female  to  Libera.  To  these  things  they  add 
the  women  assigned  to  Liber,  and  the  wine  for 
exciting  lust.  Thus  the  Bacchanalia  are  celebrat¬ 
ed  with  the  utmost  insanity,  with  respect  to 
which  Varro  himself  confesses  that  such  things 
would  not  be  done  by  the  Bacchanals  except 
their  minds  were  highly  excited.  These  things, 
however,  afterwards  displeased  a  saner  senate, 
and  it  ordered  them  to  be  discontinued.  Here,  at 
length,  they  perhaps  perceived  how  much  power 
unclean  spirits,  when  held  to  be  gods,  exercise 
over  the  minds  of  men.  These  things,  certainly, 
were  not  to  be  done  in  the  theatres;  for  there 
they  play,  not  rave,  although  to  have  gods  who 
are  delighted  with  such  plays  is  very  like  raving. 

But  what  kind  of  distinction  is  this  which  he 
makes  between  the  religious  and  the  supersti¬ 
tious  man,  saying  that  the  gods  are  feared  by 
the  superstitious  man,  but  are  reverenced  as 
parents  by  the  religious  man,  not  feared  as  en¬ 
emies;  and  that  they  are  all  so  good  that  they 
will  more  readily  spare  those  who  are  impious 
than  hurt  one  who  is  innocent?  And  yet  he  tells 
us  that  three  gods  are  assigned  as  guardians  to  a 
woman  after  she  has  been  delivered,  lest  the  god 
Silvanus  come  in  and  molest  her;  and  that  in  or¬ 
der  to  signify  the  presence  of  these  protectors, 
three  men  go  round  the  house  during  the  night, 
and  first  strike  the  threshold  with  a  hatchet,  next 
with  a  pestle,  and  the  third  time  sweep  it  with  a 
brush,  in  order  that  these  symbols  of  agriculture 
having  been  exhibited,  the  god  Silvanus  might 
be  hindered  from  entering,  because  neither  are 
trees  cut  down  or  pruned  without  a  hatchet,  nei¬ 
ther  is  grain  ground  without  a  pestle,  nor  corn 
heaped  up  without  a  besom.  Now  from  these 
three  things  three  gods  have  been  named:  In- 
tercidona,  from  the  cut1  made  by  the  hatchet; 
Pilumnus,  from  the  pestle;  Diverra,  from  the 
lIntercido ,  I  cut  or  cleave. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


besom ;  by  which  guardian  gods  the  woman  who 
has  been  delivered  is  preserved  against  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  god  Silvanus.  Thus  the  guardianship  of 
kindly-disposed  gods  would  not  avail  against 
the  malice  of  a  mischievous  god,  unless  they 
were  three  to  one,  and  fought  against  him,  as  it 
were,  with  the  opposing  emblems  of  cultivation, 
who,  being  an  inhabitant  of  the  woods,  is  rough, 
horrible,  and  uncultivated.  Is  this  the  innocence 
of  the  gods?  Is  this  their  concord?  Are  these 
the  health-giving  deities  of  the  cities,  more  ri¬ 
diculous  than  the  things  which  are  laughed  at  in 
the  theatres? 

When  a  male  and  a  female  are  united,  the 
god  Jugatinus  presides.  Well,  let  this  be  borne 
with.  But  the  married  woman  must  be  brought 
home :  the  god  Domiducus  also  is  invoked.  That 
she  may  be  in  the  house,  the  god  Domitius  is  in¬ 
troduced.  That  she  may  remain  with  her  hus¬ 
band,  the  goddess  Manturnae  is  used.  What  more 
is  required?  Let  human  modesty  be  spared.  Let 
the  lust  of  flesh  and  blood  go  on  with  the  rest, 
the  secret  of  shame  being  respected.  Why  is  the 
bed-chamber  filled  with  a  crowd  of  deities,  when 
even  the  groomsmen  have  departed?  And.  more¬ 
over,  it  is  so  filled,  not  that  in  consideration  of 
their  presence  more  regard  may  be  paid  to  chas¬ 
tity,  but  that  by  their  help  the  woman,  naturally 
of  the  weaker  sex,  and  trembling  with  the  novel¬ 
ty  of  her  situation,  may  the  more  readily  yield 
her  virginity.  For  there  are  the  goddess  Virgin- 
iensis,  and  the  god-father  Subigus,  and  the  god¬ 
dess-mother  Prema,  and  the  goddess  Pertunda, 
and  Venus,  and  Priapus.  What  is  this?  If  it  was 
absolutely  necessary  that  a  man  labouring  at 
this  work,  should  be  helped  by  the  gods,  might 
not  some  one  god  or  goddess  have  been  suffi¬ 
cient?  Was  Venus  not  sufficient  alone,  who  is 
even  said  to  be  named  from  this,  that  without 
her  power  a  woman  does  not  cease  to  be  a  vir¬ 
gin?  If  there  is  any  shame  in  men,  which  is  not 
in  the  deities,  is  it  not  the  case  that,  when  the 
married  couple  believe  that  so  many  gods  of 
either  sex  are  present,  and  busy  at  this  work, 
they  are  so  much  affected  with  shame,  that  the 
man  is  less  moved,  and  the  woman  more  reluc¬ 
tant?  And  certainly,  if  the  goddess  Virginiensis 
is  present  to  loose  the  virgin’s  zone,  if  the  god 
Subigus  is  present  that  the  virgin  may  be  got  un¬ 
der  the  man,  if  the  goddess  Prema  is  present 
that,  having  been  got  under  him,  she  may  be 
kept  down,  and  may  not  move  herself,  what  has 
the  goddess  Pertunda  to  do  there?  Let  her 
blush;  let  her  go  forth.  Let  the  husband  himself 
do  something.  It  is  disgraceful  that  any  one  but 
himself  should  do  that  from  which  she  gets  her 


name.  But  perhaps  she  is  tolerated  because  she 
is  said  to  be  a  goddess,  and  not  a  god.  For  if  she 
were  believed  to  be  a  male,  and  were  called  Per- 
tundus,  the  husband  would  demand  more  help 
against  him  for  the  chastity  of  his  wife  than  the 
newly-delivered  woman  against  Silvanus.  But 
why  am  I  saying  this,  when  Priapus,  too,  is 
there,  a  male  to  excess,  upon  whose  immense 
and  most  unsightly  member  the  newly-married 
bride  is  commanded  to  sit,  according  to  the  most 
honourable  and  most  religious  custom  of  ma¬ 
trons? 

Let  them  go  on.  and  let  them  attempt  with  all 
the  subtlety  they  can  to  distinguish  the  civil  the¬ 
ology  from  the  fabulous,  the  cities  from  the 
theatres,  the  temples  from  the  stages,  the  sacred 
things  of  the  priests  from  the  songs  of  the  poets, 
as  honourable  things  from  base  things,  truthful 
things  from  fallacious,  grave  from  light,  serious 
from  ludicrous,  desirable  things  from  things  to 
be  rejected,  we  understand  what  they  do.  They 
are  aware  that  that  theatrical  and  fabulous  the¬ 
ology  hangs  by  the  civil,  and  is  reflected  back 
upon  it  from  the  songs  of  the  poets  as  from  a 
mirror;  and  thus,  that  theology  having  been  ex¬ 
posed  to  view  which  they  do  not  dare  to  con¬ 
demn,  they  more  freely  assail  and  censure  that 
picture  of  it,  in  order  that  those  who  perceive 
what  they  mean  may  detest  this  very  face  itself 
of  which  that  is  the  picture — which,  however, 
the  gods  themselves,  as  though  seeing  them¬ 
selves  in  the  same  mirror,  love  so  much  that  it  is 
better  seen  in  both  of  them  who  and  what  they 
are.  Whence,  also,  they  have  compelled  their 
worshippers,  with  terrible  commands,  to  dedi¬ 
cate  to  them  the  uncleanness  of  the  fabulous 
theology,  to  put  them  among  their  solemnities, 
and  reckon  them  among  divine  things;  and  thus 
they  have  both  shown  themselves  more  mani¬ 
festly  to  be  most  impure  spirits,  and  have  made 
that  rejected  and  reprobated  theatrical  theol¬ 
ogy  a  member  and  a  part  of  this,  as  it  were, 
chosen  and  approved  theology  of  the  city,  so 
that,  though  the  whole  is  disgraceful  and  false, 
and  contains  in  it  fictitious  gods,  one  part  of  it 
is  in  the  literature  of  the  priests,  the  other  in  the 
songs  of  the  poets.  Whether  it  may  have  other 
parts  is  another  question.  At  present,  I  think.  I 
have  sufficiently  shown,  on  account  of  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  Varro,  that  the  theology  of  the  city  and 
that  of  the  theatre  belong  to  one  civil  theology. 
Wherefore,  because  they  are  both  equally  dis¬ 
graceful.  absurd,  shameful,  false,  far  be  it  from 
religious  men  to  hope  for  eternal  life  from  either 
the  one  or  the  other. 

In  fine,  even  Varro  himself,  in  his  account  and 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  io  241 


enumeration  of  the  gods,  starts  from  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  a  man’s  conception.  He  commences  the 
series  of  those  gods  who  take  charge  of  man  with 
Janus,  carries  it  on  to  the  death  of  the  man  de¬ 
crepit  with  age,  and  terminates  it  with  the  god¬ 
dess  Naenia,  who  is  sung  at  the  funerals  of  the 
aged.  After  that,  he  begins  to  give  an  account  of 
the  other  gods,  whose  province  is  not  man  him¬ 
self,  but  man’s  belongings,  as  food,  clothing,  and 
all  that  is  necessary  for  this  life;  and,  in  the  case 
of  all  these,  he  explains  what  is  the  special  office 
of  each,  and  for  what  each  ought  to  be  suppli¬ 
cated.  But  with  all  this  scrupulous  and  compre¬ 
hensive  diligence,  he  has  neither  proved  the  ex¬ 
istence,  nor  so  much  as  mentioned  the  name,  of 
any  god  from  whom  eternal  life  is  to  be  sought 
— the  one  object  for  which  we  are  Christians. 
Who,  then,  is  so  stupid  as  not  to  perceive  that 
this  man,  by  setting  forth  and  opening  up  so 
diligently  the  civil  theology,  and  by  exhibiting 
its  likeness  to  that  fabulous,  shameful,  and  dis¬ 
graceful  theology,  and  also  by  teaching  that  that 
fabulous  sort  is  also  a  part  of  this  other,  was 
labouring  to  obtain  a  place  in  the  minds  of  men 
for  none  but  that  natural  theology,  which  he 
says  pertains  to  philosophers,  with  such  subtlety 
that  he  censures  the  fabulous,  and,  not  daring 
openly  to  censure  the  civil,  shows  its  censurable 
character  by  simply  exhibiting  it;  and  thus,  both 
being  reprobated  by  the  judgment  of  men  of 
right  understanding,  the  natural  alone  remains 
to  be  chosen?  But  concerning  this  in  its  own 
place,  by  the  help  of  the  true  God,  we  have  to 
discuss  more  diligently. 

Chap.  io.  Concerning  the  liberty  of  Seneca,  who 
more  vehemently  censured  the  civil  theology 
than  Varro  did  the  fabulous 
That  liberty,  in  truth,  which  this  man  wanted, 
so  that  he  did  not  dare  to  censure  that  theology 
of  the  city,  which  is  very  similar  to  the  theatri¬ 
cal,  so  openly  as  he  did  the  theatrical  itself,  was, 
though  not  fully,  yet  in  part  possessed  by  An¬ 
naeus  Seneca,  whom  we  have  some  evidence  to 
show  to  have  flourished  in  the  times  of  our  apos¬ 
tles.  It  was  in  part  possessed  by  him,  I  say,  for 
he  possessed  it  in  writing,  but  not  in  living.  For 
in  that  book  which  he  wrote  against  supersti¬ 
tion,  he  more  copiously  and  vehemently  cen¬ 
sured  that  civil  and  urban  theology  than  Varro 
the  theatrical  and  fabulous.  For,  when  speaking 
concerning  images,  he  says,  “They  dedicate  im¬ 
ages  of  the  sacred  and  inviolable  immortals  in 
most  worthless  and  motionless  matter.  They 
give  them  the  appearance  of  man,  beasts,  and 
fishes,  and  some  make  them  of  mixed  sex,  and 


heterogeneous  bodies.  They  call  them  deities, 
when  they  are  such  that  if  they  should  get 
breath  and  should  suddenly  meet  them,  they 
would  be  held  to  be  monsters.”  Then,  a  while 
afterwards,  when  extolling  the  natural  theology, 
he  had  expounded  the  sentiments  of  certain  phi¬ 
losophers,  he  opposes  to  himself  a  question,  and 
says,  “Here  some  one  says,  Shall  I  believe  that 
the  heavens  and  the  earth  are  gods,  and  that 
some  are  above  the  moon  and  some  below  it? 
Shall  I  bring  forward  either  Plato  or  the  peri¬ 
patetic  Strato,  one  of  whom  made  God  to  be 
without  a  body,  the  other  without  a  mind?”  In 
answer  to  which  he  says,  “And,  really,  what 
truer  do  the  dreams  of  Titus  Tatius,  or  Romu¬ 
lus,  or  Tullus  Hostilius  appear  to  thee?  Tatius 
declared  the  divinity  of  the  goddess  Cloacina; 
Romulus  that  of  Picus  and  Tiberinus;  Tullus 
Hostilius  that  of  Pavor  and  Pallor,  the  most  dis¬ 
agreeable  affections  of  men,  the  one  of  which  is 
the  agitation  of  the  mind  under  fright,  the  other 
that  of  the  body,  not  a  disease,  indeed,  but  a 
change  of  colour.”  Wilt  thou  rather  believe  that 
these  are  deities,  and  receive  them  into  heaven? 
But  with  what  freedom  he  has  written  concern¬ 
ing  the  rites  themselves,  cruel  and  shameful! 
“One,”  he  says,  “castrates  himself,  another  cuts 
his  arms.  Where  will  they  find  room  for  the  fear 
of  these  gods  when  angry,  who  use  such  means 
of  gaining  their  favour  when  propitious?  But 
gods  who  wish  to  be  worshipped  in  this  fashion 
should  be  worshipped  in  none.  So  great  is  the 
frenzy  of  the  mind  when  perturbed  and  driven 
from  its  seat  that  the  gods  are  propitiated  by 
men  in  a  manner  in  which  not  even  men  of  the 
greatest  ferocity  and  fable-renowned  cruelty 
vent  their  rage.  Tyrants  have  lacerated  the 
limbs  of  some;  they  never  ordered  any  one  to 
lacerate  his  own.  For  the  gratification  of  royal 
lust,  some  have  been  castrated;  but  no  one  ever, 
by  the  command  of  his  lord,  laid  violent  hands 
on  himself  to  emasculate  himself.  They  kill 
themselves  in  the  temples.  They  supplicate  with 
their  wounds  and  with  their  blood.  If  any  one 
has  time  to  see  the  things  they  do  and  the  things 
they  suffer,  he  will  find  so  many  things  unseem¬ 
ly  for  men  of  respectability,  so  unworthy  of 
freemen,  so  unlike  the  doings  of  sane  men,  that 
no  one  would  doubt  that  they  are  mad,  had  they 
been  mad  with  the  minority;  but  now  the  mul¬ 
titude  of  the  insane  is  the  defence  of  their 
sanity.” 

He  next  relates  those  things  which  are  wont 
to  be  done  in  the  Capitol,  and  with  the  utmost 
intrepidity  insists  that  they  are  such  things  as 
one  could  only  believe  to  be  done  by  men  mak- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ing  sport,  or  by  madmen.  For.  having  spoken 
with  derision  of  this,  that  in  the  Egyptian  sacred 
rites  Osiris,  being  lost,  is  lamented  for,  but 
straightway,  when  found  is  the  occasion  of  great 
joy  by  his  reappearance,  because  both  the  losing 
and  the  finding  of  him  are  feigned;  and  yet  that 
grief  and  that  joy  which  are  elicited  thereby 
from  those  who  have  lost  nothing  and  found 
nothing  are  real;  having  I  say,  so  spoken  of  this, 
he  says,  “Still  there  is  a  fixed  time  for  this 
frenzy.  It  is  tolerable  to  go  mad  once  in  the  year. 
Go  into  the  Capitol.  One  is  suggesting  divine 
commands1  to  a  god;  another  is  telling  the  hours 
to  Jupiter;  one  is  a  lictor;  another  is  an  anoint- 
er,  who  with  the  mere  movement  of  his  arms 
imitates  one  anointing.  There  are  women  who 
arrange  the  hair  of  Juno  and  Minerva,  standing 
far  away  not  only  from  her  image,  but  even 
from  her  temple.  These  move  their  fingers  in  the 
manner  of  hairdressers.  There  are  some  women 
who  hold  a  mirror.  There  are  some  who  are  call¬ 
ing  the  gods  to  assist  them  in  court.  There  are 
some  who  are  holding  up  documents  to  them 
and  are  explaining  to  them  their  cases.  A  learhed 
and  distinguished  comedian,  now  old  and  de¬ 
crepit,  was  daily  playing  the  mimic  in  the  Capi¬ 
tol,  as  though  the  gods  would  gladly  be  specta¬ 
tors  of  that  which  men  had  ceased  to  care  about. 
Every  kind  of  artificers  working  for  the  immor¬ 
tal  gods  is  dwelling  there  in  idleness.”  And  a  lit¬ 
tle  after  he  says,  “Nevertheless  these,  though 
they  give  themselves  up  to  the  gods  for  purposes 
superfluous  enough,  do  not  do  so  for  any  abomi¬ 
nable  or  infamous  purpose.  There  sit  certain 
women  in  the  Capitol  who  think  they  are  be¬ 
loved  by  Jupiter;  nor  are  they  frightened  even 
by  the  look  of  the,  if  you  will  believe  the  poets, 
most  wrathful  Juno.” 

This  liberty  Varro  did  not  enjoy.  It  was  only 
the  poetical  theology  he  seemed  to  censure.  The 
civil,  which  this  man  cuts  to  pieces,  he  was  not 
bold  enough  to  impugn.  But  if  we  attend  to  the 
truth,  the  temples  where  these  things  are  per¬ 
formed  are  far  worse  than  the  theatres  where 
they  are  represented.  Whence,  with  respect  to 
these  sacred  rites  of  the  civil  theology.  Seneca 
preferred,  as  the  best  course  to  be  followed  by 
a  wise  man,  to  feign  respect  for  them  in  act,  but 
to  have  no  real  regard  for  them  at  heart.  “All 
which  things,”  he  says,  “a  wise  man  will  observe 
as  being  commanded  by  the  laws,  but  not  as  be¬ 
ing  pleasing  to  the  gods.”  And  a  little  after  he 
says,  “And  what  of  this,  that  we  unite  the  gods 

xNumina.  Another  reading  is  notnina:  and  with  either 
reading  another  translation  is  admissible:  “One  is  an¬ 
nouncing  to  a  god  the  names  (or  gods)  who  salute  him.” 


in  marriage,  and  that  not  even  naturally,  for  we 
join  brothers  and  sisters?  We  marry  Bellona  to 
Mars,  Venus  to  Vulcan,  Salacia  to  Neptune. 
Some  of  them  we  leave  unmarried,  as  though 
there  were  no  match  for  them,  which  is  surely 
needless,  especially  when  there  are  certain  un¬ 
married  goddesses,  as  Populonia,  or  Fulgora,  or 
the  goddess  Rumina,  for  whom  I  am  not  aston¬ 
ished  that  suitors  have  been  awanting.  All  this 
ignoble  crowd  of  gods,  which  the  superstition  of 
ages  has  amassed,  we  ought,”  he  says,  “to  adore 
in  such  a  way  as  to  remember  all  the  while  that 
its  worship  belongs  rather  to  custom  than  to 
reality.”  Wherefore,  neither  those  laws  nor  cus¬ 
toms  instituted  in  the  civil  theology  that  which 
was  pleasing  to  the  gods,  or  which  pertained  to 
reality.  But  this  man,  whom  philosophy  had 
made,  as  it  were,  free,  nevertheless,  because  he 
was  an  illustrious  senator  of  the  Roman  people, 
worshipped  what  he  censured,  did  what  he  con¬ 
demned,  adored  what  he  reproached,  because, 
forsooth,  philosophy  had  taught  him  something 
great — namely,  not  to  be  superstitious  in  the 
world,  but,  on  account  of  the  laws  of  cities  and 
the  customs  of  men,  to  be  an  actor,  not  on  the 
stage,  but  in  the  temples — conduct  the  more  to 
be  condemned,  that  those  things  which  he  was 
deceitfully  acting  he  so  acted  that  the  people 
thought  he  was  acting  sincerely.  But  a  stage- 
actor  would  rather  delight  people  by  acting  plays 
than  take  them  in  by  false  pretences. 

Chap.  ii.  What  Seneca  thought  concerning  the 

Jews 

Seneca,  among  the  other  superstitions  of  civil 
theology,  also  found  fault  with  the  sacred  things 
of  the  Jews,  and  especially  the  sabbaths,  affirm¬ 
ing  that  they  act  uselessly  in  keeping  those  sev¬ 
enth  days,  whereby  they  lose  through  idleness 
about  the  seventh  part  of  their  life,  and  also 
many  things  which  demand  immediate  attention 
are  damaged.  The  Christians,  however,  who 
were  already  most  hostile  to  the  Jews,  he  did  not 
dare  to  mention,  either  for  praise  or  blame,  lest, 
if  he  praised  them,  he  should  do  so  against  the 
ancient  custom  of  his  country,  or,  perhaps,  if  he 
should  blame  them,  he  should  do  so  against  his 
own  will. 

When  he  was  speaking  concerning  those  Jews, 
he  said,  “When,  meanwhile,  the  customs  of  that 
most  accursed  nation  have  gained  such  strength 
that  they  have  been  now  received  in  all  lands, 
the  conquered  have  given  laws  to  the  conquer¬ 
ors.”  By  these  words  he  expresses  his  astonish¬ 
ment;  and,  not  knowing  what  the  providence  of 
God  was  leading  him  to  say,  subjoins  in  plain 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VI.  11-12,  VII.  243 


words  an  opinion  by  which  he  showed  what  he 
thought  about  the  meaning  of  those  sacred  in¬ 
stitutions:  “For,”  he  says,  “those,  however, 
know  the  cause  of  their  rites,  whilst  the  greater 
part  of  the  people  know  not  why  they  perform 
theirs.”  But  concerning  the  solemnities  of  the 
Jews,  either  why  or  how  far  they  were  instituted 
by  divine  authority,  and  afterwards,  in  due  time, 
by  the  same  authority  taken  away  from  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  God,  to  whom  the  mystery  of  eternal  life 
was  revealed,  we  have  both  spoken  elsewhere, 
especially  when  we  were  treating  against  the 
Manichaeans,  and  also  intend  to  speak  in  this 
work  in  a  more  suitable  place. 

Chap.  12.  That  when  once  the  vanity  of  the 
gods  of  the  nations  has  been  exposed ,  it  can¬ 
not  be  doubted  that  they  are  unable  to  be¬ 
stow  eternal  life  on  any  one,  when  they  cannot 
afford  help  even  with  respect  to  the  things  of 
this  temporal  life 

Now,  since  there  are  three  theologies,  which 
the  Greeks  call  respectively  mythical,  physical, 
and  political,  and  which  may  be  called  in  Latin 
fabulous,  natural,  and  civil;  and  since  neither 
from  the  fabulous,  which  even  the  worshippers 
of  many  and  false  gods  have  themselves  most 
freely  censured,  nor  from  the  civil,  of  which  that 
is  convicted  of  being  a  part,  or  even  worse  than 
it,  can  eternal  life  be  hoped  for  from  any  of 
these  theologies — if  any  one  thinks  that  what 
has  been  said  in  this  book  is  not  enough  for  him, 
let  him  also  add  to  it  the  many  and  various  dis¬ 
sertations  concerning  God  as  the  giver  of  felic¬ 
ity,  contained  in  the  former  books,  especially 
the  fourth  one. 

For  to  what  but  to  felicity  should  men  conse¬ 
crate  themselves,  were  felicity  a  goddess?  How¬ 


ever,  as  it  is  not  a  goddess,  but  a  gift  of  God,  to 
what  God  but  the  giver  of  happiness  ought  we 
to  consecrate  ourselves,  who  piously  love  eter¬ 
nal  life,  in  which  there  is  true  and  full  felicity? 
But  I  think,  from  what  has  been  said,  no  one 
ought  to  doubt  that  none  of  those  gods  is  the 
giver  of  happiness,  who  are  worshipped  with 
such  shame,  and  who,  if  they  are  not  so  wor¬ 
shipped,  are  more  shamefully  enraged,  and  thus 
confess  that  they  are  most  foul  spirits.  More¬ 
over,  how  can  he  give  eternal  life  who  cannot 
give  happiness?  For  we  mean  by  eternal  life  that 
life  where  there  is  endless  happiness.  For  if  the 
soul  live  in  eternal  punishments,  by  which  also 
those  unclean  spirits  shall  be  tormented,  that  is 
rather  eternal  death  than  eternal  life.  For  there 
is  no  greater  or  worse  death  than  when  death 
never  dies.  But  because  the  soul  from  its  very 
nature,  being  created  immortal,  cannot  be  with¬ 
out  some  kind  of  life,  its  utmost  death  is  alien¬ 
ation  from  the  life  of  God  in  an  eternity  of  pun¬ 
ishment.  So,  then.  He  only  Who  gives  true  hap¬ 
piness  gives  eternal  life,  that  is,  an  endlessly 
happy  life.  And  since  those  gods  whom  this  civil 
theology  worships  have  been  proved  to  be  un¬ 
able  to  give  this  happiness,  they  ought  not  to  be 
worshipped  on  account  of  those  temporal  and 
terrestrial  things,  as  we  showed  in  the  five  for¬ 
mer  books,  much  less  on  account  of  eternal  life, 
which  is  to  be  after  death,  as  we  have  sought  to 
show  in  this  one  book  especially,  whilst  the  other 
books  also  lend  it  their  co-operation.  But  since 
the  strength  of  inveterate  habit  has  its  roots 
very  deep,  if  any  one  thinks  that  I  have  not  dis¬ 
puted  sufficiently  to  show  that  this  civil  theol¬ 
ogy  ought  to  be  rejected  and  shunned,  let  him 
attend  to  another  book  which,  with  God’s  help, 
is  to  be  joined  to  this  one. 


BOOK  VII 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  it  is  shown  that  eternal  life  is  not  obtained  by 

'  THE  WORSHIP  OF  JANUS,  JUPITER,  SATURN,  AND  THE  OTHER  “SELECT  GODS”  OF  THE 
CIVIL  THEOLOGY. 


Preface 

It  will  be  the  duty  of  those  who  are  endowed 
with  quicker  and  better  understandings,  in 
whose  case  the  former  books  are  sufficient  and 
more  than  sufficient  to  effect  their  intended  ob¬ 
ject,  to  bear  with  me  with  patience  and  equa¬ 
nimity  whilst  I  attempt  with  more  than  ordinary 
diligence  to  tear  up  and  eradicate  depraved  and 


ancient  opinions  hostile  to  the  truth  of  piety, 
which  the  long-continued  error  of  the  human 
race  has  fixed  very  deeply  in  unenlightened 
minds;  co-operating  also  in  this,  according  to 
my  little  measure,  with  the  grace  of  Him  Who, 
being  the  true  God,  is  able  to  accomplish  it,  and 
on  Whose  help  I  depend  in  my  work;  and,  for 
the  sake  of  others,  such  should  not  deem  super¬ 
fluous  what  they  feel  to  be  no  longer  necessary 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


for  themselves.  A  very  great  matter  is  at  stake 
when  the  true  and  truly  holy  divinity  is  com¬ 
mended  to  men  as  that  which  they  ought  to  seek 
after  and  to  worship;  not,  however,  on  account 
of  the  transitory  vapour  of  mortal  life,  but  on 
account  of  life  eternal,  which  alone  is  blessed, 
although  the  help  necessary  for  this  frail  life  we 
are  now  living  is  also  afforded  us  by  it. 

Chap.  i.  Whether ,  since  it  is  evident  that  deity 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  civil  theology ,  we  are 
to  believe  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  select 
gods 

If  there  is  any  one  whom  the  sixth  book, 
which  I  have  last  finished,  has  not  persuaded 
that  this  divinity,  or,  so  to  speak,  deity — for  this 
word  also  our  authors  do  not  hesitate  to  use,  in 
order  to  translate  more  accurately  that  which 
the  Greeks  call  debris — if  there  is  any  one, 
I  say,  whom  the  sixth  book  has  not  persuaded 
that  this  divinity  or  deity  is  not  to  be  found  in 
that  theology  which  they  call  civil,  and  which 
Marcus  Varro  has  explained  in  sixteen  books — 
that  is,  that  the  happiness  of  eternal  life  is  not 
attainable  through  the  worship  of  gods  such  as 
states  have  established  to  be  worshipped,  and 
that  in  such  a  form — perhaps,  when  he  has  read 
this  book,  he  will  not  have  anything  further  to 
desire  in  order  to  the  clearing  up  of  this  ques¬ 
tion.  For  it  is  possible  that  some  one  may  think 
that  at  least  the  select  and  chief  gods,  whom 
Varro  comprised  in  his  last  book,  and  of  whom 
we  have  not  spoken  sufficiently,  are  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  on  account  of  the  blessed  life,  which  is 
none  other  than  eternal.  In  respect  to  which 
matter  I  do  not  say  what  Tertullian  said,  per¬ 
haps  more  wittily  than  truly,  “If  gods  are  select¬ 
ed  like  onions,  certainly  the  rest  are  rejected  as 
bad.”  I  do  not  say  this,  for  I  see  that  even  from 
among  the  select,  some  are  selected  for  some 
greater  and  more  excellent  office:  as  in  warfare, 
when  recruits  have  been  elected,  there  are  some 
again  elected  from  among  those  for  the  per¬ 
formance  of  some  greater  military  service;  and 
in  the  Church,  when  persons  are  elected  to  be 
overseers,  certainly  the  rest  are  not  rejected, 
since  all  good  Christians  are  deservedly  called 
elect;  in  the  erection  of  a  building  corner-stones 
are  elected,  though  the  other  stones,  which  are 
destined  for  other  parts  of  the  structure,  are  not 
rejected;  grapes  are  elected  for  eating,  whilst 
the  others,  which  we  leave  for  drinking,  are  not 
rejected.  There  is  no  need  of  adducing  many  il¬ 
lustrations,  since  the  thing  is  evident.  Where¬ 
fore  the  selection  of  certain  gods  from  among 


many  affords  no  proper  reason  why  either  he 
who  wrote  on  this  subject,  or  the  worshippers  of 
the  gods,  or  the  gods  themselves,  should  be 
spurned.  We  ought  rather  to  seek  to  know  what 
gods  these  are,  and  for  what  purpose  they  may 
appear  to  have  been  selected. 

Chap.  2.  Who  are  the  select  gods ,  and  whether 
they  are  held  to  be  exempt  from  the  offices  of 
the  commoner  gods 

The  following  gods,  certainly,  Varro  signal¬ 
izes  as  select,  devoting  one  book  to  this  sub¬ 
ject:  Janus,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Genius,  Mercury, 
Apollo,  Mars,  Vulcan,  Neptune,  Sol,  Orcus, 
father  Liber,  Tellus,  Ceres,  Juno,  Luna,  Diana, 
Minerva.  Venus,  Vesta;  of  which  twenty  gods, 
twelve  are  males  and  eight  females.  Whether 
are  these  deities  called  select,  because  of  their 
higher  spheres  of  administration  in  the  world, 
or  because  they  have  become  better  known  to 
the  people,  and  more  worship  has  been  expended 
on  them?  If  it  be  on  account  of  the  greater 
works  which  are  performed  by  them  in  the 
world,  we  ought  not  to  have  found  them  among 
that,  as  it  were,  plebeian  crowd  of  deities,  wrhich 
has  assigned  to  it  the  charge  of  minute  and  tri¬ 
fling  things.  For,  first  of  all,  at  the  conception  of 
a  foetus,  from  which  point  all  the  works  com¬ 
mence  wThich  have  been  distributed  in  minute 
detail  to  many  deities,  Janus  himself  opens  the 
way  for  the  reception  of  the  seed;  there  also  is 
Saturn,  on  account  of  the  seed  itself;  there  is 
Liber,  who  liberates  the  male  by  the  effusion  of 
the  seed;  there  is  Libera,  whom  they  also  would 
have  to  be  Venus,  who  confers  this  same  benefit 
on  the  woman,  namely,  that  she  also  be  liberated 
by  the  emission  of  the  seed;  all  these  are  of  the 
number  of  those  who  are  called  select.  But  there 
is  also  the  goddess  Mena,  who  presides  over  the 
menses;  though  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,  ignoble 
nevertheless.  And  this  province  of  the  menses 
the  same  author,  in  his  book  on  the  select  gods, 
assigns  to  Juno  herself,  who  is  even  queen 
among  the  select  gods ;  and  here,  as  Juno  Lucina. 
along  writh  the  same  Mena,  her  step-daughter, 
she  presides  over  the  same  blood.  There  also  are 
two  gods,  exceedingly  obscure,  Vitumnus  and 
Sentinus — the  one  of  whom  imparts  life  to  the 
foetus,  and  the  other  sensation;  and,  of  a  truth, 
they  bestow,  most  ignoble  though  they  be,  far 
more  than  all  those  noble  and  select  gods  be¬ 
stow.  For.  surely,  without  life  and  sensation, 
what  is  the  whole  foetus  which  a  woman  carries 
in  her  womb,  but  a  most  vile  and  worthless 
thing,  no  better  than  slime  and  dust? 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  3.  How  there  is  no  reason  which  can  he 
shown  for  the  selection  of  certain  gods,  when 
the  administration  of  more  exalted  offices  is 
assigned  to  many  inferior  gods 

What  is  the  cause,  therefore,  which  has  driven 
so  many  select  gods  to  these  very  small  works, 
in  which  they  are  excelled  by  Vitumnus  and  Sen¬ 
tinus,  though  little  known  and  sunk  in  obscur¬ 
ity,  inasmuch  as  they  confer  the  munificent  gifts 
of  life  and  sensation?  For  the  select  Janus  be¬ 
stows  an  entrance,  and,  as  it  were,  a  door  for  the 
seed;  the  select  Saturn  bestows  the  seed  itself; 
the  select  Liber  bestows  on  men  the  emission  of 
the  same  seed;  Libera,  who  is  Ceres  or  Venus, 
confers  the  same  on  women;  the  select  Juno 
confers  (not  alone,  but  together  with  Mena,  the 
daughter  of  Jupiter)  the  menses,  for  the  growth 
of  that  which  has  been  conceived;  and  the  ob¬ 
scure  and  ignoble  Vitumnus  confers  life,  whilst 
the  obscure  and  ignoble  Sentinus  confers  sensa¬ 
tion — which  two  last  things  are  as  much  more 
excellent  than  the  others  as  they  themselves  are 
excelled  by  reason  and  intellect.  For  as  those 
things  which  reason  and  understand  are  prefer¬ 
able  to  those  which,  without  intellect  and  rea¬ 
son,  as  in  the  case  of  cattle,  live  and  feel;  so 
also  those  things  which  have  been  endowed  with 
life  and  sensation  are  deservedly  preferred  to 
those  things  which  neither  live  nor  feel.  There¬ 
fore  Vitumnus  the  life-giver,  and  Sentinus  the 
sense-giver,  ought  to  have  been  reckoned  among 
the  select  gods,  rather  than  Janus  the  admitter  of 
seed,  and  Saturn  the  giver  or  sower  of  seed,  and 
Liber  and  Libera  the  movers  and  liberators  of 
seed;  which  seed  is  not  worth  a  thought,  unless 
it  attain  to  life  and  sensation.  Yet  these  select 
gifts  are  not  given  by  select  gods,  but  by  cer¬ 
tain  unknown  and,  considering  their  dignity, 
neglected  gods.  But  if  it  be  replied  that  Janus 
has  dominion  over  all  beginnings,  and  therefore 
the  opening  of  the  way  for  conception  is  not 
without  reason  assigned  to  him ;  and  that  Saturn 
has  dominion  over  all  seeds,  and  therefore  the 
sowing  of  the  seed  whereby  a  human  being  is 
generated  cannot  be  excluded  from  his  opera¬ 
tion;  that  Liber  and  Libera  have  power  over  the 
emission  of  all  seeds,  and  therefore  preside  over 
those  seeds  which  pertain  to  the  procreation  of 
men;  that  Juno  presides  over  all  purgations  and 
births,  and  therefore  she  has  also  charge  of  the 
purgations  of  women  and  the  births  of  human 
beings;  if  they  give  this  reply,  let  them  find  an 
answer  to  the  question  concerning  Vitumnus 
and  Sentinus,  whether  they  are  willing  that  these 
likewise  should  have  dominion  over  all  things 


GOD  VII.  1-3  245 

which  live  and  feel.  If  they  grant  this,  let  them 
observe  in  how  sublime  a  position  they  are  about 
to  place  them.  For  to  spring  from  seeds  is  in  the 
earth  and  of  the  earth,  but  to  live  and  feel  are 
supposed  to  be  properties  even  of  the  sidereal 
gods.  But  if  they  say  that  only  such  things  as 
come  to  life  in  flesh  and  are  supported  by  senses 
are  assigned  to  Sentinus,  why  does  not  that  God 
who  made  all  things  live  and  feel  bestow  on  flesh 
also  life  and  sensation,  in  the  universality  of 
His  operation  conferring  also  on  foetuses  this 
gift?  And  what,  then,  is  the  use  of  Vitumnus 
and  Sentinus?  But  if  these,  as  it  were,  extreme 
and  lowest  things  have  been  committed  by  Him 
who  presides  universally  over  life  and  sense  to 
these  gods  as  to  servants,  are  these  select  gods 
then  so  destitute  of  servants  that  they  could  not 
find  any  to  whom  even  they  might  commit  those 
things,  but  with  all  their  dignity,  for  which  they 
are,  it  seems,  deemed  worthy  to  be  selected, 
were  compelled  to  perform  their  work  along 
with  ignoble  ones?  Juno  is  select  queen  of  the 
gods,  and  the  sister  and  wife  of  Jupiter;  never¬ 
theless  she  is  Iterduca,  the  conductor  to  boys, 
and  performs  this  work  along  with  a  most  ig¬ 
noble  pair — the  goddesses  Abeona  and  Adeona. 
There  they  have  also  placed  the  goddess  Mena, 
who  gives  to  boys  a  good  mind,  and  she  is  not 
placed  among  the  select  gods;  as  if  anything 
greater  could  be  bestowed  on  a  man  than  a  good 
mind.  But  Juno  is  placed  among  the  select  be¬ 
cause  she  is  Iterduca  and  Domiduca  (she  who 
conducts  one  on  a  journey,  and  who  conducts 
him  home  again) ;  as  if  it  is  of  any  advantage 
for  one  to  make  a  journey  and  to  be  conducted 
home  again,  if  his  mind  is  not  good.  And  yet  the 
goddess  who  bestows  that  gift  has  not  been 
placed  by  the  selectors  among  the  select  gods, 
though  she  ought  indeed  to  have  been  preferred 
even  to  Minerva,  to  whom,  in  this  minute  dis¬ 
tribution  of  work,  they  have  allotted  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  boys.  For  who  will  doubt  that  it  is  a  far 
better  thing  to  have  a  good  mind  than  ever  so 
great  a  memory?  For  no  one  is  bad  who  has  a 
good  mind ;  but  some  who  are  very  bad  are  pos¬ 
sessed  of  an  admirable  memory,  and  are  so 
much  the  worse,  the  less  they  are  able  to  forget 
the  bad  things  which  they  think.  And  yet  Min¬ 
erva  is  among  the  select  gods,  whilst  the  goddess 
Mena  is  hidden  by  a  worthless  crowd.  What 
shall  I  say  concerning  Virtus?  What  concerning 
Felicitas? — concerning  whom  I  have  already 
spoken  much  in  the  fourth  book;1  to  whom, 
though  they  held  them  to  be  goddesses,  they 
have  not  thought  fit  to  assign  a  place  among  the 

^haps.  21,  23. 


246  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


select  gods,  among  whom  they  have  given  a 
place  to  Mars  and  Orcus,  the  one  the  causer  of 
death,  the  other  the  receiver  of  the  dead. 

Since,  therefore,  we  see  that  even  the  select 
gods  themselves  work  together  with  the  others, 
like  a  senate  with  the  people,  in  all  those  minute 
works  which  have  been  minutely  portioned  out 
among  many  gods;  and  since  we  find  that  far 
greater  and  better  things  are  administered  by 
certain  gods  who  have  not  been  reckoned  worthy 
to  be  selected  than  by  those  who  are  called  se¬ 
lect,  it  remains  that  we  suppose  that  they  were 
called  select  and  chief,  not  on  account  of  their 
holding  more  exalted  offices  in  the  world,  but 
because  it  happened  to  them  to  become  better 
known  to  the  people.  And  even  Varro  himself 
says  that  in  that  way  obscurity  had  fallen  to  the 
lot  of  some  father  gods  and  mother  goddesses  as 
it  falls  to  the  lot  of  man.  If.  therefore,  Felicity 
ought  not  perhaps  to  have  been  put  among  the 
select  gods,  because  they  did  not  attain  to  that 
noble  position  by  merit,  but  by  chance.  Fortune 
at  least  should  have  been  placed  among  them, 
or  rather  before  them;  for  they  say  that  Ihat 
goddess  distributes  to  every  one  the  gifts  she 
receives,  not  according  to  any  rational  arrange¬ 
ment,  but  according  as  chance  may  determine. 
She  ought  to  have  held  the  uppermost  place 
among  the  select  gods,  for  among  them  chiefly 
it  is  that  she  shows  what  power  she  has.  For  we 
see  that  they  have  been  selected  not  on  account 
of  some  eminent  virtue  or  rational  happiness, 
but  by  that  random  power  of  Fortune  which  the 
worshippers  of  these  gods  think  that  she  exerts. 
For  that  most  eloquent  man  Sallust  also  may 
perhaps  have  the  gods  themselves  in  view  when 
he  says :  “But,  in  truth,  fortune  rules  in  every¬ 
thing;  it  renders  all  things  famous  or  obscure, 
according  to  caprice  rather  than  according  to 
truth.”  For  they  cannot  discover  a  reason  why 
Venus  should  have  been  made  famous,  whilst 
Virtus  has  been  made  obscure,  when  the  divinity 
of  both  of  them  has  been  solemnly  recognized 
by  them,  and  their  merits  are  not  to  be  com¬ 
pared.  Again,  if  she  has  deserved  a  noble  posi¬ 
tion  on  account  of  the  fact  that  she  is  much 
sought  after — for  there  are  more  who  seek  after 
Venus  than  after  Virtus — why  has  Minerva 
been  celebrated  whilst  Pecunia  has  been  left  in 
obscurity,  although  throughout  the  whole  hu¬ 
man  race  avarice  allures  a  far  greater  number 
than  skill?  And  even  among  those  who  are 
skilled  in  the  arts,  you  will  rarely  find  a  man 
who  does  not  practise  his  own  art  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  pecuniary  gain;  and  that  for  the  sake  of 
which  anything  is  made  is  always  valued  more 


than  that  which  is  made  for  the  sake  of  some¬ 
thing  else.  If,  then,  this  selection  of  gods  has 
been  made  by  the  judgment  of  the  foolish  mul¬ 
titude,  why  has  not  the  goddess  Pecunia  been 
preferred  to  Minerva,  since  there  are  many  arti¬ 
ficers  for  the  sake  of  money?  But  if  this  dis¬ 
tinction  has  been  made  by  the  few  wise,  why  has 
Virtus  been  preferred  to  Venus,  when  reason  by 
far  prefers  the  former?  At  all  events,  as  I  have 
already  said.  Fortune  herself — who,  according 
to  those  who  attribute  most  influence  to  her, 
renders  all  things  famous  or  obscure  according 
to  caprice  rather  than  according  to  the  truth — 
since  she  has  been  able  to  exercise  so  much 
power  even  over  the  gods  as,  according  to  her 
capricious  judgment,  to  render  those  of  them 
famous  whom  she  would  and  those  obscure 
whom  she  would;  Fortune  herself  ought  to  oc¬ 
cupy  the  place  of  pre-eminence  among  the  select 
gods,  since  over  them  also  she  has  such  pre¬ 
eminent  power.  Or  must  we  suppose  that  the 
reason  why  she  is  not  among  the  select  is  sim¬ 
ply  this,  that  even  Fortune  herself  has  had  an 
adverse  fortune?  She  was  adverse,  then,  to  her¬ 
self,  since,  whilst  ennobling  others,  she  herself 
has  remained  obscure. 

Chap.  4.  The  inferior  gods,  whose  names  are  not 
associated  with  infamy ,  have  been  better 
dealt  with  than  the  select  gods,  whose  in¬ 
famies  are  celebrated 

However,  any  one  who  eagerly  seeks  for  ce¬ 
lebrity  and  renown,  might  congratulate  those  se¬ 
lect  gods,  and  call  them  fortunate,  were  it  not 
that  he  saw  that  they  have  been  selected  more 
to  their  injury  than  to  their  honour.  For  that 
low  crowd  of  gods  have  been  protected  by  their 
very  meanness  and  obscurity  from  being  over¬ 
whelmed  with  infamy.  We  laugh,  indeed,  when 
we  see  them  distributed  by  the  mere  fiction  of 
human  opinions,  according  to  the  special  works 
assigned  to  them,  like  those  who  farm  small  por¬ 
tions  of  the  public  revenue,  or  like  workmen  in 
the  street  of  the  silversmiths,  where  one  vessel, 
in  order  that  it  may  go  out  perfect,  passes 
through  the  hands  of  many,  when  it  might  have 
been  finished  by  one  perfect  workman.  But  the 
only  reason  why  the  combined  skill  of  many 
workmen  was  thought  necessary,  was,  that  it  is 
better  that  each  part  of  an  art  should  be  learned 
by  a  special  workman,  which  can  be  done  speed¬ 
ily  and  easily,  than  that  they  should  all  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  be  perfect  in  one  art  throughout  all  its 
parts,  which  they  could  only  attain  slowly  and 
with  difficulty.  Nevertheless  there  is  scarcely  to 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VII.  4-5  247 


be  found  one  of  the  non-select  gods  who  has 
brought  infamy  on  himself  by  any  crime,  whilst 
there  is  scarce  any  one  of  the  select  gods  who 
has  not  received  upon  himself  the  brand  of  no¬ 
table  infamy.  These  latter  have  descended  to 
the  humble  works  of  the  others,  whilst  the  oth¬ 
ers  have  not  come  up  to  their  sublime  crimes. 
Concerning  Janus,  there  does  not  readily  occur 
to  my  recollection  anything  infamous;  and  per¬ 
haps  he  was  such  an  one  as  lived  more  innocent¬ 
ly  than  the  rest  and  further  removed  from  mis¬ 
deeds  and  crimes.  He  kindly  received  and  enter¬ 
tained  Saturn  when  he  was  fleeing;  he  divided 
his  kingdom  with  his  guest,  so  that  each  of  them 
had  a  city  for  himself,1  the  one  Janiculum,  and 
the  other  Saturnia.  But  those  seekers  after  ev¬ 
ery  kind  of  unseemliness  in  the  worship  of  the 
gods  have  disgraced  him,  whose  life  they  found 
to  be  less  disgraceful  than  that  of  the  other 
gods,  with  an  image  of  monstrous  deformity, 
making  it  sometimes  with  two  faces,  and  some¬ 
times.  as  it  were,  double,  with  four  faces.  Did 
they  wish  that,  as  the  most  of  the  select 
gods  had  lost  shame  through  the  perpetration 
of  shameful  crimes,  his  greater  innocence 
should  be  marked  by  a  greater  number  of 
faces? 

Chap.  5.  Concerning  the  more  secret  doctrine 
of  the  pagans ,  and  concerning  the  physical  in¬ 
terpretations 

But  let  us  hear  their  own  physical  interpreta¬ 
tions  by  which  they  attempt  to  colour,  as  with 
the  appearance  of  profounder  doctrine,  the  base¬ 
ness  of  most  miserable  error.  Varro,  in  the  first 
place,  commends  these  interpretations  so  strong¬ 
ly  as  to  say  that  the  ancients  invented  the  im¬ 
ages,  badges,  and  adornments  of  the  gods,  in  or¬ 
der  that  when  those  who  went  to  the  mysteries 
should  see  them  with  their  bodily  eyes,  they 
might  with  the  eyes  of  their  mind  see  the  soul  of 
the  world,  and  its  parts,  that  is,  the  true  gods; 
and  also  that  the  meaning  which  was  intended 
by  those  who  made  their  images  with  the  human 
form,  seemed  to  be  this — namely,  that  the  mind 
of  mortals,  which  is  in  a  human  body,  is  very 
like  to  the  immortal  mind,  just  as  vessels  might 
be  placed  to  represent  the  gods,  as,  for  instance, 
a  wine-vessel  might  be  placed  in  the  temple  of 
Liber,  to  signify  wine,  that  which  is  contained 
being  signified  by  that  which  contains.  Thus  by 
an  image  which  had  the  human  form  the  rational 
soul  was  signified,  because  the  human  form  is 
the  vessel,  as  it  were,  in  which  that  nature  is 
1Virgil,  JEneid,  bk.  viii.  357,  358. 


wont  to  be  contained  which  they  attribute  to 
God,  or  to  the  gods.  These  are  the  mysteries  of 
doctrine  to  which  that  most  learned  man  pene¬ 
trated  in  order  that  he  might  bring  them  forth 
to  the  light.  But,  0  thou  most  acute  man,  hast 
thou  lost  among  those  mysteries  that  prudence 
which  led  thee  to  form  the  sober  opinion,  that 
those  who  first  established  those  images  for  the 
people  took  away  fear  from  the  citizens  and  add¬ 
ed  error,  and  that  the  ancient  Romans  honoured 
the  gods  more  chastely  without  images?  For  it 
was  through  consideration  of  them  that  thou 
wast  emboldened  to  speak  these  things  against 
the  later  Romans.  For  if  those  most  ancient  Ro¬ 
mans  also  had  worshipped  images,  perhaps  thou 
wouldst  have  suppressed  by  the  silence  of  fear 
all  those  sentiments  (true  sentiments,  neverthe¬ 
less)  concerning  the  folly  of  setting  up  images, 
and  wouldst  have  extolled  more  loftily,  and 
more  loquaciously,  those  mysterious  doctrines 
consisting  of  these  vain  and  pernicious  fictions. 
Thy  soul,  so  learned  and  so  clever  (and  for  this 
I  grieve  much  for  thee),  could  never  through 
these  mysteries  have  reached  its  God;  that  is, 
the  God  by  Whom,  not  with  Whom,  it  has  made, 
of  Whom  it  is  not  a  part,  but  a  work;  that  God 
Who  is  not  the  soul  of  all  things,  but  Who 
made  every  soul,  and  in  Whose  light  alone  every 
soul  is  blessed,  if  it  be  not  ungrateful  for  His 
grace. 

But  the  things  which  follow  in  this  book  will 
show  what  is  the  nature  of  these  mysteries,  and 
what  value  is  to  be  set  upon  them.  Meanwhile, 
this  most  learned  man  confesses  as  his  opinion 
that  the  soul  of  the  world  and  its  parts  are  the 
true  gods,  from  which  we  perceive  that  his  the¬ 
ology  (to  wit,  that  same  natural  theology  to 
which  he  pays  great  regard)  has  been  able, 
in  its  completeness,  to  extend  itself  even  to  the 
nature  of  the  rational  soul.  For  in  this  book 
(concerning  the  select  gods)  he  says  a  very  few 
things  by  anticipation  concerning  the  natural 
theology;  and  we  shall  see  whether  he  has  been 
able  in  that  book,  by  means  of  physical  inter¬ 
pretations,  to  refer  to  this  natural  theology  that 
civil  theology,  concerning  which  he  wrote  last 
when  treating  of  the  select  gods.  Now,  if  he  has 
been  able  to  do  this,  the  whole  is  natural;  and 
in  that  case,  what  need  was  there  for  distin¬ 
guishing  so  carefully  the  civil  from  the  natural? 
But  if  it  has  been  distinguished  by  a  veritable 
distinction,  then,  since  not  even  this  natural  the¬ 
ology  with  which  he  is  so  much  pleased  is  true 
(for  though  it  has  reached  as  far  as  the  soul,  it 
has  not  reached  to  the  true  God  Who  made  the 
soul),  how  much  more  contemptible  and  false  is 


2 48  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


that  civil  theology  which  is  chiefly  occupied 
about  what  is  corporeal,  as  will  be  shown  by  its 
very  interpretations,  which  they  have  with  such 
diligence  sought  out  and  enucleated,  some  of 
which  I  must  necessarily  mention! 

Chap.  6.  Concerning  the  opinion  of  Varro ,  that 
God  is  the  soul  of  the  world ,  which  neverthe- 
less ,  in  its  various  parts ,  has  many  souls 
whose  nature  is  divine 

The  same  Varro,  then,  still  speaking  by  antic¬ 
ipation,  says  that  he  thinks  that  God  is  the  soul 
of  the  world  (which  the  Greeks  call  koo-jjlos) 
and  that  this  world  itself  is  God;  but  as  a  wise 
man,  though  he  consists  of  body  and  mind,  is 
nevertheless  called  wise  on  account  of  his  mind, 
so  the  world  is  called  God  on  account  of  mind, 
although  it  consists  of  mind  and  body.  Here  he 
seems,  in  some  fashion  at  least,  to  acknowledge 
one  God;  but  that  he  may  introduce  more,  he 
adds  that  the  world  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
heaven  and  earth,  which  are  again  divided  each 
into  two  parts,  heaven  into  ether  and  air,  earth 
into  water  and  land,  of  all  which  the  ether  is  the 
highest,  the  air  second,  the  water  third,  and  the 
earth  the  lowest.  All  these  four  parts,  he  says, 
are  full  of  souls;  those  which  are  in  the  ether 
and  air  being  immortal,  and  those  which  are  in 
the  water  and  on  the  earth  mortal.  From  the 
highest  part  of  the  heavens  to  the  orbit  of  the 
moon  there  are  souls,  namely,  the  stars  and 
planets ;  and  these  are  not  only  understood  to  be 
gods,  but  are  seen  to  be  such.  And  between  the 
orbit  of  the  moon  and  the  commencement  of  the 
region  of  clouds  and  winds  there  are  aerial 
souls ;  but  these  are  seen  with  the  mind,  not  with 
the  eyes,  and  are  called  Heroes,  and  Lares,  and 
Genii.  This  is  the  natural  theology  which  is 
briefly  set  forth  in  these  anticipatory  state¬ 
ments,  and  which  satisfied  not  Varro  only,  but 
many  philosophers  besides.  This  I  must  discuss 
more  carefully,  when,  with  the  help  of  God,  I 
shall  have  completed  what  I  have  yet  to  say 
concerning  the  civil  theology,  as  far  as  it  con¬ 
cerns  the  select  gods. 

Chap.  7.  Whether  it  is  reasonable  to  separate 
Janus  and  Terminus  as  two  distinct  deities 
Who,  then,  is  Janus,  with  whom  Varro  com¬ 
mences?  He  is  the  world.  Certainly  a  very  brief 
and  unambiguous  reply.  Why,  then,  do  they  say 
that  the  beginnings  of  things  pertain  to  him,  but 
the  ends  to  another  whom  they  call  Terminus? 
For  they  say  that  two  months  have  been  dedi¬ 
cated  to  these  two  gods,  with  reference  to  begin¬ 
nings  and  ends— -January  to  Janus,  and  Febru¬ 


ary  to  Terminus — over  and  above  those  ten 
months  which  commence  with  March  and  end 
with  December.  And  they  say  that  that  is  the 
reason  why  the  Terminalia  are  celebrated  in  the 
month  of  February,  the  same  month  in  which 
the  sacred  purification  is  made  which  they  call 
Februum.  and  from  which  the  month  derives  its 
name.1  Do  the  beginnings  of  things,  therefore, 
pertain  to  the  world,  which  is  Janus,  and  not 
also  the  ends,  since  another  god  has  been  placed 
over  them?  Do  they  not  own  that  all  things 
which  they  say  begin  in  this  world  also  come  to 
an  end  in  this  world?  What  folly  it  is  to  give 
him  only  half  power  in  work,  when  in  his  image 
they  give  him  two  faces!  Would  it  not  be  a  far 
more  elegant  way  of  interpreting  the  two-faced 
image  to  say  that  Janus  and  Terminus  are  the 
same  and  that  the  one  face  has  reference  to  be¬ 
ginnings,  the  other  to  ends?  For  one  who  works 
ought  to  have  respect  to  both.  For  he  who  in 
every  forthputting  of  activity  does  not  look 
back  on  the  beginning,  does  not  look  forward 
to  the  end.  Wherefore  it  is  necessary  that  pro¬ 
spective  intention  be  connected  with  retrospec¬ 
tive  memory.  For  how  shall  one  find  how  to  fin¬ 
ish  anything,  if  he  has  forgotten  what  it  was 
which  he  had  begun?  But  if  they  thought  that 
the  blessed  life  is  begun  in  this  world,  and  per¬ 
fected  beyond  the  world,  and  for  that  reason  at¬ 
tributed  to  Janus,  that  is,  to  the  world,  only  the 
power  of  beginnings,  they  should  certainly  have 
preferred  Terminus  to  him,  and  should  not  have 
shut  him  out  from  the  number  of  the  select  gods. 
Yet  even  now,  when  the  beginnings  and  ends  of 
temporal  things  are  represented  by  these  two 
gods,  more  honour  ought  to  have  been  given  to 
Terminus.  For  the  greater  joy  is  that  which  is 
felt  when  anything  is  finished;  but  things  begun 
are  always  cause  of  much  anxiety  until  they  are 
brought  to  an  end,  which  end  he  who  begins  any¬ 
thing  very  greatly  longs  for,  fixes  his  mind  on, 
expects,  desires;  nor  does  any  one  ever  rejoice 
over  anything  he  has  begun,  unless  it  be  brought 
to  an  end. 

Chap.  8.  For  what  reason  the  worshippers  of 
Janus  have  made  his  image  with  two  faces , 
when  they  would  sometimes  have  it  be  seen 
with  four 

But  now  let  the  interpretation  of  the  two- 
faced  image  be  produced.  For  they  say  that 
it  has  two  faces,  one  before  and  one  behind, 
because  our  gaping  mouths  seem  to  resemble 
the  world:  whence  the  Greeks  call  the  pal¬ 
ate  ovpavos  and  some  La  in  poets,  he  says,  have 
1Cf.  Plutarch,  Numa. 


THE  CITY  OF 

called  the  heavens  palatum;  and  from  the  gap¬ 
ing  mouth,  they  say,  there  is  a  way  out  in  the 
direction  of  the  teeth,  and  a  way  in  in  the 
direction  of  the  gullet.  See  what  the  world  has 
been  brought  to  on  account  of  a  Greek  or  a  po¬ 
etical  word  for  our  palate!  Let  this  god  be  wor¬ 
shipped  only  on  account  of  saliva,  which  has 
two  open  doorways  under  the  heavens  of  the 
palate — one  through  which  part  of  it  may  be 
spitten  out.  the  other  through  which  part  of  it 
may  be  swallowed  down.  Besides,  what  is  more 
absurd  than  not  to  find  in  the  world  itself  two 
doorways  opposite  to  each  other,  through  which 
it  may  either  receive  anything  into  itself,  or  cast 
it  out  from  itself ;  and  to  seek  of  our  throat  and 
gullet,  to  which  the  world  has  no  resemblance,  to 
make  up  an  image  of  the  world  in  Janus,  be¬ 
cause  the  world  is  said  to  resemble  the  palate , 
to  which  Janus  bears  no  likeness?  But  when 
they  make  him  four-faced,  and  call  him  double 
Janus,  they  interpret  this  as  having  reference  to 
the  four  quarters  of  the  world,  as  though  the 
world  looked  out  on  anything,  like  Janus 
through  his  four  faces.  Again,  if  Janus  is  the 
world,  and  the  world  consists  of  four  quarters, 
then  the  image  of  the  two-faced  Janus  is  false. 
Or  if  it  is  true,  because  the  whole  world  is  some¬ 
times  understood  by  the  expression  east  and 
west,  will  any  one  call  the  world  double  when 
north  and  south  also  are  mentioned,  as  they  call 
Janus  double  when  he  has  four  faces?  They  have 
no  way  at  all  of  interpreting,  in  relation  to  the 
world,  four  doorways  by  which  to  go  in  and  to 
come  out  as  they  did  in  the  case  of  the  two- 
faced  Janus,  where  they  found,  at  any  rate  in 
the  human  mouth,  something  which  answered  to 
what  they  said  about  him;  unless  perhaps  Nep¬ 
tune  come  to  their  aid  and  hand  them  a  fish, 
which,  besides  the  mouth  and  gullet,  has  also 
the  openings  of  the  gills,  one  on  each  side.  Nev¬ 
ertheless,  with  all  the  doors,  no  soul  escapes  this 
vanity  but  that  one  which  hears  the  truth  say¬ 
ing,  “I  am  the  door.”  1 

Chap.  9.  Concerning  the  power  of  Jupiter ,  and 
a  comparison  of  Jupiter  with  Janus 
But  they  also  show  whom  they  would  have 
Jove  (who  is  also  called  Jupiter)  understood  to 
be.  He  is  the  god,  say  they,  who  has  the  power 
of  the  causes  by  which  anything  comes  to  be  in 
the  world.  And  how  great  a  thing  this  is  that 
most  noble  verse  of  Virgil  testifies : 

Happy  is  he  who  has  learned  the  causes  of  things.2 

But  why  is  Janus  preferred  to  him?  Let  that 
^ohn,  10. 9.  2Georgics.  bk.  ii.  470. 


GOD  VII.  6-9  249 

most  acute  and  most  learned  man  answer  us  this 
question.  “Because,”  says  he,  “Janus  has  do¬ 
minion  over  first  things,  Jupiter  over  highest3 
things.  Therefore  Jupiter  is  deservedly  held  to 
be  the  king  of  all  things;  for  highest  things  are 
better  than  first  things:  for  although  first  things 
precede  in  time,  highest  things  excel  by  dignity.” 

Now  this  would  have  been  rightly  said  had  the 
first  parts  of  things  which  are  done  been  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  highest  parts;  as,  for  instance, 
it  is  the  beginning  of  a  thing  done  to  set  out,  the 
highest  part  to  arrive.  The  commencing  to  learn 
is  the  first  part  of  a  thing  begun,  the  acquire¬ 
ment  of  knowledge  is  the  highest  part.  And  so  of 
all  things:  the  beginnings  are  first,  the  ends  high¬ 
est.  This  matter,  however,  has  been  already  dis¬ 
cussed  in  connection  with  Janus  and  Terminus. 
But  the  causes  which  are  attributed  to  Jupiter 
are  things  effecting,  not  things  effected;  and  it  is 
impossible  for  them  to  be  prevented  in  time  by 
things  which  are  made  or  done,  or  by  the  begin¬ 
nings  of  such  things;  for  the  thing  which  makes 
is  always  prior  to  the  thing  which  is  made. 
Therefore,  though  the  beginnings  of  things 
which  are  made  or  done  pertain  to  Janus,  they 
are  nevertheless  not  prior  to  the  efficient  causes 
which  they  attribute  to  Jupiter.  For  as  nothing 
takes  place  without  being  preceded  by  an  effi¬ 
cient  cause,  so  without  an  efficient  cause  nothing 
begins  to  take  place.  Verily,  if  the  people  call 
this  god  Jupiter,  in  whose  power  are  all  the 
causes  of  all  natures  which  have  been  made 
and  of  all  natural  things,  and  worship  him 
with  such  insults  and  infamous  criminations, 
they  are  guilty  of  more  shocking  sacrilege  than 
if  they  should  totally  deny  the  existence  of  any 
god.  It  would  therefore  be  better  for  them  to 
call  some  other  god  by  the  name  of  Jupiter — 
some  one  worthy  of  base  and  criminal  honours ; 
substituting  instead  of  Jupiter  some  vain  fiction 
(as  Saturn  is  said  to  have  had  a  stone  given  to 
him  to  devour  instead  of  his  son),  which  they 
might  make  the  subject  of  their  blasphemies, 
rather  than  speak  of  that  god  as  both  thunder¬ 
ing  and  committing  adultery — ruling  the  whole 
world,  and  laying  himself  out  for  the  commis¬ 
sion  of  so  many  licentious  acts — having  in  his 
power  nature  and  the  highest  causes  of  all  nat¬ 
ural  things,  but  not  having  his  own  causes  good. 

Next,  I  ask  what  place  they  find  any  longer 
for  this  Jupiter  among  the  gods,  if  Janus  is  the 
world;  for  Varro  defined  the  true  gods  to  be  the 
soul  of  the  world,  and  the  parts  of  it.  And  there¬ 
fore  whatever  falls  not  within  this  definition,  is 
certainly  not  a  true  god,  according  to  them. 

zSumma,  which  also  includes  the  meaning  last. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


250 

Will  they  then  say  that  Jupiter  is  the  soul  of  the 
world  and  Janus  the  body — that  is,  this  visible 
world?  If  they  say  this,  it  will  not  be  possible 
for  them  to  affirm  that  Janus  is  a  god.  For  even, 
according  to  them,  the  body  of  the  world  is  not 
a  god.  but  the  soul  of  the  world  and  its  parts. 
Wherefore  Varro.  seeing  this,  says  that  he  thinks 
God  is  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  that  this  world 
itself  is  God;  but  that  as  a  wise  man,  though  he 
consists  of  soul  and  body,  is  nevertheless  called 
wise  from  the  soul,  so  the  world  is  called  God 
from  the  soul,  though  it  consists  of  soul  and 
body.  Therefore  the  body  of  the  world  alone  is 
not  God,  but  either  the  soul  of  it  alone,  or  the 
soul  and  the  body  together,  yet  so  as  that  it  is 
God  not  by  virtue  of  the  body,  but  by  virtue  of 
the  soul.  If.  therefore,  Janus  is  the  world  and 
Janus  is  a  god.  will  they  say,  in  order  that  Jupi¬ 
ter  may  be  a  god.  that  he  is  some  part  of  Janus? 
For  they  are  wont  rather  to  attribute  universal 
existence  to  Jupiter;  whence  the  saying,  “All 
things  are  full  of  Jupiter.”1  Therefore  they  must 
think  Jupiter  also,  in  order  that  he  may  be  a 
god.  and  especially  king  of  the  gods,  to  belhe 
world,  that  he  may  rule  over  the  other  gods — 
according  to  them,  his  parts.  To  this  effect,  also, 
the  same  Varro  expounds  certain  verses  of  Vale¬ 
rius  Soranus  in  that  book  which  he  wrote  apart 
from  the  others  concerning  the  worship  of  the 
gods.  These  are  the  verses: 

Almighty  Jove,  progenitor  of  kings,  and  things,  and 

gods, 

And  eke  the  mother  of  the  gods,  god  one  and  all. 

But  in  the  same  book  he  expounds  these  verses 
by  saying  that  as  the  male  emits  seed  and  the 
female  receives  it,  so  Jupiter,  whom  they  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  the  world,  both  emits  all  seeds  from 
himself  and  receives  them  into  himself.  For 
which  reason,  he  says.  Soranus  wrote,  “Jove, 
progenitor  and  mother” ;  and  with  no  less  reason 
said  that  one  and  all  were  the  same.  For  the 
world  is  one,  and  in  that  one  are  all  things. 

Chap.  10.  Whether  the  distinction  between  Ja¬ 
nus  and  Jupiter  is  a  proper  one 

Since,  therefore,  Janus  is  the  world,  and  Jupi¬ 
ter  is  the  world,  wherefore  are  Janus  and  Jupi¬ 
ter  two  gods,  while  the  world  is  but  one?  Why 
do  they  have  separate  temples,  separate  altars, 
different  rites,  dissimilar  images?  If  it  be  be¬ 
cause  the  nature  of  beginnings  is  one,  and  the 
nature  of  causes  another,  and  the  one  has  re¬ 
ceived  the  name  of  Janus,  the  other  of  Jupiter; 

1Virgil,  Eclogues ,  bk.  iii.  60. 


is  it  then  the  case,  that  if  one  man  has  two  dis¬ 
tinct  offices  of  authority,  or  two  arts,  two  judges 
or  two  artificers  are  spoken  of,  because  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  offices  or  the  arts  is  different?  So  also 
with  respect  to  one  god :  if  he  have  the  power  of 
beginnings  and  of  causes,  must  he  therefore  be 
thought  to  be  two  gods,  because  beginnings  and 
causes  are  two  things?  But  if  they  think  that  this 
is  right,  let  them  also  affirm  that  Jupiter  is  as 
many  gods  as  they  have  given  him  surnames,  on 
account  of  many  powers;  for  the  things  from 
which  these  surnames  are  applied  to  him  are 
many  and  diverse.  I  shall  mention  a  few  of  them. 

Chap.  ii.  Concerning  the  surnames  of  Jupiter , 

which  are  referred  not  to  many  gods ,  but  to 

one  and  the  same  god 

They  have  called  him  “Victor,”  “Invictus,” 
“Opitulus,”  “Impulsor,”  “Stator,”  “Centum- 
peda,”  “Supinalis,”  “Tigillus,”  “Almus,”  “Ru- 
minus,”  and  other  names  which  it  were  long  to 
enumerate.  But  these  surnames  they  have  given 
to  one  god  on  account  of  diverse  causes  and 
powers,  but  yet  have  not  compelled  him  to  be. 
on  account  of  so  many  things,  as  many  gods. 
They  gave  him  these  surnames  because  he  con¬ 
quered  all  things ;  because  he  was  conquered  by 
none;  because  he  brought  help  to  the  needy;  be¬ 
cause  he  had  the  power  of  impelling,  stopping, 
establishing,  throwing  on  the  back;  because  as  a 
beam2  he  held  together  and  sustained  the  world; 
because  he  nourished  all  things;  because,  like 
the  pap,3  he  nourished  animals.  Here,  we  per¬ 
ceive,  are  some  great  things  and  some  small 
things;  and  yet  it  is  one  who  is  said  to  perform 
them  all.  I  think  that  the  causes  and  the  begin¬ 
nings  of  things,  on  account  of  which  they  have 
thought  that  the  one  world  is  two  gods,  Jupiter 
and  Janus,  are  nearer  to  each  other  than  the 
holding  together  of  the  world  and  the  giving  of 
the  pap  to  animals;  and  yet.  on  account  of  these 
two  works  so  far  apart  from  each  other,  both  in 
nature  and  dignity,  there  has  not  been  any  ne¬ 
cessity  for  the  existence  of  two  gods;  but  one 
Jupiter  has  been  called,  on  account  of  the  one 
Tigillus,  on  account  of  the  other  Ruminus.  I  am 
unwilling  to  say  that  the  giving  of  the  pap  to 
sucking  animals  might  have  become  Juno  rather 
than  Jupiter,  especially  when  there  was  the  god¬ 
dess  Rumina  to  help  and  to  serve  her  in  this 
work;  for  I  think  it  may  be  replied  that  Juno 
herself  is  nothing  else  than  Jupiter,  according 
to  those  verses  of  Valerius  Soranus,  where  it  has 
been  said : 

2Tigillus.  zRuma. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VII.  10-13  251 


Almighty  Jove ,  progenitor  of  kings,  and  things ,  and 
gods , 

And  eke  the  mother  of  the  gods,  etc. 

Why.  then,  was  he  called  Ruminus,  when  they 
who  may  perchance  inquire  more  diligently  may 
find  that  he  is  also  that  goddess  Rumina? 

If,  then,  it  was  rightly  thought  unworthy  of 
the  majesty  of  the  gods  that  in  one  ear  of  corn 
one  god  should  have  the  care  of  the  joint,  an¬ 
other  that  of  the  husk,  how  much  more  un¬ 
worthy  of  that  majesty  is  it  that  one  thing,  and 
that  of  the  lowest  kind,  even  the  giving  of  the 
pap  to  animals  that  they  may  be  nourished, 
should  be  under  the  care  of  two  gods,  one  of 
whom  is  Jupiter  himself,  the  very  king  of  all 
things,  who  does  this  not  along  with  his  own 
wife,  but  with  some  ignoble  Rumina  (unless  per¬ 
haps  he  himself  is  Rumina,  being  Ruminus  for 
males  and  Rumina  for  females) !  I  should  cer¬ 
tainly  have  said  that  they  had  been  unwilling  to 
apply  to  Jupiter  a  feminine  name,  had  he  not 
been  styled  in  these  verses  “progenitor  and 
mother.”  and  had  I  not  read  among  other  sur¬ 
names  of  his  that  of  Pecunia,  which  we  found  as 
a  goddess  among  those  petty  deities,  as  I  have 
already  mentioned  in  the  fourth  book.  But  since 
both  males  and  females  have  money,  why  has  he 
not  been  called  both  Pecunius  and  Pecunia? 
That  is  their  concern. 

Chap.  12.  That  Jupiter  is  also  called  Pecunia 
How  elegantly  they  have  accounted  for  this 
name!  “He  is  also  called  Pecunia,”  say  they, 
“because  all  things  belong  to  him.”  Oh  how 
grand  an  explanation  of  the  name  of  a  deity! 
Yes;  he  to  whom  all  things  belong  is  most  mean¬ 
ly  and  most  contumeliously  called  Pecunia.  In 
comparison  of  all  things  which  are  contained  by 
heaven  and  earth,  what  are  all  things  together 
which  are  possessed  by  men  under  the  name  of 
money?  And  this  name,  forsooth,  hath  avarice 
given  to  Jupiter,  that  whoever  was  a  lover  of 
money  might  seem  to  himself  to  love  not  an  or¬ 
dinary  pd,  but  the  very  king  of  all  things  him¬ 
self.  But  it  would  be  a  far  different  thing  if  he 
had  been  called  Riches.  For  riches  are  one  thing, 
money  another.  For  we  call  rich  the  wise,  the 
just,  the  good,  who  have  either  no  money  or 
very  little.  For  they  are  more  truly  rich  in  pos¬ 
sessing  virtue,  since  by  it,  even  as  respects 
things  necessary  for  the  body,  they  are  content 
with  what  they  have.  But  we  call  the  greedy 
poor,  who  are  always  craving  and  always  want¬ 
ing.  For  they  may  possess  ever  so  great  an 
amount  of  money;  but  whatever  be  the  abun¬ 
dance  of  that,  they  are  not  able  but  to  want. 


And  we  properly  call  God  Himself  rich;  not. 
however,  in  money,  but  in  omnipotence.  There¬ 
fore  they  who  have  abundance  of  money  are 
called  rich,  but  inwardly  needy  if  they  are 
greedy.  So  also,  those  who  have  no  money  are 
called  poor,  but  inwardly  rich  if  they  are  wise. 

What,  then,  ought  the  wise  man  to  think  of 
this  theology,  in  which  the  king  of  the  gods  re¬ 
ceives  the  name  of  that  thing  “which  no  wise 
man  has  desired”?  For  had  there  been  anything 
wholesomely  taught  by  this  philosophy  concern¬ 
ing  eternal  life,  how  much  more  appropriately 
would  that  god  who  is  the  ruler  of  the  world 
have  been  called  by  them,  not  money,  but  wis¬ 
dom,  the  love  of  which  purges  from  the  filth  of 
avarice,  that  is,  of  the  love  of  money! 

Chap.  13.  That  when  it  is  expounded  what  Sat¬ 
urn  is,  what  Genius  is,  it  comes  to  this ,  that 
both  of  them  are  shown  to  be  Jupiter 
But  why  speak  more  of  this  Jupiter,  with 
whom  perchance  all  the  rest  are  to  be  identified : 
so  that,  he  being  all,  the  opinion  as  to  the  exis¬ 
tence  of  many  gods  may  remain  as  a  mere  opin¬ 
ion,  empty  of  all  truth?  And  they  are  all  to  be 
referred  to  him,  if  his  various  parts  and  powers 
are  thought  of  as  so  many  gods,  or  if  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  mind  which  they  think  to  be  diffused 
through  all  things  has  received  the  names  of 
many  gods  from  the  various  parts  which  the 
mass  of  this  visible  world  combines  in  itself, 
and  from  the  manifold  administration  of  nature. 
For  what  is  Saturn  also?  “One  of  the  principal 
gods,”  he  says,  “who  has  dominion  over  all  sow¬ 
ings.”  Does  not  the  exposition  of  the  verses  of 
Valerius  Soranus  teach  that  Jupiter  is  the  world, 
and  that  he  emits  all  seeds  from  himself,  and  re¬ 
ceives  them  into  himself? 

It  is  he,  then,  with  whom  is  the  dominion  of 
all  sowings.  What  is  Genius?  “He  is  the  god  who 
is  set  over,  and  has  the  power  of  begetting,  all 
things.”  Who  else  than  the  world  do  they  believe 
to  have  this  power,  to  which  it  has  been  said: 

Almighty  Jove,  progenitor  and  mother? 

And  when  in  another  place  he  says  that  Genius 
is  the  rational  soul  of  every  one  and  therefore 
exists  separately  in  each  individual,  but  that  the 
corresponding  soul  of  the  world  is  God,  he  just 
comes  back  to  this  same  thing — namely,  that  the 
soul  of  the  world  itself  is  to  be  held  to  be,  as  it 
were,  the  universal  genius.  This,  therefore,  is 
what  he  calls  Jupiter.  For  if  every  genius  is  a 
god,  and  the  soul  of  every  man  a  genius,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  soul  of  every  man  is  a  god.  But  if 
very  absurdity  compels  even  these  theologists 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


themselves  to  shrink  from  this,  it  remains  that 
they  call  that  genius  god  by  special  and  pre¬ 
eminent  distinction,  whom  they  call  the  soul  of 
the  world,  and  therefore  Jupiter. 

Chap.  14.  Concerning  the  offices  of  Mercury 
and  M ars 

But  they  have  not  found  how  to  refer  Mer¬ 
cury  and  Mars  to  any  parts  of  the  world,  and  to 
the  works  of  God  which  are  in  the  elements ;  and 
therefore  they  have  set  them  at  least  over  hu¬ 
man  works,  making  them  assistants  in  speaking 
and  in  carrying  on  wars.  Now  Mercury,  if  he  has 
also  the  power  of  the  speech  of  the  gods,  rules 
also  over  the  king  of  the  gods  himself,  if  Jupiter, 
as  he  receives  from  him  the  faculty  of  speech, 
also  speaks  according  as  it  is  his  pleasure  to  per¬ 
mit  him — which  surely  is  absurd;  but  if  it  is 
only  the  power  over  human  speech  which  is  held 
to  be  attributed  to  him,  then  we  say  it  is  incredi¬ 
ble  that  Jupiter  should  have  condescended  to 
give  the  pap  not  only  to  children,  but  also  to 
beasts — from  which  he  has  been  surnamed  Ru- 
minus — and  yet  should  have  been  unwilling  that 
the  care  of  our  speech,  by  which  we  excel  the 
beasts,  should  pertain  to  him.  And  thus  speech 
itself  both  belongs  to  Jupiter  and  is  Mercury. 
But  if  speech  itself  is  said  to  be  Mercury,  as 
those  things  which  are  said  concerning  him  by 
way  of  interpretation  show  it  to  be;  for  he 
is  said  to  have  been  called  Mercury,  that  is, 
he  who  runs  between,  because  speech  runs  be¬ 
tween  men:  they  say  also  that  the  Greeks  call 
him  'Epjurjs,  because  speech,  or  interpretation, 
which  certainly  belongs  to  speech,  is  called  by 
them  ipfirjveia:  also  he  is  said  to  preside  over 
payments,  because  speech  passes  between  sell¬ 
ers  and  buyers :  the  wings,  too,  which  he  has  on 
his  head  and  on  his  feet,  they  say  mean  that 
speech  passes  winged  through  the  air:  he  is  also 
said  to  have  been  called  the  messenger,1  because 
by  means  of  speech  all  our  thoughts  are  ex¬ 
pressed;2  if,  therefore,  speech  itself  is  Mercury, 
then,  even  by  their  owTn  confession,  he  is  not  a 
god.  But  when  they  make  to  themselves  gods  of 
such  as  are  not  even  demons,  by  praying  to  un¬ 
clean  spirits,  they  are  possessed  by  such  as  are 
not  gods,  but  demons.  In  like  manner,  because 
they  have  not  been  able  to  find  for  Mars  any 
element  or  part  of  the  world  in  which  he  might 
perform  some  works  of  nature  of  whatever 
kind,  they  have  said  that  he  is  the  god  of  w7ar, 
w’hich  is  a  work  of  men,  and  that  not  one  winch 
is  considered  desirable  by  them.  If,  therefore, 
Felicitas  should  give  perpetual  peace,  Mars 
lNuncius.  2Enunciantur. 


w’ould  have  nothing  to  do.  But  if  w7ar  itself  is 
Mars,  as  speech  is  Mercury,  I  wish  it  were  as 
true  that  there  w7ere  no  war  to  be  falsely  called 
a  god,  as  it  is  true  that  it  is  not  a  god. 

Chap.  15.  Concerning  certain  stars  which  the 
pagans  have  called  by  the  names  of  their  gods 
But  possibly  these  stars  w’hich  have  been 
called  by  their  names  are  these  gods.  For  they 
call  a  certain  star  Mercury,  and  likewise  a  cer¬ 
tain  other  star  Mars.  But  among  those  stars 
wilich  are  called  by  the  names  of  gods  is  that  one 
which  they  call  Jupiter,  and  yet  with  them  Jupi¬ 
ter  is  the  world.  There  also  is  that  one  they  call 
Saturn,  and  yet  they  give  to  him  no  small  prop¬ 
erty  besides — namely,  all  seeds.  There  also  is 
that  brightest  of  them  all  which  is  called  by 
them  Venus,  and  yet  they  will  have  this  same 
Venus  to  be  also  the  moon :  not  to  mention  how 
Venus  and  Juno  are  said  by  them  to  contend 
about  that  most  brilliant  star,  as  though  about 
another  golden  apple.  For  some  say  that  Lucifer 
belongs  to  Venus,  and  some  to  Juno.  But,  as 
usual,  Venus  conquers.  For  by  far  the  greatest 
number  assign  that  star  to  Venus,  so  much  so 
that  there  is  scarcely  found  one  of  them  wiio 
thinks  otherwise.  But  since  they  call  Jupiter  the 
king  of  all,  w7ho  will  not  laugh  to  see  his  star  so 
far  surpassed  in  brilliancy  by  the  star  of  Venus? 
For  it  ought  to  have  been  as  much  more  brilliant 
than  the  rest  as  he  himself  is  more  powerful. 
They  answer  that  it  only  appears  so  because  it 
is  higher  up,  and  very  much  farther  away  from 
the  earth.  If,  therefore,  its  greater  dignity  has 
deserved  a  higher  place,  wiiy  is  Saturn  higher  in 
the  heavens  than  Jupiter?  Was  the  vanity  of  the 
fable  wrhich  made  Jupiter  king  not  able  to  reach 
the  stars?  And  has  Saturn  been  permitted  to 
obtain  at  least  in  the  heavens,  w7hat  he  could  not 
obtain  in  his  own  kingdom  nor  in  the  Capitol? 

But  w7hy  has  Janus  received  no  star?  If  it  is 
because  he  is  the  wrorld,  and  they  are  all  in  him, 
the  w7orld  is  also  Jupiter’s,  and  yet  he  has  one. 
Did  Janus  compromise  his  case  as  best  he  could, 
and  instead  of  the  one  star  which  he  does  not 
have  among  the  heavenly  bodies,  accept  so 
many  faces  on  earth?  Again,  if  they  think  that 
on  account  of  the  stars  alone  Mercury  and  Mars 
are  parts  of  the  world,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
able  to  have  them  for  gods,  since  speech  and 
wTar  are  not  parts  of  the  world,  but  acts  of  men, 
how7  is  it  that  they  have  made  no  altars,  estab¬ 
lished  no  rites,  built  no  temples  for  Aries,  and 
Taurus,  and  Cancer,  and  Scorpio,  and  the  rest 
w’hich  they  number  as  the  celestial  signs,  and 
w7hich  consist  not  of  single  stars,  but  each  of 


THE  CITY  OF 

them  of  many  stars,  which  also  they  say  are 
situated  above  those  already  mentioned  in  the 
highest  part  of  the  heavens,  where  a  more  con¬ 
stant  motion  causes  the  stars  to  follow  an  un¬ 
deviating  course?  And  why  have  they  not  reck¬ 
oned  them  as  gods,  I  do  not  say  among  those  se¬ 
lect  gods,  but  not  even  among  those,  as  it  were, 
plebeian  gods? 

Chap.  16.  Concerning  Apollo  and  Diana ,  and  the 
other  select  gods  whom  they  would  have  to 
he  parts  of  the  world 

Although  they  would  have  Apollo  to  be  a  di¬ 
viner  and  physician,  they  have  nevertheless 
given  him  a  place  as  some  part  of  the  world. 
They  have  said  that  he  is  also  the  sun ;  and  like¬ 
wise  they  have  said  that  Diana,  his  sister,  is  the 
moon,  and  the  guardian  of  roads.  Whence  also 
they  will  have  her  be  a  virgin,  because  a  road 
brings  forth  nothing.  They  also  make  both  of 
them  have  arrows,  because  those  two  planets 
send  their  rays  from  the  heavens  to  the  earth. 
They  make  Vulcan  to  be  the  fire  of  the  world; 
Neptune  the  waters  of  the  world;  Father  Dis, 
that  is,  Orcus,  the  earthy  and  lowest  part  of  the 
world.  Liber  and  Ceres  they  set  over  seeds — the 
former  over  the  seeds  of  males,  the  latter  over 
the  seeds  of  females;  or  the  one  over  the  fluid 
part  of  seed,  but  the  other  over  the  dry  part. 
And  all  this  together  is  referred  to  the  world, 
that  is,  to  Jupiter,  who  is  called  “progenitor  and 
mother,”  because  he  emitted  all  seeds  from  him¬ 
self,  and  received  them  into  himself.  For  they 
also  make  this  same  Ceres  to  be  the  Great  Moth¬ 
er,  who  they  say  is  none  other  than  the  earth, 
and  call  her  also  Juno.  And  therefore  they  assign 
to  her  the  second  causes  of  things,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  that  it  has  been  said  to  Jupiter,  “progenitor 
and  mother  of  the  gods”;  because,  according  to 
them,  the  whole  world  itself  is  Jupiter’s.  Min¬ 
erva,  also,  because  they  set  her  over  human 
arts,  and  did  not  find  even  a  star  in  which  to 
place  her,  has  been  said  by  them  to  be  either  the 
highest  £ther,  or  even  the  moon.  Also  Vesta  her¬ 
self  they  have  thought  to  be  the  highest  of  the 
goddesses,  because  she  is  the  earth;  although 
they  have  thought  that  the  milder  fire  of  the 
world,  which  is  used  for  the  ordinary  purposes 
of  human  life,  not  the  more  violent  fire,  such  as 
belongs  to  Vulcan,  is  to  be  assigned  to  her.  And 
thus  they  will  have  all  those  select  gods  to  be 
the  world  and  its  parts — some  of  them  the  whole 
world,  others  of  them  its  parts ;  the  whole  of  it 
Jupiter — its  parts,  Genius,  Mater  Magna,  Sol 
and  Luna,  or  rather  Apollo  and  Diana,  and  so 
on.  And  sometimes  they  make  one  god  many 


GOD  VII.  14-17  253 

things;  sometimes  one  thing  many  gods.  Many 
things  are  one  god  in  the  case  of  Jupiter;  for 
both  the  whole  world  is  Jupiter,  and  the  sky 
alone  is  Jupiter,  and  the  star  alone  is  said  and 
held  to  be  Jupiter.  Juno  also  is  mistress  of  sec¬ 
ond  causes — Juno  is  the  air,  Juno  is  the  earth; 
and  had  she  won  it  over  Venus,  Juno  would  have 
been  the  star.  Likewise  Minerva  is  the  highest 
ether,  and  Minerva  is  likewise  the  moon,  which 
they  suppose  to  be  in  the  lowest  limit  of  the 
ether.  And  also  they  make  one  thing  many  gods 
in  this  way.  The  world  is  both  Janus  and  Jupi¬ 
ter;  also  the  earth  is  Juno,  and  Mater  Magna, 
and  Ceres. 

Chap.  17.  That  even  Varro  himself  pronounced 
his  own  opinions  regarding  the  gods  ambigu¬ 
ous 

And  the  same  is  true  with  respect  to  all  the 
rest,  as  is  true  with  respect  to  those  things  which 
I  have  mentioned  for  the  sake  of  example.  They 
do  not  explain  them,  but  rather  involve  them. 
They  rush  hither  and  thither,  to  this  side  or  to 
that,  according  as  they  are  driven  by  the  im¬ 
pulse  of  erratic  opinion;  so  that  even  Varro  him¬ 
self  has  chosen  rather  to  doubt  concerning  all 
things  than  to  affirm  anything.  For,  having  writ¬ 
ten  the  first  of  the  three  last  books  concerning 
the  certain  gods,  and  having  commenced  in  the 
second  of  these  to  speak  of  the  uncertain  gods, 
he  says:  “I  ought  not  to  be  censured  for  having 
stated  in  this  book  the  doubtful  opinions  con¬ 
cerning  the  gods.  For  he  who,  when  he  has  read 
them,  shall  think  that  they  both  ought  to  be, 
and  can  be,  conclusively  judged  of,  will  do  so 
himself.  For  my  own  part,  I  can  be  more  easily 
led  to  doubt  the  things  which  I  have  written  in 
the  first  book,  than  to  attempt  to  reduce  all  the 
things  I  shall  write  in  this  one  to  any  orderly 
system.”  Thus  he  makes  uncertain  not  only  that 
book  concerning  the  uncertain  gods,  but  also 
that  other  concerning  the  certain  gods.  More¬ 
over,  in  that  third  book  concerning  the  select 
gods,  after  having  exhibited  by  anticipation  as 
much  of  the  natural  theology  as  he  deemed  nec¬ 
essary,  and  when  about  to  commence  to  speak 
of  the  vanities  and  lying  insanities  of  the  civil 
theology,  where  he  was  not  only  without  the 
guidance  of  the  truth  of  things,  but  was  also 
pressed  by  the  authority  of  tradition,  he  says: 
“I  will  write  in  this  book  concerning  the  public 
gods  of  the  Roman  people,  to  whom  they  have 
dedicated  temples,  and  whom  they  have  con¬ 
spicuously  distinguished  by  many  adornments; 
but,  as  Xenophon  of  Colophon  writes,  I  will 
state  what  I  think,  not  what  I  am  prepared  to 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


maintain:  it  is  for  man  to  think  those  things,  for 
God  to  know  them.” 

It  is  not,  then,  an  account  of  things  compre¬ 
hended  and  most  certainly  believed  which  he 
promised,  when  about  to  write  those  things 
which  were  instituted  by  men.  He  only  timidly 
promises  an  account  of  things  which  are  but  the 
subject  of  doubtful  opinion.  Nor,  indeed,  was  it 
possible  for  him  to  affirm  with  the  same  certain¬ 
ty  that  Janus  was  the  world,  and  such  like 
things;  or  to  discover  with  the  same  certainty 
such  things  as  how  Jupiter  was  the  Son  of  Sat¬ 
urn,  while  Saturn  was  made  subject  to  him  as 
king:  he  could,  I  say,  neither  affirm  nor  discover 
such  things  with  the  same  certainty  with  which 
he  knew  such  things  as  that  the  world  existed, 
that  the  heavens  and  earth  existed,  the  heavens 
bright  with  stars,  and  the  earth  fertile  through 
seeds;  or  with  the  same  perfect  conviction  with 
which  he  believed  that  this  universal  mass  of 
nature  is  governed  and  administered  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  invisible  and  mighty  force. 

Chap.  18.  A  more  credible  cause  of  the  rise  of 

pagan  error 

A  far  more  credible  account  of  these  gods  is 
given,  when  it  is  said  that  they  were  men,  and 
that  to  each  one  of  them  sacred  rites  and  so¬ 
lemnities  were  instituted,  according  to  his  par¬ 
ticular  genius,  manners,  actions,  circumstances; 
which  rites  and  solemnities,  by  gradually  creep¬ 
ing  through  the  souls  of  men,  which  are  like  de¬ 
mons,  and  eager  for  things  which  yield  them 
sport,  were  spread  far  and  wide;  the  poets 
adorning  them  with  lies,  and  false  spirits  seduc¬ 
ing  men  to  receive  them.  For  it  is  far  more  like¬ 
ly  that  some  youth,  either  impious  himself,  or 
afraid  of  being  slain  by  an  impious  father,  being 
desirous  to  reign,  dethroned  his  father,  than  that 
(according  to  Varro’s  interpretation)  Saturn 
was  overthrown  by  his  son  Jupiter;  for  cause, 
which  belongs  to  Jupiter,  is  before  seed,  which 
belongs  to  Saturn.  For  had  this  been  so,  Saturn 
would  never  have  been  before  Jupiter,  nor  would 
he  have  been  the  father  of  Jupiter.  For  cause 
always  precedes  seed,  and  is  never  generated 
from  seed.  But  when  they  seek  to  honour  by  nat¬ 
ural  interpretation  most  vain  fables  or  deeds  of 
men,  even  the  acutest  men  are  so  perplexed  that 
we  are  compelled  to  grieve  for  their  folly  also. 

Chap.  19.  Concerning  the  interpretations  which 

compose  the  reason  of  the  worship  of  Saturn 

“They  said,”  says  Varro,  “that  Saturn  was 
wont  to  devour  all  that  sprang  from  him,  be¬ 
cause  seeds  returned  to  the  earth  from  whence 


they  sprang.  And  when  it  is  said  that  a  lump  of 
earth  was  put  before  Saturn  to  be  devoured  in¬ 
stead  of  Jupiter,  it  is  signified,”  he  says,  “that 
before  the  art  of  ploughing  was  discovered, 
seeds  were  buried  in  the  earth  by  the  hands  of 
men.”  The  earth  itself,  then,  and  not  seeds, 
should  have  been  called  Saturn,  because  it  in  a 
manner  devours  what  it  has  brought  forth,  when 
the  seeds  which  have  sprung  from  it  return  again 
into  it.  And  what  has  Saturn’s  receiving  of  a 
lump  of  earth  instead  of  Jupiter  to  do  with  this, 
that  the  seeds  were  covered  in  the  soil  by  the 
hands  of  men?  Was  the  seed  kept  from  being 
devoured,  like  other  things,  by  being  covered 
with  the  soil?  For  what  they  say  would  imply 
that  he  who  put  on  the  soil  took  away  the  seed, 
as  Jupiter  is  said  to  have  been  taken  away  when 
the  lump  of  soil  was  offered  to  Saturn  instead 
of  him,  and  not  rather  that  the  soil,  by  covering 
the  seed,  only  caused  it  to  be  devoured  the  more 
eagerly.  Then,  in  that  way,  Jupiter  is  the  seed 
and  not  the  cause  of  the  seed,  as  was  said  a  little 
before. 

But  what  shall  men  do  who  cannot  find  any¬ 
thing  wise  to  say,  because  they  are  interpreting 
foolish  things?  Saturn  has  a  pruning-knife. 
“That,”  says  Varro,  “is  on  account  of  agricul¬ 
ture.”  Certainly  in  Saturn’s  reign  there  as  yet 
existed  no  agriculture,  and  therefore  the  former 
times  of  Saturn  are  spoken  of,  because,  as  the 
same  Varro  interprets  the  fables,  the  primeval 
men  lived  on  those  seeds  which  the  earth  pro¬ 
duced  spontaneously.  Perhaps  he  received  a 
pruning-knife  when  he  had  lost  his  sceptre;  that 
he  who  had  been  a  king,  and  lived  at  ease  dur¬ 
ing  the  first  part  of  his  time,  should  become  a 
laborious  workman  whilst  his  son  occupied  the 
throne.  Then  he  says  that  boys  were  wont  to  be 
immolated  to  him  by  certain  peoples,  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  for  instance;  and  also  that  adults 
were  immolated  by  some  nations,  for  example 
the  Gauls — because,  of  all  seeds,  the  human  race 
is  the  best.  What  need  we  say  more  concerning 
this  most  cruel  vanity.  Let  us  rather  attend  to 
and  hold  by  this,  that  these  interpretations  are 
not  carried  up  to  the  true  God — a  living,  incor¬ 
poreal,  unchangeable  nature,  from  whom  a  bless¬ 
ed  life  enduring  for  ever  may  be  obtained — but 
that  they  end  in  things  which  are  corporeal, 
temporal,  mutable,  and  mortal.  And  whereas  it 
is  said  in  the  fables  that  Saturn  castrated  his 
father  Ccelus,  this  signifies,  says  Varro,  that  the 
divine  seed  belongs  to  Saturn,  and  not  to  Coelus ; 
for  this  reason,  as  far  as  a  reason  can  be  discov¬ 
ered,  namely,  that  in  heaven  nothing  is  born 
from  seed.  But,  lo!  Saturn,  if  he  is  the  son  of 
Coelus,  is  the  son  of  Jupiter.  For  they  affirm 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VII.  18-22 


times  without  number,  and  that  emphatically, 
that  the  heavens  are  Jupiter.  Thus  those  things 
which  come  not  of  the  truth,  do  very  often, 
without  being  impelled  by  any  one,  themselves 
overthrow  one  another.  He  says  that  Saturn  was 
called  Kpopos,  which  in  the  Greek  tongue  sig¬ 
nifies  a  space  of  time,  because,  without  that, 
seed  cannot  be  productive.  These  and  many 
other  things  are  said  concerning  Saturn,  and 
they  are  all  referred  to  seed.  But  Saturn  surely, 
with  all  that  great  power,  might  have  sufficed  for 
seed.  Why  are  other  gods  demanded  for  it,  espe¬ 
cially  Liber  and  Libera,  that  is,  Ceres? — con¬ 
cerning  whom  again,  as  far  as  seed  is  con¬ 
cerned.  he  says  as  many  things  as  if  he  had  said 
nothing  concerning  Saturn. 

Chap.  20.  Concerning  the  rites  of  Elensinian 
Ceres 

Now  among  the  rites  of  Ceres,  those  Eleu- 
sinian  rites  are  much  famed  which  were  in  the 
highest  repute  among  the  Athenians,  of  which 
Varro  offers  no  interpretation  except  with  re¬ 
spect  to  corn,  which  Ceres  discovered,  and  with 
respect  to  Proserpine,  whom  Ceres  lost,  Orcus 
having  carried  her  away.  And  this  Proserpine 
herself,  he  says,  signifies  the  fecundity  of  seeds. 
But  as  this  fecundity  departed  at  a  certain  sea¬ 
son,  whilst  the  earth  wore  an  aspect  of  sorrow 
through  the  consequent  sterility,  there  arose  an 
opinion  that  the  daughter  of  Ceres,  that  is,  fe¬ 
cundity  itself,  who  was  called  Proserpine,  from 
proserpere  (to  creep  forth,  to  spring),  had  been 
carried  away  by  Orcus  and  detained  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  nether  world;  which  circum¬ 
stance  was  celebrated  with  public  mourning.  But 
since  the  same  fecundity  again  returned,  there 
arose  joy  because  Proserpine  had  been  given 
back  by  Orcus,  and  thus  these  rites  were  insti¬ 
tuted.  Then  Varro  adds  that  many  things  are 
taught  in  the  mysteries  of  Ceres  which  only  re¬ 
fer  to  the  discovery  of  fruits. 

Chap.  21.  Concerning  the  shamefulness  of  the 
rites  hvhich  are  celebrated  in  honour  of  Liber 
Now  as  to  the  rites  of  Liber,  whom  they  have 
set  over  liquid  seeds,  and  therefore  not  only  over 
the  liquors  of  fruits,  among  which  wine  holds, 
so  to  speak,  the  primacy,  but  also  over  the  seeds 
of  animals:  as  to  these  rites,  I  am  unwilling  to 
undertake  to  show  to  what  excess  of  turpitude 
they  had  reached,  because  that  would  entail  a 
lengthened  discourse,  though  I  am  not  unwilling 
to  do  so  as  a  demonstration  of  the  proud  stupid¬ 
ity  of  those  who  practise  them.  Among  other 
rites  which  I  am  compelled  from  the  greatness 
of  their  number  to  omit,  Varro  says  that  in 


255 

Italy,  at  the  places  where  roads  crossed  each 
other,  the  rites  of  Liber  were  celebrated  with 
such  unrestrained  turpitude  that  the  private 
parts  of  a  man  were  worshipped  in  his  honour. 
Nor  was  this  abomination  transacted  in  secret, 
that  some  regard  at  least  might  be  paid  to  mod¬ 
esty,  but  was  openly  and  wantonly  displayed. 
For  during  the  festival  of  Liber,  this  obscene 
member,  placed  on  a  car,  was  carried  with  great 
honour,  first  over  the  crossroads  in  the  country, 
and  then  into  the  city.  But  in  the  town  of  Lavi- 
nium  a  whole  month  was  devoted  to  Liber  alone, 
during  the  days  of  which  all  the  people  gave 
themselves  up  to  the  most  dissolute  conversa¬ 
tion,  until  that  member  had  been  carried  through 
the  Forum  and  brought  to  rest  in  its  own  place; 
on  which  unseemly  member  it  was  necessary 
that  the  most  honourable  matron  should  place 
a  wreath  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people.  Thus, 
forsooth,  was  the  god  Liber  to  be  appeased  in 
order  to  the  growth  of  seeds.  Thus  was  enchant¬ 
ment  to  be  driven  away  from  fields,  even  by  a 
matron’s  being  compelled  to  do  in  public  what 
not  even  a  harlot  ought  to  be  permitted  to  do  in 
a  theatre,  if  there  were  matrons  among  the  spec¬ 
tators.  For  these  reasons,  then,  Saturn  alone  was 
not  believed  to  be  sufficient  for  seeds — namely, 
that  the  impure  mind  might  find  occasions  for 
multiplying  the  gods;  and  that,  being  righteous¬ 
ly  abandoned  to  uncleanness  by  the  one  true 
God,  and  being  prostituted  to  the  worship  of 
many  false  gods,  through  an  avidity  for  ever 
greater  and  greater  uncleanness,  it  should  call 
these  sacrilegious  rites  sacred  things,  and  should 
abandon  itself  to  be  violated  and  polluted  by 
crowds  of  foul  demons. 

Chap.  22.  Concerning  Neptune ,  and  Salacia  and 

Venilia 

Now  Neptune  had  Salacia  to  wife,  who  they 
say  is  the  nether  waters  of  the  sea.  Wherefore 
was  Venilia  also  joined  to  him?  Was  it  not  sim¬ 
ply  through  the  lust  of  the  soul  desiring  a  great¬ 
er  number  of  demons  to  whom  to  prostitute  it¬ 
self,  and  not  because  this  goddess  was  necessary 
to  the  perfection  of  their  sacred  rites?  But  let 
the  interpretation  of  this  illustrious  theology  be 
brought  forward  to  restrain  us  from  this  censur¬ 
ing  by  rendering  a  satisfactory  reason.  Venilia. 
says  this  theology,  is  the  wave  which  comes  to 
the  shore,  Salacia  the  wave  which  returns  into 
the  sea.  Why,  then,  are  there  two  goddesses, 
when  it  is  one  wave  which  comes  and  returns? 
Certainly  it  is  mad  lust  itself,  which  in  its  eager¬ 
ness  for  many  deities  resembles  the  waves  which 
break  on  the  shore.  For  though  the  water  which 
goes  is  not  different  from  that  which  returns. 


256  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


still  the  soul  which  goes  and  returns  not  is  de¬ 
filed  by  two  demons,  whom  it  has  taken  occa¬ 
sion  by  this  false  pretext  to  invite.  I  ask  thee.  0 
Varro,  and  you  who  have  read  such  works  of 
learned  men  and  think  ye  have  learned  some¬ 
thing  great — I  ask  you  to  interpret  this,  I  do 
not  say  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  eternal 
and  unchangeable  nature  which  alone  is  God. 
but  only  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  doc¬ 
trine  concerning  the  soul  of  the  world  and  its 
parts,  which  ye  think  to  be  the  true  gods.  It  is  a 
somewhat  more  tolerable  thing  that  ye  have 
made  that  part  of  the  soul  of  the  world  which 
pervades  the  sea  your  god  Neptune.  Is  the  wave, 
then,  which  comes  to  the  shore  and  returns  to 
the  main,  two  parts  of  the  world,  or  two  parts  of 
the  soul  of  the  world?  Who  of  you  is  so  silly  as 
to  think  so?  Why,  then,  have  they  made  to  you 
two  goddesses?  The  only  reason  seems  to  be 
that  your  wise  ancestors  have  provided,  not  that 
many  gods  should  rule  you,  but  that  many  of 
such  demons  as  are  delighted  with  those  vani¬ 
ties  and  falsehoods  should  possess  you.  But  why 
has  that  Salacia,  according  to  this  interpreta¬ 
tion,  lost  the  lower  part  of  the  sea,  seeing  that 
she  was  represented  as  subject  to  her  husband? 
For  in  saying  that  she  is  the  receding  wave,  ye 
have  put  her  on  the  surface.  Was  she  enraged  at 
her  husband  for  taking  Venilia  as  a  concubine 
and  thus  drove  him  from  the  upper  part  of  the 
sea? 

Chap.  23.  Concerning  the  earth,  which  Varro 
affirms  to  be  a  goddess,  because  that  soul  of 
the  world  which  he  thinks  to  be  god  pervades 
also  this  lowest  part  of  his  body,  and  imparts 
to  it  a  divine  force 

Surely  the  earth,  which  we  see  full  of  its  own 
living  creatures,  is  one;  but  for  all  that,  it  is  but 
a  mighty  mass  among  the  elements,  and  the  low¬ 
est  part  of  the  world.  Why,  then,  would  they 
have  it  to  be  a  goddess?  Is  it  because  it  is  fruit¬ 
ful?  Why,  then,  are  not  men  rather  held  to  be 
gods,  who  render  it  fruitful  by  cultivating  it; 
but  though  they  plough  it,  do  not  adore  it?  But, 
say  they,  the  part  of  the  soul  of  the  world  which 
pervades  it  makes  it  a  goddess.  As  if  it  were  not 
a  far  more  evident  thing,  nay,  a  thing  which  is 
not  called  in  question,  that  there  is  a  soul  in 
man.  And  yet  men  are  not  held  to  be  gods,  but  (a 
thing  to  be  sadly  lamented),  with  wonderful  and 
pitiful  delusion,  are  subjected  to  those  who  are 
not  gods  and  than  whom  they  themselves  are 
better,  as  the  objects  of  deserved  worship  and 
adoration.  And  certainly  the  same  Varro,  in  the 
book  concerning  the  select  gods,  affirms  that 


there  are  three  grades  of  soul  in  universal  na¬ 
ture.  One  which  pervades  all  the  living  parts  of 
the  body,  and  has  not  sensation,  but  only  the 
power  of  life,  that  principle  which  penetrates 
into  the  bones,  nails  and  hair.  By  this  principle 
in  the  world  trees  are  nourished  and  grow  with¬ 
out  being  possessed  of  sensation,  and  live  in  a 
manner  peculiar  to  themselves.  The  second 
grade  of  soul  is  that  in  which  there  is  sensation. 
This  principle  penetrates  into  the  eyes,  ears, 
nostrils,  mouth,  and  the  organs  of  sensation.  The 
third  grade  of  soul  is  the  highest,  and  is  called 
mind,  where  intelligence  has  its  throne.  This 
grade  of  soul  no  mortal  creatures  except  man 
are  possessed  of.  “Now  this  part  of  the  soul  of 
the  world,”  Varro  says,  “is  called  ‘God,’  and  in 
us  is  called  ‘Genius.’  And  the  stones  and  earth  in 
the  world,  which  we  see,  and  which  are  not  per¬ 
vaded  by  the  power  of  sensation,  are,  as  it  were, 
the  bones  and  nails  of  God.  Again,  the  sun. 
moon,  and  stars,  which  we  perceive,  and  by 
which  He  perceives,  are  His  organs  of  percep¬ 
tion.  Moreover,  the  ether  is  His  mind;  and  by 
the  virtue  which  is  in  it,  which  penetrates  into 
the  stars,  it  also  makes  them  gods;  and  because 
it  penetrates  through  them  into  the  earth,  it 
makes  it  the  goddess  Tellus,  whence  again  it  en¬ 
ters  and  permeates  the  sea  and  ocean,  making 
them  the  god  Neptune.” 

Let  him  return  from  this,  which  he  thinks  to 
be  natural  theology,  back  to  that  from  which  he 
went  out,  in  order  to  rest  from  the  fatigue  occa¬ 
sioned  by  the  many  turnings  and  windings  of  his 
path.  Let  him  return,  I  say,  let  him  return  to  the 
civil  theology.  I  wish  to  detain  him  there  a 
while.  I  have  somewhat  to  say  which  has  to  do 
with  that  theology.  I  am  not  yet  saying  that,  if 
the  earth  and  stones  are  similar  to  our  bones  and 
nails,  they  are  in  like  manner  devoid  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  as  they  are  devoid  of  sensation.  Nor  am 
I  saying  that,  if  our  bones  and  nails  are  said  to 
have  intelligence,  because  they  are  in  a  man  who 
has  intelligence,  he  who  says  that  the  things 
analogous  to  these  in  the  world  are  gods  is  as 
stupid  as  he  is  who  says  that  our  bones  and  nails 
are  men.  We  shall  perhaps  have  occasion  to  dis¬ 
pute  these  things  with  the  philosophers.  At  pres¬ 
ent,  however,  I  wish  to  deal  with  Varro  as  a  po¬ 
litical  theologian.  For  it  is  possible  that,  though 
he  may  seem  to  have  wished  to  lift  up  his  head, 
as  it  were,  into  the  liberty  of  natural  theology, 
the  consciousness  that  the  book  with  which  he 
was  occupied  was  one  concerning  a  subject  be¬ 
longing  to  civil  theology,  may  have  caused  him 
to  relapse  into  the  point  of  view  of  that  theology 
and  to  say  this  in  order  that  the  ancestors  of  his 


THE  CITY  OF 

nation  and  other  states  might  not  be  believed  to 
have  bestowed  on  Neptune  an  irrational  wor¬ 
ship.  What  I  am  to  say  is  this:  Since  the  earth 
is  one,  why  has  not  that  part  of  the  soul  of  the 
world  which  permeates  the  earth  made  it  that 
one  goddess  which  he  calls  Tellus?  But  had  it 
done  so,  what  then  had  become  of  Orcus,  the 
brother  of  Jupiter  and  Neptune,  whom  they  call 
Father  Dis?1  And  where,  in  that  case,  had  been 
his  wife  Proserpine,  who,  according  to  another 
opinion  given  in  the  same  book,  is  called,  not  the 
fecundity  of  the  earth,  but  its  lower  part?  But 
if  they  say  that  part  of  the  soul  of  the  world, 
when  it  permeates  the  upper  part  of  the  earth, 
makes  the  god  Father  Dis.  but  when  it  pervades 
the  nether  part  of  the  same  the  goddess  Proser¬ 
pine;  what,  in  that  case,  will  that  Tellus  be?  For 
all  that  which  she  was  has  been  divided  into 
these  two  parts  and  these  two  gods ;  so  that  it  is 
impossible  to  find  what  to  make  or  where  to 
place  her  as  a  third  goddess,  except  it  be  said 
that  those  divinities  Orcus  and  Proserpine  are 
the  one  goddess  Tellus,  and  that  they  are  not 
three  gods,  but  one  or  two,  whilst  notwithstand¬ 
ing  they  are  called  three,  held  to  be  three,  wor¬ 
shipped  as  three,  having  their  own  several  altars, 
their  own  shrines,  rites,  images,  priests,  whilst 
their  own  false  demons  also  through  these  things 
defile  the  prostituted  soul.  Let  this  further  ques¬ 
tion  be  answered:  “What  part  of  the  earth  does 
a  part  of  the  soul  of  the  world  permeate  in  order 
to  make  the  god  Tellumo?”  “No,”  says  he;  “but 
the  earth  being  one  and  the  same,  has  a  double 
life — the  masculine,  which  produces  seed,  and 
the  feminine,  which  receives  and  nourishes  the 
seed.  Hence  it  has  been  called  Tellus  from  the 
feminine  principle,  and  Tellumo  from  the  mas¬ 
culine.”  Why,  then,  do  the  priests,  as  he  indi¬ 
cates,  perform  divine  service  to  four  gods,  two 
others  being  added — namely,  to  Tellus,  Tellu¬ 
mo.  Altor,  and  Rusor?  We  have  already  spoken 
concerning  Tellus  and  Tellumo.  But  why  do 
they  worship  Altor?2  “Because,”  says  he,  “all 
that  springs  of  the  earth  is  nourished  by  the 
earth.”  Wherefore  do  they  worship  Rusor?3 
“Because  all  things  return  back  again  to  the 
place  whence  they  proceeded.” 

Chap.  24.  Concerning  the  surnames  of  Tellus 
and  their  significations,  which ,  although  they 
indicate  many  properties,  ought  not  to  have 
established  the  opinion  that  there  is  a  corre¬ 
sponding  number  of  gods 
The  one  earth,  then,  on  account  of  this  four¬ 
fold  virtue,  ought  to  have  had  four  surnames, 
^ee  Chap.  16.  2Nourisher.  3  Returner. 


GOD  VII.  23-24  257 

but  not  to  have  been  considered  as  four  gods — 
as  Jupiter  and  Juno,  though  they  have  so  many 
surnames,  are  for  all  that  only  single  deities — 
for  by  all  these  surnames  it  is  signified  that  a 
manifold  virtue  belongs  to  one  god  or  to  one 
goddess;  but  the  multitude  of  surnames  does 
not  imply  a  multitude  of  gods.  But  as  sometimes 
even  the  vilest  women  themselves  grow  tired  of 
those  crowds  which  they  have  sought  after  un¬ 
der  the  impulse  of  wicked  passion,  so  also  the 
soul,  become  vile  and  prostituted  to  impure 
spirits,  sometimes  begins  to  loathe  to  multiply 
to  itself  gods  to  whom  to  surrender  itself  to  be 
polluted  by  them,  as  much  as  it  once  delighted 
in  so  doing.  For  Varro  himself,  as  if  ashamed  of 
that  crowd  of  gods,  would  make  Tellus  to  be  one 
goddess.  “They  say,”  says  he,  “that  whereas  the 
one  great  mother  has  a  tympanum,  it  is  signi¬ 
fied  that  she  is  the  orb  of  the  earth;  whereas  she 
has  towers  on  her  head,  towns  are  signified;  and 
whereas  seats  are  fixed  round  about  her,  it  is 
signified  that  whilst  all  things  move,  she  moves 
not.  And  their  having  made  the  Galli  to  serve 
this  goddess,  signifies  that  they  who  are  in  need 
of  seed  ought  to  follow  the  earth,  for  in  it  all 
seeds  are  found.  By  their  throwing  themselves 
down  before  her,  it  is  taught,”  he  says,  “that 
they  who  cultivate  the  earth  should  not  sit  idle, 
for  there  is  always  something  for  them  to  do. 
The  sound  of  the  cymbals  signifies  the  noise 
made  by  the  throwing  of  iron  utensils,  and  by 
men’s  hands,  and  all  other  noises  connected  with 
agricultural  operations;  and  these  cymbals  are 
of  brass,  because  the  ancients  used  brazen  uten¬ 
sils  in  their  agriculture  before  iron  was  discov¬ 
ered.  They  place  beside  the  goddess  an  unbound 
and  tame  lion,  to  show  that  there  is  no  kind  of 
land  so  wild  and  so  excessively  barren  as  that  it 
would  be  profitless  to  attempt  to  bring  it  in  and 
cultivate  it.”  Then  he  adds  that,  because  they 
gave  many  names  and  surnames  to  mother  Tel¬ 
lus,  it  came  to  be  thought  that  these  signified 
many  gods.  “They  think,”  says  he,  “that  Tellus 
is  Ops,  because  the  earth  is  improved  by  la¬ 
bour;  Mother,  because  it  brings  forth  much; 
Great,  because  it  brings  forth  seed;  Proserpine, 
because  fruits  creep  forth  from  it;  Vesta,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  invested  with  herbs.  And  thus,”  says 
he,  “they  not  at  all  absurdly  identify  other  god¬ 
desses  with  the  earth.”  If,  then,  it  is  one  god¬ 
dess  (though,  if  the  truth  were  consulted  it  is 
not  even  that),  why  do  they  nevertheless  sep¬ 
arate  it  into  many?  Let  there  be  many  names  of 
one  goddess,  and  let  there  not  be  as  many  god¬ 
desses  as  there  are  names. 

But  the  authority  of  the  erring  ancients 


258  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


weighs  heavily  on  Varro,  and  compels  him,  after 
having  expressed  this  opinion,  to  show  signs  of 
uneasiness;  for  he  immediately  adds,  “With 
which  things  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  who 
thought  that  there  were  really  many  goddesses, 
does  not  conflict.”  How  does  it  not  conflict, 
when  it  is  entirely  a  different  thing  to  say  that 
one  goddess  has  many  names  and  to  say  that 
there  are  many  goddesses?  “But  it  is  possible,” 
he  says,  “that  the  same  thing  may  both  be  one, 
and  yet  have  in  it  a  plurality  of  things.”  I  grant 
that  there  are  many  things  in  one  man ;  are  there 
therefore  in  him  many  men?  In  like  manner,  in 
one  goddess  there  are  many  things;  are  there 
therefore  also  many  goddesses?  But  let  them  di¬ 
vide,  unite,  multiply,  reduplicate,  and  implicate 
as  they  like. 

These  are  the  famous  mysteries  of  Tellus  and 
the  Great  Mother,  all  of  which  are  shown  to 
have  reference  to  mortal  seeds  and  to  agricul¬ 
ture.  Do  these  things,  then — namely,  the  tym¬ 
panum,  the  towers,  the  Galli,  the  tossing  to  and 
fro  of  limbs,  the  noise  of  cymbals,  the  images  of 
lions — do  these  things,  having  this  reference  and 
this  end,  promise  eternal  life?  Do  the  mutilated 
Galli,  then,  serve  this  Great  Mother  in  order  to 
signify  that  they  who  are  in  need  of  seed  should 
follow  the  earth,  as  though  it  were  not  rather  the 
case  that  this  very  service  caused  them  to  want 
seed?  For  whether  do  they,  by  following  this 
goddess,  acquire  seed,  being  in  want  of  it,  or,  by 
following  her,  lose  seed  when  they  have  it?  Is 
this  to  interpret  or  to  deprecate?  Nor  is  it  con¬ 
sidered  to  what  a  degree  malign  demons  have 
gained  the  upper  hand,  inasmuch  as  they  have 
been  able  to  exact  such  cruel  rites  without  hav¬ 
ing  dared  to  promise  any  great  things  in  return 
for  them.  Had  the  earth  not  been  a  goddess,  men 
would  have,  by  labouring,  laid  their  hands  on  it 
in  order  to  obtain  seed  through  it,  and  would  not 
have  laid  violent  hands  on  themselves  in  order 
to  lose  seed  on  account  of  it.  Had  it  not  been  a 
goddess,  it  would  have  become  so  fertile  by  the 
hands  of  others  that  it  would  not  have  com¬ 
pelled  a  man  to  be  rendered  barren  by  his  own 
hands;  nor  that  in  the  festival  of  Liber  an  hon¬ 
ourable  matron  put  a  wreath  on  the  private 
parts  of  a  man  in  the  sight  of  the  multitude, 
where  perhaps  her  husband  was  standing  by 
blushing  and  perspiring,  if  there  is  any  shame 
left  in  men;  and  that  in  the  celebration  of  mar¬ 
riages  the  newly-married  bride  was  ordered  to 
sit  upon  Priapus.  These  things  are  bad  enough, 
but  they  are  small  and  contemptible  in  com¬ 
parison  with  that  most  cruel  abomination,  or 
most  abominable  cruelty,  by  which  either  set  is 


so  deluded  that  neither  perishes  of  its  wound. 
There  the  enchantment  of  fields  is  feared;  here 
the  amputation  of  members  is  not  feared.  There 
the  modesty  of  the  bride  is  outraged,  but  in  such 
a  manner  as  that  neither  her  fruitfulness  nor 
even  her  virginity  is  taken  away;  here  a  man  is 
so  mutilated  that  he  is  neither  changed  into  a 
woman  nor  remains  a  man. 

Chap.  25.  The  interpretation  of  the  mutilation 
of  Atys  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Greek  sages 
set  forth 

Varro  has  not  spoken  of  that  Atys,  nor  sought 
out  any  interpretation  for  him,  in  memory  of 
whose  being  loved  by  Ceres  the  Gallus  is  mu¬ 
tilated.  But  the  learned  and  wise  Greeks  have 
by  no  means  been  silent  about  an  interpretation 
so  holy  and  so  illustrious.  The  celebrated  philos¬ 
opher  Porphyry  has  said  that  Atys  signifies  the 
flowers  of  spring,  which  is  the  most  beautiful 
season,  and  therefore  was  mutilated  because  the 
flower  falls  before  the  fruit  appears.  They  have 
not,  then,  compared  the  man  himself,  or  rather 
that  semblance  of  a  man  they  called  Atys,  to  the 
flower,  but  his  male  organs — these,  indeed,  fell 
whilst  he  was  living.  Did  I  say  fell?  nay,  truly 
they  did  not  fall,  nor  were  they  plucked  off,  but 
torn  away.  Nor  when  that  flower  was  lost  did 
any  fruit  follow,  but  rather  sterility.  What, 
then,  do  they  say  is  signified  by  the  castrated 
Atys  himself,  and  whatever  remained  to  him 
after  his  castration?  To  what  do  they  refer  that? 
What  interpretation  does  that  give  rise  to?  Do 
they,  after  vain  endeavours  to  discover  an  in¬ 
terpretation,  seek  to  persuade  men  that  that  is 
rather  to  be  believed  which  report  has  made 
public,  and  which  has  also  been  written  con¬ 
cerning  his  having  been  a  mutilated  man?  Our 
Varro  has  very  properly  opposed  this  and  has 
been  unwilling  to  state  it;  for  it  certainly  was 
not  unknown  to  that  most  learned  man. 

Chap.  26.  Concerning  the  abomination  of  the 
sacred  rites  of  the  Great  Mother 
Concerning  the  effeminates  consecrated  to 
the  same  Great  Mother,  in  defiance  of  all  the 
modesty  which  belongs  to  men  and  women,  Var¬ 
ro  has  not  wished  to  say  anything,  nor  do  I  re¬ 
member  to  have  read  anywhere  aught  concern¬ 
ing  them.  These  effeminates,  no  later  than  yes¬ 
terday,  were  going  through  the  streets  and 
places  of  Carthage  with  anointed  hair,  whitened 
faces,  relaxed  bodies,  and  feminine  gait,  exact¬ 
ing  from  the  people  the  means  of  maintaining 
their  ignominious  lives.  Nothing  has  been  said 
concerning  them.  Interpretation  failed,  reason 


THE  CITY  OF 

blushed,  speech  was  silent.  The  Great  Mother 
has  surpassed  all  her  sons,  not  in  greatness  of 
deity,  but  of  crime.  To  this  monster  not  even 
the  monstrosity  of  Janus  is  to  be  compared.  His 
deformity  was  only  in  his  image;  hers  was  the 
deformity  of  cruelty  in  her  sacred  rites.  He  has 
a  redundancy  of  members  in  stone  images ;  she 
inflicts  the  loss  of  members  on  men.  This  abom¬ 
ination  is  not  surpassed  by  the  licentious  deeds 
of  Jupiter,  so  many  and  so  great.  He,  with  all  his 
seductions  of  women,  only  disgraced  heaven 
with  one  Ganymede;  she,  with  so  many  avowed 
and  public  effeminates,  has  both  defiled  the 
earth  and  outraged  heaven.  Perhaps  we  may 
either  compare  Saturn  to  this  Magna  Mater,  or 
even  set  him  before  her  in  this  kind  of  abom¬ 
inable  cruelty,  for  he  mutilated  his  father.  But 
at  the  festivals  of  Saturn,  men  could  rather  be 
slain  by  the  hands  of  others  than  mutilated  by 
their  own.  He  devoured  his  sons,  as  the  poets 
say,  and  the  natural  theologists  interpret  this  as 
they  list.  History  says  he  slew  them.  But  the 
Romans  never  received,  like  the  Carthaginians, 
the  custom  of  sacrificing  their  sons  to  him.  This 
Great  Mother  of  the  gods,  however,  has  brought 
mutilated  men  into  Roman  temples,  and  has 
preserved  that  cruel  custom,  being  believed  to 
promote  the  strength  of  the  Romans  by  emas¬ 
culating  their  men.  Compared  with  this  evil, 
what  are  the  thefts  of  Mercury,  the  wantonness 
of  Venus,  and  the  base  and  flagitious  deeds  of 
the  rest  of  them,  which  we  might  bring  forward 
from  books,  were  it  not  that  they  are  daily  sung 
and  danced  in  the  theatres?  But  what  are  these 
things  to  so  great  an  evil — an  evil  whose  magni¬ 
tude  was  only  proportioned  to  the  greatness  of 
the  Great  Mother — especially  as  these  are  said 
to  have  been  invented  by  the  poets?  as  if  the 
poets  had  also  invented  this,  that  they  are  ac¬ 
ceptable  to  the  gods.  Let  it  be  imputed,  then,  to 
the  audacity  and  impudence  of  the  poets  that 
these  things  have  been  sung  and  written  of.  But 
that  they  have  been  incorporated  into  the  body 
of  divine  rites  and  honours,  the  deities  them¬ 
selves  demanding  and  extorting  that  incorpora¬ 
tion,  what  is  that  but  the  crime  of  the  gods?  nay 
more,  the  confession  of  demons  and  the  decep¬ 
tion  of  wretched  men?  But  as  to  this,  that  the 
Great  Mother  is  considered  to  be  worshipped  in 
the  appropriate  form  when  she  is  worshipped  by 
the  consecration  of  mutilated  men,  this  is  not 
an  invention  of  the  poets,  nay,  they  have  rather 
shrunk  from  it  with  horror  than  sung  of  it. 
Ought  any  one,  then,  to  be  consecrated  to  these 
select  gods,  that  he  may  live  blessedly  after 
death,  consecrated  to  whom  he  could  not  live  de- 


GOD  VII.  25-27  259 

cently  before  death,  being  subjected  to  such 
foul  superstitions,  and  bound  over  to  unclean 
demons?  “But  all  these  things,”  says  Varro. 
“are  to  be  referred  to  the  world.”1  Let  him  con¬ 
sider  if  it  be  not  rather  to  the  unclean.2  But  why 
not  refer  that  to  the  world  which  is  demon¬ 
strated  to  be  in  the  world?  We,  however,  seek 
for  a  mind  which,  trusting  to  true  religion,  does 
not  adore  the  world  as  its  god,  but  for  the  sake 
of  God  praises  the  world  as  a  work  of  God,  and, 
purified  from  mundane  defilements,  comes  pure3 
to  God  Himself  Who  founded  the  world.4 

Chap.  27.  Concerning  the  figments  of  the  phy¬ 
sical  theologists,  who  neither  worship  the  true 
divinity,  nor  perform  the  worship  wherewith 
the  true  divinity  should  be  served 

We  see  that  these  select  gods  have,  indeed, 
become  more  famous  than  the  rest;  not,  how¬ 
ever,  that  their  merits  may  be  brought  to  light, 
but  that  their  opprobrious  deeds  may  not  be  hid. 
Whence  it  is  more  credible  that  they  were  men, 
as  not  only  poetic  but  also  historical  literature 
has  handed  down.  For  this  which  Virgil  says, 

Then  from  Olympus>  heights  came  down 
Good  Saturn,  exiled  from  his  throne 
By  Jove,  his  mightier  heir;5 

and  what  follows  with  reference  to  this  affair  is 
fully  related  by  the  historian  Euhemerus  and 
has  been  translated  into  Latin  by  Ennius.  And 
as  they  who  have  written  before  us  in  the  Greek 
or  in  the  Latin  tongue  against  such  errors  as 
these  have  said  much  concerning  this  matter,  I 
have  thought  it  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  it. 
When  I  consider  those  physical  reasons,  then, 
by  which  learned  and  acute  men  attempt  to  turn 
human  things  into  divine  things,  all  I  see  is  that 
they  have  been  able  to  refer  these  things  only  to 
temporal  works  and  to  that  which  has  a  corpo¬ 
real  nature,  and  even  though  invisible  still  mu¬ 
table  ;  and  this  is  by  no  means  the  true  God.  But 
if  this  worship  had  been  performed  as  the  sym¬ 
bolism  of  ideas  at  least  congruous  with  religion, 
though  it  would  indeed  have  been  cause  of  grief 
that  the  true  God  was  not  announced  and  pro¬ 
claimed  by  its  symbolism,  nevertheless  it  could 
have  been  in  some  degree  borne  with,  when  it 
did  not  occasion  and  command  the  performance 
of  such  foul  and  abominable  things.  But  since  it 
is  impiety  to  worship  the  body  or  the  soul  for 
the  true  God,  by  whose  indwelling  alone  the  soul 
is  happy,  how  much  more  impious  is  it  to  wor- 

lMundum.  Hmmundum.  zMundus.  4Mundum. 
6Virgil,  . Eneid ,  bk.  viii.  319-20. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


260 

ship  those  things  through  which  neither  soul  nor 
body  can  obtain  either  salvation  or  human  hon¬ 
our?  Wherefore  if  with  temple,  priest,  and  sacri¬ 
fice,  which  are  due  to  the  true  God,  any  element 
of  the  world  be  worshipped,  or  any  created  spir¬ 
it,  even  though  not  impure  and  evil,  that  wor¬ 
ship  is  still  evil,  not  because  the  things  are  evil 
by  which  the  worship  is  performed,  but  because 
those  things  ought  only  to  be  used  in  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  Him  to  Whom  alone  such  worship  and 
service  are  due.  But  if  any  one  insist  that  he 
worships  the  one  true  God — that  is,  the  Creator 
of  every  soul  and  of  every  body — with  stupid 
and  monstrous  idols,  with  human  victims,  with 
putting  a  wreath  on  the  male  organ,  with  the 
wages  of  unchastity,  with  the  cutting  of  limbs, 
with  emasculation,  with  the  consecration  of  ef¬ 
feminates,  with  impure  and  obscene  plays,  such 
a  one  does  not  sin  because  he  worships  One  Who 
ought  not  to  be  worshipped,  but  because  he  wor¬ 
ships  Him  Who  ought  to  be  worshipped  in  a  way 
in  which  He  ought  not  to  be  worshipped.  But  he 
who  worships  with  such  things — that  is,  foul 
and  obscene  things — and  that  not  the  true  God, 
namely,  the  Maker  of  soul  and  body,  but  a  crea¬ 
ture,  even  though  not  a  wicked  creature,  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  soul  or  body,  or  soul  and  body  together, 
twice  sins  against  God,  because  he  both  worships 
for  God  what  is  not  God,  and  also  worships  with 
such  things  as  neither  God  nor  what  is  not  God 
ought  to  be  worshipped  with.  It  is,  indeed,  mani¬ 
fest  how  these  pagans  worship — that  is,  how 
shamefully  and  criminally  they  worship;  but 
what  or  whom  they  worship  would  have  been 
left  in  obscurity,  had  not  their  history  testified 
that  those  same  confessedly  base  and  foul  rites 
were  rendered  in  obedience  to  the  demands  of 
the  gods,  who  exacted  them  with  terrible  sever¬ 
ity.  Wherefore  it  is  evident  beyond  doubt  that 
this  whole  civil  theology  is  occupied  in  invent¬ 
ing  means  for  attracting  wicked  and  most  im¬ 
pure  spirits,  inviting  them  to  visit  senseless 
images  and  through  these  to  take  possession  of 
stupid  hearts. 

Chap.  28.  That  the  doctrine  of  Varro  concerning 
theology  is  in  no  part  consistent  with  itself. 
To  what  purpose,  then,  is  it  that  this  most 
learned  and  most  acute  man  Varro  attempts  as 
it  were,  with  subtle  disputation  to  reduce  and 
refer  all  these  gods  to  heaven  and  earth?  He  can¬ 
not  do  it.  They  go  out  of  his  hands  like  water; 
they  shrink  back;  they  slip  down  and  fall.  For 
when  about  to  speak  of  the  females,  that  is,  the 
goddesses,  he  says,  “Since,  as  I  observed  in  the 
first  book  concerning  places,  heaven  and  earth 


are  the  two  origins  of  the  gods,  on  which  account 
they  are  called  celestials  and  terrestrials,  and  as 
I  began  in  the  former  books  with  heaven,  speak¬ 
ing  of  Janus,  whom  some  have  said  to  be  heav¬ 
en,  and  others  the  earth,  so  I  now  commence  with 
Tellus  in  speaking  concerning  the  goddesses.”  I 
can  understand  what  embarrassment  so  great  a 
mind  was  experiencing.  For  he  is  influenced  by 
the  perception  of  a  certain  plausible  resemblance, 
when  he  says  that  the  heaven  is  that  which  does, 
and  the  earth  that  which  suffers,  and  therefore 
attributes  the  masculine  principle  to  the  one, 
and  the  feminine  to  the  other,  not  considering 
that  it  is  rather  He  Who  made  both  heaven  and 
earth  Who  is  the  maker  of  both  activity  and  pas¬ 
sivity.  On  this  principle  he  interprets  the  cele¬ 
brated  mysteries  of  the  Samothracians,  and 
promises,  with  an  air  of  great  devoutness,  that 
he  will  by  writing  expound  these  mysteries, 
which  have  not  been  so  much  as  known  to  his 
countrymen,  and  will  send  them  his  exposition. 
Then  he  says  that  he  had  from  many  proofs 
gathered  that,  in  those  mysteries,  among  the 
images  one  signifies  heaven,  another  the  earth, 
another  the  patterns  of  things,  which  Plato  calls 
ideas.  He  makes  Jupiter  to  signify  heaven,  Juno 
the  earth,  Minerva  the  ideas.  Heaven,  by  which 
anything  is  made;  the  earth,  from  which  it  is 
made;  and  the  pattern,  according  to  which  it  is 
made.  But,  with  respect  to  the  last,  I  am  forget¬ 
ting  to  say  that  Plato  attributed  so  great  an  im¬ 
portance  to  these  ideas  as  to  say,  not  that  any¬ 
thing  was  made  by  heaven  according  to  them, 
but  that  according  to  them  heaven  itself  was 
made.1  To  return,  however,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  Varro  has,  in  the  book  on  the  select  gods, 
lost  that  theory  of  these  gods,  in  whom  he  has, 
as  it  were,  embraced  all  things.  For  he  assigns 
the  male  gods  to  heaven,  the  females  to  earth; 
among  which  latter  he  has  placed  Minerva, 
whom  he  had  before  placed  above  heaven  itself. 
Then  the  male  god  Neptune  is  in  the  sea,  which 
pertains  rather  to  earth  than  to  heaven.  Last  of 
all,  Father  Dis,  who  is  called  in  Greek  TWovtuv, 
another  male  god,  brother  of  both  (Jupiter  and 
Neptune),  is  also  held  to  be  a  god  of  the  earth, 
holding  the  upper  region  of  the  earth  himself, 
and  allotting  the  nether  region  to  his  wife  Pro¬ 
serpine.  How,  then,  do  they  attempt  to  refer  the 
gods  to  heaven  and  the  goddesses  to  earth? 
What  solidity,  what  consistency,  what  sobriety 
has  this  disputation?  But  that  Tellus  is  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  the  goddesses,  the  great  mother,  to  wit,  be¬ 
side  whom  there  is  continually  the  noise  of  the 
mad  and  abominable  revelry  of  effeminates  and 
the  Titnceus. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VII.  28-31  261 


mutilated  men,  and  men  who  cut  themselves  and 
indulge  in  frantic  gesticulations;  how  is  it,  then, 
that  Janus  is  called  the  head  of  the  gods,  and 
Tellus  the  head  of  the  goddesses?  In  the  one 
case  error  does  not  make  one  head,  and  in  the 
other  frenzy  does  not  make  a  sane  one.  Why  do 
they  vainly  attempt  to  refer  these  to  the  world? 
Even  if  they  could  do  so,  no  pious  person  wor¬ 
ships  the  world  for  the  true  God.  Nevertheless, 
plain  truth  makes  it  evident  that  they  are  not 
able  even  to  do  this.  Let  them  rather  identify 
them  with  dead  men  and  most  wicked  demons, 
and  no  further  question  will  remain. 

Chap.  29.  That  all  things  which  the  physical 
theologists  have  referred  to  the  world  and  its 
parts,  they  ought  to  have  referred  to  the  one 
true  God 

For  all  those  things  which,  according  to  the 
account  given  of  those  gods,  are  referred  to  the 
world  by  so-called  physical  interpretation,  may, 
without  any  religious  scruple,  be  rather  assigned 
to  the  true  God,  Who  made  heaven  and  earth 
and  created  every  soul  and  every  body ;  and  the 
following  is  the  manner  in  which  we  see  that  this 
may  be  done.  We  worship  God — not  heaven  and 
earth,  of  which  two  parts  this  world  consists, 
nor  the  soul  or  souls  diffused  through  all  living 
things — but  God  Who  made  heaven  and  earth 
and  all  things  which  are  in  them ;  who  made  ev¬ 
ery  soul,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  its  life, 
whether  it  have  life  without  sensation  and  rea¬ 
son,  or  life  with  sensation,  or  life  with  both  sen¬ 
sation  and  reason. 

Chap.  30.  How  piety  distinguishes  the  Creator 
from  the  creatures,  so  that,  instead  of  one 
God,  there  are  not  worshipped  as  many  gods 
as  there  are  works  of  the  one  Author 
And  now,  to  begin  to  go  over  those  works  of 
the  one  true  God,  on  account  of  which  these 
have  made  to  themselves  many  and  false  gods, 
whilst  they  attempt  to  give  an  honourable  in¬ 
terpretation  to  their  many  most  abominable  and 
most  infamous  mysteries — we  worship  that  God 
Who  has  appointed  to  the  natures  created  by 
Him  both  the  beginnings  and  the  end  of  their 
existing  and  moving:  Who  holds,  knows,  and 
disposes  the  causes  of  things ;  Who  hath  created 
the  virtue  of  seeds;  Who  hath  given  to  what 
creatures  He  would  a  rational  soul,  which  is 
called  mind;  Who  hath  bestowed  the  faculty  and 
use  of  speech;  Who  hath  imparted  the  gift  of 
foretelling  future  things  to  whatever  spirits  it 
seemed  to  Him  good;  Who  also  Himself  predicts 
future  things  through  whom  He  pleases,  and 


through  whom  He  will  remove  diseases;  Who. 
when  the  human  race  is  to  be  corrected  and 
chastised  by  wars,  regulates  also  the  beginnings, 
progress,  and  ends  of  these  wars ;  Who  hath  cre¬ 
ated  and  governs  the  most  vehement  and  most 
violent  fire  of  this  world,  in  due  relation  and  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  other  elements  of  immense  na¬ 
ture;  Who  is  the  governor  of  all  the  waters; 
Who  hath  made  the  sun  brightest  of  all  material 
lights,  and  hath  given  him  suitable  power  and 
motion;  Who  hath  not  withdrawn,  even  from 
the  inhabitants  of  the  nether  world.  His  domin¬ 
ion  and  power;  Who  hath  appointed  to  mortal 
natures  their  suitable  seed  and  nourishment,  dry 
or  liquid;  Who  establishes  and  makes  fruitful 
the  earth;  Who  bountifully  bestows  its  fruits  on 
animals  and  on  men;  Who  knows  and  ordains, 
not  only  principal  causes,  but  also  subsequent 
causes ;  Who  hath  determined  for  the  moon  her 
motion;  Who  affords  ways  in  heaven  and  on 
earth  for  passage  from  one  place  to  another; 
Who  hath  granted  also  to  human  minds,  which 
He  hath  created,  the  knowledge  of  the  various 
arts  for  the  help  of  life  and  nature;  Who  hath 
appointed  the  union  of  male  and  female  for  the 
propagation  of  offspring;  Who  hath  favoured  the 
societies  of  men  with  the  gift  of  terrestrial  fire 
for  the  simplest  and  most  familiar  purposes,  to 
burn  on  the  hearth  and  to  give  light.  These  are, 
then,  the  things  which  that  most  acute  and  most 
learned  man  Varro  has  laboured  to  distribute 
among  the  select  gods,  by  I  know  not  what  phys¬ 
ical  interpretation,  which  he  has  got  from  other 
sources  and  also  conjectured  for  himself.  But 
these  things  the  one  true  God  makes  and  does, 
but  as  the  same  God — that  is,  as  He  who  is 
wholly  everywhere,  included  in  no  space,  bound 
by  no  chains,  mutable  in  no  part  of  His  being, 
filling  heaven  and  earth  with  omnipresent  pow¬ 
er,  not  with  a  needy  nature.  Therefore  He  gov¬ 
erns  all  things  in  such  a  manner  as  to  allow  them 
to  perform  and  exercise  their  own  proper  move¬ 
ments.  For  although  they  can  be  nothing  with¬ 
out  Him,  they  are  not  what  He  is.  He  does  also 
many  things  through  angels;  but  only  from 
Himself  does  He  beatify  angels.  So  also,  though 
He  send  angels  to  men  for  certain  purposes.  He 
does  not  for  all  that  beatify  men  by  the  good 
inherent  in  the  angels,  but  by  Himself,  as  He 
does  the  angels  themselves. 

Chap.  31.  What  benefits  God  gives  to  the  fol¬ 
lowers  of  the  truth  to  enjoy  over  and  above 
his  general  bounty 

For,  besides  such  benefits  as,  according  to  this 
administration  of  nature  of  which  we  have  made 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


262 

some  mention,  He  lavishes  on  good  and  bad 
alike,  we  have  from  Him  a  great  manifestation 
of  great  love,  which  belongs  only  to  the  good. 
For  although  we  can  never  sufficiently  give 
thanks  to  Him.  that  we  are,  that  we  live,  that  we 
behold  heaven  and  earth,  that  we  have  mind  and 
reason  by  which  to  seek  after  Him  who  made  all 
these  things,  nevertheless,  what  hearts,  what 
number  of  tongues,  shall  affirm  that  they  are 
sufficient  to  render  thanks  to  Him  for  this,  that 
He  hath  not  wholly  departed  from  us,  laden  and 
overwhelmed  with  sins,  averse  to  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  His  light  and  blinded  by  the  love  of 
darkness,  that  is,  of  iniquity,  but  hath  sent  to  us 
His  own  Word,  who  is  His  only  Son,  that  by  His 
birth  and  suffering  for  us  in  the  flesh,  which  He 
assumed,  we  might  know  how  much  God  valued 
man,  and  that  by  that  unique  sacrifice  we  might 
be  purified  from  all  our  sins,  and  that,  love  being 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  His  Spirit,  we 
might,  having  surmounted  all  difficulties,  come 
into  eternal  rest,  and  the  ineffable  sweetness  of 
the  contemplation  of  Himself? 

Chap.  32.  That  at  no  time  in  the  past  was  the 
mystery  of  Christ' s  redemption  awanting ,  but 
was  at  all  times  declared ,  though  in  various 
forms 

This  mystery  of  eternal  life,  even  from  the 
beginning  of  the  human  race,  was  by  certain 
signs  and  sacraments  suitable  to  the  times,  an¬ 
nounced  through  angels  to  those  to  whom  it  was 
meet.  Then  the  Hebrew  people  was  congregated 
into  one  republic,  as  it  were,  to  perform  this 
mystery ;  and  in  that  republic  was  foretold,  some¬ 
times  through  men  who  understood  what  they 
spake  and  sometimes  through  men  who  under¬ 
stood  not,  all  that  had  transpired  since  the  ad¬ 
vent  of  Christ  until  now  and  all  that  will  trans¬ 
pire.  This  same  nation,  too,  was  afterwards  dis¬ 
persed  through  the  nations,  in  order  to  testify  to 
the  scriptures  in  which  eternal  salvation  in 
Christ  had  been  declared.  For  not  only  the 
prophecies  which  are  contained  in  words,  nor 
only  the  precepts  for  the  right  conduct  of  life, 
which  teach  morals  and  piety,  and  are  contained 
in  the  sacred  writings — not  only  these,  but  also 
the  rites,  priesthood,  tabernacle  or  temple,  al¬ 
tars,  sacrifices,  ceremonies,  and  whatever  else 
belongs  to  that  service  which  is  due  to  God  and 
which  in  Greek  is  properly  called  Xarpeia — all 
these  signified  and  fore-announced  those  things 
which  we  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  unto  eter¬ 
nal  life  believe  to  have  been  fulfilled,  or  behold 
in  process  of  fulfillment,  or  confidently  believe 
shall  yet  be  fulfilled. 


Chap.  33.  That  only  through  the  Christian  reli¬ 
gion  could  the  deceit  of  malign  spirits ,  who 
rejoice  in  the  errors  of  men ,  have  been  mani¬ 
fested 

This,  the  only  true  religion,  has  alone  been 
able  to  manifest  that  the  gods  of  the  nations  are 
most  impure  demons,  who  desire  to  be  thought 
gods,  availing  themselves  of  the  names  of  cer¬ 
tain  defunct  souls,  or  the  appearance  of  mun¬ 
dane  creatures,  and  with  proud  impurity  rejoic¬ 
ing  in  things  most  base  and  infamous,  as  though 
in  divine  honours,  and  envying  human  souls 
their  conversion  to  the  true  God.  From  whose 
most  cruel  and  most  impious  dominion  a  man  is 
liberated  when  he  believes  on  Him  who  has  af¬ 
forded  an  example  of  humility,  following  which 
men  may  rise  as  great  as  was  that  pride  by  which 
they  fell.  Hence  are  not  only  those  gods,  con¬ 
cerning  whom  we  have  already  spoken  much, 
and  many  others  belonging  to  different  nations 
and  lands,  but  also  those  of  whom  we  are  now 
treating,  who  have  been  selected  as  it  were  into 
the  senate  of  the  gods — selected,  however,  on 
account  of  the  notoriousness  of  their  crimes,  not 
on  account  of  the  dignity  of  their  virtues — 
whose  sacred  things  Varro  attempts  to  refer  to 
certain  natural  reasons,  seeking  to  make  base 
things  honourable,  but  cannot  find  how  to  square 
and  agree  with  these  reasons,  because  these  are 
not  the  causes  of  those  rites,  which  he  thinks, 
or  rather  wishes  to  be  thought  to  be  so.  For  had 
not  only  these,  but  also  all  others  of  this  kind, 
been  real  causes,  even  though  they  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  true  God  and  eternal  life,  which 
is  to  be  sought  in  religion,  they  would,  by  af¬ 
fording  some  sort  of  reason  drawn  from  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  have  mitigated  in  some  degree 
that  offence  which  was  occasioned  by  some  tur¬ 
pitude  or  absurdity  in  the  sacred  rites,  which 
was  not  understood.  This  he  attempted  to  do  in 
respect  to  certain  fables  of  the  theatres,  or  mys¬ 
teries  of  the  shrines;  but  he  did  not  acquit  the 
theatres  of  likeness  to  the  shrines,  but  rather 
condemned  the  shrines  for  likeness  to  the  thea¬ 
tres.  However,  he  in  some  way  made  the  at¬ 
tempt  to  soothe  the  feelings  shocked  by  horrible 
things,  by  rendering  what  he  would  have  to  be 
natural  interpretations. 

Chap.  34.  Concerning  the  books  of  Numa  Pom - 
pilius,  which  the  senate  ordered  to  be  burned, 
in  order  that  the  causes  of  sacred  rites  there¬ 
in  assigned  should  not  become  known 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find,  as  the  same 
most  learned  man  has  related,  that  the  causes  of 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VII.  32-35  263 


the  sacred  rites  which  were  given  from  the 
books  of  Xuma  Pompilius  could  by  no  means  be 
tolerated  and  were  considered  unworthy,  not 
only  to  become  known  to  the  religious  by  being 
read,  but  even  to  lie  written  in  the  darkness  in 
which  they  had  been  concealed.  For  now  let  me 
say  what  I  promised  in  the  third  book  of  this 
work  to  say  in  its  proper  place.  For,  as  we  read 
in  the  same  Varro’s  book  on  the  worship  of  the 
gods,  “A  certain  one  Terentius  had  a  field  at  the 
Janiculum,  and  once,  when  his  ploughman  was 
passing  the  plough  near  to  the  tomb  of  Xuma 
Pompilius,  he  turned  up  from  the  ground  the 
books  of  Xuma,  in  which  were  written  the 
causes  of  the  sacred  institutions;  which  books 
he  carried  to  the  praetor,  who,  having  read  the 
beginnings  of  them,  referred  to  the  senate  what 
seemed  to  be  a  matter  of  so  much  importance. 
And  when  the  chief  senators  had  read  certain  of 
the  causes  why  this  or  that  rite  was  instituted, 
the  senate  assented  to  the  dead  Xuma,  and  the 
conscript  fathers,  as  though  concerned  for  the 
interests  of  religion,  ordered  the  praetor  to  burn 
the  books.”1  Let  each  one  believe  what  he 
thinks;  nay,  let  every  champion  of  such  impiety 
say  whatever  mad  contention  may  suggest.  For 
my  part,  let  it  suffice  to  suggest  that  the  causes 
of  those  sacred  things  which  were  written  down 
by  King  Xuma  Pompilius;  the  institutor  of  the 
Roman  rites,  ought  never  to  have  become  known 
to  people  or  senate,  or  even  to  the  priests  them¬ 
selves;  and  also  that  Xuma  himself  attained  to 
these  secrets  of  demons  by  an  illicit  curiosity,  in 
order  that  he  might  write  them  down,  so  as  to  be 
able,  by  reading,  to  be  reminded  of  them.  How¬ 
ever,  though  he  was  king  and  had  no  cause  to  be 
afraid  of  any  one,  he  neither  dared  to  teach 
them  to  any  one,  nor  to  destroy  them  by  oblit¬ 
eration.  or  any  other  form  of  destruction.  There¬ 
fore,  because  he  was  unwilling  that  any  one 
should  know  them,  lest  men  should  be  taught 
infamous  things,  and  because  he  was  afraid  to 
violate  them,  lest  he  should  enrage  the  demons 
against  himself,  he  buried  them  in  what  he 
thought  a  safe  place,  believing  that  a  plough 
could  not  approach  his  sepulchre.  But  the  sen¬ 
ate,  fearing  to  condemn  the  religious  solemni¬ 
ties  of  their  ancestors,  and  therefore  compelled 
to  assent  to  Xuma,  were  nevertheless  so  con¬ 
vinced  that  those  books  were  pernicious  that 
they  did  not  order  them  to  be  buried  again, 
knowing  that  human  curiosity  would  thereby  be 
excited  to  seek  with  far  greater  eagerness  after 
the  matter  already  divulged,  but  ordered  the 
scandalous  relics  to  be  destroyed  with  fire;  be- 
1Plutarch,  Numa. 


cause,  as  they  thought  it  was  now  a  necessity  to 
perform  those  sacred  rites,  they  judged  that  the 
error  arising  from  ignorance  of  their  causes  was 
more  tolerable  than  the  disturbance  which  the 
knowledge  of  them  wTould  occasion  the  state. 

Chap.  35.  Concerning  the  hydromancy  through 
which  Numa  was  befooled  by  certain  images 
of  demons  seen  in  the  water 
For  Xuma  himself  also,  to  whom  no  prophet 
of  God,  no  holy  angel  was  sent,  wTas  driven  to 
have  recourse  to  hydromancy,  that  he  might  see 
the  images  of  the  gods  in  the  water  (or,  rather, 
appearances  wThereby  the  demons  made  sport  of 
him)  and  might  learn  from  them  wThat  he  ought 
to  ordain  and  observe  in  the  sacred  rites.  “This 
kind  of  divination,”  says  Varro,  “was  introduced 
from  the  Persians,  and  was  used  by  Xuma  him¬ 
self,  and  at  an  after  time  by  the  philosopher 
Pythagoras.  In  this  divination,”  he  says,  “they 
also  inquire  at  the  inhabitants  of  the  nether 
world,  and  make  use  of  blood;  and  this  the 
Greeks  called  veKpofiavrlav”  But  whether  it  be 
called  necromancy  or  hydromancy  it  is  the  same 
thing,  for  in  either  case  the  dead  are  supposed  to 
foretell  future  things.  But  by  wiiat  artifices 
these  things  are  done,  let  themselves  consider; 
for  I  am  unwilling  to  say  that  these  artifices 
were  wront  to  be  prohibited  by  the  laws,  and  to 
be  very  severely  punished  even  in  the  Gentile 
states,  before  the  advent  of  our  Saviour.  I  am 
unwilling,  I  say,  to  affirm  this,  for  perhaps  even 
such  things  wTere  then  allowed.  However,  it  wras 
by  these  arts  that  Pompilius  learned  those  sa¬ 
cred  rites  which  he  gave  forth  as  facts,  whilst 
he  concealed  their  causes;  for  even  he  himself 
was  afraid  of  that  which  he  had  learned.  The 
senate  also  caused  the  books  in  which  those 
causes  wTere  recorded  to  be  burned.  What  is  it, 
then,  to  me,  that  Varro  attempts  to  adduce  all 
sorts  of  fanciful  physical  interpretations,  wThich 
if  these  books  had  contained,  they  wrould  cer¬ 
tainly  not  have  been  burned?  For  otherwise  the 
conscript  fathers  wTould  also  have  burned  those 
books  wilich  Varro  published  and  dedicated  to 
the  high  priest  Caesar.  Now  NTuma  is  said  to  have 
married  the  nymph  Egeria,  because  (as  Varro 
explains  it  in  the  forementioned  book)  he  car¬ 
ried  forth  w^ater  wTherewith  to  perform  his  hy¬ 
dromancy.  Thus  facts  are  wont  to  be  converted 
into  fables  through  false  colourings.  It  wras  by 
that  hydromancy,  then,  that  that  over-curious 
Roman  king  learned  both  the  sacred  rites  wilich 
wrere  to  be  wTritten  in  the  books  of  the  priests, 
and  also  the  causes  of  those  rites,  which  latter, 
however,  he  wras  unwilling  that  any  one  besides 


264  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


himself  should  know.  Wherefore  he  made  these 
causes,  as  it  were,  to  die  along  with  himself, 
taking  care  to  have  them  written  by  themselves 
and  removed  from  the  knowledge  of  men  by 
being  buried  in  the  earth.  Wherefore  the  things 
which  are  written  in  those  books  were  either 
abominations  of  demons,  so  foul  and  noxious  as 
to  render  that  whole  civil  theology  execrable 
even  in  the  eyes  of  such  men  as  those  senators, 
who  had  accepted  so  many  shameful  things  in 
the  sacred  rites  themselves,  or  they  were  nothing 
else  than  the  accounts  of  dead  men,  whom, 
through  the  lapse  of  ages,  almost  all  the  Gentile 
nations  had  come  to  believe  to  be  immortal 
gods ;  whilst  those  same  demons  were  delighted 
even  with  such  rites,  having  presented  them¬ 
selves  to  receive  worship  under  pretence  of  be¬ 
ing  those  very  dead  men  whom  they  had  caused 
to  be  thought  immortal  gods  by  certain  falla¬ 
cious  miracles,  performed  in  order  to  establish 
that  belief.  But,  by  the  hidden  providence  of  the 
true  God,  these  demons  were  permitted  to  con¬ 
fess  these  things  to  their  friend  Numa,  having 
been  gained  by  those  arts  through  which  necro¬ 
mancy  could  be  performed,  and  yet  were  not 
constrained  to  admonish  him  rather  at  his  death 


to  burn  than  to  bury  the  books  in  which  they 
were  written.  But,  in  order  that  these  books 
might  be  unknown,  the  demons  could  not  resist 
the  plough  by  which  they  were  thrown  up,  or 
the  pen  of  Varro,  through  which  the  things 
which  were  done  in  reference  to  this  matter  have 
come  down  even  to  our  knowledge.  For  they  are 
not  able  to  effect  anything  which  they  are  not 
allowed;  but  they  are  permitted  to  influence 
those  whom  God,  in  His  deep  and  just  judg¬ 
ment,  according  to  their  deserts,  gives  over 
either  to  be  simply  afflicted  by  them,  or  to  be 
also  subdued  and  deceived.  But  how  pernicious 
these  writings  were  judged  to  be,  or  how  alien 
from  the  worship  of  the  true  Divinity,  may  be 
understood  from  the  fact  that  the  senate  pre¬ 
ferred  to  burn  what  Pompilius  had  hid,  rather 
than  to  fear  what  he  feared,  so  that  he  could  not 
dare  to  do  that.  Wherefore  let  him  who  does  not 
desire  to  live  a  pious  life  even  now  seek  eternal 
life  by  means  of  such  rites.  But  let  him  who  does 
not  wish  to  have  fellowship  with  malign  demons 
have  no  fear  for  the  noxious  superstition  where¬ 
with  they  are  worshipped,  but  let  him  recognize 
the  true  religion  by  which  they  are  unmasked 
and  vanquished. 


BOOK  VIII 

ARGUMENT.  Augustine  comes  now  to  the  third  kind  of  theology,  that  is, 

THE  NATURAL,  AND  TAKES  UP  THE  QUESTION  WHETHER  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  GODS 
OF  THE  NATURAL  THEOLOGY  IS  OF  ANY  AVAIL  TOWARDS  SECURING  BLESSEDNESS  IN 
THE  LIFE  TO  COME.  THIS  QUESTION  HE  PREFERS  TO  DISCUSS  WITH  THE  PLATONISTS, 
BECAUSE  THE  PLATONIC  SYSTEM  IS  “FACILE  PRINCEPS”  AMONG  PHILOSOPHIES,  AND 
MAKES  THE  NEAREST  APPROXIMATION  TO  CHRISTIAN  TRUTH.  In  PURSUING  THIS 
ARGUMENT.  HE  FIRST  REFUTES  APULEIUS,  AND  ALL  WHO  MAINTAIN  THAT  THE  DE¬ 
MONS  SHOULD  BE  WORSHIPPED  AS  MESSENGERS  AND  MEDIATORS  BETWEEN  GODS  AND 

men;  demonstrating  that  by  no  possibility  can  men  be  reconciled  to  good 

GODS  BY  DEMONS,  WHO  ARE  THE  SLAVES  OF  VICE,  AND  WHO  DELIGHT  IN  AND  PATRON¬ 
IZE  WHAT  GOOD  AND  WISE  MEN  ABHOR  AND  CONDEMN — THE  BLASPHEMOUS  FICTIONS 
OF  POETS,  THEATRICAL  EXHIBITIONS,  AND  MAGICAL  ARTS. 


Chap.  i.  That  the  question  of  natural  theology 
is  to  be  discussed  with  those  philosophers  who 
sought  a  more  excellent  wisdom 
We  shall  require  to  apply  our  mind  with  far 
greater  intensity  to  the  present  question  than 
was  requisite  in  the  solution  and  unfolding  of 
the  questions  handled  in  the  preceding  books; 
for  it  is  not  with  ordinary  men,  but  with  philos¬ 
ophers  that  we  must  confer  concerning  the  the¬ 
ology  which  they  call  natural.  For  it  is  not  like 
the  fabulous,  that  is,  the  theatrical;  nor  the 
civil,  that  is,  the  urban  theology:  the  one  of 


which  displays  the  crimes  of  the  gods,  whilst  the 
other  manifests  their  criminal  desires,  which 
demonstrate  them  to  be  rather  malign  demons 
than  gods.  It  is,  we  say,  with  philosophers  we 
have  to  confer  with  respect  to  this  theology — 
men  whose  very  name,  if  rendered  into  Latin, 
signifies  those  who  profess  the  love  of  wisdom. 
Now,  if  wisdom  is  God,  who  made  all  things,  as 
is  attested  by  the  divine  authority  and  truth,1 
then  the  philosopher  is  a  lover  of  God.  But  since 
the  thing  itself,  which  is  called  by  this  name, 
exists  not  in  all  who  glory  in  the  name — for  it 
HVisd.  7.  24-27. 


THE  CITY  OF 

does  not  follow,  of  course,  that  all  who  are 
called  philosophers  are  lovers  of  true  wisdom — 
we  must  needs  select  from  the  number  of  those 
with  whose  opinions  we  have  been  able  to  ac¬ 
quaint  ourselves  by  reading,  some  with  whom 
we  may  not  unworthily  engage  in  the  treatment 
of  this  question.  For  I  have  not  in  this  work  un¬ 
dertaken  to  refute  all  the  vain  opinions  of  the 
philosophers,  but  only  such  as  pertain  to  the¬ 
ology,  which  Greek  word  we  understand  to  mean 
an  account  or  explanation  of  the  divine  nature. 
Nor,  again,  have  I  undertaken  to  refute  all  the 
vain  theological  opinions  of  all  the  philosophers, 
but  only  of  such  of  them  as,  agreeing  in  the  be¬ 
lief  that  there  is  a  divine  nature,  and  that  this 
divine  nature  is  concerned  about  human  affairs, 
do  nevertheless  deny  that  the  worship  of  the  one 
unchangeable  God  is  sufficient  for  the  obtaining 
of  a  blessed  life  after  death,  as  well  as  at  the 
present  time;  and  hold  that,  in  order  to  obtain 
that  life,  many  gods,  created,  indeed,  and  ap¬ 
pointed  to  their  several  spheres  by  that  one  God, 
are  to  be  worshipped.  These  approach  nearer  to 
the  truth  than  even  Varro;  for,  whilst  he  saw  no 
difficulty  in  extending  natural  theology  in  its 
entirety  even  to  the  world  and  the  soul  of  the 
world,  these  acknowledge  God  as  existing  above 
all  that  is  of  the  nature  of  soul,  and  as  the  Crea¬ 
tor  not  only  of  this  visible  world,  which  is  often 
called  heaven  and  earth,  but  also  of  every  soul 
whatsoever,  and  as  Him  Who  gives  blessedness 
to  the  rational  soul — of  which  kind  is  the  human 
soul — by  participation  in  His  own  unchange¬ 
able  and  incorporeal  light.  There  is  no  one,  who 
has  even  a  slender  knowledge  of  these  things, 
who  does  not  know  of  the  Platonic  philosophers, 
who  derive  their  name  from  their  master  Plato. 
Concerning  this  Plato,  then,  I  will  briefly  state 
such  things  as  I  deem  necessary  to  the  present 
question,  mentioning  beforehand  those  who  pre¬ 
ceded  him  in  time  in  the  same  department  of 
literature. 

Chap.  2.  Concerning  the  two  schools  of  philoso¬ 
phers!  that  is,  the  Italic  and  Ionic,  and  their 
founders 

As  far  as  concerns  the  literature  of  the  Greeks, 
whose  language  holds  a  more  illustrious  place 
than  any  of  the  languages  of  the  other  nations, 
history  mentions  two  schools  of  philosophers,  the 
one  called  the  Italic  school,  originating  in  that 
part  of  Italy  which  was  formerly  called  Magna 
Graecia;  the  other  called  the  Ionic  school,  hav¬ 
ing  its  origin  in  those  regions  which  are  still 
called  by  the  name  of  Greece.  The  Italic  school 
had  for  its  founder  Pythagoras  of  Samos,  to 


GOD  VIII.  1-2  265 

whom  also  the  term  “philosophy”  is  said  to  owe 
its  origin.  For  whereas  formerly  those  who 
seemed  to  excel  others  by  the  laudable  manner 
in  which  they  regulated  their  lives  were  called 
sages,  Pythagoras,  on  being  asked  what  he  pro¬ 
fessed,  replied  that  he  was  a  philosopher,  that  is, 
a  student  or  lover  of  wisdom;  for  it  seemed  to 
him  to  be  the  height  of  arrogance  to  profess  one¬ 
self  a  sage.  The  founder  of  the  Ionic  school, 
again,  was  Thales  of  Miletus,  one  of  those  seven 
who  were  styled  the  “seven  sages,”  of  whom  six 
were  distinguished  by  the  kind  of  life  they  lived, 
and  by  certain  maxims  which  they  gave  forth 
for  the  proper  conduct  of  life.  Thales  was  dis¬ 
tinguished  as  an  investigator  into  the  nature  of 
things;  and,  in  order  that  he  might  have  succes¬ 
sors  in  his  school,  he  committed  his  disserta¬ 
tions  to  writing.  That,  however,  which  especially 
rendered  him  eminent  was  his  ability,  by  means 
of  astronomical  calculations,  even  to  predict 
eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon.  He  thought,  how¬ 
ever,  that  water  was  the  first  principle  of  things 
and  that  of  it  all  the  elements  of  the  world,  the 
world  itself  and  all  things  which  are  generated 
in  it,  ultimately  consist.  Over  all  this  work,  how¬ 
ever,  which,  when  we  consider  the  world,  ap¬ 
pears  so  admirable,  he  set  nothing  of  the  nature 
of  divine  mind.  To  him  succeeded  Anaximander, 
his  pupil,  who  held  a  different  opinion  concern¬ 
ing  the  nature  of  things ;  for  he  did  not  hold  that 
all  things  spring  from  one  principle,  as  Thales 
did,  who  held  that  principle  to  be  water,  but 
thought  that  each  thing  springs  from  its  own 
proper  principle.  These  principles  of  things  he 
believed  to  be  infinite  in  number  and  thought 
that  they  generated  innumerable  worlds  and  all 
the  things  which  arise  in  them.  He  thought,  also, 
that  these  worlds  are  subject  to  a  perpetual 
process  of  alternate  dissolution  and  regenera¬ 
tion,  each  one  continuing  for  a  longer  or  shorter 
period  of  time,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
case;  nor  did  he  any  more  than  Thales,  attrib¬ 
ute  anything  to  a  divine  mind  in  the  production 
of  all  this  activity  of  things.  Anaximander  left 
as  his  successor  his  disciple  Anaximenes,  who 
attributed  all  the  causes  of  things  to  an  infinite 
air.  He  neither  denied  nor  ignored  the  existence 
of  gods,  but,  so  far  from  believing  that  the  air 
was  made  by  them,  he  held,  on  the  contrary, 
that  they  sprang  from  the  air.  Anaxagoras,  how¬ 
ever,  who  was  his  pupil,  perceived  that  a  divine 
mind  was  the  productive  cause  of  all  things 
which  we  see,  and  said  that  all  the  various  kinds 
of  things,  according  to  their  several  modes  and 
species,  were  produced  out  of  an  infinite  matter 
consisting  of  homogeneous  particles,  but  by  the 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


266 

efficiency  of  a  divine  mind.  Diogenes,  also,  an¬ 
other  pupil  of  Anaximenes,  said  that  a  certain 
air  was  the  original  substance  of  things  out  of 
which  all  things  were  produced,  but  that  it  was 
possessed  of  a  divine  reason,  without  which 
nothing  could  be  produced  from  it.  Anaxagoras 
was  succeeded  by  his  disciple  Archelaus,  who 
also  thought  that  all  things  consisted  of  homo¬ 
geneous  particles,  of  which  each  particular  thing 
was  made,  but  that  those  particles  were  pervad¬ 
ed  by  a  divine  mind,  which  perpetually  ener¬ 
gized  all  the  eternal  bodies,  namely,  those  parti¬ 
cles,  so  that  they  are  alternately  united  and  sep¬ 
arated.  Socrates,  the  master  of  Plato,  is  said  to 
have  been  the  disciple  of  Archelaus;  and  on  Pla¬ 
to’s  account  it  is  that  I  have  given  this  brief  his¬ 
torical  sketch  of  the  whole  history  of  these 
schools. 

Chap.  3.  Of  the  Socratic  philosophy 
Socrates  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  di¬ 
rected  the  entire  effort  of  philosophy  to  the  cor¬ 
rection  and  regulation  of  manners,  all  who  went 
before  him  having  expended  their  greatest  ef¬ 
forts  in  the  investigation  of  physical,  that  is, 
natural  phenomena.  However,  it  seems  to  me 
that  it  cannot  be  certainly  discovered  whether 
Socrates  did  this  because  he  was  wearied  of  ob¬ 
scure  and  uncertain  things,  and  so  wished  to  di¬ 
rect  his  mind  to  the  discovery  of  something 
manifest  and  certain,  which  was  necessary  in 
order  to  the  obtaining  of  a  blessed  life — that  one 
great  object  toward  which  the  labour,  vigilance, 
and  industry  of  all  philosophers  seem  to  have 
been  directed — or  whether  (as  some  yet  more 
favourable  to  him  suppose)  he  did  it  because  he 
was  unwilling  that  minds  defiled  with  earthly 
desires  should  essay  to  raise  themselves  upward 
to  divine  things.  For  he  saw  that  the  causes  of 
things  were  sought  for  by  them — which  causes 
he  believed  to  be  ultimately  reducible  to  noth¬ 
ing  else  than  the  will  of  the  one  true  and  su¬ 
preme  God — and  on  this  account  he  thought 
they  could  only  be  comprehended  by  a  purified 
mind;  and  therefore  that  all  diligence  ought  to 
be  given  to  the  purification  of  the  life  by  good 
morals,  in  order  that  the  mind,  delivered  from 
the  depressing  weight  of  lusts,  might  raise  itself 
upward  by  its  native  vigour  to  eternal  things  and 
might,  with  purified  understanding,  contemplate 
that  nature  which  is  incorporeal  and  unchange¬ 
able  light,  where  live  the  causes  of  all  created 
natures.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  he  hunted 
out  and  pursued,  with  a  wonderful  pleasantness 
of  style  and  argument  and  with  a  most  pointed 
and  insinuating  urbanity,  the  foolishness  of  ig¬ 


norant  men,  who  thought  that  they  knew  this  or 
that,  sometimes  confessing  his  own  ignorance 
and  sometimes  dissimulating  his  knowledge, 
even  in  those  very  moral  questions  to  which  he 
seems  to  have  directed  the  whole  force  of  his 
mind.  And  hence  there  arose  hostility  against 
him,  which  ended  in  his  being  calumniously  im¬ 
peached,  and  condemned  to  death.  Afterwards, 
however,  that  very  city  of  the  Athenians,  which 
had  publicly  condemned  him.  did  publicly  be¬ 
wail  him,  the  popular  indignation  having  turned 
with  such  vehemence  on  his  accusers  that  one  of 
them  perished  by  the  violence  of  the  multitude, 
whilst  the  other  only  escaped  a  like  punishment 
by  voluntary  and  perpetual  exile. 

Illustrious,  therefore,  both  in  his  life  and  in 
his  death,  Socrates  left  very  many  disciples  of 
his  philosophy,  who  vied  with  one  another  in 
desire  for  proficiency  in  handling  those  moral 
questions  which  concern  the  chief  good  ( sum- 
mum  bonum ),  the  possession  of  which  can  make 
a  man  blessed ;  and  because,  in  the  disputations 
of  Socrates,  where  he  raises  all  manner  of  ques¬ 
tions,  makes  assertions,  and  then  demolishes 
them,  it  did  not  evidently  appear  what  he  held 
to  be  the  chief  good,  every  one  took  from  these 
disputations  what  pleased  him  best,  and  every 
one  placed  the  final  good  in  whatever  it  ap¬ 
peared  to  himself  to  consist.  Now,  that  which  is 
called  the  final  good  is  that  at  which,  when  one 
has  arrived,  he  is  blessed.  But  so  diverse  were 
the  opinions  held  by  those  followers  of  Socrates 
concerning  this  final  good  that  (a  thing  scarcely 
to  be  credited  with  respect  to  the  followers  of 
one  master)  some  placed  the  chief  good  in 
pleasure,  as  Aristippus,  others  in  virtue,  as  An- 
tisthenes.  Indeed,  it  were  tedious  to  recount  the 
various  opinions  of  various  disciples. 

Chap.  4.  Concerning  Plato,  the  chief  among  the 

disciples  of  Socrates,  and  his  threefold  divi¬ 
sion  of  philosophy 

But,  among  the  disciples  of  Socrates,  Plato 
was  the  one  who  shone  with  a  glory  which  far 
excelled  that  of  the  others  and  who  not  unjustly 
eclipsed  them  all.  By  birth  an  Athenian  of  hon¬ 
ourable  parentage,  he  far  surpassed  his  fellow- 
disciples  in  natural  endowments,  of  which  he 
was  possessed  in  a  wonderful  degree.  Yet,  deem¬ 
ing  himself  and  the  Socratic  discipline  far  from 
sufficient  for  bringing  philosophy  to  perfection, 
he  travelled  as  extensively  as  he  was  able,  going 
to  every  place  famed  for  the  cultivation  of  any 
science  of  which  he  could  make  himself  master. 
Thus  he  learned  from  the  Egyptians  whatever 
they  held  and  taught  as  important;  and  from 


THE  CITY  OF 

Egypt,  passing  into  those  parts  of  Italy  which 
were  filled  with  the  fame  of  the  Pythagoreans, 
he  mastered,  with  the  greatest  facility,  and  un¬ 
der  the  most  eminent  teachers,  all  the  Italic  phi¬ 
losophy  which  was  then  in  vogue.  And,  as  he  had 
a  peculiar  love  for  his  master  Socrates,  he  made 
him  the  speaker  in  all  his  dialogues,  putting  into 
his  mouth  whatever  he  had  learned,  either  from 
others,  or  from  the  efforts  of  his  own  powerful 
intellect,  tempering  even  his  moral  disputations 
with  the  grace  and  politeness  of  the  Socratic 
style.  And,  as  the  study  of  wisdom  consists  in 
action  and  contemplation,  so  that  one  part  of  it 
may  be  called  active,  and  the  other  contempla¬ 
tive — the  active  part  having  reference  to  the 
conduct  of  life,  that  is,  to  the  regulation  of 
morals,  and  the  contemplative  part  to  the  in¬ 
vestigation  into  the  causes  of  nature  and  into 
pure  truth — Socrates  is  said  to  have  excelled  in 
the  active  part  of  that  study,  while  Pythagoras 
gave  more  attention  to  its  contemplative  part, 
on  wThich  he  brought  to  bear  all  the  force  of  his 
great  intellect.  To  Plato  is  given  the  praise  of 
having  perfected  philosophy  by  combining  both 
parts  into  one.  He  then  divides  it  into  three 
parts — the  first  moral,  wrhich  is  chiefly  occupied 
with  action;  the  second  natural,  of  which  the 
object  is  contemplation;  and  the  third  rational, 
which  discriminates  between  the  true  and  the 
false.  And  though  this  last  is  necessary  both  to 
action  and  contemplation,  it  is  contemplation, 
nevertheless,  which  lays  peculiar  claim  to  the 
office  of  investigating  the  nature  of  truth.  Thus 
this  tripartite  division  is  not  contrary  to  that 
which  made  the  study  of  wisdom  to  consist  in 
action  and  contemplation.  Now,  as  to  what  Pla¬ 
to  thought  with  respect  to  each  of  these  parts — 
that  is,  what  he  believed  to  be  the  end  of  all  ac¬ 
tions,  the  cause  of  all  natures,  and  the  light  of 
all  intelligences — it  would  be  a  question  too  long 
to  discuss  and  about  which  we  ought  not  to 
make  any  rash  affirmation.  For,  as  Plato  liked 
and  constantly  affected  the  well-known  method 
of  his  master  Socrates,  namely,  that  of  dissimu¬ 
lating  his  knowledge  or  his  opinions,  it  is  not 
easy  to  discover  clearly  what  he  himself  thought 
on  various  matters,  any  more  than  it  is  to  dis¬ 
cover  what  were  the  real  opinions  of  Socrates. 
We  must,  nevertheless,  insert  into  our  work  cer¬ 
tain  of  those  opinions  which  he  expresses  in  his 
waitings,  whether  he  himself  uttered  them,  or 
narrates  them  as  expressed  by  others,  and  seems 
himself  to  approve  of — opinions  sometimes  fa¬ 
vourable  to  the  true  religion,  which  our  faith 
takes  up  and  defends,  and  sometimes  contrary 
to  it,  as,  for  example,  in  the  questions  concern- 


GOD  VIII.  3-5  267 

ing  the  existence  of  one  God  or  of  many,  as  it 
relates  to  the  truly  blessed  life  which  is  to  be 
after  death.  For  those  who  are  praised  as  having 
most  closely  followed  Plato,  who  is  justly  pre¬ 
ferred  to  all  the  other  philosophers  of  the  Gen¬ 
tiles,  and  who  are  said  to  have  manifested  the 
greatest  acuteness  in  understanding  him,  do  per¬ 
haps  entertain  such  an  idea  of  God  as  to  admit 
that  in  Him  are  to  be  found  the  cause  of  exist¬ 
ence,  the  ultimate  reason  for  the  understand¬ 
ing,  and  the  end  in  reference  to  which  the  whole 
life  is  to  be  regulated.  Of  which  three  things,  the 
first  is  understood  to  pertain  to  the  natural,  the 
second  to  the  rational,  and  the  third  to  the  mor¬ 
al  part  of  philosophy.  For  if  man  has  been  so 
created  as  to  attain,  through  that  which  is  most 
excellent  in  him,  to  that  which  excels  all  things 
— that  is,  to  the  one  true  and  absolutely  good 
God,  without  Whom  no  nature  exists,  no  doc¬ 
trine  instructs,  no  exercise  profits — let  Him  be 
sought  in  Whom  all  things  are  secure  to  us,  let 
Him  be  discovered  in  Whom  all  truth  becomes 
certain  to  us,  let  Him  be  loved  in  Whom  all  be¬ 
comes  right  to  us. 

Chap.  5.  That  it  is  especially  with  the  Platonists 
that  we  must  carry  on  our  disputations  on 
matters  of  theology ,  their  opinions  being  pref¬ 
erable  to  those  of  all  other  philosophers 
If,  then,  Plato  defined  the  wise  man  as  one 
who  imitates,  knows,  loves  this  God,  and  who  is 
rendered  blessed  through  fellowship  with  Him 
in  His  own  blessedness,  why  discuss  with  the 
other  philosophers?  It  is  evident  that  none  come 
nearer  to  us  than  the  Platonists.  To  them,  there¬ 
fore,  let  that  fabulous  theology  give  place  which 
delights  the  minds  of  men  with  the  crimes  of  the 
gods;  and  that  civil  theology  also,  in  which  im¬ 
pure  demons,  under  the  name  of  gods,  have  se¬ 
duced  the  peoples  of  the  earth  given  up  to  earth¬ 
ly  pleasures,  desiring  to  be  honoured  by  the  er¬ 
rors  of  men,  and  by  filling  the  minds  of  their 
worshippers  with  impure  desires,  exciting  them 
to  make  the  representation  of  their  crimes  one 
of  the  rites  of  their  worship,  whilst  they  them¬ 
selves  found  in  the  spectators  of  these  exhibi¬ 
tions  a  most  pleasing  spectacle — a  theology  in 
which,  whatever  was  honourable  in  the  temple, 
was  defiled  by  its  mixture  with  the  obscenity  of 
the  theatre,  and  whatever  was  base  in  the  thea¬ 
tre  was  vindicated  by  the  abominations  of  the 
temples.  To  these  philosophers  also  the  inter¬ 
pretations  of  Varro  must  give  place,  in  which  he 
explains  the  sacred  rites  as  having  reference  to 
heaven  and  earth,  and  to  the  seeds  and  opera¬ 
tions  of  perishable  things ;  for,  in  the  first  place, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


268 

those  rites  have  not  the  signification  which  he 
would  have  men  believe  is  attached  to  them,  and 
therefore  truth  does  not  follow  him  in  his  at¬ 
tempt  so  to  interpret  them ;  and  even  if  they  had 
this  signification,  still  those  things  ought  not  to 
be  worshipped  by  the  rational  soul  as  its  god 
which  are  placed  below  it  in  the  scale  of  nature, 
nor  ought  the  soul  to  prefer  to  itself  as  gods 
things  to  which  the  true  God  has  given  it  the 
preference.  The  same  must  be  said  of  those 
writings  pertaining  to  the  sacred  rites,  which 
Numa  Pompilius  took  care  to  conceal  by  caus¬ 
ing  them  to  be  buried  along  with  himself,  and 
which,  when  they  were  afterwards  turned  up  by 
the  plough,  were  burned  by  order  of  the  senate. 
And,  to  treat  Numa  with  all  honour,  let  us  men¬ 
tion  as  belonging  to  the  same  rank  as  these  writ¬ 
ings  that  which  Alexander  of  Macedon  wrote  to 
his  mother  as  communicated  to  him  by  Leo,  an 
Egyptian  high  priest.  In  this  letter  not  only 
Picus  and  Faunus,  and  ^Eneas  and  Romulus 
or  even  Hercules,  and  ^Esculapius  and  Liber, 
born  of  Semele,  and  the  twin  sons  of  Tyndareus, 
or  any  other  mortals  who  have  been  deified:  but 
even  the  principal  gods  themselves  to  whom 
Cicero,  in  his  Tusculan  questions,  alludes  with¬ 
out  mentioning  their  names,  Jupiter,  Juno,  Sa¬ 
turn,  Vulcan,  Vesta,  and  many  others  whom 
Varro  attempts  to  identify  with  the  parts  or  the 
elements  of  the  world,  are  shown  to  have  been 
men.  There  is,  as  we  have  said,  a  similarity  be¬ 
tween  this  case  and  that  of  Numa;  for  the  priest 
being  afraid  because  he  had  revealed  a  mystery, 
earnestly  begged  of  Alexander  to  command  his 
mother  to  burn  the  letter  which  conveyed  these 
communications  to  her.  Let  these  two  theolo¬ 
gies,  then,  the  fabulous  and  the  civil,  give  place 
to  the  Platonic  philosophers,  who  have  recog¬ 
nized  the  true  God  as  the  author  of  all  things, 
the  source  of  the  light  of  truth,  and  the  bounti¬ 
ful  bestower  of  all  blessedness.  And  not  these 
only,  but  to  these  great  acknowledgers  of  so 
great  a  God,  those  philosophers  must  yield  who, 
having  their  mind  enslaved  to  their  body,  sup¬ 
posed  the  principles  of  all  things  to  be  material; 
as  Thales,  who  held  that  the  first  principle  of  all 
things  was  water;  Anaximenes,  that  it  was  air; 
the  Stoics,  that  it  was  fire;  Epicurus,  who  af¬ 
firmed  that  it  consisted  of  atoms,  that  is  to  say, 
of  minute  corpuscules ;  and  many  others  whom 
it  is  needless  to  enumerate,  but  who  believed 
that  bodies,  simple  or  compound,  animate  or  in¬ 
animate,  but  nevertheless  bodies,  were  the  cause 
and  principle  of  all  things.  For  some  of  them — 
as,  for  instance,  the  Epicureans — believed  that 
living  things  could  originate  from  things  with¬ 


out  life;  others  held  that  all  things  living  or 
without  life  spring  from  a  living  principle,  but 
that,  nevertheless,  all  things,  being  material, 
spring  from  a  material  principle.  For  the  Stoics 
thought  that  fire,  that  is,  one  of  the  four  ma¬ 
terial  elements  of  which  this  visible  world  is 
composed,  was  both  living  and  intelligent,  the 
maker  of  the  world  and  of  all  things  contained 
in  it — that  it  was  in  fact  God.  These  and  others 
like  them  have  only  been  able  to  suppose  that 
which  their  hearts  enslaved  to  sense  have  vainly 
suggested  to  them.  And  yet  they  have  within 
themselves  something  which  they  could  not  see : 
they  represented  to  themselves  inwardly  things 
which  they  had  seen  without,  even  when  they 
were  not  seeing  them,  but  only  thinking  of  them. 
But  this  representation  in  thought  is  no  longer 
a  body,  but  only  the  similitude  of  a  body;  and 
that  faculty  of  the  mind  by  which  this  similitude 
of  a  body  is  seen  is  neither  a  body  nor  the  simili¬ 
tude  of  a  body;  and  the  faculty  which  judges 
whether  the  representation  is  beautiful  or  ugly 
is  without  doubt  superior  to  the  object  judged 
of.  This  principle  is  the  understanding  of  man, 
the  rational  soul;  and  it  is  certainly  not  a  body, 
since  that  similitude  of  a  body  which  it  beholds 
and  judges  of  is  itself  not  a  body.  The  soul  is 
neither  earth,  nor  water,  nor  air,  nor  fire,  of 
which  four  bodies,  called  the  four  elements,  we 
see  that  this  world  is  composed.  And  if  the  soul 
is  not  a  body,  how  should  God,  its  Creator,  be  a 
body?  Let  all  those  philosophers,  then,  give 
place,  as  we  have  said,  to  the  Platonists,  and 
those  also  who  have  been  ashamed  to  say  that 
God  is  a  body,  but  yet  have  thought  that  our 
souls  are  of  the  same  nature  as  God.  They  have 
not  been  staggered  by  the  great  changeableness 
of  the  soul — an  attribute  which  it  would  be  im¬ 
pious  to  ascribe  to  the  divine  nature — but  they 
say  it  is  the  body  which  changes  the  soul,  for  in 
itself  it  is  unchangeable.  As  well  might  they  say, 
“Flesh  is  wounded  by  some  body,  for  in  itself 
it  is  invulnerable.”  In  a  word,  that  which  is  un¬ 
changeable  can  be  changed  by  nothing,  so  that 
that  which  can  be  changed  by  the  body  cannot 
properly  be  said  to  be  immutable. 

Chap.  6.  Concerning  the  meaning  of  the  Plato¬ 
nists  in  that  part  of  philosophy  called  physi¬ 
cal 

These  philosophers,  then,  whom  we  see  not 
undeservedly  exalted  above  the  rest  in  fame 
and  glory,  have  seen  that  no  material  body  is 
God,  and  therefore  they  have  transcended  all 
bodies  in  seeking  for  God.  They  have  seen  that 
whatever  is  changeable  is  not  the  most  high  God, 


THE  CITY  OF 

and  therefore  they  have  transcended  every  soul 
and  all  changeable  spirits  in  seeking  the  su¬ 
preme.  They  have  seen  also  that,  in  every 
changeable  thing,  the  form  which  makes  it  that 
which  it  is.  whatever  be  its  mode  or  nature,  can 
only  be  through  Him  who  truly  is,  because  He  is 
unchangeable.  And  therefore,  whether  we  con¬ 
sider  the  whole  body  of  the  world,  its  figure, 
qualities,  and  orderly  movement,  and  also  all 
the  bodies  which  are  in  it;  or  whether  we  con¬ 
sider  all  life,  either  that  which  nourishes  and 
maintains,  as  the  life  of  trees,  or  that  which, 
besides  this,  has  also  sensation,  as  the  life  of 
beasts;  or  that  wfliich  adds  to  all  these  intelli¬ 
gence,  as  the  life  of  man;  or  that  which  does  not 
need  the  support  of  nutriment,  but  only  main¬ 
tains.  feels,  understands,  as  the  life  of  angels — 
all  can  only  be  through  Him  who  absolutely  is. 
For  to  Him  it  is  not  one  thing  to  be ,  and  another 
to  live,  as  though  He  could  be,  not  living ;  nor  is 
it  to  Him  one  thing  to  live,  and  another  thing  to 
understand,  as  though  He  could  live,  not  under¬ 
standing;  nor  is  it  to  Him  one  thing  to  under¬ 
stand,  another  thing  to  be  blessed,  as  though  He 
could  understand  and  not  be  blessed.  But  to 
Him  to  live,  to  understand,  to  be  blessed,  are  to 
be.  They  have  understood,  from  this  unchange¬ 
ableness  and  this  simplicity,  that  all  things  must 
have  been  made  by  Him,  and  that  He  could 
Himself  haye  been  made  by  none.  For  they  have 
considered  that  whatever  is  is  either  body  or 
life,  and  that  life  is  something  better  than  body, 
and  that  the  nature  of  body  is  sensible,  and  that 
of  life  intelligible.  Therefore  they  have  pre¬ 
ferred  the  intelligible  nature  to  the  sensible.  We 
mean  by  sensible  things  such  things  as  can  be 
perceived  by  the  sight  and  touch  of  the  body; 
by  intelligible  things,  such  as  can  be  understood 
by  the  sight  of  the  mind.  For  there  is  no  corpo¬ 
real  beauty,  whether  in  the  condition  of  a  body, 
as  figure,  or  in  its  movement,  as  in  music,  of 
which  it  is  not  the  mind  that  judges.  But  this 
could  never  have  been  had  there  not  existed  in 
the  min^  itself  a  superior  form  of  these  things, 
without  bulk,  without  noise  of  voice,  without 
space  and  time.  But  even  in  respect  of  these 
things,  had  the  mind  not  been  mutable,  it  would 
not  have  been  possible  for  one  to  judge  better 
than  another  with  regard  to  sensible  forms.  He 
who  is  clever,  judges  better  than  he  who  is  slow, 
he  who  is  skilled  than  he  who  is  unskillful,  he 
who  is  practised  than  he  who  is  unpractised; 
and  the  same  person  judges  better  after  he  has 
gained  experience  than  he  did  before.  But  that 
which  is  capable  of  more  and  less  is  mutable; 
whence  able  men,  who  have  thought  deeply  on 


GOD  VIII.  6-7  269 

these  things,  have  gathered  that  the  first  form 
is  not  to  be  found  in  those  things  whose  form  is 
changeable.  Since,  therefore,  they  saw  that  body 
and  mind  might  be  more  or  less  beautiful  in 
form,  and  that,  if  they  wanted  form,  they  could 
have  no  existence,  they  saw  that  there  is  some 
existence  in  which  is  the  first  form,  unchange¬ 
able,  and  therefore  not  admitting  of  degrees  of 
comparison,  and  in  that  they  most  rightly  be¬ 
lieved  was  the  first  principle  of  things  which 
was  not  made,  and  by  which  all  things  were 
made.  Therefore  that  which  is  known  of  God  He 
manifested  to  them  when  His  invisible  things 
were  seen  by  them,  being  understood  by  those 
things  which  have  been  made;  also  His  eternal 
power  and  Godhead  by  whom  all  visible  and 
temporal  things  have  been  created.1  We  have 
said  enough  upon  that  part  of  theology  which 
they  call  physical,  that  is,  natural. 

Chap.  7.  How  much  the  Platonists  are  to  be 

held  as  excelling  other  philosophers  in  logic , 

i.e.  rational  philosophy 

Then,  again,  as  far  as  regards  the  doctrine 
which  treats  of  that  which  they  call  logic,  that 
is,  rational  philosophy,  far  be  it  from  us  to  com¬ 
pare  them  with  those  who  attributed  to  the  bod¬ 
ily  senses  the  faculty  of  discriminating  truth, 
and  thought,  that  all  we  learn  is  to  be  measured 
by  their  untrustworthy  and  fallacious  rules. 
Such  were  the  Epicureans,  and  all  of  the  same 
school.  Such  also  were  the  Stoics,  who  ascribed 
to  the  bodily  senses  that  expertness  in  disputa¬ 
tion  which  they  so  ardently  love,  called  by  them 
dialectic,  asserting  that  from  the  senses  the 
mind  conceives  the  notions  tvvoiai  of  those 
things  which  they  explicate  by  definition.  And 
hence  is  developed  the  whole  plan  and  connec¬ 
tion  of  their  learning  and  teaching.  I  often  won¬ 
der,  with  respect  to  this,  how  they  can  say  that 
none  are  beautiful  but  the  wise;  for  by  what 
bodily  sense  have  they  perceived  that  beauty, 
by  what  eyes  of  the  flesh  have  they  seen  wis¬ 
dom’s  comeliness  of  form?  Those,  however, 
whom  we  justly  rank  before  all  others,  have 
distinguished  those  things  which  are  conceived 
by  the  mind  from  those  which  are  perceived  by 
the  senses,  neither  taking  away  from  the  senses 
anything  to  which  they  are  competent,  nor  at¬ 
tributing  to  them  anything  beyond  their  com¬ 
petency.  And  the  light  of  our  understandings, 
by  which  all  things  are  learned  by  us,  they  have 
affirmed  to  be  that  selfsame  God  by  Whom  all 
things  were  made. 

^om.  1.  19,  20. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  8.  That  the  Platonists  hold  the  first  rank 

in  moral  philosophy  also 

The  remaining  part  of  philosophy  is  mor¬ 
als,  or  what  is  called  by  the  Greeks  rjdtKi 7,  in 
which  is  discussed  the  question  concerning  the 
chief  good — that  which  will  leave  us  nothing 
further  to  seek  in  order  to  be  blessed,  if  only  we 
make  all  our  actions  refer  to  it,  and  seek  it  not 
for  the  sake  of  something  else,  but  for  its  own 
sake.  Therefore  it  is  called  the  end,  because  we 
wish  other  things  on  account  of  it,  but  itself 
only  for  its  own  sake.  This  beatific  good,  there¬ 
fore,  according  to  some,  comes  to  a  man  from 
the  body,  according  to  others,  from  the  mind, 
and,  according  to  others,  from  both  together. 
For  they  saw  that  man  himself  consists  of  soul 
and  body;  and  therefore  they  believed  that 
from  either  of  these  two,  or  from  both  together, 
their  well-being  must  proceed,  consisting  in  a 
certain  final  good,  which  could  render  them 
blessed,  and  to  which  they  might  refer  all  their 
actions,  not  requiring  anything  ulterior  to  which 
to  refer  that  good  itself.  This  is  why  those  tvho 
have  added  a  third  kind  of  good  things,  which 
they  call  extrinsic — as  honour,  glory,  wealth, 
and  the  like — have  not  regarded  them  as  part 
of  the  final  good,  that  is,  to  be  sought  after  for 
their  own  sake,  but  as  things  which  are  to  be 
sought  for  the  sake  of  something  else,  affirming 
that  this  kind  of  good  is  good  to  the  good,  and 
evil  to  the  evil.  Wherefore,  whether  they  have 
sought  the  good  of  man  from  the  mind  or  from 
the  body,  or  from  both  together,  it  is  still  only 
from  man  they  have  supposed  that  it  must  be 
sought.  But  they  who  have  sought  it  from  the 
body  have  sought  it  from  the  inferior  part  of 
man;  they  who  have  sought  it  from  the  mind, 
from  the  superior  part;  and  they  who  have 
sought  it  from  both,  from  the  whole  man. 
Whether,  therefore,  they  have  sought  it  from 
any  part  or  from  the  whole  man,  still  they  have 
only  sought  it  from  man;  nor  have  these  differ¬ 
ences,  being  three,  given  rise  only  to  three  dis¬ 
sentient  sects  of  philosophers,  but  to  many.  For 
diverse  philosophers  have  held  diverse  opinions, 
both  concerning  the  good  of  the  body,  and  the 
good  of  the  mind,  and  the  good  of  both  together. 
Let,  therefore,  all  these  give  place  to  those  phi¬ 
losophers  who  have  not  affirmed  that  a  man  is 
blessed  by  the  enjoyment  of  the  body,  or  by  the 
enjoyment  of  the  mind,  but  by  the  enjoyment 
of  God — enjoying  Him,  however,  not  as  the 
mind  does  the  body  or  itself,  or  as  one  friend  en¬ 
joys  another,  but  as  the  eye  enjoys  light,  if,  in¬ 


deed,  we  may  draw  any  comparison  between 
these  things.  But  what  the  nature  of  this  com¬ 
parison  is,  will,  if  God  help  me,  be  shown  in  an¬ 
other  place,  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  At  pres¬ 
ent,  it  is  sufficient  to  mention  that  Plato  deter¬ 
mined  the  final  good  to  be  to  live  according  to 
virtue,  and  affirmed  that  he  only  can  attain  to 
virtue  who  knows  and  imitates  God — which 
knowledge  and  imitation  are  the  only  cause  of 
blessedness.  Therefore  he  did  not  doubt  that  to 
philosophize  is  to  love  God,  whose  nature  is  in¬ 
corporeal.  Whence  it  certainly  follows  that  the 
student  of  wisdom,  that  is,  the  philosopher,  will 
then  become  blessed  when  he  shall  have  begun 
to  enjoy  God.  For  though  he  is  not  necessarily 
blessed  who  enjoys  that  which  he  loves  (for 
many  are  miserable  by  loving  that  which  ought 
not  to  be  loved  and  still  more  miserable  when 
they  enjoy  it),  nevertheless  no  one  is  blessed 
who  does  not  enjoy  that  which  he  loves.  For 
even  they  who  love  things  which  ought  not  to  be 
loved  do  not  count  themselves  blessed  by  loving 
merely,  but  by  enjoying  them.  Who,  then,  but 
the  most  miserable  will  deny  that  he  is  blessed, 
who  enjoys  that  which  he  loves  and  loves  the 
true  and  highest  good?  But  the  true  and  highest 
good,  according  to  Plato,  is  God,  and  therefore 
he  would  call  him  a  philosopher  who  loves  God ; 
for  philosophy  is  directed  to  the  obtaining  of  the 
blessed  life,  and  he  who  loves  God  is  blessed  in 
the  enjoyment  of  God. 

Chap.  9.  Concerning  that  philosophy  which  has 
come  nearest  to  the  Christian  faith 
Whatever  philosophers,  therefore,  thought 
concerning  the  supreme  God,  that  He  is  both 
the  maker  of  all  created  things,  the  light  by 
which  things  are  known,  and  the  good  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  w7hich  things  are  to  be  done;  that  we 
have  in  Him  the  first  principle  of  nature,  the 
truth  of  doctrine,  and  the  happiness  of  life — 
whether  these  philosophers  may  be  more  suit¬ 
ably  called  Platonists,  or  whether  they  may  give 
some  other  name  to  their  sect;  whether  we  say 
that  only  the  chief  men  of  the  Ionic  school,  such 
as  Plato  himself  and  they  who  have  well  under¬ 
stood  him,  have  thought  thus;  or  whether  we 
also  include  the  Italic  school,  on  account  of 
Pythagoras  and  the  Pythagoreans  and  all  who 
may  have  held  like  opinions;  and,  lastly,  wheth¬ 
er  also  we  include  all  who  have  been  held  wise 
men  and  philosophers  among  all  nations  who 
are  discovered  to  have  seen  and  taught  this,  be 
they  Atlantics,  Libyans,  Egyptians,  Indians, 
Persians,  Chaldeans,  Scythians,  Gauls,  Span- 


THE  CITY  OF 

iards,  or  of  other  nations — we  prefer  these  to  all 
other  philosophers,  and  confess  that  they  ap¬ 
proach  nearest  to  us. 

Chap.  io.  That  the  excellency  of  the  Christian 
religion  is  above  all  the  science  of  philoso¬ 
phers 

For  although  a  Christian  man  instructed  only 
in  ecclesiastical  literature  may  perhaps  be  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  very  name  of  Platonists  and  may  not 
even  know  that  there  have  existed  two  schools 
of  philosophers  speaking  the  Greek  tongue,  to 
wit,  the  Ionic  and  Italic,  he  is  nevertheless  not 
so  deaf  with  respect  to  human  affairs  as  not  to 
know  that  philosophers  profess  the  study,  and 
even  the  possession,  of  wisdom.  He  is  on  his 
guard,  however,  with  respect  to  those  who  phi¬ 
losophize  according  to  the  elements  of  this 
world,  not  according  to  God,  by  Whom  the 
world  itself  was  made;  for  he  is  warned  by  the 
precept  of  the  apostle,  and  faithfully  hears  what 
has  been  said,  “Beware  that  no  one  deceive  you 
through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  according 
to  the  elements  of  the  world.”1  Then,  that  he 
may  not  suppose  that  all  philosophers  are  such 
as  do  this,  he  hears  the  same  apostle  say  con¬ 
cerning  certain  of  them,  “Because  that  which  is 
known  of  God  is  manifest  among  them,  for  God 
has  manifested  it  to  them'.  For  His  invisible 
things  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly 
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  which  are 
made,  also  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead.”2 
And.  when  speaking  to  the  Athenians,  after  hav¬ 
ing  spoken  a  mighty  thing  concerning  God, 
which  few  are  able  to  understand,  “In  Him  we 
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,”3  he  goes  on 
to  say,  “As  certain  also  of  your  own  have  said.” 
He  knows  well,  too,  to  be  on  his  guard  against 
even  these  philosophers  in  their  errors.  For 
where  it  has  been  said  by  him,  “that  God  has 
manifested  to  them  by  those  things  which  are 
made  His  invisible  things,  that  they  might  be 
seen  by  the  understanding,”  there  it  has  also 
been  said,  that  they  did  not  rightly  worship  God 
Himself,  because  they  paid  divine  honours, 
wrhich  are  due  to  Him  alone,  to  other  things  also 
to  which  they  ought  not  to  have  paid  them — 
“because,  knowing  God,  they  glorified  Him  not 
as  God;  neither  were  thankful,  but  became  vain 
in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was 
darkened.  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise, 
they  became  fools,  and  changed  the  glory  of  the 
incorruptible  God  into  the  likeness  of  the  image 
of  corruptible  man,  and  of  birds,  and  fourfooted 
1Col.  2.  8.  2Rom.  i.  19,  20.  3Acts,  17.  28. 


GOD  VIII.  8-1 1  271 

beasts,  and  creeping  things”4 — where  the  apostle 
would  have  us  understand  him  as  meaning  the 
Romans,  and  Greeks,  and  Egyptians,  who  glo¬ 
ried  in  the  name  of  wisdom ;  but  concerning  this 
we  will  dispute  with  them  afterwards.  With  re¬ 
spect,  however,  to  that  wherein  they  agree  with 
us  we  prefer  them  to  all  others,  namely,  con¬ 
cerning  the  one  God,  the  author  of  this  uni¬ 
verse,  Who  is  not  only  above  every  body,  being 
incorporeal,  but  also  above  all  souls,  being  in¬ 
corruptible — our  principle,  our  light,  our  good. 
And  though  the  Christian  man,  being  ignorant 
of  their  writings,  does  not  use  in  disputation 
words  which  he  has  not  learned — not  calling 
that  part  of  philosophy  natural  (which  is  the~ 
Latin  term),  or  physical  (which  is  the  Greek 
one),  which  treats  of  the  investigation  of  na¬ 
ture;  or  that  part  rational,  or  logical,  which 
deals  with  the  question  how  truth  may  be  dis¬ 
covered;  or  that  part  moral,  or  ethical,  which 
concerns  morals,  and  shows  how  good  is  to  be 
sought,  and  evil  to  be  shunned — he  is  not,  there¬ 
fore,  ignorant  that  it  is  from  the  one  true  and 
supremely  good  God  that  we  have  that  nature 
in  which  we  are  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and 
that  doctrine  by  which  we  know  Him  and  our¬ 
selves,  and  that  grace  through  which,  by  cleav¬ 
ing  to  Him,  we  are  blessed.  This,  therefore,  is 
the  cause  why  we  prefer  these  to  all  the  others, 
because,  whilst  other  philosophers  have  worn 
out  their  minds  and  powers  in  seeking  the  causes 
of  things  and  endeavouring  to  discover  the  right 
mode  of  learning  and  of  living,  these,  by  know¬ 
ing  God,  have  found  where  resides  the  cause  by 
which  the  universe  has  been  constituted,  and  the 
light  by  which  truth  is  to  be  discovered,  and  the 
fountain  at  which  felicity  is  to  be  drunk.  All  phi¬ 
losophers,  then,  who  have  had  these  thoughts 
concerning  God,  whether  Platonists  or  others, 
agree  with  us.  But  we  have  thought  it  better  to 
plead  our  cause  with  the  Platonists,  because 
their  writings  are  better  known.  For  the  Greeks, 
whose  tongue  holds  the  highest  place  among  the 
languages  of  the  Gentiles,  are  loud  in  their 
praises  of  these  writings;  and  the  Latins,  taken 
with  their  excellence,  or  their  renown,  have 
studied  them  more  heartily  than  other  writings 
and,  by  translating  them  into  our  tongue,  have 
given  them  greater  celebrity  and  notoriety. 

Chap.  ii.  How  Plato  has  been  able  to  approach 
so  nearly  to  Christian  knowledge 
Certain  partakers  with  us  in  the  grace  of 
Christ  wonder  when  they  hear  and  read  that 
4Rom.  1.  21-23. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Plato  had  conceptions  concerning  God,  in  which 
they  recognize  considerable  agreement  with  the 
truth  of  our  religion.  Some  have  concluded  from 
this  that  when  he  went  to  Egypt  he  had  heard 
the  prophet  Jeremiah,  or,  whilst  travelling  in 
the  same  country,  had  read  the  prophetic  scrip¬ 
tures,  which  opinion  I  myself  have  expressed  in 
certain  of  my  writings.1  But  a  careful  calcula¬ 
tion  of  dates,  contained  in  chronological  history, 
shows  that  Plato  was  born  about  a  hundred 
years  after  the  time  in  which  Jeremiah  prophe¬ 
sied,  and,  as  he  lived  eighty-one  years,  there  are 
found  to  have  been  about  seventy  years  from 
his  death  to  that  time  when  Ptolemy,  king  of 
Egypt,  requested  the  prophetic  scriptures  of  the 
Hebrew  people  to  be  sent  to  him  from  Judea, 
and  committed  them  to  seventy  Hebrews,  who 
also  knew  the  Greek  tongue,  to  be  translated 
and  kept.  Therefore,  on  that  voyage  of  his,  Pla¬ 
to  could  neither  have  seen  Jeremiah,  who  was 
dead  so  long  before,  nor  have  read  those  same 
scriptures  which  had  not  yet  been  translated 
into  the  Greek  language,  of  which  he  was  a  mas¬ 
ter,  unless,  indeed,  we  say  that,  as  he  was^most 
earnest  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  he  also 
studied  those  writings  through  an  interpreter,  as 
he  did  those  of  the  Egyptians — not,  indeed, 
writing  a  translation  of  them  (the  facilities  for 
doing  which  were  only  gained  even  by  Ptolemy 
in  return  for  munificent  acts  of  kindness,  though 
fear  of  his  kingly  authority  might  have  seemed 
a  sufficient  motive),  but  learning  as  much  as  he 
possibly  could  concerning  their  contents  by 
means  of  conversation.  What  warrants  this  sup¬ 
position  are  the  opening  verses  of  Genesis:  “In 
the  beginning  God  made  the  heaven  and  earth. 
And  the  earth  was  invisible,  and  without  order; 
and  darkness  was  over  the  abyss :  and  the  Spirit 
of  God  moved  over  the  waters.”2  For  in  the 
Timceus ,  when  writing  on  the  formation  of  the 
world,  he  says  that  God  first  united  earth  and 
fire,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  he  assigns  to 
fire  a  place  in  heaven.  This  opinion  bears  a  cer¬ 
tain  resemblance  to  the  statement,  “In  the  be¬ 
ginning  God  made  heaven  and  earth.”  Plato 
next  speaks  of  those  two  intermediary  elements, 
water  and  air,  by  which  the  other  twro  extremes, 
namely,  earth  and  fire,  were  mutually  united; 
from  which  circumstance  he  is  thought  to  have 
so  understood  the  words,  “The  Spirit  of  God 
moved  over  the  waters.”  For,  not  paying  suffi¬ 
cient  attention  to  the  designations  given  by 
those  scriptures  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  may 
have  thought  that  the  four  elements  are  spoken 
of  in  that  place,  because  the  air  also  is  called 
lOn  Christian  Doctrine,  Bk.  n.  ch.  28.  2Gen.  1.  1,  2. 


spirit.3  Then,  as  to  Plato’s  saying  that  the  phi¬ 
losopher  is  a  lover  of  God,  nothing  shines  forth 
more  conspicuously  in  those  sacred  writings. 
But  the  most  striking  thing  in  this  connexion, 
and  that  which  most  of  all  inclines  me  almost  to 
assent  to  the  opinion  that  Plato  was  not  ignorant 
of  those  writings,  is  the  answer  which  was  given 
to  the  question  elicited  from  the  holy  Moses 
when  the  words  of  God  were  conveyed  to  him 
by  the  angel ;  for,  when  he  asked  what  was  the 
name  of  that  God  who  was  commanding  him  to 
go  and  deliver  the  Hebrew  people  out  of  Egypt, 
this  answer  was  given:  “I  am  who  am;  and  thou 
shalt  say  to  the  children  of  Israel,  He  who  is 
sent  me  unto  you”;4  as  though  compared  with 
Him  that  truly  is,  because  He  is  unchangeable, 
those  things  which  have  been  created  mutable 
are  not — a  truth  which  Plato  zealously  held, 
and  most  diligently  commended.  And  I  know 
not  whether  this  sentiment  is  anywhere  to  be 
found  in  the  books  of  those  who  were  before 
Plato,  unless  in  that  book  where  it  is  said,  “I  am 
who  am ;  and  thou  shalt  say  to  the  children  of 
Israel,  who  is  sent  me  unto  you.” 

Chap.  12.  That  even  the  Platonists,  though  they 
say  these  things  concerning  the  one  true  God, 
nevertheless  thought  that  sacred  rites  were 
to  be  performed  in  honour  of  many  gods 

But  we  need  not  determine  from  what  source 
he  learned  these  things — whether  it  was  from 
the  books  of  the  ancients  who  preceded  him,  or, 
as  is  more  likely,  from  the  words  of  the  apostle: 
“Because  that  which  is  known  of  God,  has  been 
manifested  among  them,  for  God  hath  manifest¬ 
ed  it  to  them.  For  His  invisible  things  from  the 
creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  un¬ 
derstood  by  those  things  which  have  been  made, 
also  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead.”5  From 
whatever  source  he  may  have  derived  this 
knowledge,  then,  I  think  I  have  made  it  suffi¬ 
ciently  plain  that  I  have  not  chosen  the  Platonic 
philosophers  undeservedly  as  the  parties  with 
whom  to  discuss;  because  the  question  we  have 
just  taken  up  concerns  the  natural  theology — 
the  question,  namely,  whether  sacred  rites  are 
to  be  performed  to  one  God,  or  to  many,  for  the 
sake  of  the  happiness  which  is  to  be  after  death. 
I  have  specially  chosen  them  because  their  just- 
er  thoughts  concerning  the  one  God  Who  made 
heaven  and  earth  have  made  them  illustrious 
among  philosophers.  This  has  given  them  such 
superiority  to  all  others  in  the  judgment  of 
posterity  that,  though  Aristotle,  the  disciple  of 
zSpiritus.  4Ex.  3.  14.  6Rom.  1.  20. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VIII.  12-14  273 


Plato,  a  man  of  eminent  abilities,  inferior  in 
eloquence  to  Plato,  yet  far  superior  to  many  in 
that  respect,  had  founded  the  Peripatetic  sect — 
so  called  because  they  were  in  the  habit  of  walk¬ 
ing  about  during  their  disputations — and  though 
he  had,  through  the  greatness  of  his  fame,  gath¬ 
ered  very  many  disciples  into  his  school,  even 
during  the  life  of  his  master;  and  though  Plato 
at  his  death  was  succeeded  in  his  school,  which 
was  called  the  Academy,  by  Speusippus,  his  sis¬ 
ter’s  son,  and  Xenocrates,  his  beloved  disciple, 
who,  together  with  their  successors,  were  called 
from  this  name  of  the  school,  Academics ;  never¬ 
theless  the  most  illustrious  recent  philosophers, 
who  have  chosen  to  follow  Plato,  have  been  un¬ 
willing  to  be  called  Peripatetics,  or  Academics, 
but  have  preferred  the  name  of  Platonists. 
Among  these  were  the  renowned  Plotinus,  Iam- 
blichus,  and  Porphyry,  who  were  Greeks,  and 
the  African  Apuleius,  who  was  learned  both  in 
the  Greek  and  Latin  tongues.  All  these,  how¬ 
ever,  and  the  rest  who  were  of  the  same  school, 
and  also  Plato  himself,  thought  that  sacred  rites 
ought  to  be  performed  in  honour  of  many  gods. 

Chap.  13.  Concerning  the  opinion  of  Plato ,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  he  defined  the  gods  as  beings 
entirely  good  and  the  friends  of  virtue 
Therefore,  although  in  many  other  important 
respects  they  differ  from  us,  nevertheless  with 
respect  to  this  particular  point  of  difference, 
which  I  have  just  stated,  as  it  is  one  of  great 
moment,  and  the  question  on  hand  concerns  it, 
I  will  first  ask  them  to  what  gods  they  think  that 
sacred  rites  are  to  be  performed — to  the  good  or 
to  the  bad,  or  to  both  the  good  and  the  bad?  But 
we  have  the  opinion  of  Plato  affirming  that  all 
the  gods  are  good,  and  that  there  is  not  one  of 
the  gods  bad.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  these 
are  to  be  performed  to  the  good,  for  then  they 
are  performed  to  gods;  for  if  they  are  not  good, 
neither  are  they  gods.  Now,  if  this  be  the  case 
(for  what  else  ought  we  to  believe  concerning 
the  gods?),  certainly  it  explodes  the  opinion 
that  the  bad  gods  are  to  be  propitiated  by  sacred 
rites  in  order  that  they  may  not  harm  us,  but 
the  good  gods  are  to  be  invoked  in  order  that 
they  may  assist  us.  For  there  are  no  bad  gods, 
and  it  is  to  the  good  that,  as  they  say,  the  due 
honour  of  such  rites  is  to  be  paid.  Of  what  char¬ 
acter,  then,  are  those  gods  who  love  scenic  dis¬ 
plays,  even  demanding  that  a  place  be  given 
them  among  divine  things,  and  that  they  be  ex¬ 
hibited  in  their  honour?  The  power  of  these  gods 
proves  that  they  exist,  but  their  liking  such 
things  proves  that  they  are  bad.  For  it  is  well- 


known  what  Plato’s  opinion  was  concerning 
scenic  plays.  He  thinks  that  the  poets  them¬ 
selves,  because  they  have  composed  songs  so 
unworthy  of  the  majesty  and  goodness  of  the 
gods,  ought  to  be  banished  from  the  state.  Of 
what  character,  therefore,  are  those  gods  who 
contend  with  Plato  himself  about  those  scenic 
plays?  He  does  not  suffer  the  gods  to  be  defamed 
by  false  crimes ;  the  gods  command  those  same 
crimes  to  be  celebrated  in  their  own  honour. 

In  fine,  when  they  ordered  these  plays  to  be 
inaugurated,  they  not  only  demanded  base 
things,  but  also  did  cruel  things,  taking  from 
Titus  Latinius  his  son,  and  sending  a  disease 
upon  him  because  he  had  refused  to  obey  them, 
which  they  removed  when  he  had  fulfilled  their 
commands.  Plato,  however,  bad  though  they 
were,  did  not  think  they  were  to  be  feared;  but, 
holding  to  his  opinion  with  the  utmost  firmness 
and  constancy,  does  not  hesitate  to  remove  from 
a  well-ordered  state  all  the  sacrilegious  follies 
of  the  poets,  with  which  these  gods  are  delighted 
because  they  themselves  are  impure.  But  Labeo 
places  this  same  Plato  (as  I  have  mentioned  al¬ 
ready  in  the  second  book)1  among  the  demi¬ 
gods.  Now  Labeo  thinks  that  the  bad  deities  are 
to  be  propitiated  with  bloody  victims,  and  by 
fasts  accompanied  with  the  same,  but  the  good 
deities  with  plays,  and  all  other  things  which  are 
associated  with  joyfulness.  How  comes  it,  then, 
that  the  demi-god  Plato  so  persistently  dares  to 
take  away  those  pleasures,  because  he  deems 
them  base,  not  from  the  demi-gods  but  from  the 
gods,  and  these  the  good  gods?  And,  moreover, 
those  very  gods  themselves  do  certainly  refute 
the  opinion  of  Labeo,  for  they  showed  them¬ 
selves  in  the  case  of  Latinius  to  be  not  only  wan¬ 
ton  and  sportive,  but  also  cruel  and  terrible. 
Let  the  Platonists,  therefore,  explain  these 
things  to  us,  since,  following  the  opinion  of  their 
master,  they  think  that  all  the  gods  are  good  and 
honourable,  and  friendly  to  the  virtues  of  the 
wise,  holding  it  unlawful  to  think  otherwise 
concerning  any  of  the  gods.  We  will  explain  it, 
say  they.  Let  us  then  attentively  listen  to  them. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  opinion  of  those  who  have  said 
that  rational  souls  are  of  three  kinds ,  to  wit , 
those  of  the  celestial  gods,  those  of  the  aerial 
demons,  and  those  of  terrestrial  men 
There  is,  say  they,  a  threefold  division  of  all 
animals  endowed  with  a  rational  soul,  namely, 
into  gods,  men,  and  demons.  The  gods  occupy 
the  loftiest  region,  men  the  lowest,  the  demons 
the  middle  region.  For  the  abode  of  the  gods  is 

^hap.  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


heaven,  that  of  men  the  earth,  that  of  the  de¬ 
mons  the  air.  As  the  dignity  of  their  regions  is 
diverse,  so  also  is  that  of  their  natures;  there¬ 
fore  the  gods  are  better  than  men  and  demons. 
Men  have  been  placed  below  the  gods  and  de¬ 
mons,  both  in  respect  of  the  order  of  the  regions 
they  inhabit,  and  the  difference  of  their  merits. 
The  demons,  therefore,  who  hold  the  middle 
place,  as  they  are  inferior  to  the  gods,  than 
whom  they  inhabit  a  lower  region,  so  they  are 
superior  to  men,  than  whom  they  inhabit  a  loft¬ 
ier  one.  For  they  have  immortality  of  body  in 
common  with  the  gods,  but  passions  of  the  mind 
in  common  with  men.  On  which  account,  say 
they,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  they  are  delighted 
with  the  obscenities  of  the  theatre,  and  the  fic¬ 
tions  of  the  poets,  since  they  are  also  subject  to 
human  passions,  from  which  the  gods  are  far 
removed,  and  to  which  they  are  altogether 
strangers.  Whence  we  conclude  that  it  was  not 
the  gods,  who  are  all  good  and  highly  exalted, 
that  Plato  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  theatric 
plays,  by  reprobating  and  prohibiting  the  fic¬ 
tions  of  the  poets,  but  the  demons. 

Of  these  things  many  have  written:  among 
others  Apuleius,  the  Platonist  of  Madaura,  who 
composed  a  whole  work  on  the  subject,  entitled, 
Concerning  the  God  of  Socrates.  He  there  dis¬ 
cusses  and  explains  of  what  kind  that  deity  was 
who  attended  on  Socrates,  a  sort  of  familiar,  by 
whom  it  is  said  he  was  admonished  to  desist 
from  any  action  which  would  not  turn  out  to 
his  advantage.  He  asserts  most  distinctly,  and 
proves  at  great  length,  that  it  was  not  a  god  but 
a  demon;  and  he  discusses  with  great  diligence 
the  opinion  of  Plato  concerning  the  lofty  estate 
of  the  gods,  the  lowly  estate  of  men.  and  the 
middle  estate  of  demons.  These  things  being  so, 
how  did  Plato  dare  to  take  away,  if  not  from  the 
gods,  whom  he  removed  from  all  human  conta¬ 
gion,  certainly  from  the  demons,  all  the  pleas¬ 
ures  of  the  theatre,  by  expelling  the  poets  from 
the  state?  Evidently  in  this  way  he  wished  to 
admonish  the  human  soul,  although  still  con¬ 
fined  in  these  moribund  members,  to  despise  the 
shameful  commands  of  the  demons,  and  to 
detest  their  impurity,  and  to  choose  rather  the 
splendour  of  virtue.  But  if  Plato  showed  him¬ 
self  virtuous  in  answering  and  prohibiting  these 
things,  then  certainly  it  was  shameful  of  the  de¬ 
mons  to  command  them.  Therefore  either  Apu¬ 
leius  is  wrong,  and  Socrates’  familiar  did  not  be¬ 
long  to  this  class  of  deities,  or  Plato  held  con¬ 
tradictory  opinions,  now  honouring  the  demons, 
now  removing  from  the  well-regulated  state  the 
things  in  which  they  delighted,  or  Socrates  is 


not  to  be  congratulated  on  the  friendship  of  the 
demon,  of  which  Apuleius  was  so  ashamed  that 
he  entitled  his  book  On  the  God  of  Socrates, 
whilst  according  to  the  tenor  of  his  discussion, 
wherein  he  so  diligently  and  at  such  length  dis¬ 
tinguishes  gods  from  demons,  he  ought  not  to 
have  entitled  it.  Concerning  the  God,  but  Con¬ 
cerning  the  Demon  of  Socrates.  But  he  pre¬ 
ferred  to  put  this  into  the  discussion  itself  rath¬ 
er  than  into  the  title  of  his  book.  For,  through 
the  sound  doctrine  which  has  illuminated  hu¬ 
man  society,  all,  or  almost  all  men  have  such  a 
horror  at  the  name  of  demons  that  every  one 
who  before  reading  the  dissertation  of  Apuleius, 
which  sets  forth  the  dignity  of  demons,  should 
have  read  the  title  of  the  book,  On  the  Demon 
of  Socrates,  would  certainly  have  thought  that 
the  author  was  not  a  sane  man.  But  what  did 
even  Apuleius  find  to  praise  in  the  demons,  ex¬ 
cept  subtlety  and  strength  of  body  and  a  higher 
place  of  habitation?  For  when  he  spoke  general¬ 
ly  concerning  their  manners,  he  said  nothing 
that  was  good,  but  very  much  that  was  bad.  Fi¬ 
nally,  no  one,  when  he  has  read  that  book,  won¬ 
ders  that  they  desired  to  have  even  the  obscen¬ 
ity  of  the  stage  among  divine  things,  or  that, 
wishing  to  be  thought  gods,  they  should  be  de¬ 
lighted  with  the  crimes  of  the  gods,  or  that  all 
those  sacred  solemnities,  whose  obscenity  occa¬ 
sions  laughter,  and  whose  shameful  cruelty 
causes  horror,  should  be  in  agreement  with  their 
passions. 

Chap.  15.  That  the  demons  are  not  better  than 
men  because  of  their  aerial  bodies,  or  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  superior  place  of  abode 
Wherefore  let  not  the  mind  truly  religious, 
and  submitted  to  the  true  God,  suppose  that  de¬ 
mons  are  better  than  men,  because  they  have 
better  bodies.  Otherwise  it  must  put  many 
beasts  before  itself  which  are  superior  to  us  both 
in  acuteness  of  the  senses,  in  ease  and  quickness 
of  movement,  in  strength  and  in  long-continued 
vigour  of  body.  What  man  can  equal  the  eagle 
or  the  vulture  in  strength  of  vision?  Who  can 
equal  the  dog  in  acuteness  of  smell?  Who  can 
equal  the  hare,  the  stag,  and  all  the  birds  in 
swiftness?  Who  can  equal  in  strength  the  lion 
or  the  elephant?  Who  can  equal  in  length  of  life 
the  serpents,  which  are  affirmed  to  put  off  old 
age  along  with  their  skin  and  to  return  to  youth 
again?  But  as  we  are  better  than  all  these  by  the 
possession  of  reason  and  understanding,  so  we 
ought  also  to  be  better  than  the  demons  by  liv¬ 
ing  good  and  virtuous  lives.  For  divine  provi¬ 
dence  gave  to  them  bodies  of  a  better  quality 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VIII.  15-16  275 


than  ours,  that  that  in  which  we  excel  them 
might  in  this  way  be  commended  to  us  as  de¬ 
serving  to  be  far  more  cared  for  than  the  body, 
and  that  we  should  learn  to  despise  the  bodily 
excellence  of  the  demons  compared  with  good¬ 
ness  of  life,  in  respect  of  which  we  are  better 
than  they,  knowing  that  we  too  shall  have  im¬ 
mortality  of  body — not  an  immortality  tortured 
by  eternal  punishment,  but  that  which  is  con¬ 
sequent  on  purity  of  soul. 

But  now,  as  regards  loftiness  of  place,  it  is  al¬ 
together  ridiculous  to  be  so  influenced  by  the 
fact  that  the  demons  inhabit  the  air  and  we  the 
earth  as  to  think  that  on  that  account  they  are 
to  be  put  before  us;  for  in  this  way  we  put  all 
the  birds  before  ourselves.  But  the  birds,  when 
they  are  weary  with  flying,  or  require  to  repair 
their  bodies  with  food,  come  back  to  the  earth  to 
rest  or  to  feed,  which  the  demons,  they  say,  do 
not.  Are  they,  therefore,  inclined  to  say  that  the 
birds  are  superior  to  us  and  the  demons  supe¬ 
rior  to  the  birds?  But  if  it  be  madness  to  think 
so.  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  think  that, 
on  account  of  their  inhabiting  a  loftier  element, 
the  demons  have  a  claim  to  our  religious  sub¬ 
mission.  But  as  it  is  really  the  case  that  the 
birds  of  the  air  are  not  only  not  put  before  us 
who  dwell  on  the  earth,  but  are  even  subjected 
to  us  on  account  of  the  dignity  of  the  rational 
soul  which  is  in  us,  so  also  it  is  the  case  that  the 
demons,  though  they  are  aerial,  are  not  better 
than  we  who  are  terrestrial  because  the  air  is 
higher  than  the  earth,  but,  on  the  contrary,  men 
are  to  be  put  before  demons  because  their  de¬ 
spair  is  not  to  be  compared  to  the  hope  of  pious 
men.  Even  that  law  of  Plato’s,  according  to 
which  he  mutually  orders  and  arranges  the  four 
elements,  inserting  between  the  two  extreme 
elements — namely,  fire,  which  is  in  the  highest 
degree  mobile,  and  the  immovable  earth — the 
two  middle  ones,  air  and  water,  that  by  how 
much  the  air  is  higher  up  than  the  water,  and  the 
fire  than  the  air,  by  so  much  also  are  the  waters 
higher  than  the  earth — this  law,  I  say,  sufficient¬ 
ly  admonishes  us  not  to  estimate  the  merits  of 
animated  creatures  according  to  the  grades  of 
the  elements.  And  Apuleius  himself  says  that 
man  is  a  terrestrial  animal  in  common  with  the 
rest,  who  is  nevertheless  to  be  put  far  before 
aquatic  animals,  though  Plato  puts  the  waters 
themselves  before  the  land.  By  this  he  would 
have  us  understand  that  the  same  order  is  not  to 
be  observed  when  the  question  concerns  the 
merits  of  animals,  though  it  seems  to  be  the 
true  one  in  the  gradation  of  bodies;  for  it  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  possible  that  a  soul  of  a  higher  order 


may  inhabit  a  body  of  a  lower,  and  a  soul  of  a 
lower  order  a  body  of  a  higher. 

Chap.  16.  What  Apuleius  the  Platonist  thought 
concerning  the  manners  and  actions  of  de¬ 
mons 

The  same  Apuleius,  when  speaking  concern¬ 
ing  the  manners  of  demons,  said  that  they  are 
agitated  with  the  same  perturbations  of  mind 
as  men;  that  they  are  provoked  by  injuries, 
propitiated  by  services  and  by  gifts,  rejoice  in 
honours,  are  delighted  with  a  variety  of  sacred 
rites,  and  are  annoyed  if  any  of  them  be  neg¬ 
lected.  Among  other  things,  he  also  says  that  on 
them  depend  the  divinations  of  augurs,  sooth¬ 
sayers,  and  prophets,  and  the  revelations  of 
dreams,  and  that  from  them  also  are  the  mira¬ 
cles  of  the  magicians.  But,  when  giving  a  brief 
definition  of  them,  he  says,  “Demons  are  of  an 
animal  nature,  passive  in  soul,  rational  in  mind, 
aerial  in  body,  eternal  in  time.”  “Of  which  five 
things,  the  three  first  are  common  to  them  and 
us,  the  fourth  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  the 
fifth  common  to  them  with  the  gods.”  But  I  see 
that  they  have  in  common  with  the  gods  two  of 
the  first  things,  which  they  have  in  common  with 
us.  For  he  says  that  the  gods  also  are  animals; 
and  w7hen  he  is  assigning  to  every  order  of  be¬ 
ings  its  own  element,  he  places  us  among  the 
other  terrestrial  animals  which  live  and  feel  up¬ 
on  the  earth.  Wherefore,  if  the  demons  are  ani¬ 
mals  as  to  genus,  this  is  common  to  them,  not 
only  with  men,  but  also  with  the  gods  and  with 
beasts ;  if  they  are  rational  as  to  their  mind,  this 
is  common  to  them  with  the  gods  and  with  men ; 
if  they  are  eternal  in  time,  this  is  common  to 
them  with  the  gods  only;  if  they  are  passive  as 
to  their  soul,  this  is  common  to  them  with  men 
only;  if  they  are  aerial  in  body,  in  this  they  are 
alone.  Therefore  it  is  no  great  thing  for  them  to 
be  of  an  animal  nature,  for  so  also  are  the 
beasts ;  in  being  rational  as  to  mind,  they  are  not 
above  ourselves,  for  so  are  we  also;  and  as  to 
their  being  eternal  as  to  time,  what  is  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  that  if  they  are  not  blessed?  for  better 
is  temporal  happiness  than  eternal  misery. 
Again,  as  to  their  being  passive  in  soul,  how  are 
they  in  this  respect  above  us,  since  we  also  are 
so,  but  would  not  have  been  so  had  we  not  been 
miserable?  Also,  as  to  their  being  aerial  in  body, 
how  much  value  is  to  be  set  on  that,  since  a  soul 
of  any  kind  whatsoever  is  to  be  set  above  every¬ 
body?  and  therefore  religious  worship,  which 
ought  to  be  rendered  from  the  soul,  is  by  no 
means  due  to  that  thing  wdiich  is  inferior  to  the 
soul.  Moreover,  if  he  had,  among  those  things 


276  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


which  he  says  belong  to  demons,  enumerated 
virtue,  wisdom,  happiness,  and  affirmed  that 
they  have  those  things  in  common  with  the  gods, 
and,  like  them,  eternally,  he  would  assuredly 
have  attributed  to  them  something  greatly  to  be 
desired,  and  much  to  be  prized.  And  even  in  that 
case  it  would  not  have  been  our  duty  to  wor¬ 
ship  them  like  God  on  account  of  these  things, 
but  rather  to  worship  Him  from  Whom  we  know 
they  had  received  them.  But  how  much  less  are 
they  really  worthy  of  divine  honour — those 
aerial  animals  who  are  only  rational  that  they 
may  be  capable  of  misery,  passive  that  they  may 
be  actually  miserable,  and  eternal  that  it  may 
be  impossible  for  them  to  end  their  misery! 

Chap.  17.  Whether  it  is  proper  that  men  should 
worship  those  spirits  from  whose  vices  it  is 
necessary  that  they  be  freed 
Wherefore,  to  omit  other  things,  and  confine 
our  attention  to  that  which  he  says  is  common 
to  the  demons  with  us,  let  us  ask  this  question : 
If  all  the  four  elements  are  full  of  their  own 
animals,  the  fire  and  the  air  of  immortal,  and  the 
water  and  the  earth  of  mortal  ones,  why  are  the 
souls  of  demons  agitated  by  the  whirlwinds  and 
tempests  of  passions? — for  the  Greek  word 
7ra dos  means  perturbation,  when  he  chose  to 
call  the  demons  “passive  in  soul,”  because  the 
word  passion,  which  is  derived  from  Tados,  sig¬ 
nified  a  commotion  of  the  mind  contrary  to 
reason.  Why,  then,  are  these  things  in  the  minds 
of  demons  which  are  not  in  beasts?  For  if  any¬ 
thing  of  this  kind  appears  in  beasts,  it  is  not 
perturbation,  because  it  is  not  contrary  to  rea¬ 
son,  of  which  they  are  devoid.  Now  it  is  foolish¬ 
ness  or  misery  which  is  the  cause  of  these  per¬ 
turbations  in  the  case  of  men,  for  we  are  not  yet 
blessed  in  the  possession  of  that  perfection  of 
wisdom  which  is  promised  to  us  at  last,  when 
we  shall  be  set  free  from  our  present  mortality. 
But  the  gods,  they  say,  are  free  from  these  per¬ 
turbations,  because  they  are  not  only  eternal, 
but  also  blessed;  for  they  also  have  the  same 
kind  of  rational  souls,  but  most  pure  from  all 
spot  and  plague.  Wherefore,  if  the  gods  are  free 
from  perturbation  because  they  are  blessed,  not 
miserable  animals,  and  the  beasts  are  free  from 
them  because  they  are  animals  which  are  capa¬ 
ble  neither  of  blessedness  nor  misery,  it  remains 
that  the  demons,  like  men,  are  subject  to  per¬ 
turbations  because  they  are  not  blessed  but  mis¬ 
erable  animals.  What  folly,  therefore,  or  rather 
what  madness,  to  submit  ourselves  through  any 
sentiment  of  religion  to  demons,  when  it  be¬ 
longs  to  the  true  religion  to  deliver  us  from  that 


depravity  which  makes  us  like  to  them!  For 
Apuleius  himself,  although  he  is  very  sparing 
toward  them,  and  thinks  they  are  worthy  of  di¬ 
vine  honours,  is  nevertheless  compelled  to  con¬ 
fess  that  they  are  subject  to  anger;  and  the  true 
religion  commands  us  not  to  be  moved  with  an¬ 
ger,  but  rather  to  resist  it.  The  demons  are  won 
over  by  gifts;  and  the  true  religion  commands 
us  to  favour  no  one  on  account  of  gifts  received. 
The  demons  are  flattered  by  honours;  but  the 
true  religion  commands  us  by  no  means  to  be 
moved  by  such  things.  The  demons  are  haters 
of  some  men  and  lovers  of  others,  not  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  prudent  and  calm  judgment,  but 
because  of  what  he  calls  their  “passive  soul”; 
whereas  the  true  religion  commands  us  to  love 
even  our  enemies.  Lastly,  the  true  religion  com¬ 
mands  us  to  put  away  all  disquietude  of  heart, 
and  agitation  of  mind,  and  also  all  commotions 
and  tempests  of  the  soul,  which  Apuleius  asserts 
to  be  continually  swelling  and  surging  in  the 
souls  of  demons.  Why,  therefore,  except  through 
foolishness  and  miserable  error,  shouldst  thou 
humble  thyself  to  worship  a  being  to  whom  thou 
desirest  to  be  unlike  in  thy  life?  And  why 
shouldst  thou  pay  religious  homage  to  him 
whom  thou  are  unwilling  to  imitate,  when  it  is 
the  highest  duty  of  religion  to  imitate  Him 
Whom  thou  worshippest? 

Chap.  18.  What  kind  of  religion  that  is  which 
teaches  that  men  ought  to  employ  the  advo¬ 
cacy  of  demons  in  order  to  be  recommended 
to  the  favour  of  the  good  gods 
In  vain,  therefore,  have  Apuleius  and  they 
who  think  with  him  conferred  on  the  demons 
the  honour  of  placing  them  in  the  air,  between 
the  ethereal  heavens  and  the  earth,  that  they 
may  carry  to  the  gods  the  prayers  of  men,  to 
men  the  answers  of  the  gods:  for  Plato  held, 
they  say,  that  no  god  has  intercourse  with  man. 
They  who  believe  these  things  have  thought  it 
unbecoming  that  men  should  have  intercourse 
with  the  gods  and  the  gods  with  men,  but  a  be¬ 
fitting  thing  that  the  demons  should  have  inter¬ 
course  with  both  gods  and  men,  presenting  to 
the  gods  the  petitions  of  men,  and  conveying  to 
men  what  the  gods  have  granted;  so  that  a 
chaste  man,  and  one  who  is  a  stranger  to  the 
crimes  of  the  magic  arts,  must  use  as  patrons, 
through  whom  the  gods  may  be  induced  to  hear 
him,  demons  who  love  these  crimes,  although 
the  very  fact  of  his  not  loving  them  ought  to 
have  recommended  him  to  them  as  one  who  de¬ 
served  to  be  listened  to  with  greater  readiness 
and  willingness  on  their  part.  They  love  the 


THE  CITY  OF 

abominations  of  the  stage,  which  chastity  does 
not  love.  They  love,  in  the  sorceries  of  the  ma¬ 
gicians,  “a  thousand  arts  of  inflicting  harm”1 
which  innocence  does  not  love.  Yet  both  chas¬ 
tity  and  innocence,  if  they  wish  to  obtain  any¬ 
thing  from  the  gods,  will  not  be  able  to  do  so  by 
their  own  merits,  except  their  enemies  act  as 
mediators  on  their  behalf.  Apuleius  need  not  at¬ 
tempt  to  justify  the  fictions  of  the  poets,  and 
the  mockeries  of  the  stage.  If  human  modesty 
can  act  so  faithlessly  towards  itself  as  not  only 
to  love  shameful  things,  but  even  to  think  that 
they  are  pleasing  to  the  divinity,  we  can  cite  on 
the  other  side  their  own  highest  authority  and 
teacher,  Plato. 

Chap.  19.  Of  the  impiety  of  the  magic  art , 
which  is  dependent  on  the  assistance  of  ma¬ 
lign  spirits 

Moreover,  against  those  magic  arts,  concern¬ 
ing  which  some  men,  exceedingly  wretched  and 
exceedingly  impious,  delight  to  boast,  may  not 
public  opinion  itself  be  brought  forward  as  a 
witness?  For  why  are  those  arts  so  severely 
punished  by  the  laws,  if  they  are  the  works  of 
deities  who  ought  to  be  worshipped?  Shall  it  be 
said  that  the  Christians  have  ordained  those 
laws  by  which  magic  arts  are  punished?  With 
what  other  meaning,  except  that  these  sorceries 
are  without  doubt  pernicious  to  the  human  race, 
did  the  most  illustrious  poet  say, 

By  heaven ,  I  swear,  and  your  dear  life, 
Unwillingly  these  arms  I  wield, 

And  take,  to  meet  the  coming  strife, 
Enchantment’s  sword  and  shield.2 

And  that  also  which  he  says  in  another  place 
concerning  magic  arts, 

I’ve  seen  him  to  another  place 
transport  the  standing  corn} 

has  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  fruits  of  one 
field  are  said  to  be  transferred  to  another  by 
these  arts  which  this  pestiferous  and  accursed 
doctrine,  teaches.  Does  not  Cicero  inform  us 
that,  among  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that 
is,  the  most  ancient  laws  of  the  Romans,  there 
was  a  law  written  which  appointed  a  punish¬ 
ment  to  be  inflicted  on  him  who  should  do  this? 
Lastly,  was  it  before  Christian  judges  that  Apu¬ 
leius  himself  was  accused  of  magic  arts?  Had  he 
known  these  arts  to  be  divine  and  pious,  and  con¬ 
gruous  with  the  works  of  divine  power,  he  ought 
not  only  to  have  confessed,  but  also  to  have 
professed  them,  rather  blaming  the  laws  by 

lVirgil,  JEneid ,  bk.  vii,  338.  Hhid .,  bk.  iv.  492,  493. 

:Virgil,  Eclogues,  bk.  viii.  99. 


GOD  VIII.  17-19  277 

which  these  things  were  prohibited  and  pro¬ 
nounced  worthy  of  condemnation,  while  they 
ought  to  have  been  held  worthy  of  admiration 
and  respect.  For  by  so  doing,  either  he  would 
have  persuaded  the  judges  to  adopt  his  own 
opinion,  or,  if  they  had  shown  their  partiality 
for  unjust  laws  and  condemned  him  to  death 
notwithstanding  his  praising  and  commending 
such  things,  the  demons  would  have  bestowed 
on  his  soul  such  rewards  as  he  deserved,  who,  in 
order  to  proclaim  and  set  forth  their  divine 
works,  had  not  feared  the  loss  of  his  human  life. 
As  our  martyrs,  when  that  religion  was  charged 
on  them  as  a  crime,  by  which  they  knew  they 
were  made  safe  and  most  glorious  throughout 
eternity,  did  not  choose,  by  denying  it,  to  escape 
temporal  punishments,  but  rather  by  confessing, 
professing,  and  proclaiming  it,  by  enduring  all 
things  for  it  with  fidelity  and  fortitude,  and  by 
dying  for  it  with  pious  calmness,  put  to  shame 
the  law  by  which  that  religion  was  prohibited, 
and  caused  its  revocation.  But  there  is  extant  a 
most  copious  and  eloquent  oration  of  this  Pla¬ 
tonic  philosopher,  in  which  he  defends  himself 
against  the  charge  of  practising  these  arts,  af¬ 
firming  that  he  is  wholly  a  stranger  to  them,  and 
only  wishing  to  show  his  innocence  by  denying 
such  things  as  cannot  be  innocently  committed. 
But  all  the  miracles  of  the  magicians,  who  he 
thinks  are  justly  deserving  of  condemnation, 
are  performed  according  to  the  teaching  and  by 
the  power  of  demons.  Why,  then,  does  he  think 
that  they  ought  to  be  honoured?  For  he  asserts 
that  they  are  necessary,  in  order  to  present  our 
prayers  to  the  gods,  and  yet  their  works  are  such 
as  we  must  shun  if  we  wish  our  prayers  to  reach 
the  true  God.  Again,  I  ask,  what  kind  of  prayers 
of  men  does  he  suppose  are  presented  to  the 
good  gods  by  the  demons?  If  magical  prayers, 
they  will  have  none  such;  if  lawful  prayers, 
they  will  not  receive  them  through  such  beings. 
But  if  a  sinner  who  is  penitent  pour  out  prayers, 
especially  if  he  has  committed  any  crime  of 
sorcery,  does  he  receive  pardon  through  the  in¬ 
tercession  of  those  demons  by  whose  instiga¬ 
tion  and  help  he  has  fallen  into  the  sin  he 
mourns?  or  do  the  demons  themselves,  in  order 
that  they  may  merit  pardon  for  the  penitent, 
first  become  penitents  because  they  have  de¬ 
ceived  them?  This  no  one  ever  said  concerning 
the  demons;  for  had  this  been  the  case,  they 
would  never  have  dared  to  seek  for  themselves 
divine  honours.  For  how  should  they  do  so  who 
desired  by  penitence  to  obtain  the  grace  of  par¬ 
don,  seeing  that  such  detestable  pride  could  not 
exist  along  with  a  humility  worthy  of  pardon? 


278  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  20.  Whether  we  are  to  believe  that  the 
good  gods  are  more  willing  to  have  inter¬ 
course  with  demons  than  with  men 
But  does  any  urgent  and  most  pressing  cause 
compel  the  demons  to  mediate  between  the  gods 
and  men,  that  they  may  offer  the  prayers  of 
men,  and  bring  back  the  answers  from  the  gods? 
and  if  so,  what,  pray,  is  that  cause,  what  is  that 
so  great  necessity?  Because,  say  they,  no  god 
has  intercourse  with  man.  Most  admirable  holi¬ 
ness  of  God,  which  has  no  intercourse  with  a 
supplicating  man,  and  yet  has  intercourse  with 
an  arrogant  demon!  which  has  no  intercourse 
with  a  penitent  man.  and  yet  has  intercourse 
with  a  deceiving  demon!  which  has  no  inter¬ 
course  with  a  man  fleeing  for  refuge  to  the  di¬ 
vine  nature,  and  yet  has  intercourse  with  a  de¬ 
mon  feigning  divinity!  which  has  no  intercourse 
with  a  man  seeking  pardon,  and  yet  has  inter¬ 
course  with  a  demon  persuading  to  wickedness! 
which  has  no  intercourse  with  a  man  expelling 
the  poets  by  means  of  philosophical  writings 
from  a  well-regulated  state,  and  yet  has  inter¬ 
course  with  a  demon  requesting  from  the  princes 
and  priests  of  a  state  the  theatrical  performance 
of  the  mockeries  of  the  poets!  which  has  no  in¬ 
tercourse  with  the  man  who  prohibits  the  as¬ 
cribing  of  crime  to  the  gods,  and  yet  has  inter¬ 
course  with  a  demon  who  takes  delight  in  the 
fictitious  representation  of  their  crimes!  which 
has  no  intercourse  with  a  man  punishing  the 
crimes  of  the  magicians  by  just  laws,  and  yet 
has  intercourse  with  a  demon  teaching  and  prac¬ 
tising  magical  arts!  which  has  no  intercourse 
with  a  man  shunning  the  imitation  of  a  demon, 
and  yet  has  intercourse  with  a  demon  lying  in 
wait  for  the  deception  of  a  man! 

Chap.  21.  Whether  the  gods  use  the  demons  as 
messengers  and  interpreters ,  and  whether 
they  are  deceived  by  them  willingly ,  or  with¬ 
out  their  own  knowledge 
But  herein,  no  doubt,  lies  the  great  necessity 
for  this  absurdity,  so  unworthy  of  the  gods,  that 
the  ethereal  gods,  who  are  concerned  about  hu¬ 
man  affairs,  would  not  know  what  terrestrial 
men  were  doing  unless  the  aerial  demons  should 
bring  them  intelligence,  because  the  ether  is 
suspended  far  away  from  the  earth  and  far 
above  it,  but  the  air  is  contiguous  both  to  the 
ether  and  to  the  earth.  0  admirable  wisdom! 
what  else  do  these  men  think  concerning  the 
gods  who,  they  say,  are  all  in  the  highest  degree 
good,  but  that  they  are  concerned  about  human 
affairs,  lest  they  should  seem  unworthy  of  wor¬ 
ship,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  dis¬ 


tance  between  the  elements,  they  are  ignorant 
of  terrestrial  things?  It  is  on  this  account  that 
they  have  supposed  the  demons  to  be  necessary 
as  agents,  through  whom  the  gods  may  inform 
themselves  with  respect  to  human  affairs,  and 
through  whom,  when  necessary,  they  may  suc¬ 
cour  men;  and  it  is  on  account  of  this  office  that 
the  demons  themselves  have  been  held  as  de¬ 
serving  of  worship.  If  this  be  the  case,  then  a 
demon  is  better  known  by  these  good  gods 
through  nearness  of  body  than  a  man  is  by 
goodness  of  mind.  0  mournful  necessity,  or  shall 
I  not  rather  say  detestable  and  vain  error,  that 
I  may  not  impute  vanity  to  the  divine  nature! 
For  if  the  gods  can,  with  their  minds  free  from 
the  hindrance  of  bodies,  see  our  mind,  they  do 
not  need  the  demons  as  messengers  from  our 
mind  to  them ;  but  if  the  ethereal  gods,  by  means 
of  their  bodies,  perceive  the  corporeal  indices 
of  minds,  as  the  countenance,  speech,  motion, 
and  thence  understand  what  the  demons  tell 
them,  then  it  is  also  possible  that  they  may  be 
deceived  by  the  falsehoods  of  demons.  More¬ 
over,  if  the  divinity  of  the  gods  cannot  be  de¬ 
ceived  by  the  demons,  neither  can  it  be  ignorant 
of  our  actions.  But  I  would  they  would  tell  me 
whether  the  demons  have  informed  the  gods 
that  the  fictions  of  the  poets  concerning  the 
crimes  of  the  gods  displease  Plato,  concealing 
the  pleasure  which  they  themselves  take  in 
them ;  or  whether  they  have  concealed  both,  and 
have  preferred  that  the  gods  should  be  ignorant 
with  respect  to  this  whole  matter,  or  have  told 
both,  as  well  the  pious  prudence  of  Plato  with 
respect  to  the  gods  as  their  own  lust,  which  is  in¬ 
jurious  to  the  gods;  or  whether  they  have  con¬ 
cealed  Plato’s  opinion,  according  to  which  he 
was  unwilling  that  the  gods  should  be  defamed 
with  falsely  alleged  crimes  through  the  impious 
licence  of  the  poets,  whilst  they  have  not  been 
ashamed  nor  afraid  to  make  known  their  own 
wickedness,  which  make  them  love  theatrical 
plays,  in  which  the  infamous  deeds  of  the  gods 
are  celebrated.  Let  them  choose  which  they  will 
of  these  four  alternatives,  and  let  them  consider 
how  much  evil  any  one  of  them  would  require 
them  to  think  of  the  gods.  For  if  they  choose  the 
first,  they  must  then  confess  that  it  was  not  pos¬ 
sible  for  the  good  gods  to  dwell  with  the  good 
Plato,  though  he  sought  to  prohibit  things  in¬ 
jurious  to  them,  whilst  they  dwelt  with  evil  de¬ 
mons,  who  exulted  in  their  injuries;  and  this  be¬ 
cause  they  suppose  that  the  good  gods  can  only 
know  a  good  man,  placed  at  so  great  a  distance 
from  them,  through  the  mediation  of  evil  de¬ 
mons,  whom  they  could  know  on  account  of 


THE  CITY  OF 

their  nearness  to  themselves.1  If  they  shall 
choose  the  second,  and  shall  say  that  both  these 
things  are  concealed  by  the  demons,  so  that  the 
gods  are  wholly  ignorant  both  of  Plato’s  most 
religious  law  and  the  sacrilegious  pleasure  of  the 
demons,  what,  in  that  case,  can  the  gods  know  to 
any  profit  with  respect  to  human  affairs  through 
these  mediating  demons,  when  they  do  not  know 
those  things  which  are  decreed,  through  the 
piety  of  good  men,  for  the  honour  of  the  good 
gods  against  the  lust  of  evil  demons?  But  if 
they  shall  choose  the  third  and  reply  that  these 
intermediary  demons  have  communicated,  net 
only  the  opinion  of  Plato,  which  prohibited 
wrongs  to  be  done  to  the  gods,  but  also  their 
own  delight  in  these  wrongs,  I  would  ask  if  such 
a  communication  is  not  rather  an  insult?  Now 
the  gods,  hearing  both  and  knowing  both,  not 
only  permit  the  approach  of  those  malign  de¬ 
mons,  who  desire  and  do  things  contrary  to  the 
dignity  of  the  gods  and  the  religion  of  Plato,  but 
also,  through  these  wicked  demons,  who  are  near 
to  them,  send  good  things  to  the  good  Plato,  who 
is  far  away  from  them ;  for  they  inhabit  such  a 
place  in  the  concatenated  series  of  the  elements, 
that  they  can  come  into  contact  with  those  by 
whom  they  are  accused,  but  not  with  him  by 
whom  they  are  defended — knowing  the  truth  on 
both  sides,  but  not  being  able  to  change  the 
weight  of  the  air  and  the  earth.  There  remains 
the  fourth  supposition;  but  it  is  worse  than  the 
rest.  For  who  will  suffer  it  to  be  said  that  the 
demons  have  made  known  the  calumnious  fic¬ 
tions  of  the  poets  concerning  the  immortal  gods, 
and  also  the  disgraceful  mockeries  of  the  thea¬ 
tres,  and  their  own  most  ardent  lust  after  and 
most  sweet  pleasure  in  these  things,  whilst  they 
have  concealed  from  them  that  Plato,  with  the 
gravity  of  a  philosopher,  gave  it  as  his  opinion 
that  all  these  things  ought  to  be  removed  from  a 
well-regulated  republic;  so  that  the  good  gods 
are  now  compelled,  through  such  messengers,  to 
know  the  evil  doings  of  the  most  wicked  beings, 
that  is  tp  say,  of  the  messengers  themselves,  and 
are  not  allowed  to  know  the  good  deeds  of  the 
philosophers,  though  the  former  are  for  the  in¬ 
jury,  but  these  latter  for  the  honour  of  the  gods 
themselves  ? 

Chap.  22.  That  we  must ,  notwithstanding  the 

opinion  of  Apuleius,  reject  the  worship  of 

demons 

None  of  these  four  alternatives,  then,  is  to  be 
chosen;  for  we  dare  not  suppose  such  unbecom- 

1  Another  reading:  “whom  they  could  not  know,  though 
near  to  themselves.” 


GOD  VIII.  20-23  279 

ing  things  concerning  the  gods  as  the  adoption 
of  any  one  of  them  would  lead  us  to  think.  It  re¬ 
mains,  therefore,  that  no  credence  whatever  is 
to  be  given  to  the  opinion  of  Apuleius  and  the 
other  philosophers  of  the  same  school,  namely, 
that  the  demons  act  as  messengers  and  inter¬ 
preters  between  the  gods  and  men  to  carry  our 
petitions  from  us  to  the  gods,  and  to  bring  back 
to  us  the  help  of  the  gods.  On  the  contrary,  we 
must  believe  them  to  be  spirits  most  eager  to  in¬ 
flict  harm,  utterly  alien  from  righteousness, 
swollen  with  pride,  pale  with  envy,  subtle  in  de¬ 
ceit;  who  dwell  indeed  in  this  air  as  in  a  prison, 
in  keeping  with  their  own  character,  because, 
cast  down  from  the  height  of  the  higher  heaven, 
they  have  been  condemned  to  dwell  in  this  ele¬ 
ment  as  the  just  reward  of  irretrievable  trans¬ 
gression.  But,  though  the  air  is  situated  above 
the  earth  and  the  waters,  they  are  not  on  that 
account  superior  in  merit  to  men,  who,  though 
they  do  not  surpass  them  as  far  as  their  earthly 
bodies  are  concerned,  do  nevertheless  far  excel 
them  through  piety  of  mind — they  having  made 
choice  of  the  true  God  as  their  helper.  Over 
many,  however,  who  are  manifestly  unworthy  of 
participation  in  the  true  religion,  they  tyrannize 
as  over  captives  whom  they  have  subdued — the 
greatest  part  of  whom  they  have  persuaded  of 
their  divinity  by  wonderful  and  lying  signs,  con¬ 
sisting  either  of  deeds  or  of  predictions.  Some, 
nevertheless,  who  have  more  attentively  and 
diligently  considered  their  vices,  they  have  not 
been  able  to  persuade  that  they  are  gods  and  so 
have  feigned  themselves  to  be  messengers  be¬ 
tween  the  gods  and  men.  Some,  indeed,  have 
thought  that  not  even  this  latter  honour  ought 
to  be  acknowledged  as  belonging  to  them,  not 
believing  that  they  were  gods,  because  they  saw 
that  they  were  wicked,  whereas  the  gods,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  view,  are  all  good.  Nevertheless 
they  dared  not  say  that  they  were  wholly  un¬ 
worthy  of  all  divine  honour,  for  fear  of  offend¬ 
ing  the  multitude,  by  whom,  through  inveterate 
superstition,  the  demons  were  served  by  the  per¬ 
formance  of  many  rites  and  the  erection  of 
many  temples. 

Chap.  23.  What  Hermes  Trismegistus  thought 
concerning  idolatry,  and  from  what  source  he 
knew  that  the  superstitions  of  Egypt  were  to 
he  abolished 

The  Egyptian  Hermes,  whom  they  call  Tris¬ 
megistus,  had  a  different  opinion  concerning 
those  demons.  Apuleius,  indeed,  denies  that  they 
are  gods;  but  when  he  says  that  they  hold  a  mid¬ 
dle  place  between  the  gods  and  men,  so  that  they 


2go  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


seem  to  be  necessary  for  men  as  mediators  be¬ 
tween  them  and  the  gods,  he  does  not  distin¬ 
guish  between  the  worship  due  to  them  and  the 
religious  homage  due  to  the  supernal  gods.  This 
Egyptian,  however,  says  that  there  are  some 
gods  made  by  the  supreme  God  and  some  made 
by  men.  Any  one  who  hears  this,  as  I  have  stat¬ 
ed  it,  no  doubt  supposes  that  it  has  reference  to 
images,  because  they  are  the  works  of  the  hands 
of  men ;  but  he  asserts  that  visible  and  tangible 
images  are,  as  it  were,  only  the  bodies  of  the 
gods,  and  that  there  dwell  in  them  certain  spir¬ 
its,  which  have  been  invited  to  come  into  them, 
and  which  have  power  to  inflict  harm,  or  to  ful¬ 
fil  the  desires  of  those  by  whom  divine  honours 
and  services  are  rendered  to  them.  To  unite, 
therefore,  by  a  certain  art,  those  invisible  spirits 
to  visible  and  material  things,  so  as  to  make,  as 
it  were,  animated  bodies,  dedicated  and  given  up 
to  those  spirits  who  inhabit  them — this,  he  says, 
is  to  make  gods,  adding  that  men  have  received 
this  great  and  wonderful  power.  I  will  give  the 
words  of  this  Egyptian  as  they  have  been  txans- 
lated  into  our  tongue:  “And,  since  we  have  un¬ 
dertaken  to  discourse  concerning  the  relation¬ 
ship  and  fellowship  between  men  and  the  gods, 
know,  0  ^Esculapius,  the  power  and  strength  of 
man.  As  the  Lord  and  Father,  or  that  which  is 
highest,  even  God,  is  the  maker  of  the  celestial 
gods,  so  man  is  the  maker  of  the  gods  who  are 
in  the  temples,  content  to  dwell  near  to  men.” 
And  a  little  after  he  says,  “Thus  humanity,  al¬ 
ways  mindful  of  its  nature  and  origin,  perse¬ 
veres  in  the  imitation  of  divinity;  and  as  the 
Lord  and  Father  made  eternal  gods,  that  they 
should  be  like  Himself,  so  humanity  fashioned 
its  own  gods  according  to  the  likeness  of  its  own 
countenance.”  When  this  ^Esculapius,  to  whom 
especially  he  was  speaking,  had  answered  him, 
and  had  said,  “Dost  thou  mean  the  statues,  0 
Trismegistus?” — “Yes,  the  statues,”  replied  he, 
“however  unbelieving  thou  art,  0  ^Esculapius — 
the  statues,  animated,  and  full  of  sensation  and 
spirit,  and  who  do  such  great  and  wonderful 
things,  the  statues,  prescient  of  future  things, 
and  foretelling  them  by  lot,  by  prophet,  by 
dreams,  and  many  other  things,  who  bring  dis¬ 
eases  on  men  and  cure  them  again,  giving  them 
joy  or  sorrow  according  to  their  merits.  Dost 
thou  not  know,  0  ^Esculapius,  that  Egypt  is  an 
image  of  heaven,  or,  more  truly,  a  translation 
and  descent  of  all  things  which  are  ordered  and 
transacted  there,  that  it  is,  in  truth,  if  we  may 
say  so,  to  be  the  temple  of  the  whole  world? 
And  yet,  as  it  becomes  the  prudent  man  to  know 
all  things  beforehand,  ye  ought  not  to  be  igno¬ 


rant  of  this,  that  there  is  a  time  coming  when  it 
shall  appear  that  the  Egyptians  have  all  in  vain, 
with  pious  mind,  and  with  most  scrupulous  dili¬ 
gence,  waited  on  the  divinity,  and  when  all  their 
holy  worship  shall  come  to  nought,  and  be 
found  to  be  in  vain.” 

Hermes  then  follows  out  at  great  length  the 
statements  of  this  passage,  in  which  he  seems  to 
predict  the  present  time,  in  which  the  Christian 
religion  is  overthrowing  all  lying  figments  with 
a  vehemence  and  liberty  proportioned  to  its 
superior  truth  and  holiness,  in  order  that  the 
grace  of  the  true  Saviour  may  deliver  men  from 
those  gods  which  man  has  made,  and  subject 
them  to  that  God  by  Whom  man  was  made.  But 
when  Hermes  predicts  these  things,  he  speaks  as 
one  who  is  a  friend  to  these  same  mockeries  of 
demons  and  does  not  clearly  express  the  name 
of  Christ.  On  the  contrary,  he  deplores,  as  if  it 
had  already  taken  place,  the  future  abolition  of 
those  things  by  the  observance  of  which  there 
was  maintained  in  Egypt  a  resemblance  of  heav¬ 
en  ;  he  bears  witness  to  Christianity  by  a  kind  of 
mournful  prophecy.  Now  it  was  with  reference 
to  such  that  the  apostle  said,  that  “knowing 
God,  they  glorified  Him  not  as  God,  neither 
were  thankful,  but  became  vain  in  their  imagina¬ 
tions,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened;  pro¬ 
fessing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became 
fools,  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  the  likeness  of  the  image  of  corruptible 
man,”1  and  so  on,  for  the  whole  passage  is  too 
long  to  quote.  For  Hermes  makes  many  such 
statements  agreeable  to  the  truth  concerning  the 
one  true  God  Who  fashioned  this  world.  And  I 
know  not  how  he  has  become  so  bewildered  by 
that  “darkening  of  the  heart”  as  to  stumble  into 
the  expression  of  a  desire  that  men  should  al¬ 
ways  continue  in  subjection  to  those  gods  which 
he  confesses  to  be  made  by  men  and  to  bewail 
their  future  removal;  as  if  there  could  be  any¬ 
thing  more  wretched  than  mankind  tyrannized 
over  by  the  work  of  his  own  hands,  since  man, 
by  worshipping  the  works  of  his  own  hands,  may 
more  easily  cease  to  be  man,  than  the  works  of 
his  hands  can,  through  his  worship  of  them,  be¬ 
come  gods.  For  it  can  sooner  happen  that  man, 
who  has  received  an  honourable  position,  may, 
through  lack  of  understanding,  become  com¬ 
parable  to  the  beasts,  than  that  the  works  of 
man  may  become  preferable  to  the  work  of 
God,  made  in  His  own  image,  that  is,  to  man 
himself.  Wherefore  deservedly  is  man  left  to  fall 
away  from  Him  Who  made  Him,  when  he  pre¬ 
fers  to  himself  that  which  he  himself  has  made. 

^om.  i.  2i. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VIII.  24  281 


For  these  vain,  deceitful,  pernicious,  sacrile¬ 
gious  things  did  the  Egyptian  Hermes  sorrow, 
because  he  knew  that  the  time  was  coming  when 
they  should  be  removed.  But  his  sorrow  was  as 
impudently  expressed  as  his  knowledge  was  im¬ 
prudently  obtained;  for  it  was  not  the  Holy 
Spirit  Who  revealed  these  things  to  him.  as  He 
had  done  to  the  holy  prophets,  who,  foreseeing 
these  things,  said  with  exultation,  “If  a  man 
shall  make  gods,  lo,  they  are  no  gods”;1  and  in 
another  place,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  cut  off  the  names 
of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no 
more  be  remembered.”2  But  the  holy  Isaiah 
prophesies  expressly  concerning  Egypt  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  this  matter,  saying,  “And  the  idols  of 
Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  His  presence,  and  their 
heart  shall  be  overcome  in  them,”3  and  other 
things  to  the  same  effect.  And  with  the  prophet 
are  to  be  classed  those  who  rejoiced  that  that 
which  they  knew  was  to  come  had  actually  come 
— as  Simeon,  or  Anna,  who  immediately  recog¬ 
nized  Jesus  when  He  was  born,  or  Elisabeth, 
who  in  the  Spirit  recognized  Him  when  He  was 
conceived,  or  Peter,  who  said  by  the  revelation 
of  the  Father,  “Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
living  God.”4  But  to  this  Egyptian  those  spirits 
indicated  the  time  of  their  own  destruction,  who 
also,  when  the  Lord  was  present  in  the  flesh, 
said  with  trembling,  “Art  Thou  come  hither  to 
destroy  us  before  the  time?”5  meaning  by  de¬ 
struction  before  the  time,  either  that  very  de¬ 
struction  which  they  expected  to  come,  but  which 
they  did  not  think  would  come  so  suddenly  as  it 
appeared  to  have  done,  or  only  that  destruction 
which  consisted  in  their  being  brought  into  con¬ 
tempt  by  being  made  known.  And,  indeed,  this 
was  a  destruction  before  the  time,  that  is,  before 
the  time  of  judgment,  when  they  are  to  be  pun¬ 
ished  with  eternal  damnation,  together  with  all 
men  who  are  implicated  in  their  wickedness,  as 
the  true  religion  declares,  which  neither  errs  nor 
leads  into  error ;  for  it  is  not  like  him  who,  blown 
hither  and  thither  by  every  wind  of  doctrine, 
and  mixing  true  things  with  things  which  are 
false,  bewails  as  about  to  perish  a  religion  which 
he  afterwards  confesses  to  be  error. 

Chap.  24.  How  Hermes  openly  confessed  the 
error  of  his  forefathers ,  the  coming  destruc¬ 
tion  of  which  he  nevertheless  bewailed 
After  a  long  interval,  Hermes  again  comes 
back  to  the  subject  of  the  gods  which  men  have 
made,  saying  as  follows:  “But  enough  on  this 

\Jer.  16.  20.  2Zech.  13.  2.  3Isa.  19.  1. 

4Matt.  16.  16.  6Matt.  8.  29. 


subject.  Let  us  return  to  man  and  to  reason,  that 
divine  gift  on  account  of  which  man  has  been 
called  a  rational  animal.  For  the  things  which 
have  been  said  concerning  man,  wonderful 
though  they  are,  are  less  wonderful  than  those 
which  have  been  said  concerning  reason.  For 
man  to  discover  the  divine  nature,  and  to  make 
it,  surpasses  the  wonder  of  all  other  wonderful 
things.  Because,  therefore,  our  forefathers  erred 
very  far  with  respect  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
gods,  through  incredulity  and  through  want  of 
attention  to  their  worship  and  service,  they  in¬ 
vented  this  art  of  making  gods ;  and  this  art  once 
invented,  they  associated  with  it  a  suitable  vir¬ 
tue  borrowed  from  universal  nature  and,  being 
incapable  of  making  souls,  they  evoked  those  of 
demons  or  of  angels  and  united  them  with  these 
holy  images  and  divine  mysteries,  in  order  that 
through  these  souls  the  images  might  have  power 
to  do  good  or  harm  to  men.”  I  know  not  wheth¬ 
er  the  demons  themselves  could  have  been 
made,  even  by  adjuration,  to  confess  as  he  has 
confessed  in  these  words:  “Because  our  fore¬ 
fathers  erred  very  far  with  respect  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  gods,  through  incredulity  and 
through  want  of  attention  to  their  worship  and 
service,  they  invented  the  art  of  making  gods.” 
Does  he  say  that  it  was  a  moderate  degree  of 
error  which  resulted  in  their  discovery  of  the 
art  of  making  gods,  or  was  he  content  to  say 
“they  erred?”  No;  he  must  needs  add  “very 
far,”  and  say,  “They  erred  very  far”  It  was  this 
great  error  and  incredulity,  then,  of  their  fore¬ 
fathers  who  did  not  attend  to  the  worship  and 
service  of  the  gods,  which  was  the  origin  of  the 
art  of  making  gods.  And  yet  this  wise  man 
grieves  over  the  ruin  of  this  art  at  some  future 
time,  as  if  it  were  a  divine  religion.  Is  he  not 
verily  compelled  by  divine  influence,  on  the  one 
hand,  to  reveal  the  past  error  of  his  forefathers, 
and  by  a  diabolical  influence,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  bewail  the  future  punishment  of  demons?  For 
if  their  forefathers,  by  erring  very  far  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  knowledge  of  the  gods,  through  in¬ 
credulity  and  aversion  of  mind  from  their  wor¬ 
ship  and  service,  invented  the  art  of  making 
gods,  what  wonder  is  it  that  all  that  is  done 
by  this  detestable  art,  which  is  opposed  to  the 
divine  religion,  should  be  taken  away  by  that 
religion  when  truth  corrects  error,  faith  re¬ 
futes  incredulity,  and  conversion  rectifies  aver¬ 
sion? 

For  if  he  had  only  said,  without  mentioning 
the  cause,  that  his  forefathers  had  discovered 
the  art  of  making  gods,  it  would  have  been  our 
duty,  if  we  paid  any  regard  to  what  is  right  and 


282  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


pious,  to  consider  and  to  see  that  they  could 
never  have  attained  to  this  art  if  they  had  not 
erred  from  the  truth,  if  they  had  believed  those 
things  which  are  worthy  of  God,  if  they  had  at¬ 
tended  to  divine  worship  and  service.  However, 
if  we  alone  should  say  that  the  causes  of  this  art 
were  to  be  found  in  the  great  error  and  incredu¬ 
lity  of  men,  and  aversion  of  the  mind  erring  from 
and  unfaithful  to  divine  religion,  the  impudence 
of  those  who  resist  the  truth  were  in  some  way 
to  be  borne  with ;  but  when  he  who  admires  in 
man,  above  all  other  things,  this  power  which  it 
has  been  granted  him  to  practise,  and  sorrows 
because  a  time  is  coming  when  all  those  figments 
of  gods  invented  by  men  shall  even  be  com¬ 
manded  by  the  laws  to  be  taken  away — when 
even  this  man  confesses  nevertheless  and  ex¬ 
plains  the  causes  which  led  to  the  discovery  of 
this  art,  saying  that  their  ancestors,  through 
great  error  and  incredulity,  and  through  not  at¬ 
tending  to  the  worship  and  service  of  the  gods, 
invented  this  art  of  making  gods — what  ought 
we  to  say,  or  rather  to  do.  but  to  give  to  the 
Lord  our  God  all  the  thanks  we  are  able,  because 
He  has  taken  away  those  things  by  causes  the 
contrary  of  those  which  led  to  their  institution? 
For  that  which  the  prevalence  of  error  institut¬ 
ed,  the  way  of  truth  took  away;  that  which  in¬ 
credulity  instituted,  faith  took  away;  that  which 
aversion  from  divine  worship  and  service  insti¬ 
tuted,  conversion  to  the  one  true  and  holy  God 
took  away.  Nor  was  this  the  case  only  in  Egypt, 
for  which  country  alone  the  spirit  of  the  demons 
lamented  in  Hermes,  but  in  all  the  earth,  which 
sings  to  the  Lord  a  new  song,1  as  the  truly  holy 
and  truly  prophetic  Scriptures  have  predicted, 
in  which  it  is  written,  “Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
song;  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth.”  For  the 
title  of  this  psalm  is,  “When  the  house  was  built 
after  the  captivity.”  For  a  house  is  being  built 
to  the  Lord  in  all  the  earth,  even  the  city  of  God, 
which  is  the  holy  Church,  after  that  captivity  in 
which  demons  held  captive  those  men  who, 
through  faith  in  God,  became  living  stones  in 
the  house.  For  although  man  made  gods,  it  did 
not  follow  that  he  who  made  them  was  not  held 
captive  by  them,  when,  by  worshipping  them,  he 
was  drawn  into  fellowship  with  them — into  the 
fellowship  not  of  stolid  idols,  but  of  cunning  de¬ 
mons  ;  for  what  are  idols  but  what  they  are  rep¬ 
resented  to  be  in  the  same  Scriptures,  “They 
have  eyes,  but  they  do  not  see,”2  and,  though  ar¬ 
tistically  fashioned,  are  still  without  life  and 
sensation?  But  unclean  spirits,  associated 
through  that  wicked  art  with  these  same  idols, 
^s.  96.  1.  2Ps.  1 15.  5,  etc. 


have  miserably  taken  captive  the  souls  of  their 
worshippers,  by  bringing  them  down  into  fellow¬ 
ship  with  themselves.  Whence  the  apostle  says, 
“We  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing,  but  those 
things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice  they  sacrifice 
to  demons,  and  not  to  God;  and  I  would  not  ye 
should  have  fellowship  with  demons.”3  After 
this  captivity,  therefore,  in  which  men  were  held 
by  malign  demons,  the  house  of  God  is  being 
built  in  all  the  earth;  whence  the  title  of  that 
psalm  in  which  it  is  said,  “Sing  unto  the  Lord  a 
new  song;  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth.  Sing 
unto  the  Lord,  bless  His  name;  declare  well  His 
salvation  from  day  to  day.  Declare  His  glory 
among  the  nations,  among  all  people  His  won¬ 
derful  things.  For  great  is  the  Lord,  and  much 
to  be  praised:  He  is  terrible  above  all  gods.  For 
all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  demons :  but  the 
Lord  made  the  heavens.”4 

Wherefore  he  who  sorrowed  because  a  time 
was  coming  when  the  worship  of  idols  should  be 
abolished,  and  the  domination  of  the  demons 
over  those  who  worshipped  them,  wished,  under 
the  influence  of  a  demon,  that  that  captivity 
should  always  continue,  at  the  cessation  of 
which  that  psalm  celebrates  the  building  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  in  all  the  earth.  Hermes  fore¬ 
told  these  things  with  grief,  the  prophet  with 
joyfulness;  and  because  the  Spirit  is  victorious 
Who  sang  these  things  through  the  ancient 
prophets,  even  Hermes  himself  was  compelled 
in  a  wonderful  manner  to  confess  that  those 
very  things  which  he  wished  not  to  be  removed, 
and  at  the  prospect  of  whose  removal  he  was 
sorrowful,  had  been  instituted,  not  by  prudent, 
faithful,  and  religious,  but  by  erring  and  unbe¬ 
lieving  men,  averse  to  the  worship  and  service  of 
the  gods.  And  although  he  calls  them  gods,  nev¬ 
ertheless,  when  he  says  that  they  were  made  by 
such  men  as  we  certainly  ought  not  to  be,  he 
shows,  whether  he  will  or  not,  that  they  are  not 
to  be  worshipped  by  those  who  do  not  resemble 
these  image-makers,  that  is,  by  prudent,  faith¬ 
ful,  and  religious  men,  at  the  same  time  also 
making  it  manifest  that  the  very  men  who  made 
them  involved  themselves  in  the  worship  of 
those  as  gods  who  were  not  gods.  For  true  is  the 
saying  of  the  prophet,  “If  a  man  make  gods,  lo, 
they  are  no  gods.”5  Such  gods,  therefore,  ac¬ 
knowledged  by  such  worshippers  and  made  by 
such  men,  did  Hermes  call  “gods  made  by  men,” 
that  is  to  say,  demons,  through  some  art  of  I 
know  not  what  description,  bound  by  the  chains 
of  their  own  lusts  to  images.  But,  nevertheless, 
he  did  not  agree  with  that  opinion  of  the  Pla- 

3I  Cor.  10.  19,  20.  4Ps.  96.  1-5.  5Jer.  16.  20. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VIII.  25-26  283 


tonic  Apuleius,  of  which  we  have  already  shown 
the  incongruity  and  absurdity,  namely,  that  they 
were  interpreters  and  intercessors  between  the 
gods  whom  God  made,  and  men  whom  the  same 
God  made,  bringing  to  God  the  prayers  of  men, 
and  from  God  the  gifts  given  in  answer  to  these 
prayers.  For  it  is  exceedingly  stupid  to  believe 
that  gods  whom  men  have  made  have  more  in¬ 
fluence  with  gods  whom  God  has  made  than  men 
themselves  have,  whom  the  very  same  God  has 
made.  And  consider,  too,  that  it  is  a  demon 
which,  bound  by  a  man  to  an  image  by  means  of 
an  impious  art,  has  been  made  a  god,  but  a  god 
to  such  a  man  only,  not  to  every  man.  What 
kind  of  god,  therefore,  is  that  which  no  man 
would  make  but  one  erring,  incredulous,  and 
averse  to  the  true  God?  Moreover,  if  the  de¬ 
mons  which  are  worshipped  in  the  temples,  be¬ 
ing  introduced  by  some  kind  of  strange  art  into 
images,  that  is,  into  visible  representations  of 
themselves,  by  those  men  who  by  this  art  made 
gods  when  they  were  straying  away  from,  and 
were  averse  to  the  worship  and  service  of  the 
gods — if.  I  say,  those  demons  are  neither  media¬ 
tors  nor  interpreters  between  men  and  the  gods, 
both  on  account  of  their  own  most  wicked  and 
base  manners,  and  because  men,  though  erring, 
incredulous,  and  averse  from  the  worship  and 
service  of  the  gods,  are  nevertheless  beyond 
doubt  better  than  the  demons  whom  they  them¬ 
selves  have  evoked,  then  it  remains  to  be  af¬ 
firmed  that  what  power  they  possess  they  pos¬ 
sess  as  demons,  doing  harm  by  bestowing  pre¬ 
tended  benefits — harm  all  the  greater  for  the  de¬ 
ception — or  else  openly  and  undisguisedly  doing 
evil  to  men.  They  cannot,  however,  do  anything 
of  this  kind  unless  where  they  are  permitted  by 
the  deep  and  secret  providence  of  God  and  then 
only  so  far  as  they  are  permitted.  When,  how¬ 
ever,  they  are  permitted,  it  is  not  because  they, 
being  midway  between  men  and  the  gods,  have 
through  the  friendship  of  the  gods  great  power 
over  men;  for  these  demons  cannot  possibly  be 
friend^  to  the  good  gods  who  dwell  in  the  holy 
and  heavenly  habitation,  by  whom  we  mean 
holy  angels  and  rational  creatures,  whether 
thrones,  or  dominations,  or  principalities,  or 
powers,  from  whom  they  are  as  far  separated  in 
disposition  and  character  as  vice  is  distant  from 
virtue,  wickedness  from  goodness. 

Chap.  25.  Concerning  those  things  which  may 
be  common  to  the  holy  angels  and  to  men 
Wherefore  we  must  by  no  means  seek, 
through  the  supposed  mediation  of  demons,  to 
avail  ourselves  of  the  benevolence  or  benefi¬ 


cence  of  the  gods,  or  rather  of  the  good  angels, 
but  through  resembling  them  in  the  possession 
of  a  good  will,  through  which  we  are  with  them, 
and  live  with  them,  and  worship  with  them  the 
same  God,  although  we  cannot  see  them  with 
the  eyes  of  our  flesh.  But  it  is  not  in  locality  we 
are  distant  from  them,  but  in  merit  of  life, 
caused  by  our  miserable  unlikeness  to  them  in 
will,  and  by  the  weakness  of  our  character;  for 
the  mere  fact  of  our  dwelling  on  earth  under  the 
conditions  of  life  in  the  flesh  does  not  prevent 
our  fellowship  with  them.  It  is  only  prevented 
when  we,  in  the  impurity  of  our  hearts,  mind 
earthly  things.  But  in  this  present  time,  while 
we  are  being  healed  that  we  may  eventually  be 
as  they  are,  we  are  brought  near  to  them  by 
faith,  if  by  their  assistance  we  believe  that  He 
Who  is  their  blessedness  is  also  ours. 

Chap.  26.  That  all  the  religion  of  the  pagans  has 

reference  to  dead  men 

It  is  certainly  a  remarkable  thing  how  this 
Egyptian,  when  expressing  his  grief  that  a  time 
was  coming  when  those  things  would  be  taken 
away  from  Egypt,  which  he  confesses  to  have 
been  invented  by  men  erring,  incredulous,  and 
averse  to  the  service  of  divine  religion,  says, 
among  other  things,  “Then  shall  that  land,  the 
most  holy  place  of  shrines  and  temples,  be  full 
of  sepulchres  and  dead  men,”  as  if,  in  sooth,  if 
these  things  were  not  taken  away,  men  would 
not  die!  as  if  dead  bodies  could  be  buried  else¬ 
where  than  in  the  ground!  as  if,  as  time  ad¬ 
vanced,  the  number  of  sepulchres  must  not  nec¬ 
essarily  increase  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of 
the  number  of  the  dead!  But  they  who  are  of  a 
perverse  mind,  and  opposed  to  us,  suppose  that 
what  he  grieves  for  is  that  the  memorials  of  our 
martyrs  were  to  succeed  to  their  temples  and 
shrines,  in  order,  forsooth,  that  they  may  have 
grounds  for  thinking  that  gods  were  worshipped 
by  the  pagans  in  temples,  but  that  dead  men  are 
worshipped  by  us  in  sepulchres.  For  with  such 
blindness  do  impious  men,  as  it  were,  stumble 
over  mountains,  and  will  not  see  the  things 
which  strike  their  own  eyes,  that  they  do  not  at¬ 
tend  to  the  fact  that  in  all  the  literature  of  the 
pagans  there  are  not  found  any,  or  scarcely  any 
gods,  who  have  not  been  men,  to  whom,  when 
dead,  divine  honours  have  been  paid.  I  will  not 
enlarge  on  the  fact  that  Varro  says  that  all  dead 
men  are  thought  by  them  to  be  gods — Manes — 
and  proves  it  by  those  sacred  rites  which  are 
performed  in  honour  of  almost  all  the  dead, 
among  which  he  mentions  funeral  games,  con¬ 
sidering  this  the  very  highest  proof  of  divinity, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


because  games  are  only  wont  to  be  celebrated  in 
honour  of  divinities.  Hermes  himself,  of  whom 
we  are  now  treating,  in  that  same  book  in  which, 
as  if  foretelling  future  things,  he  says  with  sorrow 
“Then  shall  that  land,  the  most  holy  place  of 
shrines  and  temples,  be  full  of  sepulchres  and 
dead  men,”  testifies  that  the  gods  of  Egypt  were 
dead  men.  For,  having  said  that  their  fore¬ 
fathers,  erring  very  far  with  respect  to  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  gods,  incredulous  and  inattentive  to 
the  divine  worship  and  service,  invented  the  art 
of  making  gods,  with  which  art,  when  invented, 
they  associated  the  appropriate  virtue  which  is 
inherent  in  universal  nature,  and  by  mixing  up 
that  virtue  with  this  art,  they  called  forth  the 
souls  of  demons  or  of  angels  (for  they  could  not 
make  souls)  and  caused  them  to  take  possession 
of,  or  associate  themselves  with  holy  images  and 
divine  mysteries,  in  order  that  through  these 
souls  the  images  might  have  power  to  do  good  or 
harm  to  men ;  having  said  this,  he  goes  on,  as  it 
were,  to  prove  it  by  illustrations,  saying,  “Thy 
grandsire,  0  ^Esculapius,  the  first  discoverer  of 
medicine,  to  whom  a  temple  was  consecrated  in 
a  mountain  of  Libya,  near  to  the  shore  of  the 
crocodiles,  in  which  temple  lies  his  earthly  man, 
that  is,  his  body — for  the  better  part  of  him,  or 
rather  the  whole  of  him,  if  the  whole  man  is  in 
the  intelligent  life,  went  back  to  heaven — af¬ 
fords  even  now  by  his  divinity  all  those  helps  to 
infirm  men,  which  formerly  he  was  wont  to  af¬ 
ford  to  them  by  the  art  of  medicine.”  He  says, 
therefore,  that  a  dead  man  was  worshipped  as  a 
god  in  that  place  where  he  had  his  sepulchre.  He 
deceives  men  by  a  falsehood,  for  the  man  “went 
back  to  heaven.”  Then  he  adds,  “Does  not  Her¬ 
mes,  who  was  my  grandsire,  and  whose  name  I 
bear,  abiding  in  the  country  which  is  called  by 
his  name,  help  and  preserve  all  mortals  who 
come  to  him  from  every  quarter?”  For  this  eld¬ 
er  Hermes,  that  is,  Mercury,  who,  he  says,  was 
his  grandsire,  is  said  to  be  buried  in  Hermopolis, 
that  is,  in  the  city  called  by  his  name;  so  here 
are  two  gods  whom  he  affirms  to  have  been  men, 
^Esculapius  and  Mercury.  Now  concerning 
^sculapius,  both  the  Greeks  and  the  Latins 
think  the  same  thing;  but  as  to  Mercury,  there 
are  many  who  do  not  think  that  he  was  formerly 
a  mortal,  though  Hermes  testifies  that  he  was 
his  grandsire.  But  are  these  two  different  indi¬ 
viduals  who  were  called  by  the  same  name?  I 
will  not  dispute  much  whether  they  are  different 
individuals  or  not.  It  is  sufficient  to  know  that 
this  Mercury  of  whom  Hermes  speaks  is,  as  well 
as  .Esculapius,  a  god  who  once  was  a  man,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  testimony  of  this  same  Trisme- 


gistus,  esteemed  so  great  by  his  countrymen,  and 
also  the  grandson  of  Mercury  himself. 

Hermes  goes  on  to  say,  “But  do  we  know  how 
many  good  things  Isis,  the  wife  of  Osiris,  be¬ 
stows  when  she  is  propitious,  and  what  great  op¬ 
position  she  can  offer  when  enraged?”  Then,  in 
order  to  show  that  there  were  gods  made  by  men 
through  this  art,  he  goes  on  to  say,  “For  it  is 
easy  for  earthly  and  mundane  gods  to  be  angry, 
being  made  and  composed  by  men  out  of  either 
nature”;  thus  giving  us  to  understand  that  he 
believed  that  demons  were  formerly  the  souls  of 
dead  men,  which,  as  he  says,  by  means  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  art  invented  by  men  very  far  in  error,  in¬ 
credulous,  and  irreligious,  were  caused  to  take 
possession  of  images,  because  they  who  made 
such  gods  were  not  able  to  make  souls.  When, 
therefore,  he  says  “either  nature,”  he  means 
soul  and  body — the  demon  being  the  soul,  and 
the  image  the  body.  What,  then,  becomes  of  that 
mournful  complaint  that  the  land  of  Egypt,  the 
most  holy  place  of  shrines  and  temples,  was  to 
be  full  of  sepulchres  and  dead  men?  Verily,  the 
fallacious  spirit,  by  whose  inspiration  Hermes 
spoke  these  things,  was  compelled  to  confess 
through  him  that  even  already  that  land  was  full 
of  sepulchres  and  of  dead  men,  whom  they  were 
worshipping  as  gods.  But  it  was  the  grief  of  the 
demons  which  was  expressing  itself  through  his 
mouth,  who  were  sorrowing  on  account  of  the 
punishments  which  were  about  to  fall  upon 
them  at  the  tombs  of  the  martyrs.  For  in  many 
such  places  they  are  tortured  and  compelled  to 
confess,  and  are  cast  out  of  the  bodies  of  men, 
of  which  they  had  taken  possession. 

Chap.  27.  Concerning  the  nature  of  the  honour 

which  the  Christians  pay  to  their  martyrs 

But,  nevertheless,  we  do  not  build  temples, 
and  ordain  priests,  rites,  and  sacrifices  for  these 
same  martyrs;  for  they  are  not  our  gods,  but 
their  God  is  our  God.  Certainly  we  honour  their 
reliquaries,  as  the  memorials  of  holy  men  of 
God  who  strove  for  the  truth  even  to  the  death 
of  their  bodies,  that  the  true  religion  might  be 
made  known,  and  false  and  fictitious  religions 
exposed.  For  if  there  were  some  before  them 
who  thought  that  these  religions  were  really 
false  and  fictitious,  they  were  afraid  to  give  ex¬ 
pression  to  their  convictions.  But  who  ever 
heard  a  priest  of  the  faithful,  standing  at  an  al¬ 
tar  built  for  the  honour  and  worship  of  God  over 
the  holy  body  of  some  martyr,  say  in  the  pray¬ 
ers,  I  offer  to  thee  a  sacrifice,  0  Peter,  or  0  Paul, 
or  0  Cyprian?  for  it  is  to  God  that  sacrifices  are 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  VIII.  27,  IX.  1  285 


offered  at  their  tombs — the  God  Who  made  them 
both  men  and  martyrs,  and  associated  them  with 
holy  angels  in  celestial  honour;  and  the  reason 
that  we  pay  such  honours  to  their  memory  is 
that  by  so  doing  we  may  both  give  thanks  to  the 
true  God  for  their  victories,  and,  by  recalling 
them  afresh  to  remembrance,  may  stir  ourselves 
up  to  imitate  them  by  seeking  to  obtain  like 
crowns  and  palms,  calling  to  our  help  that  same 
God  on  whom  they  called.  Therefore,  whatever 
honours  the  religious  may  pay  in  the  places  of  the 
martyrs,  they  are  but  honours  rendered  to  their 
memory,  not  sacred  rites  or  sacrifices  offered  to 
dead  men  as  to  gods.  And  even  such  as  bring 
thither  food — which,  indeed,  is  not  done  by  the 
better  Christians,  and  in  most  places  of  the 
world  is  not  done  at  all — do  so  in  order  that  it 
may  be  sanctified  to  them  through  the  merits  of 
the  martyrs,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the 
martyrs,  first  presenting  the  food  and  offering 
prayer,  and  thereafter  taking  it  away  to  be  eat¬ 
en.  or  to  be  in  part  bestowed  upon  the  needy.1 
But  he  who  knows  the  one  sacrifice  of  Chris¬ 
tians,  which  is  the  sacrifice  offered  in  those 
places,  also  knows  that  these  are  not  sacrifices 
offered  to  the  martyrs.  It  is,  then,  neither  with 
divine  honours  nor  with  human  crimes,  by  which 
they  worship  their  gods,  that  we  honour  our 
martyrs;  neither  do  we  offer  sacrifices  to  them, 
or  convert  the  crimes  of  the  gods  into  their  sa¬ 
cred  rites.  For  let  those  who  will  and  can  read 
the  letter  of  Alexander  to  his  mother  Olympias, 
in  which  he  tells  the  things  which  were  revealed 
to  him  by  the  priest  Leon,  and  let  those  who 
have  read  it  recall  to  memory  what  it  contains, 
that  they  may  see  what  great  abominations  have 
been  handed  down  to  memory,  not  by  poets,  but 
by  the  mystic  writings  of  the  Egyptians,  con¬ 
cerning  the  goddess  Isis,  the  wife  of  Osiris,  and 
*Cf.  The  Confessions,  bk.  vi.  2. 


the  parents  of  both,  all  of  whom,  according  to 
these  writings,  were  royal  personages.  Isis,  when 
sacrificing  to  her  parents,  is  said  to  have  discov¬ 
ered  a  crop  of  barley,  of  which  she  brought  some 
ears  to  the  king  her  husband  and  his  councillor 
Mercurius,  and  hence  they  identify  her  with 
Ceres.  Those  who  read  the  letter  may  there  see 
what  was  the  character  of  those  people  to  whom 
when  dead  sacred  rites  were  instituted  as  to 
gods,  and  what  those  deeds  of  theirs  were  which 
furnished  the  occasion  for  these  rites.  Let  them 
not  once  dare  to  compare  in  any  respect  those 
people,  though  they  hold  them  to  be  gods,  to  our 
holy  martyrs,  though  we  do  not  hold  them  to  be 
gods.  For  we  do  not  ordain  priests  and  offer  sac¬ 
rifices  to  our  martyrs,  as  they  do  to  their  dead 
men,  for  that  would  be  incongruous,  undue,  and 
unlawful,  such  being  due  only  to  God;  and  thus 
we  do  not  delight  them  with  their  own  crimes,  or 
with  such  shameful  plays  as  those  in  which  the 
crimes  of  the  gods  are  celebrated,  which  are 
either  real  crimes  committed  by  them  at  a  time 
when  they  were  men,  or  else,  if  they  never  were 
men,  fictitious  crimes  invented  for  the  pleasure 
of  noxious  demons.  The  god  of  Socrates,  if  he  had 
a  god,  cannot  have  belonged  to  this  class  of  de¬ 
mons.  But  perhaps  they  who  wished  to  excel  in 
this  art  of  making  gods,  imposed  a  god  of  this 
sort  on  a  man  who  was  a  stranger  to,  and  inno¬ 
cent  of  any  connexion  with  that  art.  What  need 
we  say  more?  No  one  who  is  even  moderately 
wise  imagines  that  demons  are  to  be  worshipped 
on  account  of  the  blessed  life  which  is  to  be  after 
death.  But  perhaps  they  will  say  that  all  the 
gods  are  good,  but  that  of  the  demons  some  are 
bad  and  some  good,  and  that  it  is  the  good  who 
are  to  be  worshipped,  in  order  that  through 
them  we  may  attain  to  the  eternally  blessed 
life.  To  the  examination  of  this  opinion  we  will 
devote  the  following  book. 


BOOK  IX 

1 

ARGUMENT .  Having  in  the  preceding  book  shown  that  the  worship  of  de¬ 
mons  MUST  BE  ABJURED,  SINCE  THEY  IN  A  THOUSAND  WAYS  PROCLAIM  THEMSELVES 
TO  BE  WICKED  SPIRITS,  AUGUSTINE  IN  THIS  BOOK  MEETS  THOSE  WHO  ALLEGE  A  DIS¬ 
TINCTION  AMONG  DEMONS,  SOME  BEING  EVIL,  WHILE  OTHERS  ARE  GOOD;  AND,  HAVING 
EXPLODED  THIS  DISTINCTION,  HE  PROVES  THAT  TO  NO  DEMON,  BUT  TO  CHRIST  ALONE, 
BELONGS  THE  OFFICE  OF  PROVIDING  MEN  WITH  ETERNAL  BLESSEDNESS. 


Chap.  1.  The  point  at  which  the  discussion  has 
arrived ,  and  what  remains  to  be  handled 
Some  have  advanced  the  opinion  that  there  are 
both  good  and  bad  gods;  but  some,  thinking 


more  respectfully  of  the  gods,  have  attributed  to 
them  so  much  honour  and  praise  as  to  preclude 
the  supposition  of  any  god  being  wicked.  But 
those  who  have  maintained  that  there  are  wick¬ 
ed  gods  as  well  as  good  ones  have  included  the 


286  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


demons  under  the  name  “gods,”  and  sometimes, 
though  more  rarely,  have  called  the  gods  de¬ 
mons;  so  that  they  admit  that  Jupiter,  whom 
they  make  the  king  and  head  of  all  the  rest,  is 
called  a  demon  by  Homer.  Those,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  maintain  that  the  gods  are  all  good, 
and  far  more  excellent  than  the  men  who  are 
justly  called  good,  are  moved  by  the  actions  of 
the  demons,  which  they  can  neither  deny  nor 
impute  to  the  gods  whose  goodness  they  affirm, 
to  distinguish  between  gods  and  demons;  so 
that,  whenever  they  find  anything  offensive  in 
the  deeds  or  sentiments  by  which  unseen  spirits 
manifest  their  power,  they  believe  this  to  pro¬ 
ceed  not  from  the  gods,  but  from  the  demons. 
At  the  same  time  they  believe  that,  as  no  god 
can  hold  direct  intercourse  with  men,  these  de¬ 
mons  hold  the  position  of  mediators,  ascending 
with  prayers  and  returning  with  gifts.  This  is  the 
opinion  of  the  Platonists,  the  ablest  and  most 
esteemed  of  their  philosophers,  with  whom  we 
therefore  chose  to  debate  this  question — wheth¬ 
er  the  worship  of  a  number  of  gods  is  of  any 
service  towards  obtaining  blessedness  in  the"  fu¬ 
ture  life.  And  this  is  the  reason  why,  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  book,  we  have  inquired  how  the  demons, 
who  take  pleasure  in  such  things  as  good  and 
wise  men  loathe  and  execrate,  in  the  sacrilegious 
and  immoral  fictions  which  the  poets  have  writ¬ 
ten  not  of  men,  but  of  the  gods  themselves,  and 
in  the  wicked  and  criminal  violence  of  magical 
arts,  can  be  regarded  as  more  nearly  related  and 
more  friendly  to  the  gods  than  men  are,  and  can 
mediate  between  good  men  and  the  good  gods ; 
and  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  this  is  abso¬ 
lutely  impossible. 

Chap.  2.  Whether  among  the  demons,  inferior 
to  the  gods,  there  are  any  good  spirits  under 
whose  guardianship  the  human  soul  might 
reach  true  blessedness 

This  book,  then,  ought,  according  to  the 
promise  made  in  the  end  of  the  preceding  one, 
to  contain  a  discussion,  not  of  the  difference 
which  exists  among  the  gods,  who,  according  to 
the  Platonists,  are  all  good,  nor  of  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  gods  and  demons,  the  former  of 
whom  they  separate  by  a  wide  interval  from 
men,  while  the  latter  are  placed  intermediately 
between  the  gods  and  men,  but  of  the  difference, 
since  they  make  one,  among  the  demons  them¬ 
selves.  This  we  shall  discuss  so  far  as  it  bears  on 
our  theme.  It  has  been  the  common  and  usual 
belief  that  some  of  the  demons  are  bad.  others 
good;  and  this  opinion,  whether  it  be  that  of  the 
Platonists  or  any  other  sect,  must  by  no  means 


be  passed  over  in  silence,  lest  some  one  suppose 
he  ought  to  cultivate  the  good  demons  in  order 
that  by  their  mediation  he  may  be  accepted  by 
the  gods,  all  of  whom  he  believes  to  be  good,  and 
that  he  may  live  with  them  after  death;  whereas 
he  would  thus  be  ensnared  in  the  toils  of  wicked 
spirits,  and  would  wander  far  from  the  true 
God,  with  Whom  alone,  and  in  Whom  alone,  the 
human  soul,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  that  is  ra¬ 
tional  and  intellectual,  is  blessed. 

Chap.  3.  What  Apuleius  attributes  to  the  de¬ 
mons,  to  whom,  though  he  does  not  deny  them 
reason,  he  does  not  ascribe  virtue 
What,  then,  is  the  difference  between  good 
and  evil  demons?  For  the  Platonist  Apuleius,  in 
a  treatise  on  this  whole  subject,  while  he  says  a 
great  deal  about  their  aerial  bodies,  has  not  a 
word  to  say  of  the  spiritual  virtues  with  which, 
if  they  were  good,  they  must  have  been  en¬ 
dowed.  Not  a  word  has  he  said,  then,  of  that 
which  could  give  them  happiness;  but  proof  of 
their  misery  he  has  given,  acknowledging  that 
their  mind,  by  which  they  rank  as  reasonable  be¬ 
ings,  is  not  only  not  imbued  and  fortified  with 
virtue  so  as  to  resist  all  unreasonable  passions, 
but  that  it  is  somehow  agitated  with  tempestu¬ 
ous  emotions  and  is  thus  on  a  level  with  the 
mind  of  foolish  men.  His  own  words  are:  “It  is 
this  class  of  demons  the  poets  refer  to,  when, 
without  serious  error,  they  feign  that  the  gods 
hate  and  love  individuals  among  men,  prosper¬ 
ing  and  ennobling  some,  and  opposing  and  dis¬ 
tressing  others.  Therefore  pity,  indignation, 
grief,  joy,  every  human  emotion  is  experienced 
by  the  demons,  with  the  same  mental  disturb¬ 
ance,  and  the  same  tide  of  feeling  and  thought. 
These  turmoils  and  tempests  banish  them  far 
from  the  tranquility  of  the  celestial  gods.”  Can 
there  be  any  doubt  that  in  these  words  it  is  not 
some  inferior  part  of  their  spiritual  nature,  but 
the  very  mind  by  which  the  demons  hold  their 
rank  as  rational  beings,  which  he  says  is  tossed 
with  passion  like  a  stormy  sea?  They  cannot, 
then,  be  compared  even  to  wise  men,  who  with 
undisturbed  mind  resist  these  perturbations  to 
which  they  are  exposed  in  this  life,  and  from 
which  human  infirmity  is  never  exempt,  and 
who  do  not  yield  themselves  to  approve  of  or 
perpetrate  anything  which  might  deflect  them 
from  the  path  of  wisdom  and  law  of  rectitude. 
They  resemble  in  character,  though  not  in  bod¬ 
ily  appearance,  wicked  and  foolish  men.  I  might 
indeed  say  they  are  worse,  inasmuch  as  they 
have  grown  old  in  iniquity,  and  incorrigible  by 
punishment.  Their  mind,  as  Apuleius  says,  is  a 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IX.  2-4  287 


sea  tossed  with  tempest,  having  no  rallying 
point  of  truth  or  virtue  in  their  soul  from  which 
they  can  resist  their  turbulent  and  depraved 
emotions. 

Chap.  4.  The  opinion  of  the  Peripatetics  and 
Stoics  about  mental  emotions 
Among  the  philosophers  there  are  two  opin¬ 
ions  about  these  mental  emotions,  which  the 
Greeks  call  TradT),  while  some  of  our  own  writ¬ 
ers,  as  Cicero,  call  them  perturbations,  some  af¬ 
fections,  and  some,  to  render  the  Greek  word 
more  accurately,  passions.  Some  say  that  even 
the  wise  man  is  subject  to  these  perturbations, 
though  moderated  and  controlled  by  reason, 
which  imposes  laws  upon  them,  and  so  restrains 
them  within  necessary  bounds.  This  is  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  Platonists  and  Aristotelians;  for  Aris¬ 
totle  was  Plato’s  disciple,  and  the  founder  of  the 
Peripatetic  school.  But  others,  as  the  Stoics,  are 
of  opinion  that  the  wise  man  is  not  subject  to 
these  perturbations.  But  Cicero,  in  his  book  De 
Finibus ,  shows  that  the  Stoics  are  here  at  vari¬ 
ance  with  the  Platonists  and  Peripatetics  rather 
in  words  than  in  reality;  for  the  Stoics  decline 
to  apply  the  term  “goods”  to  external  and  bodily 
advantages,  because  they  reckon  that  the  only 
good  is  virtue,  the  art  of  living  well,  and  this  ex¬ 
ists  only  in  the  mind.  The  other  philosophers, 
again,  use  the  simple  and  customary  phraseol¬ 
ogy,  and  do  not  scruple  to  call  these  things 
goods,  though  in  comparison  of  virtue,  which 
guides  our  life,  they  are  little  and  of  small  es¬ 
teem.  And  thus  it  is  obvious  that,  whether  these 
outward  things  are  called  goods  or  advantages, 
they  are  held  in  the  same  estimation  by  both 
parties  and  that  in  this  matter  the  Stoics  are 
pleasing  themselves  merely  with  a  novel  phrase¬ 
ology.  It  seems,  then,  to  me  that  in  this  ques¬ 
tion,  whether  the  wise  man  is  subject  to  mental 
passions,  or  wholly  free  from  them,  the  contro¬ 
versy  is  one  of  words  rather  than  of  things;  for 
I  think  that,  if  the  reality  and  not  the  mere 
sound  of  the  words  is  considered,  the  Stoics  hold 
precisely  the  same  opinion  as  the  Platonists  and 
Peripatetics.  For,  omitting  for  brevity’s  sake 
other  proofs  which  I  might  adduce  in  support  of 
this  opinion,  I  will  state  but  one  which  I  consid¬ 
er  conclusive.  Aulus  Gellius,  a  man  of  extensive 
erudition,  and  gifted  with  an  eloquent  and  grace¬ 
ful  style,  relates,  in  his  work  entitled  Nodes  At¬ 
tica  that  he  once  made  a  voyage  with  an  emi¬ 
nent  Stoic  philosopher;  and  he  goes  on  to  relate 
fully  and  with  gusto  what  I  shall  barely  state, 
that  when  the  ship  was  tossed  and  in  danger 
from  a  violent  storm,  the  philosopher  grew  pale 


with  terror.  This  was  noticed  by  those  on  board, 
who,  though  themselves  threatened  with  death, 
were  curious  to  see  whether  a  philosopher  would 
be  agitated  like  other  men.  When  the  tempest 
had  passed  over,  and  as  soon  as  their  security 
gave  them  freedom  to  resume  their  talk,  one  of 
the  passengers,  a  rich  and  luxurious  Asiatic,  be¬ 
gins  to  banter  the  philosopher,  and  rally  him  be¬ 
cause  he  had  even  become  pale  with  fear,  while 
he  himself  had  been  unmoved  by  the  impending 
destruction.  But  the  philosopher  availed  him¬ 
self  of  the  reply  of  Aristippus  the  Socratic,  who. 
on  finding  himself  similarly  bantered  by  a  man 
of  the  same  character,  answered,  “You  had  no 
cause  for  anxiety  for  the  soul  of  a  profligate  de¬ 
bauchee,  but  I  had  reason  to  be  alarmed  for  the 
soul  of  Aristippus.”  The  rich  man  being  thus 
disposed  of,  Aulus  Gellius  asked  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  in  the  interests  of  science  and  not  to  an¬ 
noy  him,  what  was  the  reason  of  his  fear?  And 
he  willing  to  instruct  a  man  so  zealous  in  the 
pursuit  of  knowledge,  at  once  took  from  his  wal¬ 
let  a  book  of  Epictetus  the  Stoic,  in  which  doc¬ 
trines  were  advanced  which  precisely  harmo¬ 
nized  with  those  of  Zeno  and  Chrysippus,  the 
founders  of  the  Stoical  school.  Aulus  Gellius 
says  that  he  read  in  this  book  that  the  Stoics 
maintain  that  there  are  certain  impressions 
made  on  the  soul  by  external  objects  which  they 
call  phantasice ,  and  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of 
the  soul  to  determine  whether  or  when  it  shall 
be  invaded  by  these.  When  these  impressions  are 
made  by  alarming  and  formidable  objects,  it 
must  needs  be  that  they  move  the  soul  even  of 
the  wise  man,  so  that  for  a  little  he  trembles 
with  fear,  or  is  depressed  by  sadness,  these  im¬ 
pressions  anticipating  the  work  of  reason  and 
self-control;  but  this  does  not  imply  that  the 
mind  accepts  these  evil  impressions,  or  approves 
or  consents  to  them.  For  this  consent  is,  they 
think,  in  a  man’s  power;  there  being  this  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  mind  of  the  wise  man  and  that 
of  the  fool,  that  the  fool’s  mind  yields  to  these 
passions  and  consents  to  them,  while  that  of  the 
wise  man,  though  it  cannot  help  being  invaded 
by  them,  yet  retains  with  unshaken  firmness  a 
true  and  steady  persuasion  of  those  things  which 
it  ought  rationally  to  desire  or  avoid.  This  ac¬ 
count  of  what  Aulus  Gellius  relates  that  he  read 
in  the  book  of  Epictetus  about  the  sentiments 
and  doctrines  of  the  Stoics  I  have  given  as  well 
as  I  could,  not,  perhaps,  with  his  choice  lan¬ 
guage.  but  with  greater  brevity,  and.  I  think, 
with  greater  clearness.  And  if  this  be  true,  then 
there  is  no  difference,  or  next  to  none,  between 
the  opinion  of  the  Stoics  and  that  of  the  other 


288  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


philosophers  regarding  mental  passions  and  per¬ 
turbations,  for  both  parties  agree  in  maintaining 
that  the  mind  and  reason  of  the  wise  man  are 
not  subject  to  these.  And  perhaps  what  the  Sto¬ 
ics  mean  by  asserting  this  is  that  the  wisdom 
which  characterizes  the  wise  man  is  clouded  by 
no  error  and  sullied  by  no  taint,  but,  with  this 
reservation  that  his  wisdom  remains  undis¬ 
turbed,  he  is  exposed  to  the  impressions  which 
the  goods  and  ills  of  this  life  (or,  as  they  prefer 
to  call  them,  the  advantages  or  disadvantages) 
make  upon  them.  For  we  need  not  say  that  if 
that  philosopher  had  thought  nothing  of  those 
things  which  he  thought  he  was  forthwith  to 
lose,  life  and  bodily  safety,  he  would  not  have 
been  so  terrified  by  his  danger  as  to  betray  his 
fear  by  the  pallor  of  his  cheek.  Nevertheless,  he 
might  suffer  this  mental  disturbance,  and  yet 
maintain  the  fixed  persuasion  that  life  and  bod¬ 
ily  safety,  which  the  violence  of  the  tempest 
threatened  to  destroy,  are  not  those  good  things 
which  make  their  possessors  good,  as  the  pos¬ 
session  of  righteousness  does.  But  in  so  far  as 
they  persist  that  we  must  call  them  not  goods 
but  advantages,  they  quarrel  about  words  and 
neglect  things.  For  what  difference  does  it  make 
whether  goods  or  advantages  be  the  better  name, 
while  the  Stoic  no  less  than  the  Peripatetic  is 
alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  losing  them,  and 
while,  though  they  name  them  differently,  they 
hold  them  in  like  esteem?  Both  parties  assure  us 
that,  if  urged  to  the  commission  of  some  im¬ 
morality  or  crime  by  the  threatened  loss  of  these 
goods  or  advantages,  they  would  prefer  to  lose 
such  things  as  preserve  bodily  comfort  and  se¬ 
curity  rather  than  commit  such  things  as  violate 
righteousness.  And  thus  the  mind  in  which  this 
resolution  is  well  grounded  suffers  no  pertur¬ 
bations  to  prevail  with  it  in  opposition  to  rea¬ 
son,  even  though  they  assail  the  weaker  parts 
of  the  soul;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  rules  over 
them,  and,  while  it  refuses  its  consent  and  re¬ 
sists  them,  administers  a  reign  of  virtue.  Such  a 
character  is  ascribed  to  Tineas  by  Virgil  when 
he  says, 

He  stands  immovable  by  tears , 

Nor  tenderest  words  with  pity  heard.1 

Chap.  5.  That  the  passions  which  assail  the 
souls  of  Christians  do  not  seduce  them  to  vice, 
but  exercise  their  virtue 
We  need  not  at  present  give  a  careful  and  co¬ 
pious  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  Scripture,  the 
sum  of  Christian  knowledge,  regarding  these 
passions.  It  subjects  the  mind  itself  to  God,  that 

xALneid,  bk.  iv.  449. 


He  may  rule  and  aid  it,  and  the  passions,  again, 
to  the  mind,  to  moderate  and  bridle  them,  and 
turn  them  to  righteous  uses.  In  our  ethics,  we  do 
not  so  much  inquire  whether  a  pious  soul  is  an¬ 
gry,  as  why  he  is  angry;  not  whether  he  is  sad, 
but  what  is  the  cause  of  his  sadness ;  not  wheth¬ 
er  he  fears,  but  what  he  fears.  For  I  am  not 
aware  that  any  right  thinking  person  would  find 
fault  with  anger  at  a  wrongdoer  which  seeks  his 
amendment,  or  with  sadness  which  intends  relief 
to  the  suffering,  or  with  fear  lest  one  in  danger 
be  destroyed.  The  Stoics,  indeed,  are  accus¬ 
tomed  to  condemn  compassion.  But  how  much 
more  honourable  had  it  been  in  that  Stoic  we 
have  been  telling  of  had  he  been  disturbed  by 
compassion  prompting  him  to  relieve  a  fellow- 
creature  than  to  be  disturbed  by  the  fear  of 
shipwreck!  Far  better,  and  more  humane,  and 
more  consonant  with  pious  sentiments,  are  the 
words  of  Cicero  in  praise  of  Caesar,  when  he 
says,  “Among  your  virtues  none  is  more  admir¬ 
able  and  agreeable  than  your  compassion.”  And 
what  is  compassion  but  a  fellow-feeling  for  an¬ 
other’s  misery,  which  prompts  us  to  help  him  if 
we  can?  And  this  emotion  is  obedient  to  reason, 
when  compassion  is  shown  without  violating 
right,  as  when  the  poor  are  relieved,  or  the  peni¬ 
tent  forgiven.  Cicero,  who  knew  how  to  use  lan¬ 
guage,  did  not  hesitate  to  call  this  a  virtue, 
which  the  Stoics  are  not  ashamed  to  reckon 
among  the  vices,  although,  as  the  book  of  the 
eminent  Stoic,  Epictetus,  quoting  the  opinions 
of  Zeno  and  Chrysippus,  the  founders  of  the 
school,  has  taught  us,  they  admit  that  passions 
of  this  kind  invade  the  soul  of  the  wise  man, 
whom  they  would  have  to  be  free  from  all  vice. 
Whence  it  follows  that  these  very  passions  are 
not  judged  by  them  to  be  vices,  since  they  assail 
the  wise  man  without  forcing  him  to  act  against 
reason  and  virtue;  and  that,  therefore,  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  Peripatetics  or  Platonists  and  of  the 
Stoics  is  one  and  the  same.  But,  as  Cicero  says, 
mere  logomachy  is  the  bane  of  these  pitiful 
Greeks,  who  thirst  for  contention  rather  than 
for  truth.  However,  it  may  justly  be  asked, 
whether  our  subjection  to  these  affections,  even 
while  we  follow  virtue,  is  a  part  of  the  infinity 
of  this  life?  For  the  holy  angels  feel  no  anger 
while  they  punish  those  whom  the  eternal  law 
of  God  consigns  to  punishment,  no  fellow-feel¬ 
ing  with  misery  while  they  relieve  the  miserable, 
no  fear  while  they  aid  those  who  are  in  danger; 
and  yet  ordinary  language  ascribes  to  them  also 
these  mental  emotions,  because,  though  they 
have  none  of  our  weakness,  their  acts  resemble 
the  actions  to  which  these  emotions  move  us; 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IX.  5-8  289 


and  thus  even  God  Himself  is  said  in  Scripture 
to  be  angry,  and  yet  without  any  perturba¬ 
tion.  For  this  word  is  used  of  the  effect  of  His 
vengeance,  not  of  the  disturbing  mental  affec¬ 
tion. 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  passions  which ,  according  to 
Apideins,  agitate  the  demons  who  are  sup¬ 
posed  by  him  to  mediate  between  gods  and 
men 

Deferring  for  the  present  the  question  about 
the  holy  angels,  let  us  examine  the  opinion  of 
the  Platonists  that  the  demons  who  mediate  be¬ 
tween  gods  and  men  are  agitated  by  passions. 
For  if  their  mind,  though  exposed  to  their  in¬ 
cursion,  still  remained  free  and  superior  to  them, 
Apuleius  could  not  have  said  that  their  hearts 
are  tossed  with  passions  as  the  sea  by  stormy 
winds.  Their  mind,  then — that  superior  part  of 
their  soul  whereby  they  are  rational  beings,  and 
which,  if  it  actually  exists  in  them,  should  rule 
and  bridle  the  turbulent  passions  of  the  inferior 
parts  of  the  soul — this  mind  of  theirs,  I  say,  is, 
according  to  the  Platonist  referred  to,  tossed 
with  a  hurricane  of  passions.  The  mind  of  the 
demons,  therefore,  is  subject  to  the  emotions  of 
fear,  anger,  lust,  and  all  similar  affections.  What 
part  of  them,  then,  is  free,  and  endued  with  wis¬ 
dom,  so  that  they  are  pleasing  to  the  gods,  and 
the  fit  guides  of  men  into  purity  of  life,  since 
their  very  highest  part,  being  the  slave  of  pas¬ 
sion  and  subject  to  vice,  only  makes  them  more 
intent  on  deceiving  and  seducing,  in  proportion 
to  the  mental  force  and  energy  of  desire  they 
possess? 

Chap.  7.  That  the  Platonists  maintain  that  the 
poets  wrong  the  gods  by  represe?iting  them  as 
distracted  by  party  feeling ,  to  which  the  de¬ 
mons  and  not  the  gods  are  subject 
But  if  any  one  says  that  it  is  not  of  all  the  de¬ 
mons,  but  only  of  the  wicked,  that  the  poets,  not 
without  truth,  say  that  they  violently  love  or 
hate  certain  men — for  it  was  of  them  Apuleius 
said  thaf  they  were  driven  about  by  strong  cur¬ 
rents  of  emotion — how  can  we  accept  this  inter¬ 
pretation,  when  Apuleius,  in  the  very  same  con¬ 
nexion,  represents  all  the  demons,  and  not  only 
the  wicked,  as  intermediate  between  gods  and 
men  by  their  aerial  bodies?  The  fiction  of  the 
poets,  according  to  him,  consists  in  their  making 
gods  of  demons,  and  giving  them  the  names  of 
gods,  and  assigning  them  as  allies  or  enemies  to 
individual  men,  using  this  poetical  licence, 
though  they  profess  that  the  gods  are  very  dif¬ 
ferent  in  character  from  the  demons,  and  far 


exalted  above  them  by  their  celestial  abode  and 
wealth  of  beatitude.  This,  I  say,  is  the  poets’  fic¬ 
tion,  to  say  that  these  are  gods  who  are  not  gods 
and  that,  under  the  names  of  gods,  they  fight 
among  themselves  about  the  men  whom  they 
love  or  hate  with  keen  partisan  feeling.  Apuleius 
says  that  this  is  not  far  from  the  truth,  since, 
though  they  are  wrongfully  called  by  the  names 
of  the  gods,  they  are  described  in  their  own 
proper  character  as  demons.  To  this  category, 
he  says,  belongs  the  Minerva  of  Homer,  “who 
interposed  in  the  ranks  of  the  Greeks  to  restrain 
Achilles.”  For  that  this  was  Minerva  he  sup¬ 
poses  to  be  poetical  fiction;  for  he  thinks  that 
Minerva  is  a  goddess,  and  he  places  her 
among  the  gods  whom  he  believes  to  be  all  good 
and  blessed  in  the  sublime  ethereal  region,  re¬ 
mote  from  intercourse  with  men.  But  that  there 
was  a  demon  favourable  to  the  Greeks  and  ad¬ 
verse  to  the  Trojans,  as  another,  whom  the  same 
poet  mentions  under  the  name  of  Venus  or  Mars 
(gods  exalted  above  earthly  affairs  in  their  heav¬ 
enly  habitations),  was  the  Trojans’  ally  and  the 
foe  of  the  Greeks,  and  that  these  demons  fought 
for  those  they  loved  against  those  they  hated — 
in  all  this  he  owned  that  the  poets  stated  some¬ 
thing  very  like  the  truth.  For  they  made  these 
statements  about  beings  to  whom  he  ascribes 
the  same  violent  and  tempestuous  passions  as 
disturb  men,  and  who  are  therefore  capable  of 
loves  and  hatreds  not  justly  formed,  but  formed 
in  a  party  spirit,  as  the  spectators  in  races  or 
hunts  take  fancies  and  prejudices.  It  seems  to 
have  been  the  great  fear  of  this  Platonist  that 
the  poetical  fictions  should  be  believed  of  the 
gods,  and  not  of  the  demons  who  bore  their 
names. 

Chap.  8.  How  Apuleius  defines  the  gods  who 
dwell  in  heaven ,  the  demons  who  occupy  the 
air,  and  men  who  inhabit  earth 
The  definition  which  Apuleius  gives  of  de¬ 
mons,  and  in  which  he  of  course  includes  all  de¬ 
mons,  is  that  they  are  in  nature  animals,  in  soul 
subject  to  passion,  in  mind  reasonable,  in  body 
aerial,  in  duration  eternal.  Now  in  these  five 
qualities  he  has  named  absolutely  nothing  which 
is  proper  to  good  men  and  not  also  to  bad.  For 
when  Apuleius  had  spoken  of  the  celestials  first, 
and  had  then  extended  his  description  so  as  to 
include  an  account  of  those  who  dwell  far  below 
on  the  earth,  that,  after  describing  the  two  ex¬ 
tremes  of  rational  being,  he  might  proceed  to 
speak  of  the  intermediate  demons,  he  says, 
“Men,  therefore,  who  are  endowed  with  the 
faculty  of  reason  and  speech,  whose  soul  is  im- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


mortal  and  their  members  mortal,  who  have 
weak  and  anxious  spirits,  dull  and  corruptible 
bodies,  dissimilar  characters,  similar  ignorance, 
who  are  obstinate  in  their  audacity  and  persist¬ 
ent  in  their  hope,  whose  labour  is  vain,  and 
whose  fortune  is  ever  on  the  wane,  their  race  im¬ 
mortal,  themselves  perishing,  each  generation  re¬ 
plenished  with  creatures  whose  life  is  swift  and 
their  wisdom  slow,  their  death  sudden  and  their 
life  a  wail — these  are  the  men  who  dwell  on  the 
earth.”  In  recounting  so  many  qualities  which 
belong  to  the  large  proportion  of  men,  did  he 
forget  that  which  is  the  property  of  the  few 
when  he  speaks  of  their  wisdom  being  slow?  If 
this  had  been  omitted,  this  his  description  of 
the  human  race,  so  carefully  elaborated,  would 
have  been  defective.  And  w7hen  he  commended 
the  excellence  of  the  gods,  he  affirmed  that  they 
excelled  in  that  very  blessedness  to  which  he 
thinks  men  must  attain  by  wisdom.  And  there¬ 
fore,  if  he  had  wished  us  to  believe  that  some  of 
the  demons  are  good,  he  should  have  inserted  in 
his  description  something  by  which  we  might 
see  that  they  have,  in  common  with  the  gads, 
some  share  of  blessedness,  or,  in  common  with 
men,  some  wisdom.  But,  as  it  is,  he  has  men¬ 
tioned  no  good  quality  by  which  the  good  may 
be  distinguished  from  the  bad.  For  although  he 
refrained  from  giving  a  full  account  of  their 
wickedness,  through  fear  of  offending,  not  them¬ 
selves  but  their  worshippers,  for  whom  he  was 
writing,  yet  he  sufficiently  indicated  to  discern¬ 
ing  readers  what  opinion  he  had  of  them;  for 
only  in  the  one  article  of  the  eternity  of  their 
bodies  does  he  assimilate  them  to  the  gods,  all 
of  whom,  he  asserts,  are  good  and  blessed,  and 
absolutely  free  from  what  he  himself  calls  the 
stormy  passions  of  the  demons;  and  as  to  the 
soul,  he  quite  plainly  affirms  that  they  resemble 
men  and  not  the  gods,  and  that  this  resemblance 
lies  not  in  the  possession  of  wisdom,  which  even 
men  can  attain  to,  but  in  the  perturbation  of 
passions  which  sway  the  foolish  and  wicked,  but 
is  so  ruled  by  the  good  and  wise  that  they  prefer 
not  to  admit  rather  than  to  conquer  it.  For  if  he 
had  wished  it  to  be  understood  that  the  demons 
resembled  the  gods  in  the  eternity  not  of  their 
bodies  but  of  their  souls,  he  would  certainly 
have  admitted  men  to  share  in  this  privilege,  be¬ 
cause,  as  a  Platonist,  he  of  course  must  hold 
that  the  human  soul  is  eternal.  Accordingly, 
when  describing  this  race  of  living  beings,  he 
said  that  their  souls  were  immortal,  their  mem¬ 
bers  mortal.  And,  consequently,  if  men  have  not 
eternity  in  common  with  the  gods  because  they 
have  mortal  bodies,  demons  have  eternity  in 


common  with  the  gods  because  their  bodies  are 
immortal. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  the  intercession  of  the  de¬ 
mons  can  secure  for  men  the  friendship  of  the 
celestial  gods 

How,  then,  can  men  hope  for  a  favourable 
introduction  to  the  friendship  of  the  gods  by 
such  mediators  as  these,  who  are,  like  men,  de¬ 
fective  in  that  which  is  the  better  part  of  every 
living  creature,  viz.,  the  soul,  and  who  resemble 
the  gods  only  in  the  body,  which  is  the  inferior 
part?  For  a  living  creature  or  animal  consists  of 
soul  and  body,  and  of  these  two  parts  the  soul  is 
undoubtedly  the  better;  even  though  vicious 
and  weak,  it  is  obviously  better  than  even  the 
soundest  and  strongest  body,  for  the  greater  ex¬ 
cellence  of  its  nature  is  not  reduced  to  the  level 
of  the  body  even  by  the  pollution  of  vice,  as 
gold,  even  when  tarnished,  is  more  precious 
than  the  purest  silver  or  lead.  And  yet  these 
mediators,  by  whose  interposition  things  human 
and  divine  are  to  be  harmonized,  have  an  eter¬ 
nal  body  in  common  with  the  gods  and  a  vicious 
soul  in  common  with  men — as  if  the  religion  by 
which  these  demons  are  to  unite  gods  and  men 
were  a  bodily,  and  not  a  spiritual  matter.  What 
wickedness,  then,  or  punishment  has  suspended 
these  false  and  deceitful  mediators,  as  it  were 
head  downwards,  so  that  their  inferior  part, 
their  body,  is  linked  to  the  gods  above,  and  their 
superior  part,  the  soul,  bound  to  men  beneath; 
united  to  the  celestial  gods  by  the  part  that 
serves,  and  miserable,  together  with  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  earth,  by  the  part  that  rules?  For  the 
body  is  the  servant,  as  Sallust  says :  “We  use  the 
soul  to  rule,  the  body  to  obey”;  adding,  “the 
one  we  have  in  common  with  the  gods,  the  other 
with  the  brutes.”  For  he  was  here  speaking  of 
men;  and  they  have,  like  the  brutes,  a  mortal 
body.  These  demons,  whom  our  philosophic 
friends  have  provided  for  us  as  mediators  with 
the  gods,  may  indeed  say  of  the  soul  and  body, 
the  one  we  have  in  common  with  the  gods,  the 
other  with  men;  but,  as  I  said,  they  are  as  it 
were  suspended  and  bound  head  downwards, 
having  the  slave,  the  body,  in  common  with  the 
gods,  the  master,  the  soul,  in  common  with  mis¬ 
erable  men — their  inferior  part  exalted,  their 
superior  part  depressed.  And  therefore,  if  any 
one  supposes  that,  because  they  are  not  subject, 
like  terrestrial  animals,  to  the  separation  of  soul 
and  body  by  death,  they  therefore  resemble  the 
gods  in  their  eternity,  their  body  must  not  be 
considered  a  chariot  of  an  eternal  triumph,  but 
rather  the  chain  of  an  eternal  punishment. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IX.  9-13 


291 


Chap.  10.  That ,  according  to  Plotinus ,  men, 

whose  body  is  mortal,  are  less  wretched  than 

demons,  whose  body  is  eternal 

Plotinus,  whose  memory  is  quite  recent,  en¬ 
joys  the  reputation  of  having  understood  Plato 
better  than  any  other  of  his  disciples.  In  speak¬ 
ing  of  human  souls,  he  says,  “The  Father  in 
compassion  made  their  bonds  mortar’;1  that  is 
to  say.  he  considered  it  due  to  the  Father’s 
mercy  that  men,  having  a  mortal  body,  should 
not  be  forever  confined  in  the  misery  of  this 
life.  But  of  this  mercy  the  demons  have  been 
judged  unworthy,  and  they  have  received,  in 
conjunction  with  a  soul  subject  to  passions,  a 
body  not  mortal  like  man’s,  but  eternal.  For 
they  should  have  been  happier  than  men  if  they 
had,  like  men,  had  a  mortal  body,  and,  like  the 
gods,  a  blessed  soul.  And  they  should  have  been 
equal  to  men.  if  in  conjunction  w7ith  a  miserable 
soul  they  had  at  least  received,  like  men,  a  mor¬ 
tal  body,  so  that  death  might  have  freed  them 
from  trouble,  if,  at  least,  they  should  have  at¬ 
tained  some  degree  of  piety.  But,  as  it  is,  they 
are  not  only  no  happier  than  men,  having,  like 
them,  a  miserable  soul,  they  are  also  more 
wretched,  being  eternally  bound  to  the  body; 
for  he  does  not  leave  us  to  infer  that  by  some 
progress  in  wisdom  and  piety  they  can  become 
gods,  but  expressly  says  that  they  are  demons 
forever. 

Chap.  ii.  Of  the  opinion  of  the  Platonists,  that 

the  souls  of  men  become  demons  when  disem¬ 
bodied 

He2  says,  indeed,  that  the  souls  of  men  are 
demons,  and  that  men  become  Lares  if  they 
are  good,  Lemures  or  Larvce  if  they  are  bad, 
and  Manes  if  it  is  uncertain  whether  they  de¬ 
serve  well  or  ill.  Who  does  not  see  at  a  glance 
that  this  is  a  mere  whirlpool  sucking  men  to 
moral  destruction?  For,  however  wicked  men 
have  been,  if  they  suppose  they  shall  become 
Larvae  or  divine  Manes,  they  will  become  the 
worse  t?he  more  love  they  have  for  inflicting  in¬ 
jury;  for,  as  the  Larvae  are  hurtful  demons 
made  out  of  wicked  men,  these  men  must  sup¬ 
pose  that  after  death  they  will  be  invoked 
with  sacrifices  and  divine  honours  that  they 
may  inflict  injuries.  But  this  question  we  must 
not  pursue.  He  also  states  that  the  blessed  are 
called  in  Greek  evda ijjioves,  because  they  are 
good  souls,  that  is  to  say,  good  demons,  con¬ 
firming  his  opinion  that  the  souls  of  men  are 
demons. 

1Enneads,  iv.  3.  12.  2Apuleius,  not  Plotinus. 


Chap.  12.  Of  the  three  opposite  qualities  by 
which  the  Platonists  distinguish  between  the 
nature  of  men  and  that  of  demons 

But  at  present  we  are  speaking  of  those  be¬ 
ings  whom  he  described  as  being  properly  inter¬ 
mediate  between  gods  and  men,  in  nature  ani¬ 
mals,  in  mind  rational,  in  soul  subject  to  passion, 
in  body  aerial,  in  duration  eternal.  When  he  had 
distinguished  the  gods,  whom  he  placed  in  the 
highest  heaven,  from  men,  whom  he  placed  on 
earth,  not  only  by  position  but  also  by  the  un¬ 
equal  dignity  of  their  natures,  he  concluded  in 
these  words:  “You  have  here  two  kinds  of  ani¬ 
mals:  the  gods,  widely  distinguished  from  men 
by  sublimity  of  abode,  perpetuity  of  life,  perfec¬ 
tion  of  nature;  for  their  habitations  are  sepa¬ 
rated  by  so  wide  an  interval  that  there  can  be 
no  intimate  communication  between  them,  and 
while  the  vitality  of  the  one  is  eternal  and  inde¬ 
feasible,  that  of  the  others  is  fading  and  precari¬ 
ous,  and  while  the  spirits  of  the  gods  are  exalted 
in  bliss,  those  of  men  are  sunk  in  miseries.” 
Here  I  find  three  opposite  qualities  ascribed  to 
the  extremes  of  being,  the  highest  and  lowest. 
For,  after  mentioning  the  three  qualities  for 
which  we  are  to  admire  the  gods,  he  repeated, 
though  in  other  words,  the  same  three  as  a  foil 
to  the  defects  of  man.  The  three  qualities  are, 
“sublimity  of  abode,  perpetuity  of  life,  perfec¬ 
tion  of  nature.”  These  he  again  mentioned  so  as 
to  bring  out  their  contrasts  in  man’s  condition. 
As  he  had  mentioned  “sublimity  of  abode,”  he 
says,  “Their  habitations  are  separated  by  so 
wide  an  interval”;  as  he  had  mentioned  “per¬ 
petuity  of  life,”  he  says,  that  “while  divine  life 
is  eternal  and  indefeasible,  human  life  is  fading 
and  precarious”;  and  as  he  had  mentioned  “per¬ 
fection  of  nature,”  he  says,  that  “while  the  spir¬ 
its  of  the  gods  are  exalted  in  bliss,  those  of  men 
are  sunk  in  miseries.”  These  three  things,  then, 
he  predicates  of  the  gods,  exaltation,  eternity, 
blessedness;  and  of  man  he  predicates  the  oppo¬ 
site,  lowliness  of  habitation,  mortality,  misery. 

Chap.  13.  How  the  demons  can  mediate  be¬ 
tween  gods  and  men  if  they  have  nothing  in 
common  with  both,  being  neither  blessed  like 
the  gods,  nor  miserable  like  men 
If,  now,  we  endeavour  to  find  between  these 
opposites  the  mean  occupied  by  the  demons, 
there  can  be  no  question  as  to  their  local  posi¬ 
tion  ;  for,  between  the  highest  and  lowest  place, 
there  is  a  place  which  is  rightly  considered  and 
called  the  middle  place.  The  other  two  qualities 
remain,  and  to  them  we  must  give  greater  care, 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


that  we  may  see  whether  they  are  altogether 
foreign  to  the  demons,  or  how  they  are  so  be¬ 
stowed  upon  them  without  infringing  upon  their 
mediate  position.  We  may  dismiss  the  idea  that 
they  are  foreign  to  them.  For  we  cannot  say  that 
the  demons,  being  rational  animals,  are  neither 
blessed  nor  wretched,  as  we  say  of  the  beasts 
and  plants,  which  are  void  of  feeling  and  reason, 
or  as  we  say  of  the  middle  place,  that  it  is  nei¬ 
ther  the  highest  nor  the  lowest.  The  demons,  be¬ 
ing  rational,  must  be  either  miserable  or  blessed. 
And.  in  like  manner,  we  cannot  say  that  they  are 
neither  mortal  nor  immortal;  for  all  living 
things  either  live  eternally  or  end  life  in  death. 
Our  author,  besides,  stated  that  the  demons  are 
eternal.  What  remains  for  us  to  suppose,  then, 
but  that  these  mediate  beings  are  assimilated  to 
the  gods  in  one  of  the  two  remaining  qualities, 
and  to  men  in  the  other?  For  if  they  received 
both  from  above,  or  both  from  beneath,  they 
should  no  longer  be  mediate,  but  either  rise  to 
the  gods  above,  or  sink  to  men  beneath.  There¬ 
fore,  as  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  they  must 
possess  these  two  qualities,  they  will  hold  their 
middle  place  if  they  receive  one  from  each  par¬ 
ty.  Consequently,  as  they  cannot  receive  their 
eternity  from  beneath,  because  it  is  not  there  to 
receive,  they  must  get  it  from  above ;  and  accord¬ 
ingly  they  have  no  choice  but  to  complete  their 
mediate  position  by  accepting  misery  from  men. 

According  to  the  Platonists,  then,  the  gods, 
who  occupy  the  highest  place,  enjoy  eternal 
blessedness,  or  blessed  eternity;  men,  who  oc¬ 
cupy  the  lowest,  a  mortal  misery,  or  a  miserable 
mortality;  and  the  demons,  who  occupy  the 
mean,  a  miserable  eternity,  or  an  eternal  misery. 
As  to  those  five  things  which  Apuleius  included 
in  his  definition  of  demons,  he  did  not  show,  as 
he  promised,  that  the  demons  are  mediate.  For 
three  of  them,  that  their  nature  is  animal,  their 
mind  rational,  their  soul  subject  to  passions,  he 
said  that  they  have  in  common  with  men;  one 
thing,  their  eternity,  in  common  with  the  gods; 
and  one  proper  to  themselves,  their  aerial  body. 
How,  then,  are  they  intermediate,  when  they 
have  three  things  in  common  with  the  lowest, 
and  only  one  in  common  with  the  highest?  Who 
does  not  see  that  the  intermediate  position  is 
abandoned  in  proportion  as  they  tend  to,  and 
are  depressed  towards,  the  lowest  extreme?  But 
perhaps  we  are  to  accept  them  as  intermediate 
because  of  their  one  property  of  an  aerial  body, 
as  the  two  extremes  have  each  their  proper 
body,  the  gods  an  ethereal,  men  a  terrestrial 
body,  and  because  two  of  the  qualities  they  pos¬ 
sess  in  common  with  man  they  possess  also  in 


common  with  the  gods,  namely,  their  animal 
nature  and  rational  mind.  For  Apuleius  himself, 
in  speaking  of  gods  and  men,  said,  “You  have 
two  animal  natures.”  And  Platonists  are  wont  to 
ascribe  a  rational  mind  to  the  gods.  Two  quali¬ 
ties  remain,  their  liability  to  passion,  and  their 
eternity — the  first  of  which  they  have  in  com¬ 
mon  with  men.  the  second  with  the  gods;  so  that 
they  are  neither  wafted  to  the  highest  nor  de¬ 
pressed  to  the  lowest  extreme,  but  perfectly 
poised  in  their  intermediate  position.  But  then, 
this  is  the  very  circumstance  which  constitutes 
the  eternal  misery,  or  miserable  eternity,  of  the 
demons.  For  he  who  says  that  their  soul  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  passions  would  also  have  said  that  they 
are  miserable,  had  he  not  blushed  for  their  wor¬ 
shippers.  Moreover,  as  the  world  is  governed, 
not  by  fortuitous  haphazard,  but,  as  the  Pla¬ 
tonists  themselves  avow,  by  the  providence  of 
the  supreme  God,  the  misery  of  the  demons 
would  not  be  eternal  unless  their  wickedness 
were  great. 

If,  then,  the  blessed  are  rightly  styled  eude- 
mons,  the  demons  intermediate  between  gods 
and  men  are  not  eudemons.  What,  then,  is  the 
local  position  of  those  good  demons,  who,  above 
men  but  beneath  the  gods,  afford  assistance  to 
the  former,  minister  to  the  latter?  For  if  they 
are  good  and  eternal,  they  are  doubtless  blessed. 
But  eternal  blessedness  destroys  their  interme¬ 
diate  character,  giving  them  a  close  resemblance 
to  the  gods  and  widely  separating  them  from 
men.  And  therefore  the  Platonists  will  in  vain 
strive  to  show  how  the  good  demons,  if  they  are 
both  immortal  and  blessed,  can  justly  be  said  to 
hold  a  middle  place  between  the  gods,  who  are 
immortal  and  blessed,  and  men.  who  are  mortal 
and  miserable.  For  if  they  have  both  immortal¬ 
ity  and  blessedness  in  common  with  the  gods, 
and  neither  of  these  in  common  with  men,  who 
are  both  miserable  and  mortal,  are  they  not 
rather  remote  from  men  and  united  with  the 
gods,  than  intermediate  between  them?  They 
would  be  intermediate  if  they  held  one  of  their 
qualities  in  common  with  the  one  party  and  the 
other  with  the  other,  as  man  is  a  kind  of  mean 
between  angels  and  beasts — the  beast  being  an 
irrational  and  mortal  animal,  the  angel  a  ration¬ 
al  and  immortal  one,  while  man,  inferior  to  the 
angel  and  superior  to  the  beast,  and  having  in 
common  with  the  one  mortality,  and  with  the 
other  reason,  is  a  rational  and  mortal  animal. 
So,  when  we  seek  for  an  intermediate  between 
the  blessed  immortals  and  miserable  mortals, 
we  should  find  a  being  which  is  either  mortal 
and  blessed,  or  immortal  and  miserable. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  IX.  14-15 


Chap.  14.  Whether  men,  though  mortal ,  can  en¬ 
joy  true  blessedness 

It  is  a  great  question  among  men,  whether 
man  can  be  mortal  and  blessed.  Some,  taking 
the  humbler  view  of  his  condition,  have  denied 
that  he  is  capable  of  blessedness  so  long  as  he 
continues  in  this  mortal  life;  others,  again,  have 
spurned  this  idea,  and  have  been  bold  enough  to 
maintain  that,  even  though  mortal,  men  may  be 
blessed  by  attaining  wisdom.  But  if  this  be  the 
case,  why  are  not  these  wise  men  constituted 
mediators  between  miserable  mortals  and  the 
blessed  immortals,  since  they  have  blessedness 
in  common  with  the  latter,  and  mortality  in 
common  with  the  former?  Certainly,  if  they  are 
blessed,  they  envy  no  one  (for  what  more  mis¬ 
erable  than  envy?),  but  seek  with  all  their  might 
to  help  miserable  mortals  on  to  blessedness,  so 
that  after  death  they  may  become  immortal  and 
be  associated  with  the  blessed  and  immortal  an¬ 
gels. 

Chap.  15.  Of  the  man  Christ  Jesus ,  the  mediator 

between  God  and  men 

But  if,  as  is  much  more  probable  and  credible, 
it  must  needs  be  that  all  men,  so  long  as  they 
are  mortal,  are  also  miserable,  we  must  seek  an 
intermediate  who  is  not  only  man,  but  also  God, 
that,  by  the  interposition  of  His  blessed  mor¬ 
tality,  He  may  bring  men  out  of  their  mortal 
misery  to  a  blessed  immortality.  In  this  inter¬ 
mediate  two  things  are  requisite,  that  He  be¬ 
come  mortal  and  that  He  do  not  continue  mor¬ 
tal.  He  did  become  mortal,  not  rendering  the  di¬ 
vinity  of  the  Word  infirm,  but  assuming  the  in¬ 
firmity  of  flesh.  Neither  did  He  continue  mortal 
in  the  flesh,  but  raised  it  from  the  dead;  for  it  is 
the  very  fruit  of  His  mediation  that  those,  for 
the  sake  of  whose  redemption  He  became  the 
Mediator,  should  not  abide  eternally  in  bodily 
death.  Wherefore  it  became  the  Mediator  be¬ 
tween  us  and  God  to  have  both  a  transient  mor¬ 
tality  £nd  a  permanent  blessedness,  that  by  that 
which  is  transient  He  might  be  assimilated  to 
mortals,  and  might  translate  them  from  mortal¬ 
ity  to  that  which  is  permanent.  Good  angels, 
therefore,  cannot  mediate  between  miserable 
mortals  and  blessed  immortals,  for  they  them¬ 
selves  also  are  both  blessed  and  immortal;  but 
evil  angels  can  mediate,  because  they  are  im¬ 
mortal  like  the  one  party,  miserable  like  the 
other.  To  these  is  opposed  the  good  Mediator, 
Who,  in  opposition  to  their  immortality  and 
misery,  has  chosen  to  be  mortal  for  a  time  and 
has  been  able  to  continue  blessed  in  eternity.  It 


293 

is  thus  He  has  destroyed,  by  the  humility  of  His 
death  and  the  benignity  of  His  blessedness, 
those  proud  immortals  and  hurtful  wretches,  and 
has  prevented  them  from  seducing  to  misery  by 
their  boast  of  immortality  those  men  whose 
hearts  He  has  cleansed  by  faith  and  whom  He 
has  thus  freed  from  their  impure  dominion. 

Man,  then,  mortal  and  miserable,  and  far  re¬ 
moved  from  the  immortal  and  the  blessed,  what 
medium  shall  he  choose  by  which  he  may  be 
united  to  immortality  and  blessedness?  The  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  demons,  which  might  have 
some  charm  for  man,  is  miserable;  the  mortal¬ 
ity  of  Christ,  which  might  offend  man,  exists  no 
longer.  In  the  one  there  is  the  fear  of  an  eternal 
misery;  in  the  other,  death,  which  could  not  be 
eternal,  can  no  longer  be  feared,  and  blessed¬ 
ness,  which  is  eternal,  must  be  loved.  For  the 
immortal  and  miserable  mediator  interposes 
himself  to  prevent  us  from  passing  to  a  blessed 
immortality,  because  that  which  hinders  such  a 
passage,  namely,  misery,  continues  in  him ;  but 
the  mortal  and  blessed  Mediator  interposed 
Himself,  in  order  that,  having  passed  through 
mortality,  He  might  of  mortals  make  immortals 
(showing  His  power  to  do  this  in  His  own  resur¬ 
rection),  and  from  being  miserable  to  raise  them 
to  the  blessed  company  from  the  number  of 
whom  He  had  Himself  never  departed.  There  is, 
then,  a  wicked  mediator,  who  separates  friends, 
and  a  good  Mediator,  who  reconciles  enemies. 
And  those  who  separate  are  numerous,  because 
the  multitude  of  the  blessed  are  blessed  only  by 
their  participation  in  the  one  God ;  of  which  par¬ 
ticipation  the  evil  angels  being  deprived,  they 
are  wretched,  and  interpose  to  hinder  rather 
than  to  help  to  this  blessedness,  and  by  their 
very  number  prevent  us  from  reaching  that  one 
beatific  good,  to  obtain  which  we  need  not  many 
but  one  Mediator,  the  uncreated  Word  of  God, 
by  Whom  all  things  were  made,  and  in  partaking 
of  Whom  we  are  blessed.  I  do  not  say  that  He  is 
Mediator  because  He  is  the  Word,  for  as  the 
Word  He  is  supremely  blessed  and  supremely 
immortal,  and  therefore  far  from  miserable 
mortals;  but  He  is  Mediator  as  He  is  man,  for 
by  His  humanity  He  shows  us  that,  in  order  to 
obtain  that  blessed  and  beatific  good,  we  need 
not  seek  other  mediators  to  lead  us  through  the 
successive  steps  of  this  attainment,  but  that  the 
blessed  and  beatific  God.  having  Himself  be¬ 
come  a  partaker  of  our  humanity,  has  afforded 
us  ready  access  to  the  participation  of  His  divin¬ 
ity.  For,  in  delivering  us  from  our  mortality  and 
misery,  He  does  not  lead  us  to  the  immortal 
and  blessed  angels,  so  that  we  should  become 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


immortal  and  blessed  by  participating  in  their 
nature,  but  He  leads  us  straight  to  that  Trinity, 
by  participating  in  which  the  angels  themselves 
are  blessed.  Therefore,  when  He  chose  to  be  in 
the  form  of  a  servant  and  lower  than  the  angels, 
that  He  might  be  our  Mediator,  He  remained 
higher  than  the  angels,  in  the  form  of  God — 
Himself  at  once  the  way  of  life  on  earth  and 
life  itself  in  heaven. 

Chap.  16.  Whether  it  is  reasonable  in  the  Pla- 
tonists  to  determine  that  the  celestial  gods 
decline  contact  with  earthly  things  and  inter¬ 
course  with  men ,  who  therefore  require  the 
intercession  of  the  demons 
That  opinion,  which  the  same  Platonist  avers 
that  Plato  uttered,  is  not  true,  “that  no  god 
holds  intercourse  with  men.”  And  this,  he  says, 
is  the  chief  evidence  of  their  exaltation,  that 
they  are  never  contaminated  by  contact  with 
men.  He  admits,  therefore,  that  the  demons  are 
contaminated;  and  it  follows  that  they  cannot 
cleanse  those  by  whom  they  are  themselves  con¬ 
taminated,  and  thus  all  alike  become  impure, 
the  demons  by  associating  with  men.  and  men 
by  worshipping  the  demons.  Or,  if  they  say  that 
the  demons  are  not  contaminated  by  associating 
and  dealing  with  men,  then  they  are  better  than 
the  gods,  for  the  gods,  were  they  to  do  so,  would 
be  contaminated.  For  this,  we  are  told,  is  the 
glory  of  the  gods,  that  they  are  so  highly  ex¬ 
alted  that  no  human  intercourse  can  sully  them. 
He  affirms,  indeed,  that  the  supreme  God,  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  Whom  we  call  the  true 
God,  is  spoken  of  by  Plato  as  the  only  God 
Whom  the  poverty  of  human  speech  fails  even 
passably  to  describe;  and  that  even  the  wise, 
when  their  mental  energy  is  as  far  as  possible 
delivered  from  the  trammels  of  connexion  with 
the  body,  have  only  such  gleams  of  insight  into 
His  nature  as  may  be  compared  to  a  flash  of 
lightning  illuminating  the  darkness.  If,  then, 
this  supreme  God,  Who  is  truly  exalted  above  all 
things,  does  nevertheless  visit  the  minds  of  the 
wise,  when  emancipated  from  the  body,  with  an 
intelligible  and  ineffable  presence,  though  this  be 
only  occasional,  and  as  it  were  a  swift  flash  of 
light  athwart  the  darkness,  why  are  the  other 
gods  so  sublimely  removed  from  all  contact  with 
men,  as  if  they  would  be  polluted  by  it?  as  if  it 
were  not  a  sufficient  refutation  of  this  to  lift  up 
our  eyes  to  those  heavenly  bodies  which  give 
the  earth  its  needful  light.  If  the  stars,  though 
they,  by  his  account,  are  visible  gods,  are  not 
contaminated  when  we  look  at  them,  neither  are 
the  demons  contaminated  when  men  see  them 


quite  closely.  But  perhaps  it  is  the  human  voice, 
and  not  the  eye,  which  pollutes  the  gods;  and 
therefore  the  demons  are  appointed  to  mediate 
and  carry  men’s  utterances  to  the  gods,  who 
keep  themselves  remote  through  fear  of  pollu¬ 
tion?  What  am  I  to  say  of  the  other  senses?  For 
by  smell  neither  the  demons,  who  are  present, 
nor  the  gods,  though  they  were  present  and  in¬ 
haling  the  exhalations  of  living  men,  would  be 
polluted  if  they  are  not  contaminated  with  the 
effluvia  of  the  carcasses  offered  in  sacrifice.  As 
for  taste,  they  are  pressed  by  no  necessity  of  re¬ 
pairing  bodily  decay,  so  as  to  be  reduced  to  ask 
food  from  men.  And  touch  is  in  their  own  power. 
For  while  it  may  seem  that  contact  is  so  called, 
because  the  sense  of  touch  is  specially  concerned 
in  it,  yet  the  gods,  if  so  minded,  might  mingle 
with  men,  so  as  to  see  and  be  seen,  hear  and  be 
heard;  and  where  is  the  need  of  touching?  For 
men  would  not  dare  to  desire  this,  if  they  were 
favoured  with  the  sight  or  conversation  of  gods 
or  good  demons ;  and  if  through  excessive  curi¬ 
osity  they  should  desire  it,  how  could  they  ac¬ 
complish  their  wish  without  the  consent  of  the 
god  or  demon,  when  they  cannot  touch  so  much 
as  a  sparrow  unless  it  be  caged? 

There  is,  then,  nothing  to  hinder  the  gods 
from  mingling  in  a  bodily  form  with  men,  from 
seeing  and  being  seen,  from  speaking  and  hear¬ 
ing.  And  if  the  demons  do  thus  mix  with  men,  as 
I  said,  and  are  not  polluted,  while  the  gods,  were 
they  to  do  so,  should  be  polluted,  then  the  de¬ 
mons  are  less  liable  to  pollution  than  the  gods. 
And  if  even  the  demons  are  contaminated,  how 
can  they  help  men  to  attain  blessedness  after 
death,  if,  so  far  from  being  able  to  cleanse  them 
and  present  them  clean  to  the  unpolluted  gods, 
these  mediators  are  themselves  polluted?  And  if 
they  cannot  confer  this  benefit  on  men,  what 
good  can  their  friendly  mediation  do?  Or  shall 
its  result  be,  not  that  men  find  entrance  to  the 
gods,  but  that  men  and  demons  abide  together 
in  a  state  of  pollution,  and  consequently  of  ex¬ 
clusion  from  blessedness?  Unless,  perhaps,  some 
one  may  say  that,  like  sponges  or  things  of  that 
sort,  the  demons  themselves,  in  the  process  of 
cleansing  their  friends,  become  themselves  the 
filthier  in  proportion  as  the  others  become  clean. 
But  if  this  is  the  solution,  then  the  gods,  who 
shun  contact  or  intercourse  with  men  for  fear  of 
pollution,  mix  with  demons  who  are  far  more 
polluted.  Or  perhaps  the  gods,  who  cannot 
cleanse  men  without  polluting  themselves,  can 
without  pollution  cleanse  the  demons  who  have 
been  contaminated  by  human  contact?  Who 
can  believe  such  follies,  unless  the  demons  have 


THE  CITY  OF 

practised  their  deceit  upon  him?  If  seeing  and 
being  seen  is  contamination,  and  if  the  gods, 
whom  Apuleius  himself  calls  visible,  “the  bril¬ 
liant  lights  of  the  world,”1  and  the  other  stars, 
are  seen  by  men,  are  we  to  believe  that  the  de¬ 
mons,  who  cannot  be  seen  unless  they  please, 
are  safer  from  contamination?  Or  if  it  is  only 
the  seeing  and  not  the  being  seen  which  con¬ 
taminates,  then  they  must  deny  that  these  gods 
of  theirs,  these  brilliant  lights  of  the  world,  see 
men  when  their  rays  beam  upon  the  earth.  Their 
rays  are  not  contaminated  by  lighting  on  all 
manner  of  pollution,  and  are  we  to  suppose  that 
the  gods  would  be  contaminated  if  they  mixed 
with  men,  and  even  if  contact  were  needed  in 
order  to  assist  them?  For  there  is  contact  be¬ 
tween  the  earth  and  the  sun's  or  moon’s  rays, 
and  yet  this  does  not  pollute  the  light. 

Chap.  17.  That  to  obtain  the  blessed  life,  which 
consists  in  partaking  of  the  supreme  good, 
man  needs  such  mediation  as  is  furnished  not 
by  a  demon,  but  by  Christ  alone 
I  am  considerably  surprised  that  such  learned 
men,  men  who  pronounce  all  material  and  sen¬ 
sible  things  to  be  altogether  inferior  to  those 
that  are  spiritual  and  intelligible,  should  men¬ 
tion  bodily  contact  in  connection  with  the  bless¬ 
ed  life.  Is  that  sentiment  of  Plotinus  forgotten? 
— “We  must  fly  to  our  beloved  fatherland. 
There  is  the  Father,  there  our  all.  What  fleet  or 
flight  shall  convey  us  thither?  Our  way  is,  to  be¬ 
come  like  God.”  If,  then,  one  is  nearer  to  God 
the  liker  he  is  to  Him,  there  is  no  other  distance 
from  God  than  unlikeness  to  Him.  And  the  soul 
of  man  is  unlike  that  incorporeal  and  unchange¬ 
able  and  eternal  essence,  in  proportion  as  it 
craves  things  temporal  and  mutable.  And  as  the 
things  beneath,  which  are  mortal  and  impure, 
cannot  hold  intercourse  with  the  immortal  pur¬ 
ity  which  is  above,  a  mediator  is  indeed  needed 
to  remove  this  difficulty;  but  not  a  mediator 
who  resembles  the  highest  order  of  being  by 
possessing  an  immortal  body,  and  the  lowest  by 
having'a  diseased  soul,  which  makes  him  rather 
grudge  that  we  be  healed  than  help  our  cure. 
We  need  a  Mediator  Who,  being  united  to  us 
here  below  by  the  mortality  of  His  body,  should 
at  the  same  time  be  able  to  afford  us  truly  divine 
help  in  cleansing  and  liberating  us  by  means  of 
the  immortal  righteousness  of  His  spirit,  where¬ 
by  He  remained  heavenly  even  while  here  upon 
earth.  Far  be  it  from  the  incontaminable  God 
to  fear  pollution  from  the  man2  He  assumed,  or 
from  the  men  among  whom  He  lived  in  the  form 
Wirgil,  Georgies ,  bk.  i.  5.  2Or,  humanity. 


GOD  IX.  16-19  295 

of  a  man.  For,  though  His  incarnation  showed 
us  nothing  else,  these  two  wholesome  facts  were 
enough,  that  true  divinity  cannot  be  polluted  by 
flesh,  and  that  demons  are  not  to  be  considered 
better  than  ourselves  because  they  have  not 
flesh.  This,  then,  as  Scripture  says,  is  the  “Medi¬ 
ator  between  God  and  man,  the  man  Christ 
Jesus,”3  of  Whose  divinity,  whereby  He  is  equal 
to  the  Father,  and  humanity,  whereby  He  has 
become  like  us,  this  is  not  the  place  to  speak  as 
fully  as  I  could. 

Chap.  18.  That  the  deceitful  demons,  while 
promising  to  conduct  men  to  God  by  their 
intercession,  mean  to  turn  them  from  the 
path  of  truth 

As  to  the  demons,  these  false  and  deceitful 
mediators,  who,  though  their  uncleanness  of 
spirit  frequently  reveals  their  misery  and  ma¬ 
lignity,  yet,  by  virtue  of  the  levity  of  their  aerial 
bodies  and  the  nature  of  the  places  they  inhabit, 
do  contrive  to  turn  us  aside  and  hinder  our  spir¬ 
itual  progress;  they  do  not  help  us  towards  God, 
but  rather  prevent  us  from  reaching  Him.  Since 
even  in  the  bodily  way,  which  is  erroneous  and 
misleading,  and  in  which  righteousness  does  not 
walk — for  we  must  rise  to  God  not  by  bodily 
ascent,  but  by  incorporeal  or  spiritual  conform¬ 
ity  to  Him — in  this  bodily  way,  I  say,  which  the 
friends  of  the  demons  arrange  according  to  the 
weight  of  the  various  elements,  the  aerial  de¬ 
mons  being  set  between  the  ethereal  gods  and 
earthy  men,  they  imagine  the  gods  to  have  this 
privilege,  that  by  this  local  interval  they  are 
preserved  from  the  pollution  of  human  contact. 
Thus  they  believe  that  the  demons  are  contam¬ 
inated  by  men  rather  than  men  cleansed  by  the 
demons,  and  that  the  gods  themselves  should  be 
polluted  unless  their  local  superiority  preserved 
them.  Who  is  so  wretched  a  creature  as  to  ex¬ 
pect  purification  by  a  way  in  which  men  are 
contaminating,  demons  contaminated,  and  gods 
contaminable?  Who  would  not  rather  choose 
that  way  whereby  we  escape  the  contamination 
of  the  demons,  and  are  cleansed  from  pollution 
by  the  incontaminable  God,  so  as  to  be  associ¬ 
ated  with  the  uncontaminated  angels? 

Chap.  19.  That  even  among  their  own  worship¬ 
pers  the  name  (< demon ”  has  never  a  good  sig¬ 
nification 

But  as  some  of  these  demonolators,  as  I  may 
call  them,  and  among  them  Labeo,  allege  that 
those  whom  they  call  demons  are  by  others 
called  angels,  I  must,  if  I  would  not  seem  to  dis- 
3Tim.  2.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


pute  merely  about  words,  say  something  about 
the  good  angels.  The  Platonists  do  not  deny 
their  existence,  but  prefer  to  call  them  good  de¬ 
mons.  But  we,  following  Scripture,  according  to 
which  we  are  Christians,  have  learned  that  some 
of  the  angels  are  good,  some  bad,  but  never 
have  we  read  in  Scripture  of  good  demons ;  but 
wherever  this  or  any  cognate  term  occurs,  it  is 
applied  only  to  wicked  spirits.  And  this  usage 
has  become  so  universal  that,  even  among  those 
who  are  called  pagans  and  who  maintain  that 
demons  as  well  as  gods  should  be  worshipped, 
there  is  scarcely  a  man,  no  matter  how  well  read 
and  learned,  who  would  dare  to  say  by  way  of 
praise  to  his  slave,  “You  have  a  demon,”  or  who 
could  doubt  that  the  man  to  whom  he  said  this 
would  consider  it  a  curse.  Why,  then,  are  we  to 
subject  ourselves  to  the  necessity  of  explaining 
away  what  we  have  said  when  we  have  given 
offence  by  using  the  word  demon,  with  which 
every  one.  or  almost  every  one,  connects  a  bad 
meaning,  while  we  can  so  easily  evade  this  neces¬ 
sity  by  using  the  word  angel? 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  puffs 

up  the  demons 

However,  the  very  origin  of  the  name  sug¬ 
gests  something  worthy  of  consideration,  if  we 
compare  it  with  the  divine  books.  They  are 
called  demons  from  a  Greek  word  meaning 
knowledge.1  Now  the  apostle,  speaking  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  says,  “Knowledge  puffeth  up.  but 
charity  buildeth  up.”2  And  this  can  only  be  un¬ 
derstood  as  meaning  that  without  charity  knowl¬ 
edge  does  no  good,  but  inflates  a  man  or  magni¬ 
fies  him  with  an  empty  windiness.  The  demons, 
then,  have  knowledge  without  charity,  and  are 
thereby  so  inflated  or  proud  that  they  crave 
those  divine  honours  and  religious  services 
which  they  know  to  be  due  to  the  true  God.  and 
still,  as  far  as  they  can,  exact  these  from  all  over 
whom  they  have  influence.  Against  this  pride  of 
the  demons,  under  which  the  human  race  was 
held  subject  as  its  merited  punishment,  there 
was  exerted  the  mighty  influence  of  the  humil¬ 
ity  of  God,  Who  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  serv¬ 
ant;  but  men,  resembling  the  demons  in  pride, 
but  not  in  knowledge,  and  being  puffed  up  with 
uncleanness,  failed  to  recognize  Him. 

Chap.  21.  To  what  extent  the  Lord  was  pleased 

to  make  Himself  known  to  the  demons 

The  devils  themselves  knew  this  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  God  so  well  that  they  said  to  the  Lord, 

l8ai/jo}v  =  8ar]/Jiccv,  knowing;  so  Plato,  Cratylus ,  398. 

2I  Cor.  8.  1. 


though  clothed  with  the  infirmity  of  flesh, 
“What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee.  Jesus  of  Naza¬ 
reth?  Art  Thou  come  to  destroy  us  before  the 
time?”3  From  these  words,  it  is  clear  that  they 
had  great  knowledge,  and  no  charity.  They 
feared  His  power  to  punish,  and  did  not  love 
His  righteousness.  He  made  known  to  them  so 
much  as  He  pleased,  and  He  was  pleased  to 
make  known  so  much  as  was  needful.  But  He 
made  Himself  known  not  as  to  the  holy  angels, 
who  know  Him  as  the  Word  of  God,  and  rejoice 
in  His  eternity,  which  they  partake,  but  as  was 
requisite  to  strike  with  terror  the  beings  from 
whose  tyranny  He  was  going  to  free  those  who 
were  predestined  to  His  kingdom  and  the  glory 
of  it,  eternally  true  and  truly  eternal.  He  made 
Himself  known,  therefore,  to  the  demons,  not 
by  that  which  is  life  eternal  and  the  unchange¬ 
able  light  which  illumines  the  pious,  whose  souls 
are  cleansed  by  the  faith  that  is  in  Him,  but  by 
some  temporal  effects  of  His  power  and  evi¬ 
dences  of  His  mysterious  presence,  which  were 
more  easily  discerned  by  the  angelic  senses  even 
of  wicked  spirits  than  by  human  infirmity.  But 
when  He  judged  it  advisable  gradually  to  sup¬ 
press  these  signs  and  to  retire  into  deeper  ob¬ 
scurity,  the  prince  of  the  demons  doubted 
whether  He  were  the  Christ  and  endeavoured  to 
ascertain  this  by  tempting  Him.  in  so  far  as  He 
permitted  Himself  to  be  tempted,  that  He  might 
adapt  the  manhood  He  wore  to  be  an  example 
for  our  imitation.  But  after  that  temptation, 
when,  as  Scripture  says.  He  was  ministered  to4 
by  the  angels  who  are  good  and  holy,  and  there¬ 
fore  objects  of  terror  to  the  impure  spirits.  He 
revealed  more  and  more  distinctly  to  the  de¬ 
mons  how  great  He  was,  so  that,  even  though  the 
infirmity  of  His  flesh  might  seem  contemptible, 
none  dared  to  resist  His  authority. 

Chap.  22.  The  difference  between  the  knowledge 
of  the  holy  angels  and  that  of  the  demons 
The  good  angels,  therefore,  hold  cheap  all 
that  knowledge  of  material  and  transitory  things 
which  the  demons  are  so  proud  of  possessing — 
not  that  they  are  ignorant  of  these  things,  but 
because  the  love  of  God,  whereby  they  are  sanc¬ 
tified,  is  very  dear  to  them,  and  because,  in 
comparison  of  that  not  merely  immaterial  but 
also  unchangeable  and  ineffable  beauty,  with  the 
holy  love  of  which  they  are  inflamed,  they  de¬ 
spise  all  things  which  are  beneath  it  and  all  that 
is  not  it,  that  they  may  with  every  good  thing 
that  is  in  them  enjoy  that  good  which  is  the 
source  of  their  goodness.  And  therefore  they 
3Mark  1.  24.  4Matt.  4.  3-1 1. 


THE  CITY  OF 

have  a  more  certain  knowledge  even  of  those 
temporal  and  mutable  things,  because  they  con¬ 
template  their  principles  and  causes  in  the  word 
of  God,  by  which  the  world  was  made — those 
causes  by  which  one  thing  is  approved,  another 
rejected,  and  all  arranged.  But  the  demons  do  not 
behold  in  the  wisdom  of  God  these  eternal,  and, 
as  it  were,  cardinal  causes  of  things  temporal,  but 
only  foresee  a  larger  part  of  the  future  than  men 
do,  by  reason  of  their  greater  acquaintance  with 
the  signs  which  are  hidden  from  us.  Sometimes, 
too.  it  is  their  own  intentions  they  predict.  And, 
finally,  the  demons  are  frequently,  the  angels 
never,  deceived.  For  it  is  one  thing,  by  the  aid 
of  things  temporal  and  changeable,  to  conjec¬ 
ture  the  changes  that  may  occur  in  time,  and  to 
modify  such  things  by  one’s  own  will  and  facul¬ 
ty — and  this  is  to  a  certain  extent  permitted  to 
the  demons — it  is  another  thing  to  foresee  the 
changes  of  times  in  the  eternal  and  immutable 
laws  of  God,  which  live  in  His  wisdom,  and  to 
know  the  will  of  God,  the  most  infallible  and 
powerful  of  all  causes,  by  participating  in  His 
spirit;  and  this  is  granted  to  the  holy  angels  by 
a  just  discretion.  And  thus  they  are  not  only 
eternal,  but  blessed.  And  the  good  wherein  they 
are  blessed  is  God,  by  Whom  they  were  created. 
For  without  end  they  enjoy  the  contemplation 
and  participation  of  Him. 

Chap.  23.  That  the  name  of  gods  is  falsely  given 
to  the  gods  of  the  Gentiles ,  though  Scripture 
applies  it  both  to  the  holy  angels  and  just 
men 

If  the  Platonists  prefer  to  call  these  angels 
gods  rather  than  demons,  and  to  reckon  them 
with  those  whom  Plato,  their  founder  and  mas¬ 
ter,  maintains  were  created  by  the  supreme 
God,1  they  are  welcome  to  do  so,  for  I  will  not 
spend  strength  in  fighting  about  words.  For  if 
they  say  that  these  beings  are  immortal,  and  yet 
created  by  the  supreme  God,  blessed  but  by 
cleaving  to  their  Creator  and  not  by  their  own 
power,  they  say  what  we  say,  whatever  name 
they  call  these  beings  by.  And  that  this  is  the 
opinion  either  of  all  or  the  best  of  the  Platonists 
can  be  ascertained  by  their  writings.  And  re¬ 
garding  the  name  itself,  if  they  see  fit  to  call 
such  blessed  and  immortal  creatures  gods,  this 
need  not  give  rise  to  any  serious  discussion  be¬ 
tween  us,  since  in  our  own  Scriptures  we  read, 
:‘The  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  hath  spoken”;2  and 
again,  “Confess  to  the  God  of  gods”  ;3  and  again, 
“He  is  a  great  King  above  all  gods.”4  And  where 
it  is  said,  “He  is  to  be  feared  above  all  gods,” 
lTim(Rus .  2Ps.  50.  1.  3Ps.  136.  2.  4Ps.  95.  3. 


GOD  IX.  20-23  297 

the  reason  is  forthwith  added,  for  it  follows, 
“for  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  idols,  but  the 
Lord  made  the  heavens.”5  He  said,  “above  all 
gods,”  but  added,  “of  the  nations”;  that  is  to 
say,  above  all  those  whom  the  nations  count 
gods,  in  other  words,  demons.  By  them  He  is  to 
be  feared  with  that  terror  in  which  they  cried  to 
the  Lord,  “Hast  Thou  come  to  destroy  us?”  But 
where  it  is  said,  “the  God  of  gods,”  it  cannot  be 
understood  as  the  god  of  the  demons;  and  far  be 
it  from  us  to  say  that  “great  King  above  all 
gods”  means  “great  King  above  all  demons.” 
But  the  same  Scripture  also  calls  men  who  be¬ 
long  to  God’s  people  “gods”:  “I  have  said,  Ye 
are  gods,  and  all  of  you  children  of  the  Most 
High.”6  Accordingly,  when  God  is  styled  God 
of  gods,  this  may  be  understood  of  these  gods; 
and  so,  too,  when  He  is  styled  a  great  King 
above  all  gods. 

Nevertheless,  some  one  may  say,  if  men  are 
called  gods  because  they  belong  to  God’s  people, 
whom  He  addresses  by  means  of  men  and  an¬ 
gels,  are  not  the  immortals,  who  already  enjoy 
that  felicity  which  men  seek  to  attain  by  wor¬ 
shipping  God,  much  more  worthy  of  the  title? 
And  what  shall  we  reply  to  this,  if  not  that  it  is 
not  without  reason  that  in  holy  Scripture  men 
are  more  expressly  styled  gods  than  those  im¬ 
mortal  and  blessed  spirits  to  whom  we  hope  to 
be  equal  in  the  resurrection,  because  there  was  a 
fear  that  the  weakness  of  unbelief,  being  over¬ 
come  with  the  excellence  of  these  beings,  might 
presume  to  constitute  some  of  them  a  god?  In 
the  case  of  men  this  was  a  result  that  need  not 
be  guarded  against.  Besides,  it  was  right  that 
the  men  belonging  to  God’s  people  should  be 
more  expressly  called  gods,  to  assure  and  certi¬ 
fy  them  that  He  who  is  called  God  of  gods  is 
their  God;  because,  although  those  immortal 
and  blessed  spirits  who  dwell  in  the  heavens  are 
called  gods,  yet  they  are  not  called  gods  of  gods, 
that  is  to  say,  gods  of  the  men  who  constitute 
God’s  people,  and  to  whom  it  is  said,  “I  have 
said.  Ye  are  gods,  and  all  of  you  the  children  of 
the  Most  High.”  Hence  the  saying  of  the  apos¬ 
tle,  “Though  there  be  that  are  called  gods, 
whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  as  there  be  gods 
many  and  lords  many,  but  to  us  there  is  but  one 
God,  the  Father,  of  Whom  are  all  things,  and  we 
in  Him;  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  Whom 
are  all  things,  and  we  by  Him.”7 

We  need  not,  therefore,  laboriously  contend 
about  the  name,  since  the  reality  is  so  obvious 
as  to  admit  of  no  shadow  of  doubt.  That  which 
we  say,  that  the  angels  who  are  sent  to  announce 

5Ps.  96.  s,  6.  6Ps.  82.  6.  7I  Cor.  8.  5,  6. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  will  of  God  to  men  belong  to  the  order  of 
blessed  immortals,  does  not  satisfy  the  Pla- 
tonists,  because  they  believe  that  this  ministry 
is  discharged,  not  by  those  whom  they  call  gods, 
in  other  words,  not  by  blessed  immortals,  but 
by  demons,  whom  they  dare  not  affirm  to  be 
blessed,  but  only  immortal,  or  if  they  do  rank 
them  among  the  blessed  immortals,  yet  only  as 
good  demons,  and  not  as  gods  who  dwell  in  the 
heaven  of  heavens  remote  from  all  human  con¬ 
tact.  But,  though  it  may  seem  mere  wrangling 
about  a  name,  yet  the  name  of  demon  is  so  de¬ 
testable  that  we  cannot  bear  in  any  sense  to  ap¬ 
ply  it  to  the  holy  angels.  Now,  therefore,  let  us 
close  this  book  in  the  assurance  that,  whatever 
we  call  these  immortal  and  blessed  spirits,  who 
yet  are  only  creatures,  they  do  not  act  as  media¬ 
tors  to  introduce  to  everlasting  felicity  miser¬ 
able  mortals,  from  whom  they  are  severed  by  a 
twofold  distinction.  And  those  others  who  are 
mediators,  in  so  far  as  they  have  immortality  in 


common  with  their  superiors  and  misery  in  com¬ 
mon  with  their  inferiors  (for  they  are  justly 
miserable  in  punishment  of  their  wickedness), 
cannot  bestow  upon  us,  but  rather  grudge  that 
we  should  possess,  the  blessedness  from  which 
they  themselves  are  excluded.  And  so  the  friends 
of  the  demons  have  nothing  considerable  to 
allege  why  we  should  rather  worship  them  as  our 
helpers  than  avoid  them  as  traitors  to  our  inter¬ 
ests.  As  for  those  spirits  who  are  good,  and  who 
are  therefore  not  only  immortal  but  also  blessed, 
and  to  whom  they  suppose  we  should  give  the 
title  of  gods,  and  offer  worship  and  sacrifices  for 
the  sake  of  inheriting  a  future  life,  we  shall,  by 
God’s  help,  endeavour  in  the  following  book  to 
show  that  these  spirits,  call  them  by  what  name, 
and  ascribe  to  them  what  nature  you  will,  desire 
that  religious  worship  be  paid  to  God  alone,  by 
Whom  they  were  created,  and  by  Whose  com¬ 
munications  of  Himself  to  them  they  are 
blessed. 


-BOOK  X 

ARGUMENT .  In  this  book  augustine  teaches  that  the  good  angels  wish 

GOD  ALONE,  WHOM  THEY  THEMSELVES  SERVE,  TO  RECEIVE  THAT  DIVINE  HONOUR 
WHICH  IS  RENDERED  BY  SACRIFICE,  AND  WHICH  IS  CALLED  LATRE1A .  He  THEN  GOES 
ON  TO  DISPUTE  AGAINST  PORPHYRY  ABOUT  THE  PRINCIPLE  AND  WAY  OF  THE  SOUL’S 
CLEANSING  AND  DELIVERANCE. 


Chap.  i.  That  the  Platonists  themselves  have 
determined  that  God  alone  can  confer  happi¬ 
ness  either  on  angels  or  men ,  but  that  it  yet 
remains  a  question  whether  those  spirits  whom 
they  direct  us  to  worship,  that  we  may  obtain 
happiness,  wish  sacrifice  to  be  offered  to  them¬ 
selves,  or  to  the  one  God  only 
It  is  the  decided  opinion  of  all  who  use  their 
brains,  that  all  men  desire  to  be  happy.  But  who 
are  happy,  or  how  they  become  so,  these  are 
questions  about  which  the  weakness  of  human 
understanding  stirs  endless  and  angry  contro¬ 
versies,  in  which  philosophers  have  wasted  their 
strength  and  expended  their  leisure.  To  adduce 
and  discuss  their  various  opinions  would  be  tedi¬ 
ous  and  is  unnecessary.  The  reader  may  remem¬ 
ber  what  we  said  in  the  eighth  book,  while  mak¬ 
ing  a  selection  of  the  philosophers  with  whom 
we  might  discuss  the  question  regarding  the  fu¬ 
ture  life  of  happiness,  whether  we  can  reach  it 
by  paying  divine  honours  to  the  one  true  God, 
the  Creator  of  all  gods,  or  by  worshipping  many 
gods,  and  he  will  not  expect  us  to  repeat  here  the 
same  argument,  especially  as,  even  if  he  has  for¬ 


gotten  it,  he  may  refresh  his  memory  by  reperu¬ 
sal.  For  we  made  selection  of  the  Platonists, 
justly  esteemed  the  noblest  of  the  philosophers, 
because  they  had  the  wit  to  perceive  that  the  hu¬ 
man  soul,  immortal  and  rational,  or  intellectual, 
as  it  is,  cannot  be  happy  except  by  partaking  of 
the  light  of  that  God  by  Whom  both  itself  and 
the  world  were  made;  and  also  that  the  happy 
life  which  all  men  desire  cannot  be  reached  by 
any  who  does  not  cleave  with  a  pure  and  holy 
love  to  that  one  supreme  good,  the  unchange¬ 
able  God.  But  as  even  these  philosophers, 
whether  accommodating  to  the  folly  and  igno¬ 
rance  of  the  people,  or,  as  the  apostle  says,  “be¬ 
coming  vain  in  their  imaginations,”1  supposed  or 
allowed  others  to  suppose  that  many  gods 
should  be  worshipped,  so  that  some  of  them 
considered  that  divine  honour  by  worship  and 
sacrifice  should  be  rendered  even  to  the  demons 
(an  error  I  have  already  exploded),  we  must 
now,  by  God’s  help,  ascertain  what  is  thought 
about  our  religious  worship  and  piety  by  those 
immortal  and  blessed  spirits,  who  dwell  in  the 
heavenly  places  among  dominations,  principali- 

^om.  i.  21. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  X.  1-2  290 


ties,  powers,  whom  the  Platonists  call  gods,  and 
some  either  good  demons,  or,  like  us,  angels — 
that  is  to  say.  to  put  it  more  plainly,  whether 
the  angels  desire  us  to  offer  sacrifice  and  wor¬ 
ship,  and  to  consecrate  our  possessions  and  our¬ 
selves,  to  them  or  only  to  God.  theirs  and  ours. 

For  this  is  the  worship  which  is  due  to  the  Di¬ 
vinity.  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  to  the 
Deity;  and,  to  express  this  worship  in  a  single 
word  as  there  does  not  occur  to  me  any  Latin 
term  sufficiently  exact,  I  shall  avail  myself, 
whenever  necessary,  of  a  Greek  word.  Aarpeia, 
whenever  it  occurs  in  Scripture,  is  rendered  by 
the  word  service.  But  that  service  which  is  due 
to  men,  and  in  reference  to  which  the  apostle 
writes  that  servants  must  be  subject  to  their 
own  masters,1  is  usually  designated  by  another 
word  in  Greek,2  whereas  the  service  which  is 
paid  to  God  alone  by  worship,  is  always,  or  al¬ 
most  always,  called  Xa rpeia  in  the  usage  of 
those  who  wrote  from  the  divine  oracles.  This 
cannot  so  well  be  called  simply  cultus ,  for  in 
that  case  it  would  not  seem  to  be  due  exclusively 
to  God;  for  the  same  word  is  applied  to  the  re¬ 
spect  we  pay  either  to  the  memory  or  the  living 
presence  of  men.  From  it,  too,  we  derive  the 
words  agriculture,  colonist,  and  others.  And  the 
heathen  call  their  gods  coelicolce ,  not  because 
they  worship  heaven,  but  because  they  dwell  in 
it,  and  as  it  were  colonize  it — not  in  the  sense  in 
which  we  call  those  colonists  who  are  attached 
to  their  native  soil  to  cultivate  it  under  the  rule 
of  the  owners,  but  in  the  sense  in  which  the  great 
master  of  the  Latin  language  says,  “There  was 
an  ancient  city  inhabited  by  Tyrian  colonists.”3 
He  called  them  colonists,  not  because  they  culti¬ 
vated  the  soil,  but  because  they  inhabited  the 
city.  So,  too,  cities  that  have  hived  off  from 
larger  cities  are  called  colonies.  Consequently, 
while  it  is  quite  true  that,  using  the  word  in  a 
special  sense,  “cult”  can  be  rendered  to  none 
but  God,  yet,  as  the  word  is  applied  to  other 
things  besides,  the  cult  due  to  God  cannot  in 
Latin  be  expressed  by  this  word  alone. 

The  word  “religion”  might  seem  to  express 
more  definitely  the  worship  due  to  God  alone, 
and  therefore  Latin  translators  have  used  this 
word  to  represent  Op^dKeia;  yet,  as  not  only 
the  uneducated,  but  also  the  best  instructed,  use 
the  word  religion  to  express  human  ties,  and  re¬ 
lationships,  and  affinities,  it  would  inevitably  in¬ 
troduce  ambiguity  to  use  this  word  in  discussing 
the  worship  of  God,  unable  as  we  are  to  say  that 
religion  is  nothing  else  than  the  worship  of  God, 

1Eph.  6.  5.  *Namely,  5ov\eia. 

Virgil,  Aneid,  bk.  i.  12. 


without  contradicting  the  common  usage  which 
applies  this  word  to  the  observance  of  social  re¬ 
lationships.  “Piety,”  again,  or,  as  the  Greeks 
say,  eD(7€/3eta,  is  commonly  understood  as  the 
proper  designation  of  the  worship  of  God.  Yet 
this  word  also  is  used  of  dutifulness  to  parents. 
The  common  people,  too,  use  it  of  works  of 
charity,  which,  I  suppose,  arises  from  the  cir¬ 
cumstance  that  God  enjoins  the  performance  of 
such  works,  and  declares  that  He  is  pleased  with 
them  instead  of.  or  in  preference  to,  sacrifices. 
From  this  usage  it  has  also  come  to  pass  that 
God  Himself  is  called  pious.4  in  which  sense  the 
Greeks  never  use  evaefielv,  though  evaefieia  is 
applied  to  works  of  charity  by  their  common 
people  also.  In  some  passages  of  Scripture, 
therefore,  they  have  sought  to  preserve  the  dis¬ 
tinction  by  using  not  evcrefieia ,  the  more  gen¬ 
eral  word,  but  Beocre^eta,  which  literally  de¬ 
notes  the  worship  of  God.  We,  on  the  other 
hand,  cannot  express  either  of  these  ideas  by  one 
word.  This  worship,  then,  which  in  Greek  is 
called  Xarpeia ,  and  in  Latin  servitus ,  but  the 
service  due  to  God  only;  this  worship,  which  in 
Greek  is  called  OprjoKeia,  and  in  Latin  religio, 
but  the  religion  by  which  we  are  bound  to  God 
only;  this  worship,  which  they  call  0€ocrq3ei a, 
but  which  we  cannot  express  in  one  word,  but 
call  it  the  worship  of  God — this,  we  say,  belongs 
only  to  that  God  Who  is  the  true  God,  and  Who 
makes  His  worshippers  gods.5  And  therefore, 
whoever  these  immortal  and  blessed  inhabitants 
of  heaven  be,  if  they  do  not  love  us  and  wish 
us  to  be  blessed,  then  we  ought  not  to  worship 
them ;  and  if  they  do  love  us  and  desire  our  hap¬ 
piness,  they  cannot  wish  us  to  be  made  happy 
by  any  other  means  than  they  themselves  have 
enjoyed — for  how  could  they  wish  our  blessed¬ 
ness  to  flow  from  one  source,  theirs  from  an¬ 
other? 

Chap.  2.  The  opinion  of  Plotinus  the  Platonist 
regarding  enlightenment  from  above 
But  with  these  more  estimable  philosophers 
we  have  no  dispute  in  this  matter.  For  they  per¬ 
ceived,  and  in  various  forms  abundantly  ex¬ 
pressed  in  their  writings,  that  these  spirits  have 
the  same  source  of  happiness  as  ourselves — a 
certain  intelligible  light,  which  is  their  God,  and 
is  different  from  themselves,  and  illumines  them 
that  they  may  be  penetrated  with  light  and  en¬ 
joy  perfect  happiness  in  the  participation  of 
God.  Plotinus,  commenting  on  Plato,  repeatedly 
and  strongly  asserts  that  not  even  the  soul 
which  they  believe  to  be  the  soul  of  the  world 
4II  Chron  30.  9;  Eccl.  11.  13;  Judith,  7.  20.  6Ps.  82.  6. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


derives  its  blessedness  from  any  other  source 
than  we  do,  viz.,  from  that  Light  which  is  dis¬ 
tinct  from  it  and  created  it,  and  by  whose  intelli¬ 
gible  illumination  it  enjoys  light  in  things  intel¬ 
ligible.  He  also  compares  those  spiritual  things 
to  the  vast  and  conspicuous  heavenly  bodies,  as 
if  God  were  the  sun,  and  the  soul  the  moon;  for 
they  suppose  that  the  moon  derives  its  light 
from  the  sun.  That  great  Platonist,  therefore, 
says  that  the  rational  soul,  or  rather  the  intellec¬ 
tual  soul — in  which  class  he  comprehends  the 
souls  of  the  blessed  immortals  who  inhabit  heav¬ 
en — has  no  nature  superior  to  it  save  God,  the 
Creator  of  the  world  and  the  soul  itself,  and 
that  these  heavenly  spirits  derive  their  blessed 
life,  and  the  light  of  truth,  from  the  same  source 
as  ourselves,  agreeing  with  the  gospel  where  we 
read,  “There  was  a  man  sent  from  God  whose 
name  was  John;  the  same  came  for  a  witness  to 
bear  witness  of  that  Light,  that  through  Him  all 
might  believe.  He  was  not  that  Light,  but  that 
he  might  bear  witness  of  the  Light.  That  was  the 
true  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  com- 
eth  into  the  world”;1  a  distinction  which  suffi¬ 
ciently  proves  that  the  rational  or  intellectual 
soul  such  as  John  had  cannot  be  its  own  light, 
but  needs  to  receive  illumination  from  another, 
the  true  Light.  This  John  himself  avows  when 
he  delivers  his  witness:  “We  have  all  received 
of  His  fullness.”2 

Chap.  3.  That  the  Platonists,  though  knowing 
something  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe, 
have  misunderstood  the  true  worship  of  God, 
by  giving  divine  honour  to  angels,  good  or  bad 
This  being  so,  if  the  Platonists,  or  those  who 
think  with  them,  knowing  God,  glorified  Him  as 
God  and  gave  thanks,  if  they  did  not  become 
vain  in  their  own  thoughts,  if  they  did  not  origi¬ 
nate  or  yield  to  the  popular  errors,  they  would 
certainly  acknowledge  that  neither  could  the 
blessed  immortals  retain,  nor  we  miserable  mor¬ 
tals  reach,  a  happy  condition  without  worship¬ 
ping  the  one  God  of  gods,  who  is  both  theirs  and 
ours.  To  Him  we  owe  the  service  which  is  called 
in  Greek  \arpeta,  whether  wre  render  it  out¬ 
wardly  or  inwardly;  for  we  are  all  His  temple, 
each  of  us  severally  and  all  of  us  together,  be¬ 
cause  He  condescends  to  inhabit  each  individ¬ 
ually  and  the  whole  harmonious  body,  being  no 
greater  in  all  than  in  each,  since  He  is  neither 
expanded  nor  divided.  Our  heart  when  it  rises  to 
Him  is  His  altar;  the  priest  who  intercedes  for 
us  is  His  Only-begotten;  we  sacrifice  to  Him 
bleeding  victims  when  we  contend  for  His  truth 
^ohn,  1.  6-9.  2John,  1.  16. 


even  unto  blood;  to  Him  we  offer  the  sweetest 
incense  when  we  come  before  Him  burning  with 
holy  and  pious  love ;  to  Him  we  devote  and  sur¬ 
render  ourselves  and  His  gifts  in  us;  to  Him,  by 
solemn  feasts  and  on  appointed  days,  we  conse¬ 
crate  the  memory  of  His  benefits,  lest  through 
the  lapse  of  time  ungrateful  oblivion  should 
steal  upon  us;  to  Him  we  offer  on  the  altar  of 
our  heart  the  sacrifice  of  humility  and  praise, 
kindled  by  the  fire  of  burning  love.  It  is  that  we 
may  see  Him,  so  far  as  He  can  be  seen ;  it  is  that 
we  may  cleave  to  Him  that  we  are  cleansed  from 
all  stain  of  sins  and  evil  passions  and  are  conse¬ 
crated  in  His  name.  For  He  is  the  fountain  of 
our  happiness,  He  the  end  of  all  our  desires.  Be¬ 
ing  attached  to  Him,  or  rather  let  me  say,  re¬ 
attached — for  we  had  detached  ourselves  and 
lost  hold  of  Him — being,  I  say,  re-attached  to 
Him,3  we  tend  towards  Him  by  love,  that  we 
may  rest  in  Him,  and  find  our  blessedness  by  at¬ 
taining  that  end.  For  our  good,  about  which  phi¬ 
losophers  have  so  keenly  contended,  is  nothing 
else  than  to  be  united  to  God.  It  is,  if  I  may  say 
so,  by  spiritually  embracing  Him  that  the  intel¬ 
lectual  soul  is  filled  and  impregnated  with  true 
virtues.  We  are  enjoined  to  love  this  good  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our 
strength.  To  this  good  we  ought  to  be  led  by 
those  who  love  us,  and  to  lead  those  we  love. 
Thus  are  fulfilled  those  two  commandments  on 
which  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets:  “Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  soul”; 
and  “Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.”4 
For.  that  man  might  be  intelligent  in  his  self- 
love,  there  was  appointed  for  him  an  end  to 
which  he  might  refer  all  his  actions,  that  he 
might  be  blessed.  For  he  who  loves  himself  wish¬ 
es  nothing  else  than  this.  And  the  end  set  before 
him  is  “to  draw  near  to  God.”5  And  so,  when  one 
who  has  this  intelligent  self-love  is  commanded 
to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  what  else  is  en¬ 
joined  than  that  he  shall  do  all  in  his  power  to 
commend  to  him  the  love  of  God?  This  is  the 
worship  of  God,  this  is  true  religion,  this  right 
piety,  this  the  service  due  to  God  only.  If  any 
immortal  power,  then,  no  matter  with  what  vir¬ 
tue  endowed,  loves  us  as  himself,  he  must  desire 
that  we  find  our  happiness  by  submitting  our¬ 
selves  to  Him,  in  submission  to  whom  he  him¬ 
self  finds  happiness.  If  he  does  not  worship  God, 
he  is  wretched,  because  deprived  of  God;  if  he 
worships  God,  he  cannot  wish  to  be  worshipped 

3Augustine  here  remarks,  in  a  clause  that  cannot  be  given 
in  English,  that  the  word  religio  is  derived  from  religere. 

4Matt.  22.  37-40.  5Ps.  73.  28. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  X.  3-5  301 


in  God’s  stead.  On  the  contrary,  these  higher 
powers  acquiesce  heartily  in  the  divine  sentence 
in  which  it  is  written,  “He  that  sacrifketh  unto 
any  god,  save  unto  the  Lord  only,  he  shall  be 
utterly  destroyed.”1 

Chap.  4.  That  sacrifice  is  due  to  the  true  God 
only 

But,  putting  aside  for  the  present  the  other  re¬ 
ligious  services  with  which  God  is  worshipped, 
certainly  no  man  would  dare  to  say  that  sacri¬ 
fice  is  due  to  any  but  God.  Many  parts,  indeed, 
of  divine  worship  are  unduly  used  in  showing 
honour  to  men,  whether  through  an  excessive 
humility  or  pernicious  flattery;  yet,  while  this 
is  done,  those  persons  who  are  thus  worshipped 
and  venerated,  or  even  adored,  are  reckoned  no 
more  than  human;  and  whoever  thought  of  sac¬ 
rificing  save  to  one  whom  he  knew,  supposed,  or 
feigned  to  be  a  god?  And  how  ancient  a  part  of 
God’s  worship  sacrifice  is  those  two  brothers, 
Cain  and  Abel,  sufficiently  show,  of  whom  God 
rejected  the  elder’s  sacrifice  and  looked  favour¬ 
ably  on  the  younger’s. 

Chap.  5.  Of  the  sacrifices  which  God  does  not 
require ,  but  wished  to  be  observed  for  the  ex¬ 
hibition  of  those  things  which  he  does  require 
And  who  is  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  that  the 
things  offered  to  God  are  needed  by  Him  for 
some  uses  of  His  own?  Divine  Scripture  in  many 
places  explodes  this  idea.  Not  to  be  wearisome, 
suffice  it  to  quote  this  brief  saying  from  a  psalm : 
“I  have  said  to  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  God :  for 
Thou  needest  not  my  goodness.”2  We  must  be¬ 
lieve,  then,  that  God  has  no  need,  not  only  of 
cattle,  or  any  other  earthly  and  material  thing, 
but  even  of  man’s  righteousness,  and  that  what¬ 
ever  right  worship  is  paid  to  God  profits  not 
Him  but  man.  For  no  man  would  say  he  did  a 
benefit  to  a  fountain  by  drinking,  or  to  the  light 
by  seeing.  And  the  fact  that  the  ancient  church 
offered  animal  sacrifices,  which  the  people  of 
God  nowadays  read  of  without  imitating,  proves 
nothing  else  than  this,  that  those  sacrifices  signi¬ 
fied  the  things  which  we  do  for  the  purpose  of 
drawing  near  to  God,  and  inducing  our  neigh¬ 
bour  to  do  the  same.  A  sacrifice,  therefore,  is  the 
visible  sacrament  or  sacred  sign  of  an  invisible 
sacrifice.  Hence  that  penitent  in  the  psalm,  or  it 
may  be  the  Psalmist  himself,  entreating  God  to 
be  merciful  to  his  sins,  says,  “If  Thou  desiredst 
sacrifice,  I  would  give  it:  Thou  delightest  not  in 
whole  burnt-offerings.  The  sacrifice  of  God  is  a 
broken  heart :  a  heart  contrite  and  humble  God 
*Ex.  22.  20.  2Ps.  16.  2. 


will  not  despise.”3  Observe  how,  in  the  very  words 
in  which  he  is  expressing  God’s  refusal  of  sacri¬ 
fice,  he  shows  that  God  requires  sacrifice.  He 
does  not  desire  the  sacrifice  of  a  slaughtered 
beast,  but  He  desires  the  sacrifice  of  a  contrite 
heart.  Thus,  that  sacrifice  which  he  says  God 
does  not  wish  is  the  symbol  of  the  sacrifice 
which  God  does  wish.  God  does  not  wish  sacri¬ 
fices  in  the  sense  in  which  foolish  people  think 
He  wishes  them,  viz.,  to  gratify  His  own  pleas- 
sure.  For  if  He  had  not  wished  that  the  sacri¬ 
fices  He  requires,  as,  e.g.,  a  heart  contrite  and 
humbled  by  penitent  sorrow,  should  be  symbol¬ 
ized  by  those  sacrifices  which  He  was  thought  to 
desire  because  pleasant  to  Himself,  the  old  law 
would  never  have  enjoined  their  presentation; 
and  they  were  destined  to  be  merged  when  the 
fit  opportunity  arrived,  in  order  that  men  might 
not  suppose  that  the  sacrifices  themselves,  rath¬ 
er  than  the  things  symbolized  by  them,  were 
pleasing  to  God  or  acceptable  in  us.  Hence,  in 
another  passage  from  another  psalm,  he  says, 
“If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell  thee;  for  the 
world  is  mine  and  the  fullness  thereof.  Will  I  eat 
the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats?”4 
as  if  He  should  say,  Supposing  such  things  were 
necessary  to  me,  I  would  never  ask  thee  for 
what  I  have  in  my  own  hand.  Then  he  goes  on  to 
mention  what  these  signify:  “Offer  unto  God 
the  sacrifice  of  praise,  and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the 
Most  High.  And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trou¬ 
ble:  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
me.”3  So  in  another  prophet:  “Wherewith  shall 
I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before 
the  High  God?  Shall  I  come  before  Him  with 
burnt-offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old?  Will 
the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or 
with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil?  Shall  I  give 
my  first-born  for  my  transgression,  the  fruit  of 
my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul?  Hath  He 
showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good;  and  what 
doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly, 
and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
God?”6  In  the  words  of  this  prophet,  these  two 
things  are  distinguished  and  set  forth  with  suffi¬ 
cient  explicitness,  that  God  does  not  require 
these  sacrifices  for  their  own  sakes  and  that  He 
does  require  the  sacrifices  which  they  symbolize. 
In  the  epistle  entitled  “To  the  Hebrews”  it  is 
said,  “To  do  good  and  to  communicate,  forget 
not:  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well 
pleased.”7  And  so,  when  it  is  written,  “I  desire 
mercy  rather  than  sacrifice,”8  nothing  else  is 
meant  than  that  one  sacrifice  is  preferred  to  an- 

3Ps.  51.  16,  17.  4Ps.  50.  12,  13.  5Ps.  50.  14,  15. 

6Micah,  6.  6-8.  7Heb.  13.  16.  8Hos.  6.  6. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


other ;  for  that  which  in  common  speech  is  called 
sacrifice  is  only  the  symbol  of  the  true  sacrifice. 
Now  mercy  is  the  true  sacrifice,  and  therefore  it 
is  said,  as  I  have  just  quoted,  “with  such  sacri¬ 
fices  God  is  well  pleased.”  All  the  divine  ordi¬ 
nances,  therefore,  which  we  read  concerning  the 
sacrifices  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  or  the 
temple,  we  are  to  refer  to  the  love  of  God  and 
our  neighbour.  For  “on  these  two  command¬ 
ments,”  as  it  is  written,  “hang  all  the  law  and 
the  prophets.”1 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  true  and  perfect  sacrifice 

Thus  a  true  sacrifice  is  every  work  which  is 
done  that  we  may  be  united  to  God  in  holy  fel¬ 
lowship,  and  which  has  a  reference  to  that  su¬ 
preme  good  and  end  in  which  alone  we  can  be 
truly  blessed.  And  therefore  even  the  mercy  we 
show  to  men,  if  it  is  not  shown  for  God’s  sake,  is 
not  a  sacrifice.  For,  though  made  or  offered  by 
man,  sacrifice  is  a  divine  thing,  as  those  who 
called  it  sacrifice 2  meant  to  indicate.  Thus  man 
himself,  consecrated  in  the  name  of  God  and 
vowed  to  God,  is  a  sacrifice  in  so  far  as  he  dies 
to  the  world  that  he  may  live  to  God.  For  this  is 
a  part  of  that  mercy  which  each  man  shows  to 
himself;  as  it  is  written,  “Have  mercy  on  thy 
soul  by  pleasing  God.”3  Our  body,  too,  is  a  sacri¬ 
fice  when  we  chasten  it  by  temperance,  if  we  do 
so  as  we  ought,  for  God’s  sake,  that  we  may  not 
yield  our  members  instruments  of  unrighteous¬ 
ness  unto  sin,  but  instruments  of  righteousness 
unto  God.4  Exhorting  to  this  sacrifice,  the  apos¬ 
tle  says,  “I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  by 
the  mercy  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  which 
is  your  reasonable  service.”5  If,  then,  the  body, 
which,  being  inferior,  the  soul  uses  as  a  servant 
or  instrument,  is  a  sacrifice  when  it  is  used 
rightly  and  with  reference  to  God,  how  much 
more  does  the  soul  itself  become  a  sacrifice 
when  it  offers  itself  to  God.  in  order  that,  being 
inflamed  by  the  fire  of  His  love,  it  may  receive 
of  His  beauty  and  become  pleasing  to  Him,  los¬ 
ing  the  shape  of  earthly  desire  and  being  re¬ 
moulded  in  the  image  of  permanent  loveliness? 
And  this,  indeed,  the  apostle  subjoins,  saying, 
“And  be  not  conformed  to  this  world;  but  be 
ye  transformed  in  the  renewing  of  your  mind, 
that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  accept¬ 
able,  and  perfect  will  of  God.”6  Since,  there¬ 
fore,  true  sacrifices  are  works  of  mercy  to  our¬ 
selves  or  others,  done  with  a  reference  to  God, 

*Matt.  22.  40.  literally,  a  sacred  action. 

3Ecclus.  30.  24.  4Rom.  6.  13. 

5Rom.  12.  i.  6Rom.  12.  2. 


and  since  works  of  mercy  have  no  other  object 
than  the  relief  of  distress  or  the  conferring  of 
happiness,  and  since  there  is  no  happiness  apart 
from  that  good  of  which  it  is  said,  “It  is  good  for 
me  to  be  very  near  to  God,”7  it  follows  that  the 
whole  redeemed  city,  that  is  to  say,  the  congre¬ 
gation  or  community  of  the  saints,  is  offered  to 
God  as  our  sacrifice  through  the  great  High 
Priest,  who  offered  Himself  to  God  in  His  pas¬ 
sion  for  us,  that  we  might  be  members  of  this 
glorious  head,  according  to  the  form  of  a  serv¬ 
ant.  For  it  was  this  form  He  offered,  in  this  He 
was  offered,  because  it  is  according  to  it  He  is 
Mediator,  in  this  He  is  our  Priest,  in  this  the 
Sacrifice.  Accordingly,  when  the  apostle  had  ex¬ 
horted  us  to  present  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,  acceptable  to  God,  our  reasonable  service, 
and  not  to  be  conformed  to  the  world,  but  to  be 
transformed  in  the  renewing  of  our  mind,  that 
we  might  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  accept¬ 
able,  and  perfect  will  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  the 
true  sacrifice  of  ourselves,  he  says,  “For  I  say, 
through  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  unto 
me,  to  every  man  that  is  among  you,  not  to  think 
of  himself  more  highly  than  he  ought  to  think, 
but  to  think  soberly,  according  as  God  hath 
dealt  to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith.  For,  as 
we  have  many  members  in  one  body,  and  all 
members  have  not  the  same  office,  so  we,  be¬ 
ing  many,  are  one  body  in  Christ,  and  every  one 
members  one  of  another,  having  gifts  differing 
according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us.”8  This 
is  the  sacrifice  of  Christians:  we,  being  many, 
are  one  body  in  Christ.  And  this  also  is  the  sacri¬ 
fice  which  the  Church  continually  celebrates  in 
the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  known  to  the  faith¬ 
ful,  in  which  she  teaches  that  she  herself  is  of¬ 
fered  in  the  offering  she  makes  to  God. 

Chap.  7 .  Of  the  love  of  the  holy  angels  y  which 
prompts  them  to  desire  that  we  worship  the 
one  true  God  and  not  themselves 
It  is  very  right  that  these  blessed  and  immor¬ 
tal  spirits,  who  inhabit  celestial  dwellings  and 
rejoice  in  the  communications  of  their  Creator’s 
fullness,  firm  in  His  eternity,  assured  in  His 
truth,  holy  by  His  grace,  since  they  compassion¬ 
ately  and  tenderly  regard  us  miserable  mortals, 
and  wish  us  to  become  immortal  and  happy,  do 
not  desire  us  to  sacrifice  to  themselves,  but  to 
Him  whose  sacrifice  they  know  themselves  to  be 
in  common  with  us.  For  we  and  they  together 
are  the  one  city  of  God,  to  which  it  is  said  in  the 
psalm,  “Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  0 
city  of  God”;9  the  human  part  sojourning  here 
7Ps.  73.  28.  8Rom.  12.  3-6.  9Ps.  87.  3. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  X.  6-9  303 


below,  the  angelic  aiding  from  above.  For  from 
that  heavenly  city,  in  which  God's  will  is  the  in¬ 
telligible  and  unchangeable  law.  from  that  heav¬ 
enly  council-chamber — for  they  sit  in  counsel 
regarding  us — that  holy  Scripture,  descended  to 
us  by  the  ministry  of  angels,  in  which  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “He  that  sacrificeth  unto  any  god.  save  un¬ 
to  the  Lord  only,  he  shall  be  utterly  destroyed”1 
— this  Scripture,  this  law,  these  precepts,  have 
been  confirmed  by  such  miracles,  that  it  is  suf¬ 
ficiently  evident  to  whom  these  immortal  and 
blessed  spirits,  who  desire  us  to  be  like  them¬ 
selves,  wish  us  to  sacrifice. 

Chap.  8.  Of  the  miracles  which  God  has  conde¬ 
scended  to  adhibit ,  through  the  ministry  of 
angels ,  to  his  promises  for  the  confirmation 
of  the  faith  of  the  godly 
I  should  seem  tedious  were  I  to  recount  all  the 
ancient  miracles,  which  were  wrought  in  attes¬ 
tation  of  God’s  promises  which  He  made  to 
Abraham  thousands  of  years  ago,  that  in  his 
seed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  bless¬ 
ed.2  For  who  can  but  marvel  that  Abraham’s 
barren  wife  should  have  given  birth  to  a  son  at 
an  age  when  not  even  a  prolific  woman  could 
bear  children;  or,  again,  that  when  Abraham 
sacrificed,  a  flame  from  heaven  should  have  run 
between  the  divided  parts;3  or  that  the  angels 
in  human  form,  whom  he  had  hospitably  enter¬ 
tained  and  who  had  renewed  God’s  promise  of 
offspring,  should  also  have  predicted  the  de¬ 
struction  of  Sodom  by  fire  from  heaven;4  and 
that  his  nephew  Lot  should  have  been  rescued 
from  Sodom  by  the  angels  as  the  fire  was  just 
descending,  while  his  wife,  who  looked  back  as 
she  went,  and  was  immediately  turned  into  salt, 
stood  as  a  sacred  beacon  warning  us  that  no  one 
who  is  being  saved  should  long  for  what  he  is 
leaving?  How  striking  also  were  the  wonders 
done  by  Moses  to  rescue  God’s  people  from  the 
yoke  of  slavery  in  Egypt,  when  the  magi  of  the 
Pharaoh,  that  is,  the  king  of  Egypt,  who  tyran¬ 
nized,  over  this  people,  were  suffered  to  do  some 
wonderful  things  that  they  might  be  vanquished 
all  the  more  signally!  They  did  these  things  by 
the  magical  arts  and  incantations  to  which  the 
evil  spirits  or  demons  are  addicted;  while 
Moses,  having  as  much  greater  power  as  he  had 
right  on  his  side,  and  having  the  aid  of  angels, 
easily  conquered  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Who  made  heaven  and  earth.  And,  in  fact,  the 
magicians  failed  at  the  third  plague;  whereas 
Moses,  dealing  out  the  miracles  delegated  to 

*Ex.  22.  20.  2Gen.  18.  18. 

3Gen.  15.  17.  4Gen.  18. 


him,  brought  ten  plagues  upon  the  land,  so  that 
the  hard  hearts  of  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians 
yielded,  and  the  people  were  let  go.  But,  quickly 
repenting,  and  essaying  to  overtake  the  depart¬ 
ing  Hebrews,  who  had  crossed  the  sea  on  dry 
ground,  they  were  covered  and  overwhelmed  in 
the  returning  waters.  What  shall  I  say  of  those 
frequent  and  stupendous  exhibitions  of  divine 
power,  while  the  people  were  conducted  through 
the  wilderness? — of  the  waters  which  could  not 
be  drunk,  but  lost  their  bitterness,  and  quenched 
the  thirsty,  when  at  God’s  command  a  piece  of 
wood  was  cast  into  them?  of  the  manna  that  de¬ 
scended  from  heaven  to  appease  their  hunger, 
and  which  begat  worms  and  putrefied  when  any 
one  collected  more  than  the  appointed  quantity, 
and  yet,  though  double  was  gathered  on  the  day 
before  the  Sabbath  (it  not  being  lawful  to  gather 
it  on  that  day),  remained  fresh?  of  the  birds 
which  filled  the  camp,  and  turned  appetite  into 
satiety  when  they  longed  for  flesh,  which  it 
seemed  impossible  to  supply  to  so  vast  a  popula¬ 
tion?  of  the  enemies  who  met  them,  and  op¬ 
posed  their  passage  with  arms,  and  were  defeat¬ 
ed  without  the  loss  of  a  single  Hebrew,  when 
Moses  prayed  with  his  hands  extended  in  the 
form  of  a  cross?  of  the  seditious  persons  who 
arose  among  God’s  people,  and  separated  them¬ 
selves  from  the  divinely-ordered  community, 
and  were  swallowed  up  alive  by  the  earth,  a  visi¬ 
ble  token  of  an  invisible  punishment?  of  the 
rock  struck  with  the  rod,  and  pouring  out  waters 
more  than  enough  for  all  the  host?  of  the  deadly 
serpents’  bites,  sent  in  just  punishment  of  sin. 
but  healed  by  looking  at  the  lifted  brazen  ser¬ 
pent,  so  that  not  only  were  the  tormented  peo¬ 
ple  healed,  but  a  symbol  of  the  crucifixion  of 
death  set  before  them  in  this  destruction  of 
death  by  death?  It  was  this  serpent  which  was 
preserved  in  memory  of  this  event,  and  was  af¬ 
terwards  worshipped  by  the  mistaken  people  as 
an  idol,  and  was  destroyed  by  the  pious  and 
God-fearing  king  Hezekiah,  much  to  his  credit. 

Chap.  9.  Of  the  illicit  arts  connected  with  de- 
monolatry ,  and  of  which  the  Platonist  Por¬ 
phyry  adopts  some ,  and  discards  others 
These  miracles,  and  many  others  of  the  same 
nature,  which  it  were  tedious  to  mention,  were 
wrought  for  the  purpose  of  commending  the 
worship  of  the  one  true  God,  and  prohibiting 
the  worship  of  a  multitude  of  false  gods.  More¬ 
over,  they  were  wrought  by  simple  faith  and 
godly  confidence,  not  by  the  incantations  and 
charms  composed  under  the  influence  of  a  crim¬ 
inal  tampering  with  the  unseen  world,  of  an  art 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


which  they  call  either  magic,  or  by  the  more 
abominable  title  necromancy,  or  the  more  hon¬ 
ourable  designation  theurgy;  for  they  wish  to 
discriminate  between  those  whom  the  people 
call  magicians,  who  practise  necromancy,  and 
are  addicted  to  illicit  arts  and  condemned,  and 
those  others  who  seem  to  them  to  be  worthy  of 
praise  for  their  practice  of  theurgy — the  truth, 
however,  being  that  both  classes  are  the  slaves 
of  the  deceitful  rites  of  the  demons  whom  they 
invoke  under  the  names  of  angels. 

For  even  Porphyry  promises  some  kind  of 
purgation  of  the  soul  by  the  help  of  theurgy, 
though  he  does  so  with  some  hesitation  and 
shame,  and  denies  that  this  art  can  secure  to  any 
one  a  return  to  God ;  so  that  you  can  detect  his 
opinion  vacillating  between  the  profession  of 
philosophy  and  an  art  which  he  feels  to  be  pre¬ 
sumptuous  and  sacrilegious.  For  at  one  time  he 
warns  us  to  avoid  it  as  deceitful,  and  prohibited 
by  law,  and  dangerous  to  those  who  practise  it; 
then  again,  as  if  in  deference  to  its  advocates, 
he  declares  it  useful  for  cleansing  one  part  of  the 
soul,  not,  indeed,  the  intellectual  part,  by  which 
the  truth  of  things  intelligible,  which  have  no 
sensible  images,  is  recognized,  but  the  spiritual 
part,  which  takes  cognizance  of  the  images  of 
things  material.  This  part,  he  says,  is  prepared 
and  fitted  for  intercourse  with  spirits  and  angels, 
and  for  the  vision  of  the  gods,  by  the  help  of  cer¬ 
tain  theurgic  consecrations,  or,  as  they  call 
them,  mysteries.  He  acknowledges,  however, 
that  these  theurgic  mysteries  impart  to  the  in¬ 
tellectual  soul  no  such  purity  as  fits  it  to  see  its 
God.  and  recognize  the  things  that  truly  exist. 
And  from  this  acknowledgment  we  may  infer 
what  kind  of  gods  these  are,  and  what  kind  of 
vision  of  them  is  imparted  by  theurgic  conse¬ 
crations,  if  by  it  one  cannot  see  the  things  which 
truly  exist.  He  says,  further,  that  the  rational, 
or,  as  he  prefers  calling  it,  the  intellectual  soul, 
can  pass  into  the  heavens  without  the  spiritual 
part  being  cleansed  by  theurgic  art,  and  that  this 
art  cannot  so  purify  the  spiritual  part  as  to  give 
it  entrance  to  immortality  and  eternity.  And 
therefore,  although  he  distinguishes  angels  from 
demons,  asserting  that  the  habitation  of  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  in  the  air,  while  the  former  dwell  in  the 
ether  and  empyrean,  and  although  he  advises  us 
to  cultivate  the  friendship  of  some  demon,  who 
may  be  able  after  our  death  to  assist  us,  and 
elevate  us  at  least  a  little  above  the  earth — for 
he  owns  that  it  is  by  another  way  we  must  reach 
the  heavenly  society  of  the  angels — he  at  the 
same  time  distinctly  warns  us  to  avoid  the  soci¬ 
ety  of  demons,  saying  that  the  soul,  expiating  its 


sin  after  death,  execrates  the  worship  of  demons 
by  whom  it  was  entangled.  And  of  theurgy  it¬ 
self,  though  he  recommends  it  as  reconciling  an¬ 
gels  and  demons,  he  cannot  deny  that  it  treats 
with  powers  which  either  themselves  envy  the 
soul  its  purity,  or  serve  the  arts  of  those  who  do 
envy  it.  He  complains  of  this  through  the  mouth 
of  some  Chaldaean  or  other:  “A  good  man  in 
Chaldaea  complains,”  he  says,  “that  his  most 
strenuous  efforts  to  cleanse  his  soul  were  frus¬ 
trated,  because  another  man,  who  had  influence 
in  these  matters,  and  who  envied  him  purity, 
had  prayed  to  the  powers,  and  bound  them  by 
his  conjuring  not  to  listen  to  his  request.  There¬ 
fore,”  adds  Porphyry,  “what  the  one  man  bound, 
the  other  could  not  loose.”  And  from  this  he 
concludes  that  theurgy  is  a  craft  which  accom¬ 
plishes  not  only  good  but  evil  among  gods  and 
men;  and  that  the  gods  also  have  passions  and 
are  perturbed  and  agitated  by  the  emotions 
which  Apuleius  attributed  to  demons  and  men, 
but  from  which  he  preserved  the  gods  by  that 
sublimity  of  residence,  which,  in  common  with 
Plato,  he  accorded  to  them. 

Chap.  io.  Concerning  theurgy ,  which  promises 
a  delusive  purification  of  the  soul  by  the  in¬ 
vocation  of  demons 

But  here  we  have  another  and  a  much  more 
learned  Platonist  than  Apuleius,  Porphyry,  to 
wit,  asserting  that,  by  I  know  not  what  theurgy, 
even  the  gods  themselves  are  subjected  to  pas¬ 
sions  and  perturbations ;  for  by  adjurations  they 
were  so  bound  and  terrified  that  they  could  not 
confer  purity  of  soul,  were  so  terrified  by  him 
who  imposed  on  them  a  wicked  command,  that 
they  could  not  by  the  same  theurgy  be  freed 
from  that  terror,  and  fulfill  the  righteous  behest 
of  him  who  prayed  to  them ;  or  do  the  good  he 
sought.  Who  does  not  see  that  all  these  things 
are  fictions  of  deceiving  demons,  unless  he  be  a 
wretched  slave  of  theirs  and  an  alien  from  the 
grace  of  the  true  Liberator?  For  if  the  Chaldaean 
had  been  dealing  with  good  gods,  certainly  a 
well-disposed  man,  who  sought  to  purify  his  own 
soul,  would  have  had  more  influence  with  them 
than  an  evil-disposed  man  seeking  to  hinder  him. 
Or,  if  the  gods  were  just  and  considered  the 
man  unworthy  of  the  purification  he  sought,  at 
all  events  they  should  not  have  been  terrified  by 
an  envious  person,  nor  hindered,  as  Porphyry 
avows,  by  the  fear  of  a  stronger  deity,  but 
should  have  simply  denied  the  boon  on  their  own 
free  judgment.  And  it  is  surprising  that  that 
well-disposed  Chaldaean,  who  desired  to  purify 
his  soul  by  theurgical  rites,  found  no  superior 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  X.  io-ii  305 


deity  who  could  either  terrify  the  frightened 
gods  still  more,  and  force  them  to  confer  the 
boon,  or  compose  their  fears,  and  so  enable  them 
to  do  good  without  compulsion,  even  supposing 
that  the  good  theurgist  had  no  rites  by  which 
he  himself  might  purge  away  the  taint  of  fear 
from  the  gods  whom  he  invoked  for  the  purifi¬ 
cation  of  his  own  soul.  And  why  is  it  that  there 
is  a  god  who  has  power  to  terrify  the  inferior 
gods,  and  none  who  has  power  to  free  them  from 
fear?  Is  there  found  a  god  who  listens  to  the  en¬ 
vious  man  and  frightens  the  gods  from  doing 
good?  and  is  there  not  found  a  god  who  listens 
to  the  well-disposed  man  and  removes  the  fear 
of  the  gods  that  they  may  do  him  good?  0  ex¬ 
cellent  theurgy !  0  admirable  purification  of  the 
soul! — a  theurgy  in  which  the  violence  of  an  im¬ 
pure  envy  has  more  influence  than  the  entreaty 
of  purity  and  holiness.  Rather  let  us  abominate 
and  avoid  the  deceit  of  such  wicked  spirits,  and 
listen  to  sound  doctrine.  As  to  those  who  per¬ 
form  these  filthy  cleansings  by  sacrilegious  rites 
and  see  in  their  initiated  state  (as  he  further 
tells  us,  though  we  may  question  this  vision) 
certain  wonderfully  lovely  appearances  of  an¬ 
gels  or  gods,  this  is  what  the  apostle  refers  to 
when  he  speaks  of  “Satan  transforming  himself 
into  an  angel  of  light.”1  For  these  are  the  delu¬ 
sive  appearances  of  that  spirit  who  longs  to  en¬ 
tangle  wretched  souls  in  the  deceptive  worship 
of  many  and  false  gods,  and  to  turn  them  aside 
from  the  true  worship  of  the  true  God,  by  Whom 
alone  they  are  cleansed  and  healed,  and  who,  as 
was  said  of  Proteus,  “turns  himself  into  all 
shapes,”2  equally  hurtful,  whether  he  assaults  us 
as  an  enemy,  or  assumes  the  disguise  of  a  friend. 

Chap.  ii.  Of  Porphyry’s  epistle  to  Anebo,  in 
which  he  asks  for  information  about  the  dif¬ 
ferences  among  demons 
It  was  a  better  tone  which  Porphyry  adopted 
in  his  letter  to  Anebo  the  Egyptian,  in  which, 
assuming  the  character  of  an  inquirer  consult¬ 
ing  him.  he  unmasks  and  explodes  these  sacrile¬ 
gious  arts.  In  that  letter,  indeed,  he  repudiates 
all  demons,  whom  he  maintains  to  be  so  foolish 
as  to  be  attracted  by  the  sacrificial  vapours,  and 
therefore  residing  not  in  the  ether,  but  in  the  air 
beneath  the  moon  and  indeed  in  the  moon  itself. 
Yet  he  has  not  the  boldness  to  attribute  to  all 
the  demons  all  the  deceptions  and  malicious  and 
foolish  practices  which  justly  move  his  indigna¬ 
tion.  For,  though  he  acknowledges  that  as  a  race 
demons  are  foolish,  he  so  far  accommodates 
himself  to  popular  ideas  as  to  call  some  of  them 
*11  Cor.  11.  14.  Wirgii,  Georgies ,  bk.  iv.  41  i. 


benignant  demons.  He  expresses  surprise  that 
sacrifices  not  only  incline  the  gods,  but  also  com¬ 
pel  and  force  them  to  do  what  men  wish ;  and  he 
is  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  the  sun  and  moon, 
and  other  visible  celestial  bodies — for  bodies  he 
does  not  doubt  that  they  are — are  considered 
gods,  if  the  gods  are  distinguished  from  the  de¬ 
mons  by  their  incorporeality;  also,  if  they  are 
gods,  how  some  are  called  beneficent  and  others 
hurtful,  and  how  they,  being  corporeal,  are  num¬ 
bered  with  the  gods,  who  are  incorporeal.  He  in¬ 
quires  further,  and  still  as  one  in  doubt,  wheth¬ 
er  diviners  and  wonderworkers  are  men  of  un¬ 
usually  powerful  souls,  or  whether  the  power  to 
do  these  things  is  communicated  by  spirits  from 
without.  He  inclines  to  the  latter  opinion,  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  by  the  use  of  stones  and  herbs 
that  they  lay  spells  on  people,  and  open  closed 
doors,  and  do  similar  wonders.  And  on  this  ac¬ 
count,  he  says,  some  suppose  that  there  is  a  race 
of  beings  whose  property  it  is  to  listen  to  men — 
a  race  deceitful,  full  of  contrivances,  capable  of 
assuming  all  forms,  simulating  gods,  demons, 
and  dead  men — and  that  it  is  this  race  which 
bring  about  all  these  things  which  have  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  good  or  evil,  but  that  what  is  real¬ 
ly  good  they  never  help  us  in,  and  are  indeed  un¬ 
acquainted  with,  for  they  make  wickedness  easy, 
but  throw  obstacles  in  the  path  of  those  who 
eagerly  follow  virtue;  and  that  they  are  filled 
with  pride  and  rashness,  delight  in  sacrificial 
odours,  are  taken  with  flattery.  These  and  the 
other  characteristics  of  this  race  of  deceitful 
and  malicious  spirits,  who  come  into  the  souls 
of  men  and  delude  their  senses,  both  in  sleep  and 
waking,  he  describes  not  as  things  of  which  he  is 
himself  convinced,  but  only  with  so  much  sus¬ 
picion  and  doubt  as  to  cause  him  to  speak  of 
them  as  commonly  received  opinions.  We  should 
sympathize  with  this  great  philosopher  in  the 
difficulty  he  experienced  in  acquainting  himself 
with  and  confidently  assailing  the  whole  fratern¬ 
ity  of  devils,  which  any  Christian  old  woman 
would  unhesitatingly  describe  and  most  unre¬ 
servedly  detest.  Perhaps,  however,  he  shrank 
from  offending  Anebo,  to  whom  he  was  writing, 
himself  the  most  eminent  patron  of  these  mys¬ 
teries,  or  the  others  who  marvelled  at  these 
magical  feats  as  divine  works,  and  closely  allied 
to  the  worship  of  the  gods. 

However,  he  pursues  this  subject,  and,  still 
in  the  character  of  an  inquirer,  mentions  some 
things  which  no  sober  judgment  could  attribute 
to  any  but  malicious  and  deceitful  powers.  He 
asks  why.  after  the  better  class  of  spirits  have 
been  invoked,  the  worse  should  be  commanded 


3o6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  perform  the  wicked  desires  of  men;  why  they 
do  not  hear  a  man  who  has  just  left  a  woman’s 
embrace,  while  they  themselves  make  no  scruple 
of  tempting  men  to  incest  and  adultery;  why 
their  priests  are  commanded  to  abstain  from 
animal  food  for  fear  of  being  polluted  by  the 
corporeal  exhalations,  while  they  themselves  are 
attracted  by  the  fumes  of  sacrifices  and  other 
exhalations;  why  the  initiated  are  forbidden  to 
touch  a  dead  body,  while  their  mysteries  are 
celebrated  almost  entirely  by  means  of  dead 
bodies ;  why  it  is  that  a  man  addicted  to  any  vice 
should  utter  threats,  not  to  a  demon  or  to  the 
soul  of  a  dead  man,  but  to  the  sun  and  moon,  or 
some  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  which  he  intimi¬ 
dates  by  imaginary  terrors,  that  he  may  wring 
from  them  a  real  boon — for  he  threatens  that  he 
will  demolish  the  sky,  and  such  like  impossibili¬ 
ties — that  those  gods,  being  alarmed,  like  silly 
children,  with  imaginary  and  absurd  threats, 
may  do  what  they  are  ordered.  Porphyry  fur¬ 
ther  relates  that  a  man,  Chaeremon,  profoundly 
versed  in  these  sacred  or  rather  sacrilegious 
mysteries,  had  written  that  the  famous  Egyp¬ 
tian  mysteries  of  Isis  and  her  husband  Osiris 
had  very  great  influence  with  the  gods  to  com¬ 
pel  them  to  do  what  they  were  ordered,  when  he 
who  used  the  spells  threatened  to  divulge  or  do 
away  with  these  mysteries,  and  cried  with  a 
threatening  voice  that  he  would  scatter  the 
members  of  Osiris  if  they  neglected  his  orders. 
Not  without  reason  is  Porphyry  surprised  that 
a  man  should  utter  such  wild  and  empty  threats 
against  the  gods — not  against  gods  of  no  ac¬ 
count,  but  against  the  heavenly  gods,  and  those 
that  shine  with  sidereal  light — and  that  these 
threats  should  be  effectual  to  constrain  them 
with  resistless  power,  and  alarm  them  so  that 
they  fulfill  his  wishes.  Not  without  reason  does 
he,  in  the  character  of  an  inquirer  into  the  rea¬ 
sons  of  these  surprising  things,  give  it  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  that  they  are  done  by  that  race  of  spir¬ 
its  which  he  previously  described  as  if  quoting 
other  people’s  opinions — spirits  who  deceive 
not,  as  he  said,  by  nature,  but  by  their  own  cor¬ 
ruption,  and  who  simulate  gods  and  dead  men, 
but  not,  as  he  said,  demons,  for  demons  they 
really  are.  As  to  his  idea  that  by  means  of  herbs, 
and  stones,  and  animals,  and  certain  incanta¬ 
tions,  and  noises,  and  drawings,  sometimes  fan¬ 
ciful,  and  sometimes  copied  from  the  motions  of 
the  heavenly  bodies,  men  create  upon  earth  pow¬ 
ers  capable  of  bringing  about  various  results,  all 
that  is  only  the  mystification  which  these  de¬ 
mons  practise  on  those  who  are  subject  to  them, 
for  the  sake  of  furnishing  themselves  with  mer¬ 


riment  at  the  expense  of  their  dupes.  Either, 
then,  Porphyry  was  sincere  in  his  doubts  and  in¬ 
quiries,  and  mentioned  these  things  to  demon¬ 
strate  and  put  beyond  question  that  they  were 
the  work,  not  of  powers  which  aid  us  in  obtain¬ 
ing  life,  but  of  deceitful  demons;  or,  to  take  a 
more  favourable  view  of  the  philosopher,  he 
adopted  this  method  with  the  Egyptian  who  was 
wedded  to  these  errors  and  was  proud  of  them, 
that  he  might  not  offend  him  by  assuming  the 
attitude  of  a  teacher,  nor  discompose  his  mind 
by  the  altercation  of  a  professed  assailant,  but, 
by  assuming  the  character  of  an  inquirer,  and 
the  humble  attitude  of  one  who  was  anxious  to 
learn,  might  turn  his  attention  to  these  matters, 
and  show  how  worthy  they  are  to  be  despised 
and  relinquished.  Towards  the  conclusion  of  his 
letter,  he  requests  Anebo  to  inform  him  what 
the  Egyptian  wisdom  indicates  as  the  way  to 
blessedness.  But  as  to  those  who  hold  inter¬ 
course  with  the  gods,  and  pester  them  only  for 
the  sake  of  finding  a  runaway  slave,  or  acquir¬ 
ing  property,  or  making  a  bargain  of  a  marriage, 
or  such  things,  he  declares  that  their  pretensions 
to  wisdom  are  vain.  He  adds  that  these  same 
gods,  even  granting  that  on  other  points  their 
utterances  were  true,  were  yet  so  ill-advised  and 
unsatisfactory  in  their  disclosures  about  blessed¬ 
ness  that  they  cannot  be  either  gods  or  good  de¬ 
mons,  but  are  either  that  spirit  who  is  called  the 
deceiver,  or  mere  fictions  of  the  imagination. 

Chap.  12  .Of  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  true 
God  through  the  ministry  of  the  holy  angels 
Since  by  means  of  these  arts  wonders  are  done 
which  quite  surpass  human  power,  what  choice 
have  we  but  to  believe  that  these  predictions 
and  operations,  which  seem  to  be  miraculous 
and  divine  and  which  at  the  same  time  form  no 
part  of  the  worship  of  the  one  God,  in  adherence 
to  whom,  as  the  Platonists  themselves  abun¬ 
dantly  testify,  all  blessedness  consists,  are  the 
pastime  of  wicked  spirits,  who  thus  seek  to  se¬ 
duce  and  hinder  the  truly  godly?  On  the  other 
hand,  we  cannot  but  believe  that  all  miracles, 
whether  wrought  by  angels  or  by  other  means, 
so  long  as  they  are  so  done  as  to  commend  the 
worship  and  religion  of  the  one  God  in  Whom 
alone  is  blessedness,  are  wrought  by  those  who 
love  us  in  a  true  and  godly  sort,  or  through  their 
means,  God  Himself  working  in  them.  For  we 
cannot  listen  to  those  who  maintain  that  the  in¬ 
visible  God  works  no  visible  miracles;  for  even 
they  believe  that  He  made  the  world,  which 
surely  they  will  not  deny  to  be  visible.  What¬ 
ever  marvel  happens  in  this  world,  it  is  certainly 


THE  CITY  OF 

less  marvellous  than  this  whole  world  itself — I 
mean  the  sky  and  earth  and  all  that  is  in  them — 
and  these  God  certainly  made.  But,  as  the  Crea¬ 
tor  Himself  is  hidden  and  incomprehensible  to 
man,  so  also  is  the  manner  of  creation.  Although, 
therefore,  the  standing  miracle  of  this  visible 
world  is  little  thought  of,  because  always  before 
us,  yet,  when  we  arouse  ourselves  to  contem¬ 
plate  it,  it  is  a  greater  miracle  than  the  rarest 
and  most  unheard-of  marvels.  For  man  himself 
is  a  greater  miracle  than  any  miracle  done 
through  his  instrumentality.  Therefore  God, 
Who  made  the  visible  heaven  and  earth,  does 
not  disdain  to  work  visible  miracles  in  heaven  or 
earth,  that  He  may  thereby  awaken  the  soul 
which  is  immersed  in  things  visible  to  worship 
Himself,  the  Invisible.  But  the  place  and  time 
of  these  miracles  are  dependent  on  His  un¬ 
changeable  will,  in  which  things  future  are  or¬ 
dered  as  if  already  they  were  accomplished.  For 
He  moves  things  temporal  without  Himself 
moving  in  time.  He  does  not  in  one  way  know 
things  that  are  to  be,  and,  in  another,  things  that 
have  been;  neither  does  He  listen  to  those  who 
pray  otherwise  than  as  He  sees  those  that  will 
pray.  For,  even  when  His  angels  hear  us,  it  is 
He  Himself  who  hears  us  in  them,  as  in  His  true 
temple  not  made  with  hands,  as  in  those  men 
who  are  His  saints;  and  His  answers,  though  ac¬ 
complished  in  time,  have  been  arranged  by  His 
eternal  appointment. 

Chap.  13.  Of  the  invisible  God ,  who  has  often 
made  Himself  visible ,  not  as  He  really  is,  but 
as  the  beholders  could  bear  the  sight 
Neither  need  we  be  surprised  that  God,  in¬ 
visible  as  He  is,  should  often  have  appeared 
visibly  to  the  patriarchs.  For  as  the  sound  which 
communicates  the  thought  conceived  in  the  si¬ 
lence  of  the  mind  is  not  the  thought  itself,  so 
the  form  by  which  God,  invisible  in  His  own  na¬ 
ture,  became  visible,  was  not  God  Himself. 
Nevertheless  it  is  He  Himself  who  was  seen 
under  that  form,  as  that  thought  itself  is  heard 
in  the  sound  of  the  voice;  and  the  patriarchs 
recognized  that,  though  the  bodily  form  was  not 
God,  they  saw  the  invisible  God.  For,  though 
Moses  conversed  with  God,  yet  he  said,  “If  I 
have  found  grace  in  Thy  sight,  show  me  Thy¬ 
self,  that  I  may  see  and  know  Thee.”1  And  as  it 
was  fit  that  the  law,  which  was  given,  not  to  one 
man  or  a  few  enlightened  men,  but  to  the  whole 
of  a  populous  nation,  should  be  accompanied  by 
awe-inspiring  signs,  great  marvels  were  wrought, 
by  the  ministry  of  angels,  before  the  people  on 

xEx.  33.  13. 


GOD  X.  12-14  307 

the  mount  where  the  law  was  being  given  to 
them  through  one  man,  while  the  multitude  be¬ 
held  the  awful  appearances.  For  the  people  of 
Israel  believed  Moses,  not  as  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians  believed  their  Lycurgus,  because  he  had 
received  from  Jupiter  or  Apollo  the  laws  he  gave 
them.  For  when  the  law  which  enjoined  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  one  God  was  given  to  the  people,  mar¬ 
vellous  signs  and  earthquakes,  such  as  the  divine 
wisdom  judged  sufficient,  were  brought  about  in 
the  sight  of  all,  that  they  might  know  that  it 
was  the  Creator  who  could  thus  use  creation  to 
promulgate  His  law. 

Chap.  14.  That  the  one  God  is  to  be  worshipped 
not  only  for  the  sake  of  eternal  blessings,  but 
also  in  connexion  with  temporal  prosperity, 
because  all  things  are  regulated  by  his  provi¬ 
dence 

The  education  of  the  human  race,  represented 
by  the  people  of  God,  has  advanced,  like  that  of 
an  individual,  through  certain  epochs,  or,  as  it 
were,  ages,  so  that  it  might  gradually  rise  from 
earthly  to  heavenly  things,  and  from  the  visible 
to  the  invisible.  This  object  was  kept  so  clearly 
in  view  that,  even  in  the  period  when  temporal 
rewards  were  promised,  the  one  God  was  pre¬ 
sented  as  the  object  of  worship,  that  men  might 
not  acknowledge  any  other  than  the  true  Crea¬ 
tor  and  Lord  of  the  spirit,  even  in  connexion 
with  the  earthly  blessings  of  this  transitory  life. 
For  he  who  denies  that  all  things,  which  either 
angels  or  men  can  give  us,  are  in  the  hand  of  the 
one  Almighty,  is  a  madman.  The  Platonist 
Plotinus  discourses  concerning  providence  and, 
from  the  beauty  of  flowers  and  foliage,  proves 
that  from  the  supreme  God,  whose  beauty  is 
unseen  and  ineffable,  providence  reaches  down 
even  to  these  earthly  things  here  below;  and  he 
argues  that  all  these  frail  and  perishing  things 
could  not  have  so  exquisite  and  elaborate  a 
beauty  were  they  not  fashioned  by  Him  Whose 
unseen  and  unchangeable  beauty  continually 
pervades  all  things.2  This  is  proved  also  by  the 
Lord  Jesus,  where  He  says,  “Consider  the  lilies, 
how  they  grow;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they 
spin.  And  yet  I  say  unto  you  that  Solomon  in 
all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these. 
But  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field,  which 
to-day  is  and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven, 
how  much  more  shall  He  clothe  you,  0  ye  of 
little  faith!”3  It  was  best,  therefore,  that  the 
soul  of  man,  which  was  still  weakly  desiring 
earthly  things,  should  be  accustomed  to  seek 
from  God  alone  even  these  petty  temporal  boons 
2Enneads,  in.  2.  13.  3Matt.  6.  28-30. 


3o8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  the  earthly  necessaries  of  this  transitory 
life,  which  are  contemptible  in  comparison  with 
eternal  blessings,  in  order  that  the  desire  even 
of  these  things  might  not  draw  it  aside  from  the 
worship  of  Him,  to  Whom  we  come  by  despising 
and  forsaking  such  things. 

Chap.  15.  Of  the  ministry  of  the  holy  angels , 
by  which  they  fulfill  the  providence  of  God 
And  so  it  has  pleased  Divine  Providence,  as 
I  have  said  and  as  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,1  that  the  law  enjoining  the  worship  of 
one  God  should  be  given  by  the  disposition  of 
angels.  But  among  them  the  person  of  God  Him¬ 
self  visibly  appeared,  not,  indeed,  in  His  proper 
substance,  which  ever  remains  invisible  to  mor¬ 
tal  eyes,  but  by  the  infallible  signs  furnished  by 
creation  in  obedience  to  its  Creator.  He  made 
use,  too,  of  the  words  of  human  speech,  uttering 
them  syllable  by  syllable  successively,  though  in 
His  own  nature  He  speaks  not  in  a  bodily  but 
in  a  spiritual  way;  not  to  sense,  but  to  the  mind; 
not  in  words  that  occupy  time,  but,  if  I  may  so 
say,  eternally,  neither  beginning  to  speak  nor 
coming  to  an  end.  And  wThat  He  says  is  accu¬ 
rately  heard,  not  by  the  bodily  but  by  the  men¬ 
tal  ear  of  His  ministers  and  messengers,  who  are 
immortally  blessed  in  the  enjoyment  of  His  un¬ 
changeable  truth;  and  the  directions  which  they 
in  some  ineffable  way  receive,  they  execute  with¬ 
out  delay  or  difficulty  in  the  sensible  and  visible 
world.  And  this  law  was  given  in  conformity 
with  the  age  of  the  world,  and  contained  at  the 
first  earthly  promises,  as  I  have  said,  which, 
however,  symbolized  eternal  ones;  and  these 
eternal  blessings  few  understood,  though  many 
took  a  part  in  the  celebration  of  their  visible 
signs.  Nevertheless,  with  one  consent  both  the 
words  and  the  visible  rites  of  that  law  enjoin  the 
worship  of  one  God — not  one  of  a  crowd  of 
gods,  but  Him  Who  made  heaven  and  earth,  and 
every  soul  and  every  spirit  which  is  other  than 
Himself.  He  created;  all  else  was  created;  and, 
both  for  being  and  well-being,  all  things  need 
Him  Who  created  them. 

Chap.  16.  Whether  those  angels  who  de?nand 
that  we  pay  them  divine  honour ,  or  those 
who  teach  us  to  render  holy  service,  not  to 
themselves,  but  to  God,  are  to  be  trusted 
about  the  way  to  life  eternal 
What  angels,  then,  are  we  to  believe  in  this 
matter  of  blessed  and  eternal  life? — those  who 
wish  to  be  worshipped  with  religious  rites  and 
observances,  and  require  that  men  sacrifice  to 
^cts,  7.  53. 


them;  or  those  who  say  that  all  this  worship  is 
due  to  one  God,  the  Creator,  and  teach  us  to 
render  it  with  true  piety  to  Him,  by  the  vision 
of  Whom  they  are  themselves  already  blessed, 
and  in  Whom  they  promise  that  we  shall  be  so? 
For  that  vision  of  God  is  the  beauty  of  a  vision 
so  great  and  is  so  infinitely  desirable  that  Plo¬ 
tinus  does  not  hesitate  to  say  that  he  who  enjoys 
all  other  blessings  in  abundance  and  has  not 
this  is  supremely  miserable.2  Since,  therefore, 
miracles  are  wrought  by  some  angels  to  induce 
us  to  worship  this  God,  by  others,  to  induce  us 
to  worship  themselves;  and  since  the  former 
forbid  us  to  worship  these,  while  the  latter  dare 
not  forbid  us  to  worship  God,  which  are  we  to 
listen  to?  Let  the  Platonists  reply,  or  any  phi¬ 
losophers,  or  the  theurgists,  or  rather,  periur - 
gists 3 — for  this  name  is  good  enough  for  those 
who  practise  such  arts.  In  short,  let  all  men  an¬ 
swer — if.  at  least,  there  survives  in  them  any 
spark  of  that  natural  perception  which,  as  ra¬ 
tional  beings,  they  possess  when  created — let 
them,  I  say,  tell  us  whether  we  should  sacrifice 
to  the  gods  or  angels  who  order  us  to  sacrifice 
to  them,  or  to  that  One  to  Whom  we  are  ordered 
to  sacrifice  by  those  who  forbid  us  to  worship 
either  themselves  or  these  others.  If  neither  the 
one  party  nor  the  other  had  wrought  miracles, 
but  had  merely  uttered  commands,  the  one  to 
sacrifice  to  themselves,  the  other  forbidding 
that,  and  ordering  us  to  sacrifice  to  God,  a  godly 
mind  would  have  been  at  no  loss  to  discern 
which  command  proceeded  from  proud  arro¬ 
gance,  and  which  from  true  religion.  I  will  say 
more.  If  miracles  had  been  wrought  only  by 
those  who  demand  sacrifice  for  themselves, 
while  those  who  forbade  this,  and  enjoined  sac¬ 
rificing  to  the  one  God  only,  thought  fit  entirely 
to  forego  the  use  of  visible  miracles,  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  latter  was  to  be  preferred  by  all 
who  would  use,  not  their  eyes  only,  but  their 
reason.  But  since  God,  for  the  sake  of  com¬ 
mending  to  us  the  oracles  of  His  truth,  has,  by 
means  of  these  immortal  messengers,  who  pro¬ 
claim  His  majesty  and  not  their  own  pride, 
wrought  miracles  of  surpassing  grandeur,  cer¬ 
tainty,  and  distinctness,  in  order  that  the  weak 
among  the  godly  might  not  be  drawn  away  to 
false  religion  by  those  who  require  us  to  sacri¬ 
fice  to  them  and  endeavour  to  convince  us  by 
stupendous  appeals  to  our  senses,  who  is  so 
utterly  unreasonable  as  not  to  choose  and  follow 
the  truth,  when  he  finds  that  it  is  heralded  by 
even  more  striking  evidences  than  falsehood? 

As  for  those  miracles  which  history  ascribes 

2Enneads,  1.  6.  7.  3Meaning,  officious  meddlers . 


THE  CITY  OF 

to  the  gods  of  the  heathen — I  do  not  refer  to 
those  prodigies  which  at  intervals  happen  from 
some  unknown  physical  causes,  and  which  are 
arranged  and  appointed  by  Divine  Providence, 
such  as  monstrous  births,  and  unusual  meteor¬ 
ological  phenomena,  whether  startling  only,  or 
also  injurious,  and  which  are  said  to  be  brought 
about  and  removed  by  communication  with  de¬ 
mons,  and  by  their  most  deceitful  craft — but  I 
refer  to  these  prodigies  which  manifestly  enough 
are  wrought  by  their  power  and  force,  as,  that 
the  household  gods  which  ^Eneas  carried  from 
Troy  in  his  flight  moved  from  place  to  place; 
that  Tarquin  cut  a  whetstone  with  a  razor;  that 
the  Epidaurian  serpent  attached  himself  as  a 
companion  to  ^Esculapius  on  his  voyage  to 
Rome;  that  the  ship  in  which  the  image  of  the 
Phrygian  mother  stood,  and  which  could  not 
be  moved  by  a  host  of  men  and  oxen,  was 
moved  by  one  weak  woman,  who  attached  her 
girdle  to  the  vessel  and  drew  it,  as  proof  of  her 
chastity;  that  a  vestal,  whose  virginity  was  ques¬ 
tioned,  removed  the  suspicion  by  carrying  from 
the  Tiber  a  sieve  full  of  water  without  any  of  it 
dropping:  these,  then,  and  the  like,  are  by  no 
means  to  be  compared  for  greatness  and  virtue 
to  those  which,  we  read,  were  wrought  among 
God’s  people.  How  much  less  can  we  compare 
those  marvels,  which  even  the  laws  of  heathen 
nations  prohibit  and  punish — I  mean  the  mag¬ 
ical  and  theurgic  marvels,  of  which  the  great 
part  are  merely  illusions  practised  upon  the 
senses,  as  the  drawing  down  of  the  moon,  “that,” 
as  Lucan  says,  “it  may  shed  a  stronger  influence 
on  the  plants”?  And  if  some  of  these  do  seem 
to  equal  those  which  are  wrought  by  the  godly, 
the  end  for  which  they  are  wrought  distinguishes 
the  two,  and  shows  that  ours  are  incomparably 
the  more  excellent.  For  those  miracles  com¬ 
mend  the  worship  of  a  plurality  of  gods,  who 
deserve  worship  the  less  the  more  they  demand 
it:  but  these  of  ours  commend  the  worship  of 
the  one  God,  Who,  both  by  the  testimony  of  His 
own  Scriptures  and  by  the  eventual  abolition  of 
sacrifices,  proves  that  He  needs  no  such  offer¬ 
ings.  If,  therefore,  any  angels  demand  sacrifice 
for  themselves,  we  must  prefer  those  who  de¬ 
mand  it  not  for  themselves,  but  for  God,  the 
Creator  of  all,  whom  they  serve.  For  thus  they 
prove  how  sincerely  they  love  us,  since  they  wish 
by  sacrifice  to  subject  us,  not  to  themselves, 
but  to  Him  by  the  contemplation  of  Whom  they 
themselves  are  blessed,  and  to  bring  us  to  Him 
from  Whom  they  themselves  have  never  strayed. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  any  angels  wish  us  to 
sacrifice,  not  to  one,  but  to  many,  not,  indeed, 


GOD  X.  15-17  309 

to  themselves,  but  to  the  gods  whose  angels  they 
are,  we  must  in  this  case  also  prefer  those  who 
are  the  angels  of  the  one  God  of  gods,  and  who 
so  bid  us  to  worship  Him  as  to  preclude  our 
worshipping  any  other.  But,  further,  if  it  be  the 
case,  as  their  pride  and  deceitfulness  rather  in¬ 
dicate,  that  they  are  neither  good  angels  nor  the 
angels  of  good  gods,  but  wicked  demons,  who 
wish  sacrifice  to  be  paid,  not  to  the  one  only  and 
supreme  God,  but  to  themselves,  what  better 
protection  against  them  can  we  choose  than 
that  of  the  one  God  Whom  the  good  angels 
serve,  the  angels  who  bid  us  sacrifice,  not  to 
themselves,  but  to  Him  Whose  sacrifice  we  our¬ 
selves  ought  to  be? 

Chap.  17.  Concerning  the  ark  of  the  covenant , 
and  the  miraculous  signs  whereby  God  au¬ 
thenticated  the  law  and  the  promise 
On  this  account  it  was  that  the  law  of  God, 
given  by  the  disposition  of  angels,  and  which 
commanded  that  the  one  God  of  gods  alone  re¬ 
ceive  sacred  worship,  to  the  exclusion  of  all 
others,  was  deposited  in  the  ark,  called  the  ark 
of  the  testimony.  By  this  name  it  is  sufficiently 
indicated,  not  that  God,  Who  was  worshipped 
by  all  those  rites,  was  shut  up  and  enclosed  in 
that  place,  though  His  responses  emanated  from 
it  along  with  signs  appreciable  by  the  senses,  but 
that  His  will  was  declared  from  that  throne.  The 
law  itself,  too,  was  engraven  on  tables  of  stone, 
and,  as  I  have  said,  deposited  in  the  ark,  which 
the  priests  carried  with  due  reverence  during  the 
sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  along  with  the  taber¬ 
nacle,  which  was  in  like  manner  called  the  tab¬ 
ernacle  of  the  testimony;  and  there  was  then  an 
accompanying  sign,  which  appeared  as  a  cloud 
by  day  and  as  a  fire  by  night;  when  the  cloud 
moved,  the  camp  was  shifted,  and  where  it 
stood  the  camp  was  pitched.  Besides  these  signs 
and  the  voices  which  proceeded  from  the  place 
where  the  ark  was,  there  were  other  miraculous 
testimonies  to  the  law.  For  when  the  ark  was 
carried  across  Jordan,  on  the  entrance  to  the 
land  of  promise,  the  upper  part  of  the  river 
stopped  in  its  course,  and  the  lower  part  flowed 
on,  so  as  to  present  both  to  the  ark  and  the 
people  dry  ground  to  pass  over.  Then,  when  it 
was  carried  seven  times  round  the  first  hostile 
and  polytheistic  city  they  came  to,  its  walls  sud¬ 
denly  fell  down,  though  assaulted  by  no  hand, 
struck  by  no  battering-ram.  Afterwards,  too, 
when  they  were  now  resident  in  the  land  of 
promise,  and  the  ark  had,  in  punishment  of  their 
sin,  been  taken  by  their  enemies,  its  captors 
triumphantly  placed  it  in  the  temple  of  their 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


favourite  god  and  left  it  shut  up  there,  but.  on 
opening  the  temple  next  day,  they  found  the 
image  they  used  to  pray  to  fallen  to  the  ground 
and  shamefully  shattered.  Then,  being  them¬ 
selves  alarmed  by  portents,  and  still  more 
shamefully  punished,  they  restored  the  ark  of 
the  testimony  to  the  people  from  whom  they 
had  taken  it.  And  what  was  the  manner  of  its 
restoration?  They  placed  it  on  a  wagon,  and 
yoked  to  it  cows  from  which  they  had  taken 
the  calves,  and  let  them  choose  their  own  course, 
expecting  that  in  this  way  the  divine  will  would 
be  indicated;  and  the  cows,  without  any  man 
driving  or  directing  them,  steadily  pursued  the 
way  to  the  Hebrews,  without  regarding  the  low¬ 
ing  of  their  calves,  and  thus  restored  the  ark 
to  its  worshippers.  To  God  these  and  such  like 
wonders  are  small,  but  they  are  mighty  to  terrify 
and  give  wholesome  instruction  to  men.  For  if 
philosophers,  and  especially  the  Platonists,  are 
with  justice  esteemed  wiser  than  other  men,  as  I 
have  just  been  mentioning,  because  they  taught 
that  even  these  earthly  and  insignificant  things 
are  ruled  by  Divine  Providence,  inferring  this 
from  the  numberless  beauties  which  are  observ¬ 
able  not  only  in  the  bodies  of  animals,  but  even 
in  plants  and  grasses,  how  much  more  plainly 
do  these  things  attest  the  presence  of  divinity 
which  happen  at  the  time  predicted,  and  in 
which  that  religion  is  commended  which  forbids 
the  offering  of  sacrifice  to  any  celestial,  terres¬ 
trial,  or  infernal  being,  and  commands  it  to  be 
offered  to  God  only,  Who  alone  blesses  us  by 
His  love  for  us.  and  by  our  love  to  Him,  and 
Who,  by  arranging  the  appointed  times  of  those 
sacrifices,  and  by  predicting  that  they  were  to 
pass  into  a  better  sacrifice  by  a  better  Priest, 
testified  that  He  has  no  appetite  for  these  sacri¬ 
fices,  but  through  them  indicated  others  of  more 
substantial  blessing — and  all  this  not  that  He 
himself  may  be  glorified  by  these  honours,  but 
that  we  may  be  stirred  up  to  worship  and  cleave 
to  Him,  being  inflamed  by  His  love,  which  is 
our  advantage  rather  than  His? 

Chap.  18.  Against  those  who  deny  that  the 
books  of  the  Church  are  to  be  believed  about 
the  miracles  whereby  the  people  of  God  were 
educated 

Will  some  one  say  that  these  miracles  are 
false,  that  they  never  happened,  and  that  the 
records  of  them  are  lies?  Whoever  says  so,  and 
asserts  that  in  such  matters  no  records  whatever 
can  be  credited,  may  also  say  that  there  are  no 
gods  who  care  for  human  affairs.  For  they  have 
induced  men  to  worship  them  only  by  means  of 


miraculous  works,  which  the  heathen  histories 
testify,  and  by  which  the  gods  have  made  a 
display  of  their  own  power  rather  than  done 
any  real  service.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  have 
not  undertaken  in  this  work,  of  which  we  are 
now  writing  the  tenth  book,  to  refute  those  who 
either  deny  that  there  is  any  divine  power,  or 
contend  that  it  does  not  interfere  with  human 
affairs,  but  those  who  prefer  their  own  good  to 
our  God,  the  Founder  of  the  holy  and  most  glor¬ 
ious  city,  not  knowing  that  He  is  also  the  in¬ 
visible  and  unchangeable  Founder  of  this  visible 
and  changing  world  and  the  truest  bestower  of 
the  blessed  life  which  resides  not  in  things 
created  but  in  Himself.  For  thus  speaks  His 
most  trustworthy  prophet :  “It  is  good  for  me 
to  be  united  to  God.”1  Among  philosophers  it 
is  a  question,  what  is  that  end  and  good  to  the 
attainment  of  which  all  our  duties  are  to  have 
a  relation?  The  Psalmist  did  not  say,  “It  is  good 
for  me  to  have  great  wealth,  or  to  wear  imperial 
insignia,  purple,  sceptre,  and  diadem”;  or,  as 
some  even  of  the  philosophers  have  not  blushed 
to  say,  “It  is  good  for  me  to  enjoy  sensual  pleas¬ 
ure”;  or,  as  the  better  men  among  them  seemed 
to  say,  “My  good  is  my  spiritual  strength” ;  but, 
“It  is  good  for  me  to  be  united  to  God.”  This  he 
had  learned  from  Him  Whom  the  holy  angels, 
with  the  accompanying  witness  of  miracles,  pre¬ 
sented  as  the  sole  object  of  worship.  And  hence 
he  himself  became  the  sacrifice  of  God,  Whose 
spiritual  love  inflamed  him  and  into  Whose  in¬ 
effable  and  incorporeal  embrace  he  yearned  to 
cast  himself.  Moreover,  if  the  worshippers  of 
many  gods  (whatever  kind  of  gods  they  fancy 
their  own  to  be)  believe  that  the  miracles  re¬ 
corded  in  their  civil  histories,  or  in  the  books  of 
magic,  or  of  the  more  respectable  theurgy,  were 
wrought  by  these  gods,  wThat  reason  have  they 
for  refusing  to  believe  the  miracles  recorded  in 
those  writings,  to  which  we  owe  a  credence  as 
much  greater  as  He  is  greater  to  Whom  alone 
these  writings  teach  us  to  sacrifice? 

Chap.  19.  On  the  reasonableness  of  offering ,  as 
the  true  religion  teaches ,  a  visible  sacrifice 
to  the  one  true  and  invisible  God 
As  to  those  wTho  think  that  these  visible  sac¬ 
rifices  are  suitably  offered  to  other  gods,  but 
that  invisible  sacrifices,  the  graces  of  purity  of 
mind  and  holiness  of  will,  should  be  offered,  as 
greater  and  better,  to  the  invisible  God,  Himself 
greater  and  better  than  all  others,  they  must  be 
oblivious  that  these  visible  sacrifices  are  signs 
of  the  invisible,  as  the  words  wre  utter  are  the 
^s.  73.  28. 


THE  CITY  OF 

signs  of  things.  And  therefore,  as  in  prayer  or 
praise  we  direct  intelligible  words  to  Him  to 
Whom  in  our  heart  we  offer  the  very  feelings  we 
are  expressing,  so  we  are  to  understand  that  in 
sacrifice  we  offer  visible  sacrifice  only  to  Him  to 
Whom  in  our  heart  we  ought  to  present  ourselves 
an  invisible  sacrifice.  It  is  then  that  the  angels, 
and  all  those  superior  powers  who  are  mighty  by 
their  goodness  and  piety,  regard  us  with  pleas¬ 
ure,  and  rejoice  with  us  and  assist  us  to  the  ut¬ 
most  of  their  power.  But  if  we  offer  such  wor¬ 
ship  to  them,  they  decline  it;  and  when  on  any 
mission  to  men  they  become  visible  to  the 
senses,  they  positively  forbid  it.  Examples  of 
this  occur  in  holy  writ.  Some  fancied  they 
should,  by  adoration  or  sacrifice,  pay  the  same 
honour  to  angels  as  is  due  to  God,  and  were  pre¬ 
vented  from  doing  so  by  the  angels  themselves 
and  ordered  to  render  it  to  Him  to  Whom  alone 
they  know  it  to  be  due.  And  the  holy  angels  have 
in  this  been  imitated  by  holy  men  of  God.  For 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  when  they  had  wrought  a 
miracle  of  healing  in  Lycaonia,  were  thought  to 
be  gods,  and  the  Lycaonians  desired  to  sacrifice 
to  them,  and  they  humbly  and  piously  declined 
this  honour,  and  announced  to  them  the  God  in 
Whom  they  should  believe.  And  those  deceitful 
and  proud  spirits,  who  exact  worship  do  so  sim¬ 
ply  because  they  know  it'  to  be  due  to  the  true 
God.  For  that  which  they  take  pleasure  in  is  not. 
as  Porphyry  says  and  some  fancy,  the  smell  of 
the  victims,  but  divine  honours.  They  have,  in 
fact,  plenty  of  odours  on  all  hands,  and,  if  they 
wished  more,  they  could  provide  them  for  them¬ 
selves.  But  the  spirits  who  arrogate  to  them¬ 
selves  divinity  are  delighted  not  with  the  smoke 
of  carcasses,  but  with  the  suppliant  spirit  which 
they  deceive  and  hold  in  subjection,  and  hinder 
from  drawing  near  to  God,  preventing  him  from 
offering  himself  in  sacrifice  to  God  by  inducing 
him  to  sacrifice  to  others. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  supreme  and  true  sacrifice 

which  was  effected  by  the  Mediator  between 

God' and  men 

And  hence  that  true  Mediator,  in  so  far  as,  by 
assuming  the  form  of  a  servant,  He  became  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ 
Jesus,  though  in  the  form  of  God  He  received 
sacrifice  together  with  the  Father,  with  whom 
He  is  one  God,  yet  in  the  form  of  a  servant  He 
chose  rather  to  be  than  to  receive  a  sacrifice, 
that  not  even  by  this  instance  any  one  might 
have  occasion  to  suppose  that  sacrifice  should 
be  rendered  to  any  creature.  Thus  He  is  both  the 
Priest  who  offers  and  the  Sacrifice  offered.  And 


GOD  X.  18-21  311 

He  designed  that  there  should  be  a  daily  sign  of 
this  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Church,  which,  being 
His  body,  learns  to  offer  herself  through  Him. 
Of  this  true  Sacrifice  the  ancient  sacrifices  of  the 
saints  were  the  various  and  numerous  signs ;  and 
it  was  thus  variously  figured,  just  as  one  thing 
is  signified  by  a  variety  of  words,  that  there  may 
be  less  weariness  when  we  speak  of  it  much.  To 
this  supreme  and  true  sacrifice  all  false  sacri¬ 
fices  have  given  place. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  power  delegated  to  demons  for 
the  trial  and  glorification  of  the  saints ,  who 
conquer  not  by  propitiating  the  spirits  of  the 
air ,  but  by  abiding  in  God 
The  power  delegated  to  the  demons  at  certain 
appointed  and  well-adjusted  seasons,  that  they 
may  give  expression  to  their  hostility  to  the  city 
of  God  by  stirring  up  against  it  the  men  who  are 
under  their  influence,  and  may  not  only  receive 
sacrifice  from  those  who  willingly  offer  it,  but 
may  also  extort  it  from  the  unwilling  by  violent 
persecution;  this  power  is  found  to  be  not  mere¬ 
ly  harmless,  but  even  useful  to  the  Church,  com¬ 
pleting  as  it  does  the  number  of  martyrs,  whom 
the  city  of  God  esteems  as  all  the  more  illustri¬ 
ous  and  honoured  citizens,  because  they  have 
striven  even  to  blood  against  the  sin  of  impiety. 
If  the  ordinary  language  of  the  Church  allowed 
it,  we  might  more  elegantly  call  these  men  our 
heroes.  For  this  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from 
Juno,  who  in  Greek  is  called  Here ,  and  hence, 
according  to  the  Greek  myths,  one  of  her  sons 
was  called  Heros.  And  these  fables  mystically 
signified  that  Juno  was  mistress  of  the  air,  which 
they  suppose  to  be  inhabited  by  the  demons  and 
the  heroes,  understanding  by  heroes  the  souls  of 
the  well-deserving  dead.  But  for  a  quite  oppo¬ 
site  reason  would  we  call  our  martyrs  heroes — 
supposing,  as  I  said,  that  the  usage  of  ecclesias¬ 
tical  language  would  admit  of  it — not  because 
they  lived  along  with  the  demons  in  the  air,  but 
because  they  conquered  these  demons  or  powers 
of  the  air,  and  among  them  Juno  herself,  be  she 
what  she  may,  not  unsuitably  represented,  as  she 
commonly  is  by  the  poets,  as  hostile  to  virtue 
and  jealous  of  men  of  mark  aspiring  to  the  heav¬ 
ens.  Virgil,  however,  unhappily  gives  way,  and 
yields  to  her;  for,  though  he  represents  her  as 
saying,  “I  am  conquered  by  AZneas ,’n  Helenus 
gives  iEneas  himself  this  religious  advice : 

Pay  vows  to  Juno:  overbear 

Her  queenly  soul  with  gift  and  prayer2 

In  conformity  with  this  opinion,  Porphyry — ex- 
ldZneid,  bk.  vii.  310.  2Ibid.,  bk.  hi.  438,  439. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


pressing,  however,  not  so  much  his  own  views  as 
other  people’s — says  that  a  good  god  or  genius 
cannot  come  to  a  man  unless  the  evil  genius  has 
been  first  of  all  propitiated,  implying  that  the 
evil  deities  had  greater  power  than  the  good; 
for,  until  they  have  been  appeased  and  give 
place,  the  good  can  give  no  assistance ;  and  if  the 
evil  deities  oppose,  the  good  can  give  no  help; 
whereas  the  evil  can  do  injury  without  the  good 
being  able  to  prevent  them.  This  is  not  the  way 
of  the  trus  and  truly  holy  religion;  not  thus  do 
our  martyrs  conquer  Juno,  that  is  to  say.  the 
powers  of  the  air,  who  envy  the  virtues  of  the 
pious.  Our  heroes,  if  we  could  so  call  them,  over¬ 
come  Here,  not  by  suppliant  gifts,  but  by  divine 
virtues.  As  Scipio,  who  conquered  Africa  by  his 
valour,  is  more  suitably  styled  Africanus  than  if 
he  had  appeased  his  enemies  by  gifts  and  so  won 
their  mercy. 

Chap.  22.  Whence  the  saints  derive  power 

against  demons  and  true  purification  of  heart 

It  is  by  true  piety  that  men  of  God  cast  '©ut 
the  hostile  power  of  the  air  which  opposes  god¬ 
liness;  it  is  by  exorcising  it.  not  by  propitiating 
it;  and  they  overcome  all  the  temptations  of  the 
adversary  by  praying,  not  to  him.  but  to  their 
own  God  against  him.  For  the  devil  cannot  con¬ 
quer  or  subdue  any  but  those  who  are  in  league 
with  sin;  and  therefore  he  is  conquered  in  the 
name  of  Him  Who  assumed  humanity  and  that 
without  sin,  that  Himself  being  both  Priest  and 
Sacrifice,  He  might  bring  about  the  remission  of 
sins,  that  is  to  say,  might  bring  it  about  through 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  by  Whom  we  are  reconciled  to 
God,  the  cleansing  from  sin  being  accomplished. 
For  men  are  separated  from  God  only  by  sins, 
from  which  we  are  in  this  life  cleansed  not  by 
our  own  virtue,  but  by  the  divine  compas¬ 
sion;  through  His  indulgence,  not  through  our 
own  power.  For,  whatever  virtue  we  call  our 
own  is  itself  bestowed  upon  us  by  His  good¬ 
ness.  And  we  might  attribute  too  much  to 
ourselves  while  in  the  flesh,  unless  we  lived  in 
the  receipt  of  pardon  until  we  laid  it  down. 
This  is  the  reason  why  there  has  been  vouch¬ 
safed  to  us,  through  the  Mediator,  this  grace, 
that  we  who  are  polluted  by  sinful  flesh  should 
be  cleansed  by  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.  By 
this  grace  of  God,  wherein  He  has  shown  His 
great  compassion  toward  us,  we  are  both  gov¬ 
erned  by  faith  in  this  life  and,  after  this  life,  are 
led  onwards  to  the  fullest  perfection  by  the  vi¬ 
sion  of  immutable  truth. 


Chap.  23.  Of  the  principles  which,  according  to 
the  Platonists,  regidate  the  purification  of  the 
soul 

Even  Porphyry  asserts  that  it  was  revealed  by 
divine  oracles  that  we  are  not  purified  by  any 
sacrifices  to  sun  or  moon,  meaning  it  to  be  in¬ 
ferred  that  we  are  not  purified  by  sacrificing  to 
any  gods.  For  what  mysteries  can  purify,  if 
those  of  the  sun  and  moon,  which  are  esteemed 
the  chief  of  the  celestial  gods,  do  not  purify?  He 
says,  too,  in  the  same  place,  that  “principles” 
can  purify,  lest  it  should  be  supposed,  from  his 
saying  that  sacrificing  to  the  sun  and  moon  can¬ 
not  purify,  that  sacrificing  to  some  other  of  the 
host  of  gods  might  do  so.  And  what  he  as  a  Pla- 
tonist  means  by  “principles,”  we  know.  For  he 
speaks  of  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son, 
whom  he  calls  (writing  in  Greek)  the  intellect 
or  mind  of  the  Father;1  but  of  the  Holy  Spirit  he 
says  either  nothing,  or  nothing  plainly,  for  I  do 
not  understand  what  other  he  speaks  of  as  hold¬ 
ing  the  middle  place  between  these  two.  For  if, 
like  Plotinus  in  his  discussion  regarding  the 
three  principal  substances,2  he  wished  us  to  un¬ 
derstand  by  this  third  the  soul  of  nature,  he 
would  certainly  not  have  given  it  the  middle 
place  between  these  two,  that  is,  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  For  Plotinus  places  the  soul 
of  nature  after  the  intellect  of  the  Father,  while 
Porphyry,  making  it  the  mean,  does  not  place  it 
after,  but  between  the  others.  No  doubt  he 
spoke  according  to  his  light,  or  as  he  thought  ex¬ 
pedient  ;  but  we  assert  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the 
Spirit  not  of  the  Father  only,  nor  of  the  Son 
only,  but  of  both.  For  philosophers  speak  as 
they  have  a  mind  to  and  in  the  most  difficult 
matters  do  not  scruple  to  offend  religious  ears; 
but  we  are  bound  to  speak  according  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  rule,  lest  freedom  of  speech  beget  impiety 
of  opinion  about  the  matters  themselves  of 
which  we  speak. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  one  only  true  principle  which 
alone  purifies  and  renews  human  nature 
Accordingly,  when  we  speak  of  God,  we  do 
not  affirm  two  or  three  principles,  no  more  than 
we  are  at  liberty  to  affirm  two  or  three  gods ;  al¬ 
though,  speaking  of  each,  of  the  Father,  or  of 
the  Son,  or  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  confess  that 
each  is  God :  and  yet  we  do  not  say,  as  the  Sabel- 
lian  heretics  say,  that  the  Father  is  the  same  as 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  the  same  as  the 
Father  and  the  Son;  but  we  say  that  the  Father 
is  the  Father  of  the  Son,  and  the  Son  the  Son  of 
the  Father,  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the 
xSee  below,  Chap.  28.  2Enneads ,  v.  1. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Father  and  the  Son  is  neither  the  Father  nor  the 
Son.  It  was  therefore  truly  said  that  man  is 
cleansed  only  by  a  Principle,  although  the  Pla- 
tonists  erred  in  speaking  in  the  plural  of  princi¬ 
ples.  But  Porphyry,  being  under  the  dominion 
of  these  envious  powers,  whose  influence  he  was 
at  once  ashamed  of  and  afraid  to  throw  off,  re¬ 
fused  to  recognize  that  Christ  is  the  Principle 
by  whose  incarnation  we  are  purified.  Indeed  he 
despised  Him,  because  of  the  flesh  itself  which 
He  assumed,  that  He  might  offer  a  sacrifice  for 
our  purification — a  great  mystery,  unintelligible 
to  Porphyry’s  pride,  which  that  true  and  benig¬ 
nant  Redeemer  brought  low  by  His  humility, 
manifesting  Himself  to  mortals  by  the  mortality 
which  He  assumed,  and  which  the  malignant 
and  deceitful  mediators  are  proud  of  wanting, 
promising,  as  the  boon  of  immortals,  a  deceptive 
assistance  to  wretched  men.  Thus  the  good  and 
true  Mediator  showed  that  it  is  sin  which  is  evil, 
and  not  the  substance  or  nature  of  flesh;  for 
this,  together  with  the  human  soul,  could  with¬ 
out  sin  be  both  assumed  and  retained,  and  laid 
down  in  death,  and  changed  to  something  better 
by  resurrection.  He  showed  also  that  death  it¬ 
self,  although  the  punishment  of  sin,  was  sub¬ 
mitted  to  by  Him  for  our  sakes  without  sin  and 
must  not  be  evaded  by  sin  on  our  part,  but  rath¬ 
er,  if  opportunity  serves,  be  borne  for  righteous¬ 
ness’  sake.  For  he  was  able  to  expiate  sins  by 
dying,  because  He  both  died  and  not  for  sin  of 
His  own.  But  He  has  not  been  recognized  by 
Porphyry  as  the  Principle,  otherwise  he  would 
have  recognized  Him  as  the  Purifier.  The  Prin¬ 
ciple  is  neither  the  flesh  nor  the  human  soul  in 
Christ,  but  the  Word  by  which  all  things  were 
made.  The  flesh,  therefore,  does  not  by  its  own 
virtue  purify,  but  by  virtue  of  the  Word  by 
which  it  was  assumed,  when  “the  Word  became 
flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.”1  For  speaking  mys¬ 
tically  of  eating  His  flesh,  when  those  who  did 
not  understand  Him  were  offended  and  went 
away,  saying,  “This  is  an  hard  saying,  who  can 
hear  it?/’  He  answered  to  the  rest  who  remained, 
“It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth;  the  flesh  profit¬ 
ed  nothing.”2  The  Principle,  therefore,  having 
assumed  a  human  soul  and  flesh,  cleanses  the 
soul  and  flesh  of  believers.  Therefore,  when  the 
Jews  asked  Him  who  He  was,  He  answered  that 
He  was  the  Principle .3  And  this  we  carnal  and 
feeble  men,  liable  to  sin  and  involved  in  the 
darkness  of  ignorance,  could  not  possibly  under¬ 
stand,  unless  we  were  cleansed  and  healed  by 

^ohn,  i.  14.  2John,  6.  60-64. 

3John,  8.  25;  or  “the  beginning,”  following  a  different 
reading  from  ours. 


GOD  X.  22-25  313 

Him,  both  by  means  of  what  we  were  and  of 
what  we  were  not.  For  we  were  men,  but  we 
were  not  righteous ;  whereas  in  His  incarnation 
there  was  a  human  nature,  but  it  was  righteous 
and  not  sinful.  This  is  the  mediation  whereby  a 
hand  is  stretched  to  the  lapsed  and  fallen;  this 
is  the  seed  “ordained  by  angels,”  by  whose 
ministry  the  law  also  was  given  enjoining  the 
worship  of  one  God,  and  promising  that  this 
Mediator  should  come. 

Chap.  25.  That  all  the  saints,  both  under  the 
law  and  before  it,  were  justified  by  faith  in 
the  mystery  of  Christ's  incarnation 
It  was  by  faith  in  this  mystery,  and  godliness 
of  life,  that  purification  was  attainable  even  by 
the  saints  of  old,  whether  before  the  law  was 
given  to  the  Hebrews  (for  God  and  the  angels 
were  even  then  present  as  instructors),  or  in  the 
periods  under  the  law,  although  the  promises  of 
spiritual  things,  being  presented  in  figure, 
seemed  to  be  carnal,  and  hence  the  name  of  Old 
Testament.  For  it  was  then  the  prophets  lived, 
by  whom,  as  by  angels,  the  same  promise  was  an¬ 
nounced;  and  among  them  was  he  whose  grand 
and  divine  sentiment  regarding  the  end  and  su¬ 
preme  good  of  man  I  have  just  now  quoted,  “It 
is  good  for  me  to  cleave  to  God.”4  In  this  psalm 
the  distinction  between  the  Old  and  New  Testa¬ 
ments  is  distinctly  announced.  For  the  Psalm¬ 
ist  says  that,  when  he  saw  that  the  carnal  and 
earthly  promises  were  abundantly  enjoyed  by 
the  ungodly,  his  feet  were  almost  gone,  his  steps 
had  well-nigh  slipped;  and  that  it  seemed  to  him 
as  if  he  had  served  God  in  vain,  when  he  saw 
that  those  who  despised  God  increased  in  that 
prosperity  which  he  looked  for  at  God’s  hand. 
He  says,  too,  that,  in  investigating  this  matter 
with  the  desire  of  understanding  why  it  was  so, 
he  had  laboured  in  vain,  until  he  went  into  the 
sanctuary  of  God  and  understood  the  end  of 
those  whom  he  had  erroneously  considered  hap¬ 
py.  Then  he  understood  that  they  were  cast 
down  by  that  very  thing,  as  he  says,  which  they 
had  made  their  boast,  and  that  they  had  been 
consumed  and  perished  for  their  iniquities;  and 
that  that  whole  fabric  of  temporal  prosperity 
had  become  as  a  dream  when  one  awaketh,  and 
suddenly  finds  himself  destitute  of  all  the  joys 
he  had  imaged  in  sleep.  And,  as  in  this  earth  or 
earthly  city  they  seemed  to  themselves  to  be 
great,  he  says,  “0  Lord,  in  Thy  city  Thou  wilt  re¬ 
duce  their  image  to  nothing.”  He  also  shows  how 
beneficial  it  had  been  for  him  to  seek  even  earth¬ 
ly  blessings  only  from  the  one  true  God,  in  Whose 
4Ps.  73.  28. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


power  are  all  things,  for  he  says,  “As  a  beast  was 
I  before  Thee,  and  I  am  always  with  Thee.”  “As 
a  beast,”  he  says,  meaning  that  he  was  stupid.  For 
I  ought  to  have  sought  from  Thee  such  things 
as  the  ungodly  could  not  enjoy  as  well  as  I,  and 
not  those  things  which  I  saw  them  enjoying  in 
abundance,  and  hence  concluded  I  was  serving 
Thee  in  vain,  because  they  who  declined  to  serve 
Thee  had  what  I  had  not.  Nevertheless,  “I  am 
always  with  Thee,”  because  even  in  my  desire 
for  such  things  I  did  not  pray  to  other  gods.  And 
.consequently  he  goes  on,  “Thou  hast  holden  me 
by  my  right  hand,  and  by  Thy  counsel  Thou 
hast  guided  me,  and  with  glory  hast  taken  me 
up”;  as  if  all  earthly  advantages  were  left-hand 
blessings,  though,  when  he  saw  them  enjoyed  by 
the  wicked,  his  feet  had  almost  gone.  “For 
what,”  he  says,  “have  I  in  heaven,  and  what 
have  I  desired  from  Thee  upon  earth?”  He 
blames  himself,  and  is  justly  displeased  with 
himself;  because,  though  he  had  in  heaven  so 
vast  a  possession  (as  he  afterwards  understood), 
he  yet  sought  from  his  God  on  earth  a  transitory 
and  fleeting  happiness — a  happiness  of  mire,  we 
may  say.  “My  heart  and  my  flesh,”  he  says, 
“fail,  0  God  of  my  heart.”  Happy  failure,  from 
things  below  to  things  above!  And  hence  in  an¬ 
other  psalm  He  says,  “My  soul  longeth,  yea, 
even  faileth,  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord.”1  Yet, 
though  he  had  said  of  both  his  heart  and  his  flesh 
that  they  were  failing,  he  did  not  say,  “0  God  of 
my  heart  and  my  flesh,”  but,  “0  God  of  my 
heart”;  for  by  the  heart  the  flesh  is  made  clean. 
Therefore,  says  the  Lord,  “Cleanse  that  which 
is  within,  and  the  outside  shall  be  clean  also.”2 
He  then  says  that  God  Himself — not  anything 
received  from  Him,  but  Himself — is  his  portion. 
“The  God  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for 
ever.”  Among  the  various  objects  of  human 
choice,  God  alone  satisfied  him.  “For,  lo,”  he 
says,  “they  that  are  far  from  Thee  shall  perish: 
Thou  destroyest  all  them  that  go  a-whoring 
from  Thee” — that  is,  who  prostitute  themselves 
to  many  gods.  And  then  follows  the  verse  for 
which  all  the  rest  of  the  psalm  seems  to  prepare : 
“It  is  good  for  me  to  cleave  to  God” — not  to  go 
far  off ;  not  to  go  a-whoring  with  a  multitude  of 
gods.  And  then  shall  this  union  with  God  be  per¬ 
fected,  when  all  that  is  to  be  redeemed  in  us  has 
been  redeemed.  But  for  the  present  we  must,  as 
he  goes  on  to  say,  “place  our  hope  in  God.”  “For 
that  which  is  seen,”  says  the  apostle,  “is  not 
hope.  For  what  a  man  sees,  why  does  he  yet  hope 
for?  But  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do 
1Ps.  84.  2.  2Matt.  23.  26. 


we  with  patience  wait  for  it.”3  Being,  then,  for 
the  present  established  in  this  hope,  let  us  do 
what  the  Psalmist  further  indicates,  and  become 
in  our  measure  angels  or  messengers  of  God,  de¬ 
claring  His  will,  and  praising  His  glory  and  His 
grace.  For  when  he  had  said,  “To  place  my  hope 
in  God,”  he  goes  on,  “that  I  may  declare  all  Thy 
praises  in  the  gates  of  the  daughter  of  Zion.” 
This  is  the  most  glorious  city  of  God;  this  is  the 
city  which  knows  and  worships  one  God :  she  is 
celebrated  by  the  holy  angels,  who  invite  us  to 
their  society,  and  desire  us  to  become  fellow- 
citizens  with  them  in  this  city;  for  they  do  not 
wish  us  to  worship  them  as  our  gods,  but  to  join 
them  in  worshipping  their  God  and  ours;  nor  to 
sacrifice  to  them,  but,  together  with  them,  to 
become  a  sacrifice  to  God.  Accordingly,  who¬ 
ever  will  lay  aside  malignant  obstinacy  and  con¬ 
sider  these  things  shall  be  assured  that  all  these 
blessed  and  immortal  spirits,  who  do  not  envy 
us  (for  if  they  envied  they  were  not  blessed), 
but  rather  love  us  and  desire  us  to  be  as  blessed 
as  themselves,  look  on  us  with  greater  pleasure 
and  give  us  greater  assistance,  when  we  join 
them  in  worshipping  one  God,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  than  if  we  were  to  offer  to  them¬ 
selves  sacrifice  and  worship. 

Chap.  26  .Of  Porphyry’s  weakness  in  wavering 
between  the  confession  of  the  true  God  and 
the  worship  of  demons 
I  know  not  how  it  is  so,  but  it  seems  to  me 
that  Porphyry  blushed  for  his  friends  the  the- 
urgists;  for  he  knew  all  that  I  have  adduced, 
but  did  not  frankly  condemn  polytheistic  wor¬ 
ship.  He  said,  in  fact,  that  there  are  some  angels 
who  visit  earth  and  reveal  divine  truth  to  the- 
urgists,  and  others  who  publish  on  earth  the 
things  that  belong  to  the  Father,  His  height  and 
depth.  Can  we  believe,  then,  that  the  angels 
whose  office  it  is  to  declare  the  will  of  the  Father 
wish  us  to  be  subject  to  any  but  Him  Whose  will 
they  declare?  And  hence,  even  this  Platonist 
himself  judiciously  observes  that  we  should 
rather  imitate  than  invoke  them.  We  ought  not, 
then,  to  fear  that  we  may  offend  these  immor¬ 
tal  and  happy  subjects  of  the  one  God  by  not 
sacrificing  to  them;  for  this  they  know  to  be  due 
only  to  the  one  true  God,  in  allegiance  to  Whom 
they  themselves  find  their  blessedness,  and 
therefore  they  will  not  have  it  given  to  them, 
either  in  figure  or  in  the  reality,  which  the  mys¬ 
teries  of  sacrifice  symbolized.  Such  arrogance 
belongs  to  proud  and  wretched  demons,  whose 
3Rom.  8.  24,  25. 


THE  CITY  OF 

disposition  is  diametrically  opposite  to  the  piety 
of  those  who  are  subject  to  God,  and  whose 
blessedness  consists  in  attachment  to  Him.  And, 
that  we  also  may  attain  to  this  bliss,  they  aid  us, 
as  is  fit,  with  sincere  kindliness,  and  usurp  over 
us  no  dominion,  but  declare  to  us  Him  under 
Whose  rule  we  are  then  fellow-subjects.  Why, 
then,  0  philosopher,  do  you  still  fear  to  speak 
freely  against  the  powers  which  are  inimical 
both  to  true  virtue  and  to  the  gifts  of  the  true 
God?  Already  you  have  discriminated  between 
the  angels  who  proclaim  God’s  will  and  those 
who  visit  theurgists,  drawn  down  by  I  know  not 
what  art.  Why  do  you  still  ascribe  to  these  latter 
the  honour  of  declaring  divine  truth?  If  they  do 
not  declare  the  will  of  the  Father,  what  divine 
revelations  can  they  make?  Are  not  these  the 
evil  spirits  who  were  bound  over  by  the  incanta¬ 
tions  of  an  envious  man,1  that  they  should  not 
grant  purity  of  soul  to  another  and  could  not,  as 
you  say,  be  set  free  from  these  bonds  by  a  good 
man  anxious  for  purity,  and  recover  power  over 
their  own  actions?  Do  you  still  doubt  whether 
these  are  wicked  demons;  or  do  you,  perhaps, 
feign  ignorance,  that  you  may  not  give  offence 
to  the  theurgists,  who  have  allured  you  by  their 
secret  rites,  and  have  taught  you,  as  a  mighty 
boon,  these  insane  and  pernicious  devilries?  Do 
you  dare  to  elevate  above  the  air,  and  even  to 
heaven,  these  envious  powers,  or  pests,  let  me 
rather  call  them,  less  worthy  of  the  name  of 
sovereign  than  of  slave,  as  you  yourself  own; 
and  are  you  not  ashamed  to  place  them  even 
among  your  sidereal  gods  and  so  put  a  slight 
upon  the  stars  themselves? 

Chap.  27  .Of  the  impiety  of  Porphyry,  which  is 
worse  than  even  the  mistake  of  Apaleius 
How  much  more  tolerable  and  accordant  with 
human  feeling  is  the  error  of  your  Platonist  co¬ 
sectary  Apuleius!  for  he  attributed  the  diseases 
and  storms  of  human  passions  only  to  the  de¬ 
mons  who  occupy  a  grade  beneath  the  moon  and 
makes  qven  this  avowal  as  by  constraint  regard¬ 
ing  gods  whom  he  honours ;  but  the  superior  and 
celestial  gods,  who  inhabit  the  ethereal  regions, 
whether  visible,  as  the  sun,  moon,  and  other 
luminaries,  whose  brilliancy  makes  them  con¬ 
spicuous,  or  invisible,  but  believed  in  by  him,  he 
does  his  utmost  to  remove  beyond  the  slightest 
stain  of  these  perturbations.  It  is  not,  then, 
from  Plato,  but  from  your  Chaldaean  teachers 
you  have  learned  to  elevate  human  vices  to  the 
ethereal  and  empyreal  regions  of  the  world  and 
^ee  above,  Chap.  9. 


GOD  X.  26-27  315 

to  the  celestial  firmament,  in  order  that  your 
theurgists  might  be  able  to  obtain  from  your 
gods  divine  revelations ;  and  yet  you  make  your¬ 
self  superior  to  these  divine  revelations  by  your 
intellectual  life,  which  dispenses  with  these  the- 
urgic  purifications  as  not  needed  by  a  philoso¬ 
pher.  But,  by  way  of  rewarding  your  teachers, 
you  recommend  these  arts  to  other  men,  who. 
not  being  philosophers,  may  be  persuaded  to  use 
what  you  acknowledge  to  be  useless  to  yourself, 
who  are  capable  of  higher  things;  so  that  those 
who  cannot  avail  themselves  of  the  virtue  of 
philosophy,  which  is  too  arduous  for  the  multi¬ 
tude,  may,  at  your  instigation,  betake  them¬ 
selves  to  theurgists  by  whom  they  may  be  puri¬ 
fied,  not,  indeed,  in  the  intellectual,  but  in  the 
spiritual  part  of  the  soul.  Now,  as  the  persons 
who  are  unfit  for  philosophy  form  incomparably 
the  majority  of  mankind,  more  may  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  consult  these  secret  and  illicit  teachers 
of  yours  than  frequent  the  Platonic  schools.  For 
these  most  impure  demons,  pretending  to  be 
ethereal  gods,  whose  herald  and  messenger  you 
have  become,  have  promised  that  those  who  are 
purified  by  theurgy  in  the  spiritual  part  of  their 
soul  shall  not  indeed  return  to  the  Father,  but 
shall  dwell  among  the  ethereal  gods  above  the 
aerial  regions.  But  such  fancies  are  not  listened 
to  by  the  multitudes  of  men  whom  Christ  came 
to  set  free  from  the  tyranny  of  demons.  For  in 
Him  they  have  the  most  gracious  cleansing,  in 
which  mind,  spirit,  and  body  alike  participate. 
For,  in  order  that  He  might  heal  the  whole  man 
from  the  plague  of  sin,  He  took  without  sin  the 
whole  human  nature.  Would  that  you  had  known 
Him,  and  would  that  you  had  committed  your¬ 
self  for  healing  to  Him  rather  than  to  your  own 
frail  and  infirm  human  virtue,  or  to  pernicious 
and  curious  arts!  He  would  not  have  deceived 
you;  for  Him  your  own  oracles,  on  your  own 
showing,  acknowledged  holy  and  immortal.  It  is 
of  Him,  too,  that  the  most  famous  poet  speaks, 
poetically  indeed,  since  he  applies  it  to  the  per¬ 
son  of  another,  yet  truly,  if  you  refer  it  to 
Christ,  saying,  “Under  thine  auspices,  if  any 
traces  of  our  crimes  remain,  they  shall  be  oblit¬ 
erated,  and  earth  freed  from  its  perpetual  fear.”2 
By  which  he  indicates  that,  by  reason  of  the  in¬ 
firmity  which  attaches  to  this  life,  the  greatest 
progress  in  virtue  and  righteousness  leaves  room 
for  the  existence,  if  not  of  crimes,  yet  of  the 
traces  of  crimes,  which  are  obliterated  only  by 
that  Saviour  of  whom  this  verse  speaks.  For  that 
he  did  not  say  this  at  the  prompting  of  his  own 
2Virgil,  Eclogues ,  bk.  iv.  13,  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


316 

fancy,  Virgil  tells  us  in  almost  the  last  verse  of 
that  4th  Eclogue,  when  he  says,  “The  last  age 
predicted  by  the  Cumaean  sibyl  has  now  ar¬ 
rived”  ;  whence  it  plainly  appears  that  this  had 
been  dictated  by  the  Cumaean  sibyl.  But  those 
theurgists,  or  rather  demons,  who  assume  the 
appearance  and  form  of  gods,  pollute  rather 
than  purify  the  human  spirit  by  false  appear¬ 
ances  and  the  delusive  mockery  of  unsubstantial 
forms.  How  can  those  whose  own  spirit  is  un¬ 
clean  cleanse  the  spirit  of  man?  Were  they  not 
unclean,  they  would  not  be  bound  by  the  in¬ 
cantations  of  an  envious  man  and  would  neither 
be  afraid  nor  grudge  to  bestow  that  hollow  boon 
which  they  promise.  But  it  is  sufficient  for  our 
purpose  that  you  acknowledge  that  the  intellec¬ 
tual  soul,  that  is,  our  mind,  cannot  be  justified 
by  theurgy;  and  that  even  the  spiritual  or  in¬ 
ferior  part  of  our  soul  cannot  by  this  act  be 
made  eternal  and  immortal,  though  you  main¬ 
tain  that  it  can  be  purified  by  it.  Christ,  how¬ 
ever,  promises  life  eternal;  and  therefore  to 
Him  the  world  flocks,  greatly  to  your  indigna¬ 
tion.  greatly  also  to  your  astonishment  and  con¬ 
fusion.  What  avails  your  forced  avowal  that  the¬ 
urgy  leads  men  astray,  and  deceives  vast  num¬ 
bers  by  its  ignorant  and  foolish  teaching,  and 
that  it  is  the  most  manifest  mistake  to  have  re¬ 
course  by  prayer  and  sacrifice  to  angels  and 
principalities,  when  at  the  same  time,  to  save 
yourself  from  the  charge  of  spending  labour  in 
vain  on  such  arts,  you  direct  men  to  the  theur¬ 
gists,  that  by  their  means  men,  who  do  not  live 
by  the  rule  of  the  intellectual  soul,  may  have 
their  spiritual  soul  purified? 

Chap.  28.  How  it  is  that  Porphyry  has  been  so 

blind  as  not  to  recognize  the  true  wisdom — 

Christ 

You  drive  men,  therefore,  into  the  most  pal¬ 
pable  error.  And  yet  you  are  not  ashamed  of  do¬ 
ing  so  much  harm,  though  you  call  yourself  a 
lover  of  virtue  and  wisdom.  Had  you  been  true 
and  faithful  in  this  profession,  you  would  have 
recognized  Christ,  the  virtue  of  God  and  the 
wisdom  of  God,  and  would  not,  in  the  pride  of 
vain  science,  have  revolted  from  His  wholesome 
humility.  Nevertheless  you  acknowledge  that 
the  spiritual  part  of  the  soul  can  be  purified  by 
the  virtue  of  chastity  without  the  aid  of  those 
theurgic  arts  and  mysteries  which  you  wasted 
your  time  in  learning.  You  even  say,  sometimes, 
that  these  mysteries  do  not  raise  the  soul  after 
death,  so  that,  after  the  termination  of  this  life, 
they  seem  to  be  of  no  service  even  to  the  part 
you  call  spiritual;  and  yet  you  recur  on  every 


opportunity  to  these  arts,  for  no  other  purpose, 
so  far  as  I  see,  than  to  appear  an  accomplished 
theurgist,  and  gratify  those  who  are  curious  in 
illicit  arts,  or  else  to  inspire  others  with  the 
same  curiosity.  But  we  give  you  all  praise  for 
saying  that  this  art  is  to  be  feared,  both  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  legal  enactments  against  it  and  by 
reason  of  the  danger  involved  in  the  very  prac¬ 
tice  of  it.  And  would  that  in  this,  at  least,  you 
were  listened  to  by  its  wretched  votaries,  that 
they  might  be  withdrawn  from  entire  absorption 
in  it,  or  might  even  be  preserved  from  tamper¬ 
ing  with  it  at  all!  You  say,  indeed,  that  igno¬ 
rance,  and  the  numberless  vices  resulting  from 
it,  cannot  be  removed  by  any  mysteries,  but 
only  by  the  tcltplkos  vovs,  that  is,  the  Father’s 
mind  or  intellect  conscious  of  the  Father’s  will. 
But  that  Christ  is  this  mind  you  do  not  be¬ 
lieve;  for  Him  you  despise  on  account  of  the 
body  He  took  of  a  woman  and  the  shame  of  the 
cross;  for  your  lofty  wisdom  spurns  such  low 
and  contemptible  things  and  soars  to  more  ex¬ 
alted  regions.  But  He  fulfils  what  the  holy 
prophets  truly  predicted  regarding  Him :  “I  will 
destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  bring  to 
nought  the  prudence  of  the  prudent.”1  For  He 
does  not  destroy  and  bring  to  nought  His  own 
gift  in  them,  but  what  they  arrogate  to  them¬ 
selves  and  do  not  hold  of  Him.  And  hence  the 
apostle,  having  quoted  this  testimony  from  the 
prophet,  adds,  “Where  is  the  wise?  where  is  the 
scribe?  where  is  the  disputer  of  this  world? 
Hath  not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this 
world?  For  after  that,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  the 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God 
by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them 
that  believe.  For  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the 
Greeks  seek  after  wisdom ;  but  we  preach  Christ 
crucified,  unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block  and 
unto  the  Greeks  foolishness;  but  unto  them 
which  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ 
the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  Be¬ 
cause  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men; 
and  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men.”2 
This  is  despised  as  a  weak  and  foolish  thing  by 
those  who  are  wise  and  strong  in  themselves; 
yet  this  is  the  grace  which  heals  the  weak,  who  do 
not  proudly  boast  a  blessedness  of  their  own,  but 
rather  humbly  acknowledge  their  real  misery. 

Chap.  29  .Of  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  the  Platonists  in  their  impiety 
blush  to  acknowledge 

You  proclaim  the  Father  and  His  Son,  whom 
you  call  the  Father’s  intellect  or  mind,  and  be- 
^sa.  29.  14.  2I  Cor.  1.  19-25. 


THE  CITY  OF 

tween  these  a  third,  by  whom  we  suppose  you 
mean  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  your  own  fashion 
you  call  these  three  Gods.  In  this,  though  your 
expressions  are  inaccurate,  you  do  in  some  sort, 
and  as  through  a  veil,  see  what  we  should  strive 
towards;  but  the  incarnation  of  the  unchange¬ 
able  Son  of  God,  whereby  we  are  saved  and  are 
enabled  to  reach  the  things  we  believe,  or  in  part 
understand,  this  is  what  you  refuse  to  recognize. 
You  see  in  a  fashion,  although  at  a  distance,  al¬ 
though  with  filmy  eye,  the  country  in  which  we 
should  abide;  but  the  way  to  it  you  know  not. 
Yet  you  believe  in  grace,  for  you  say  it  is  grant¬ 
ed  to  few  to  reach  God  by  virtue  of  intelligence. 
For  you  do  not  say,  “Few  have  thought  fit  or 
have  wished,”  but.  “It  has  been  granted  to  few” 
— distinctly  acknowledging  God’s  grace,  not 
man’s  sufficiency.  You  also  use  this  word  more 
expressly,  when,  in  accordance  with  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  Plato,  you  make  no  doubt  that  in  this  life 
a  man  cannot  by  any  means  attain  to  perfect 
wisdom,  but  that  whatever  is  lacking  is  in  the 
future  life  made  up  to  those  who  live  intellectu¬ 
ally,  by  God’s  providence  and  grace.  Oh,  had 
you  but  recognized  the  grace  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  and  that  very  incarnation  of 
His,  wherein  He  assumed  a  human  soul  and 
body,  you  might  have  seemed  the  brightest  ex¬ 
ample  of  grace!1  But  what  am  I  doing?  I  know 
it  is  useless  to  speak  to  a  dead  man — useless, 
at  least,  so  far  as  regards  you,  but  perhaps  not 
in  vain  for  those  who  esteem  you  highly,  and 
love  you  on  account  of  their  love  of  wisdom  or 
curiosity  about  those  arts  which  you  ought  not 
to  have  learned;  and  these  persons  I  address  in 
your  name.  The  grace  of  God  could  not  have 
been  more  graciously  commended  to  us  than 
thus,  that  the  only  Son  of  God,  remaining  un¬ 
changeable  in  Himself,  should  assume  human¬ 
ity,  and  should  give  us  the  hope  of  His  love,  by 
means  of  the  mediation  of  a  human  nature, 
through  which  we,  from  the  condition  of  men, 
might  come  to  Him  who  was  so  far  off — the  im¬ 
mortal  from  the  mortal;  the  unchangeable  from 
the  changeable;  the  just  from  the  unjust;  the 
blessed  from  the  wretched.  And,  as  He  had  given 
us  a  natural  instinct  to  desire  blessedness  and 
immortality,  He  Himself  continuing  to  be  bless¬ 
ed,  but  assuming  mortality,  by  enduring  what 
we  fear,  taught  us  to  despise  it,  that  what  we 
long  for  He  might  bestow  upon  us. 

But  in  order  to  your  acquiescence  in  this 
truth,  it  is  lowliness  that  is  requisite,  and  to  this 
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  bend  you.  For  what  is 

1  According  to  another  reading:  “You  might  have  seen 
it  to  be,”  etc. 


GOD  X.  28-29  317 

there  incredible,  especially  to  men  like  you,  ac¬ 
customed  to  speculation,  which  might  have  pre¬ 
disposed  you  to  believe  in  this — what  is  there 
incredible,  I  say,  in  the  assertion  that  God  as¬ 
sumed  a  human  soul  and  body?  You  yourselves 
ascribe  such  excellence  to  the  intellectual  soul, 
which  is,  after  all,  the  human  soul,  that  you 
maintain  that  it  can  become  consubstantial  with 
that  intelligence  of  the  Father  Whom  you  believe 
in  as  the  Son  of  God.  What  incredible  thing  is  it. 
then,  if  some  one  soul  be  assumed  by  Him  in  an 
ineffable  and  unique  manner  for  the  salvation  of 
many?  Moreover,  our  nature  itself  testifies  that 
a  man  is  incomplete  unless  a  body  be  united 
with  the  soul.  This  certainly  would  be  more  in¬ 
credible,  were  it  not  of  all  things  the. most  com¬ 
mon;  for  we  should  more  easily  believe  in  a 
union  between  spirit  and  spirit,  or,  to  use  your 
own  terminology,  between  the  incorporeal  and 
the  incorporeal,  even  though  the  one  were  hu¬ 
man,  the  other  divine,  the  one  changeable  and 
the  other  unchangeable,  than  in  a  union  between 
the  corporeal  and  the  incorporeal.  But  perhaps 
it  is  the  unprecedented  birth  of  a  body  from  a 
virgin  that  staggers  you?  But,  so  far  from  this 
being  a  difficulty,  it  ought  rather  to  assist  you  to 
receive  our  religion,  that  a  miraculous  person 
was  born  miraculously.  Or,  do  you  find  a  diffi¬ 
culty  in  the  fact  that,  after  His  body  had  been 
given  up  to  death,  and  had  been  changed  into  a 
higher  kind  of  body  by  resurrection,  and  was 
now  no  longer  mortal  but  incorruptible,  He  car¬ 
ried  it  up  into  heavenly  places?  Perhaps  you  re¬ 
fuse  to  believe  this,  because  you  remember  that 
Porphyry,  in  these  very  books  from  which  I 
have  cited  so  much,  and  which  treat  of  the  re¬ 
turn  of  the  soul,  so  frequently  teaches  that  a 
body  of  every  kind  is  to  be  escaped  from,  in  or¬ 
der  that  the  soul  may  dwell  in  blessedness  with 
God.  But  here,  in  place  of  following  Porphyry, 
you  ought  rather  to  have  corrected  him,  espe¬ 
cially  since  you  agree  with  him  in  believing  such 
incredible  things  about  the  soul  of  this  visible 
world  and  huge  material  frame.  For,  as  scholars 
of  Plato,  you  hold  that  the  world  is  an  animal, 
and  a  very  happy  animal,  which  you  wish  to  be 
also  everlasting.  How,  then,  is  it  never  to  be 
loosed  from  a  body  and  yet  never  lose  its  happi¬ 
ness,  if,  in  order  to  the  happiness  of  the  soul,  the 
body  must  be  left  behind?  The  sun,  too,  and  the 
other  stars,  you  not  only  acknowledge  to  be 
bodies,  in  which  you  have  the  cordial  assent  of 
all  seeing  men,  but  also,  in  obedience  to  what 
you  reckon  a  profounder  insight,  you  declare 
that  they  are  very  blessed  animals,  and  eternal, 
together  with  their  bodies.  Why  is  it,  then,  that 


318  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


when  the  Christian  faith  is  pressed  upon  you, 
you  forget,  or  pretend  to  ignore,  what  you  habit¬ 
ually  discuss  or  teach?  Why  is  it  that  you  refuse 
to  be  Christians,  on  the  ground  that  you  hold 
opinions  which,  in  fact,  you  yourselves  demol¬ 
ish?  Is  it  not  because  Christ  came  in  lowliness 
and  ye  are  proud?  The  precise  nature  of  the  res¬ 
urrection  bodies  of  the  saints  may  sometimes 
occasion  discussion  among  those  who  are  best 
read  in  the  Christian  Scriptures;  yet  there  is  not 
among  us  the  smallest  doubt  that  they  shall  be 
everlasting  and  of  a  nature  exemplified  in  the 
instance  of  Christ’s  risen  body.  But  whatever  be 
their  nature,  since  we  maintain  that  they  shall 
be  absolutely  incorruptible  and  immortal  and 
shall  offer  no  hindrance  to  the  soul’s  contempla¬ 
tion,  by  which  it  is  fixed  in  God,  and  as  you  say 
that  among  the  celestials  the  bodies  of  the  eter¬ 
nally  blessed  are  eternal,  why  do  you  maintain 
that,  in  order  to  blessedness,  every  body  must 
be  escaped  from?  Why  do  you  thus  seek  such  a 
plausible  reason  for  escaping  from  the  Christian 
faith,  if  not  because,  as  I  again  say,  Christ  is 
humble  and  ye  proud?  Are  ye  ashamed  to  be 
corrected?  This  is  the  vice  of  the  proud.  It  is, 
forsooth,  a  degradation  for  learned  men  to  pass 
from  the  school  of  Plato  to  the  discipleship  of 
Christ,  who  by  His  Spirit  taught  a  fisherman  to 
think  and  to  say,  “In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the 
Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the  beginning 
with  God.  All  things  were  made  by  Him;  and 
without  Him  was  not  anything  made  that  was 
made.  In  Him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the 
light  of  men.  And  the  light  shineth  in  darkness; 
and  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not.”1  The  old 
saint  Simplicianus.  afterwards  bishop  of  Milan, 
used  to  tell  me  that  a  certain  Platonist  was  in 
the  habit  of  saying  that  this  opening  passage  of 
the  holy  gospel,  entitled,  “According  to  John,” 
should  be  written  in  letters  of  gold,  and  hung  up  in 
all  churches  in  the  most  conspicuous  place.  But 
the  proud  scorn  to  take  God  for  their  Master,  be¬ 
cause  “the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among 
us.”2  So  that,  with  these  miserable  creatures,  it 
is  not  enough  that  they  are  sick,  but  they  boast  of 
their  sickness,  and  are  ashamed  of  the  medicine 
which  could  heal  them.  And,  doing  so,  they  se¬ 
cure  not  elevation,  but  a  more  disastrous  fall. 

Chap.  30.  Porphyry's  emendations  and  modifi¬ 
cations  of  Platonism 

If  it  is  considered  unseemly  to  emend  any¬ 
thing  which  Plato  has  touched,  why  did  Por¬ 
phyry  himself  make  emendations,  and  these  not 
^ohn,  1.  1-5.  2John,  i.  14. 


a  few?  for  it  is  very  certain  that  Plato  wrote 
that  the  souls  of  men  return  after  death  to  the 
bodies  of  beasts.  Plotinus  also,  Porphyry’s 
teacher,  held  this  opinion;  yet  Porphyry  justly 
rejected  it.  He  was  of  opinion  that  human  souls 
return  indeed  into  human  bodies,  but  not  into 
the  bodies  they  had  left,  but  other  new  bodies. 
He  shrank  from  the  other  opinion,  lest  a  woman 
who  had  returned  into  a  mule  might  possibly 
carry  her  own  son  on  her  back.  He  did  not 
shrink,  however,  from  a  theory  which  admitted 
the  possibility  of  a  mother  coming  back  into  a 
girl  and  marrying  her  own  son.  How  much  more 
honourable  a  creed  is  that  which  was  taught  by 
the  holy  and  truthful  angels,  uttered  by  the 
prophets  who  were  moved  by  God’s  Spirit, 
preached  by  Him  Who  was  foretold  as  the  com¬ 
ing  Saviour  by  His  forerunning  heralds,  and  by 
the  apostles  whom  He  sent  forth  and  who  filled 
the  whole  world  with  the  gospel — how  much 
more  honourable,  I  say,  is  the  belief  that  souls 
return  once  for  all  to  their  own  bodies,  than  that 
they  return  again  and  again  to  divers  bodies? 
Nevertheless  Porphyry,  as  I  have  said,  did  con¬ 
siderably  improve  upon  this  opinion,  in  so  far, 
at  least,  as  he  maintained  that  human  souls 
could  transmigrate  only  into  human  bodies,  and 
made  no  scruple  about  demolishing  the  bestial 
prisons  into  which  Plato  had  wished  to  cast 
them.  He  says,  too,  that  God  put  the  soul  into 
the  world  that  it  might  recognize  the  evils  of 
matter,  and  return  to  the  Father,  and  be  for 
ever  emancipated  from  the  polluting  contact  of 
matter.  And  although  here  is  some  inappropri¬ 
ate  thinking  (for  the  soul  is  rather  given  to  the 
body  that  it  may  do  good ;  for  it  would  not  learn 
evil  unless  it  did  it),  yet  he  corrects  the  opinion 
of  other  Platonists,  and  that  on  a  point  of  no 
small  importance,  inasmuch  as  he  avows  that 
the  soul,  which  is  purged  from  all  evil  and  re¬ 
ceived  to  the  Father’s  presence,  shall  never 
again  suffer  the  ills  of  this  life.  By  this  opinion 
he  quite  subverted  the  favourite  Platonic  dog¬ 
ma,  that  as  dead  men  are  made  out  of  living 
ones,  so  living  men  are  made  out  of  dead  ones; 
and  he  exploded  the  idea  which  Virgil  seems  to 
have  adopted  from  Plato,  that  the  purified  souls 
which  have  been  sent  into  the  Elysian  fields  (the 
poetic  name  for  the  joys  of  the  blessed)  are 
summoned  to  the  river  Lethe,  that  is,  to  the  ob¬ 
livion  of  the  past, 

That  earthward  they  may  pass  once  more , 

Remembering  not  the  things  before , 

And  with  a  blind  propension  yearn 

To  fleshly  bodies  to  return .3 
neid,  bk.  yi.  750,  751. 


THE  CITY  OF 


This  found  no  favour  with  Porphyry,  and  very 
justly;  for  it  is  indeed  foolish  to  believe  that 
souls  should  desire  to  return  from  that  life, 
which  cannot  be  very  blessed  unless  by  the  as¬ 
surance  of  its  permanence,  and  to  come  back 
into  this  life,  and  to  the  pollution  of  corruptible 
bodies,  as  if  the  result  of  perfect  purification 
were  only  to  make  defilement  desirable.  For  if 
perfect  purification  effects  the  oblivion  of  all 
evils,  and  the  oblivion  of  evils  creates  a  desire 
for  a  body  in  which  the  soul  may  again  be  en¬ 
tangled  with  evils,  then  the  supreme  felicity  will 
be  the  cause  of  infelicity,  and  the  perfection  of 
wisdom  the  cause  of  foolishness,  and  the  purest 
cleansing  the  cause  of  defilement.  And,  however 
long  the  blessedness  of  the  soul  last,  it  cannot 
be  founded  on  truth,  if,  in  order  to  be  blessed, 
it  must  be  deceived.  For  it  cannot  be  blessed 
unless  it  be  free  from  fear.  But,  to  be  free  from 
fear,  it  must  be  under  the  false  impression  that 
it  shall  be  always  blessed — the  false  impression, 
for  it  is  destined  to  be  also  at  some  time  miser¬ 
able.  How,  then,  shall  the  soul  rejoice  in  truth, 
whose  joy  is  founded  on  falsehood?  Porphyry 
saw  this  and  therefore  said  that  the  purified 
soul  returns  to  the  Father,  that  it  may  never 
more  be  entangled  in  the  polluting  contact  with 
evil.  The  opinion,  therefore,  of  some  Platonists, 
that  there  is  a  necessary  revolution  carrying 
souls  away  and  bringing  them  round  again  to 
the  same  things,  is  false.  But,  were  it  true,  what 
were  the  advantage  of  knowing  it?  Would  the 
Platonists  presume  to  allege  their  superiority 
to  us,  because  we  were  in  this  life  ignorant  of 
what  they  themselves  were  doomed  to  be  ig¬ 
norant  of  when  perfected  in  purity  and  wisdom 
in  another  and  better  life,  and  which  they  must 
be  ignorant  of  if  they  are  to  be  blessed?  If  it 
were  most  absurd  and  foolish  to  say  so,  then 
certainly  we  must  prefer  Porphyry’s  opinion  to 
the  idea  of  a  circulation  of  souls  through  con¬ 
stantly  alternating  happiness  and  misery.  And 
if  this  is  just,  here  is  a  Platonist  emending  Plato, 
here  is  ,a  man  who  saw  what  Plato  did  not  see 
and  who  did  not  shrink  from  correcting  so  il¬ 
lustrious  a  master,  but  preferred  truth  to  Plato. 

Chap.  31.  Against  the  arguments  on  which  the 
Platonists  ground  their  assertion  that  the  hu¬ 
man  soul  is  co-eternal  with  God 
Why,  then,  do  we  not  rather  believe  the  di¬ 
vinity  in  those  matters,  which  human  talent  can¬ 
not  fathom?  Why  do  we  not  credit  the  assertion 
of  divinity,  that  the  soul  is  not  co-eternal  with 
God,  but  is  created,  and  once  was  not?  For  the 
Platonists  seemed  to  themselves  to  allege  an 


GOD  X.  30-32  319 

adequate  reason  for  their  rejection  of  this  doc¬ 
trine,  when  they  affirmed  that  nothing  could  be 
everlasting  which  had  not  always  existed.  Plato, 
however,  in  writing  concerning  the  world  and 
the  gods  in  it,  whom  the  Supreme  made,  most 
expressly  states  that  they  had  a  beginning  and 
yet  would  have  no  end,  but,  by  the  sovereign 
will  of  the  Creator,  would  endure  eternally. 
But,  by  way  of  interpreting  this,  the  Platonists 
have  discovered  that  he  meant  a  beginning,  not 
of  time,  but  of  cause.  “For  as  if  a  foot,”  they 
say,  “had  been  always  from  eternity  in  dust, 
there  would  always  have  been  a  print  under¬ 
neath  it ;  and  yet  no  one  would  doubt  that  this 
print  was  made  by  the  pressure  of  the  foot,  nor 
that,  though  the  one  was  made  by  the  other, 
neither  was  prior  to  the  other;  so,”  they  say, 
“the  world  and  the  gods  created  in  it  have  al¬ 
ways  been,  their  Creator  always  existing,  and 
yet  they  were  made.”  If,  then,  the  soul  has  al¬ 
ways  existed,  are  we  to  say  that  its  wretched¬ 
ness  has  always  existed?  For  if  there  is  some¬ 
thing  in  it  which  was  not  from  eternity,  but 
began  in  time,  why  is  it  impossible  that  the 
soul  itself,  though  not  previously  existing, 
should  begin  to  be  in  time?  Its  blessedness,  too, 
which,  as  he  owns,  is  to  be  more  stable,  and  in¬ 
deed  endless,  after  the  soul’s  experience  of  evils, 
— this  undoubtedly  has  a  beginning  in  time,  and 
yet  is  to  be  always,  though  previously  it  had 
no  existence.  This  whole  argumentation,  there¬ 
fore,  to  establish  that  nothing  can  be  endless  ex¬ 
cept  that  which  has  had  no  beginning,  falls  to 
the  ground.  For  here  we  find  the  blessedness  of 
the  soul,  which  has  a  beginning  and  yet  has  no 
end.  And,  therefore,  let  the  incapacity  of  man 
give  place  to  the  authority  of  God;  and  let  us 
take  our  belief  regarding  the  true  religion  from 
the  ever-blessed  spirits,  who  do  not  seek  for 
themselves  that  honour  which  they  know  to  be 
due  to  their  God  and  ours,  and  who  do  not  com¬ 
mand  us  to  sacrifice  save  only  to  Him,  Whose 
sacrifice,  as  I  have  often  said  already,  and  must 
often  say  again,  we  and  they  ought  together  to 
be,  offered  through  that  Priest  Who  offered  Him¬ 
self  to  death  a  sacrifice  for  us,  in  that  human 
nature  which  He  assumed,  and  according  to 
which  He  desired  to  be  our  Priest. 

Chap.  32.  Of  the  universal  way  of  the  souVs 
deliverance y  which  Porphyry  did  not  find  be¬ 
cause  he  did  not  rightly  seek  it ,  and  which 
the  grace  of  Christ  has  alone  thrown  open 
This  is  the  religion  which  possesses  the  uni¬ 
versal  way  for  delivering  the  soul;  for,  except 
by  this  way,  none  can  be  delivered.  This  is  a 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


kind  of  royal  way,  which  alone  leads  to  a  king¬ 
dom  which  does  not  totter  like  all  temporal  dig¬ 
nities,  but  stands  firm  on  eternal  foundations. 
And  when  Porphyry  says,  towards  the  end  of 
the  first  book  De  Regressu  Anima,  that  no  sys¬ 
tem  of  doctrine  which  furnishes  the  universal 
way  for  delivering  the  soul  has  as  yet  been  re¬ 
ceived,  either  from  the  truest  philosophy,  or 
from  the  ideas  and  practices  of  the  Indians,  or 
from  the  reasoning1  of  the  Chaldaeans,  or  from 
any  source  whatever,  and  that  no  historical  read¬ 
ing  had  made  him  acquainted  with  that  way,  he 
manifestly  acknowledges  that  there  is  such  a 
way.  but  that  as  yet  he  was  not  acquainted  with 
it.  Nothing  of  all  that  he  had  so  laboriously 
learned  concerning  the  deliverance  of  the  soul, 
nothing  of  all  that  he  seemed  to  others,  if  not 
to  himself,  to  know  and  believe,  satisfied  him. 
For  he  perceived  that  there  was  still  wanting  a 
commanding  authority  which  it  might  be  right 
to  follow  in  a  matter  of  such  importance.  And 
when  he  says  that  he  had  not  learned  from  any 
truest  philosophy  a  system  which  possessed  the 
universal  way  of  the  soul’s  deliverance,  he 
shows  plainly  enough,  as  it  seems  to  me,  either 
that  the  philosophy  of  which  he  was  a  disciple 
was  not  the  truest,  or  that  it  did  not  compre¬ 
hend  such  a  way.  And  how  can  that  be  the  truest 
philosophy  which  does  not  possess  this  way? 
For  what  else  is  the  universal  way  of  the  soul’s 
deliverance  than  that  by  which  all  souls  uni¬ 
versally  are  delivered  and  without  which,  there¬ 
fore,  no  soul  is  delivered?  And  when  he  says,  in 
addition,  “or  from  the  ideas  and  practices  of 
the  Indians,  or  from  the  reasoning  of  the  Chal¬ 
daeans,  or  from  any  source  whatever,”  he  declares 
in  the  most  unequivocal  language  that  this  uni¬ 
versal  way  of  the  soul’s  deliverance  was  not  em¬ 
braced  in  what  he  had  learned  either  from  the 
Indians  or  the  Chaldaeans ;  and  yet  he  could  not 
forbear  stating  that  it  was  from  the  Chaldaeans 
he  had  derived  these  divine  oracles  of  which  he 
makes  such  frequent  mention.  What,  therefore, 
does  he  mean  by  this  universal  way  of  the  soul’s 
deliverance,  which  had  not  yet  been  made  known 
by  any  truest  philosophy,  or  by  the  doctrinal 
systems  of  those  nations  which  were  considered 
to  have  great  insight  in  things  divine,  because 
they  indulged  more  freely  in  a  curious  and  fanci¬ 
ful  science  and  worship  of  angels?  What  is  this 
universal  way  of  which  he  acknowledges  his  ig¬ 
norance,  if  not  a  way  which  does  not  belong 
to  one  nation  as  its  special  property,  but  is  com¬ 
mon  to  all  and  divinely  bestowed?  Porphyry,  a 
man  of  no  mediocre  abilities,  does  not  question 
Hnductio. 


that  such  a  way  exists;  for  he  believes  that 
Divine  Providence  could  not  have  left  men  des¬ 
titute  of  this  universal  way  of  delivering  the 
soul.  For  he  does  not  say  that  this  way  does  not 
exist,  but  that  this  great  boon  and  assistance  has 
not  yet  been  discovered  and  has  not  come  to  his 
knowledge.  And  no  wonder;  for  Porphyry  lived 
in  an  age  when  this  universal  way  of  the  soul’s 
deliverance — in  other  words,  the  Christian  reli¬ 
gion — was  exposed  to  the  persecutions  of  idol¬ 
aters  and  demon-worshippers,  and  earthly 
rulers,2  that  the  number  of  martyrs  or  witnesses 
for  the  truth  might  be  completed  and  con¬ 
secrated,  and  that  by  them  proof  might  be  given 
that  we  must  endure  all  bodily  sufferings  in  the 
cause  of  the  holy  faith,  and  for  the  commenda¬ 
tion  of  the  truth.  Porphyry,  being  a  witness  of 
these  persecutions,  concluded  that  this  way  was 
destined  to  a  speedy  extinction  and  that  it, 
therefore,  was  not  the  universal  way  of  the 
soul’s  deliverance,  and  did  not  see  that  the  very 
thing  that  thus  moved  him  and  deterred  him 
from  becoming  a  Christian  contributed  to  the 
confirmation  and  more  effectual  commendation 
of  our  religion. 

This,  then,  is  the  universal  way  of  the  soul’s 
deliverance,  the  way  that  is  granted  by  the 
divine  compassion  to  the  nations  universally. 
And  no  nation  to  which  the  knowledge  of  it  has 
already  come,  or  may  hereafter  come,  ought  to 
demand,  “Why  so  soon?”  or,  “Why  so  late?” — 
for  the  design  of  Him  Who  sends  it  is  impene¬ 
trable  by  human  capacity.  This  was  felt  by  Por¬ 
phyry  when  he  confined  himself  to  saying  that 
this  gift  of  God  was  not  yet  received  and  had 
not  yet  come  to  his  knowledge.  For  though  this 
was  so,  he  did  not  on  that  account  pronounce 
that  the  way  itself  had  no  existence.  This,  I  say, 
is  the  universal  way  for  the  deliverance  of  be¬ 
lievers,  concerning  which  the  faithful  Abraham 
received  the  divine  assurance,  “In  thy  seed  shall 
all  nations  be  blessed.”3  He,  indeed,  was  by  birth 
a  Chaldaean;  but,  that  he  might  receive  these 
great  promises,  and  that  there  might  be  propa¬ 
gated  from  him  a  seed  “disposed  by  angels  in 
the  hand  of  a  Mediator,”4  in  whom  this  uni¬ 
versal  way,  thrown  open  to  all  nations  for  the 
deliverance  of  the  soul,  might  be  found,  he  was 
ordered  to  leave  his  country,  and  kindred,  and 
father’s  house.  Then  was  he  himself,  first  of 
all,  delivered  from  the  Chaldaean  superstitions, 
and  by  his  obedience  worshipped  the  one  true 
God,  Whose  promises  he  faithfully  trusted.  This 
is  the  universal  way,  of  which  it  is  said  in  holy 

2Namely,  under  Diocletian  and  Maximian. 

3Gen.  22.  18.  4Gal.  3.  19- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  X.  32  321 


prophecy,  “God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless 
us,  and  cause  His  face  to  shine  upon  us;  that 
Thy  way  may  be  known  upon  earth,  Thy  saving 
health  among  all  nations.”1  And  hence,  when  our 
Saviour,  so  long  after,  had  taken  flesh  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  He  says  of  Himself,  “I  am 
the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.”2  This  is  the 
universal  way,  of  which  so  long  before  it  had 
been  predicted,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  days,  that  the  mountain  of  the  Lord’s 
house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the 
mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills; 
and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it.  And  many 
people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go 
up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of 
the  God  of  Jacob;  and  He  will  teach  us  of  His 
ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  His  paths:  for  out  of 
Sion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of 
the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.”3  This  way,  there¬ 
fore,  is  not  the  property  of  one,  but  of  all  na¬ 
tions.  The  law  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  did 
not  remain  in  Zion  and  Jerusalem,  but  issued 
thence  to  be  universally  diffused.  And  therefore 
the  Mediator  Himself,  after  His  resurrection, 
says  to  His  alarmed  disciples,  “These  are  the 
words  which  I  spake  unto  you  while  I  was  yet 
with  you,  that  all  things  must  be  fulfilled  which 
were  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  and  in  the 
prophets,  and  in  the  Psalms,  concerning  Me. 
Then  opened  He  their  understandings  that  they 
might  understand  the  Scriptures,  and  said  unto 
them,  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behoved 
Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the 
third  day:  and  that  repentance  and  remission 
of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His  name  among 
all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem.”4  This  is 
the  universal  way  of  the  soul’s  deliverance, 
which  the  holy  angels  and  the  holy  prophets 
formerly  disclosed  where  they  could  among  the 
few  men  who  found  the  grace  of  God,  and  espe¬ 
cially  in  the  Hebrew  nation,  whose  common¬ 
wealth  was,  as  it  were,  consecrated  to  prefigure 
and  fore-announce  the  city  of  God  which  was  to 
be  gathered  from  all  nations,  by  their  taber¬ 
nacle,  and  temple,  and  priesthood,  and  sacri¬ 
fices.  In  some  explicit  statements  and  in  many 
obscure  foreshadowings,  this  way  was  declared; 
but  latterly  came  the  Mediator  Himself  in  the 
flesh,  and  His  blessed  apostles,  revealing  how 
the  grace  of  the  New  Testament  more  openly 
explained  what  had  been  obscurely  hinted  to 
preceding  generations,  in  conformity  with  the 
relation  of  the  ages  of  the  human  race,  and  as 
it  pleased  God  in  His  wisdom  to  appoint,  who 

^s.  67.  1.2.  2John,  14.  6. 

3Isa.  2.  2.  3.  4Luke,  24.  44-47. 


also  bore  them  witness  with  signs  and  miracles, 
some  of  which  I  have  cited  above.  For  not  only 
were  there  visions  of  angels  and  words  heard 
from  those  heavenly  ministrants,  but  also  men 
of  God,  armed  with  the  word  of  simple  piety, 
cast  out  unclean  spirits  from  the  bodies  and 
senses  of  men  and  healed  deformities  and  sick¬ 
nesses;  the  wild  beasts  of  earth  and  sea,  the 
birds  of  air,  inanimate  things,  the  elements,  the 
stars,  obeyed  their  divine  commands ;  the  powers 
of  hell  gave  way  before  them,  the  dead  were 
restored  to  life.  I  say  nothing  of  the  miracles 
peculiar  and  proper  to  the  Saviour’s  own  per¬ 
son,  especially  the  nativity  and  the  resurrec¬ 
tion;  in  the  one  of  which  He  wrought  only  the 
mystery  of  a  virgin  maternity,  while  in  the  other 
He  furnished  an  instance  of  the  resurrection 
which  all  shall  at  last  experience.  This  way  puri¬ 
fies  the  whole  man  and  prepares  the  mortal  in 
all  his  parts  for  immortality.  For,  to  prevent  us 
from  seeking  for  one  purgation  for  the  part 
which  Porphyry  calls  intellectual,  and  another 
for  the  part  he  calls  spiritual,  and  another  for 
the  body  itself,  our  most  mighty  and  truthful 
Purifier  and  Saviour  assumed  the  whole  human 
nature.  Except  by  this  way,  which  has  been 
present  among  men  both  during  the  period  of 
the  promises  and  of  the  proclamation  of  their 
fulfillment,  no  man  has  been  delivered,  no  man 
is  delivered,  no  man  shall  be  delivered. 

As  to  Porphyry’s  statement  that  the  universal 
way  of  the  soul’s  deliverance  had  not  yet  come 
to  his  knowledge  by  any  acquaintance  he  had 
with  history,  I  would  ask,  what  more  remark¬ 
able  history  can  be  found  than  that  which  has 
taken  possession  of  the  whole  world  by  its  au¬ 
thoritative  voice?  or  what  more  trustworthy 
than  that  which  narrates  past  events,  and  pre¬ 
dicts  the  future  with  equal  clearness,  and  in  the 
unfulfilled  predictions  of  which  we  are  con¬ 
strained  to  believe  by  those  that  are  already 
fulfilled?  For  neither  Porphyry  nor  any  Plato- 
nists  can  despise  divination  and  prediction,  even 
of  things  that  pertain  to  this  life  and  earthly 
matters,  though  they  justly  despise  ordinary 
soothsaying  and  the  divination  that  is  con¬ 
nected  with  magical  arts.  They  deny  that  these 
are  the  predictions  of  great  men,  or  are  to  be 
considered  important,  and  they  are  right;  for 
they  are  founded,  either  on  the  foresight  of  sub¬ 
sidiary  causes,  as  to  a  professional  eye  much  of 
the  course  of  a  disease  is  foreseen  by  certain  pre¬ 
monitory  symptoms,  or  the  unclean  demons  pre¬ 
dict  what  they  have  resolved  to  do,  that  they 
may  thus  work  upon  the  thoughts  and  desires  of 
the  wicked  with  an  appearance  of  authority,  and 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


322 

incline  human  frailty  to  imitate  their  impure 
actions.  It  is  not  such  things  that  the  saints  who 
walk  in  the  universal  way  care  to  predict  as  im¬ 
portant,  although,  for  the  purpose  of  commend¬ 
ing  the  faith,  they  knew  and  often  predicted 
even  such  things  as  could  not  be  detected  by  hu¬ 
man  observation,  nor  be  readily  verified  by  ex¬ 
perience.  But  there  were  other  truly  important 
and  divine  events  which  they  predicted,  in  so 
far  as  it  was  given  them  to  know  the  will  of  God. 
For  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  and  all  those  im¬ 
portant  marvels  that  were  accomplished  in  Him, 
and  done  in  His  name;  the  repentance  of  men 
and  the  conversion  of  their  wills  to  God;  the 
remission  of  sins,  the  grace  of  righteousness,  the 
faith  of  the  pious,  and  the  multitudes  in  all  parts 
of  the  world  who  believe  in  the  true  divinity; 
the  overthrow  of  idolatry  and  demon  worship, 
and  the  testing  of  the  faithful  by  trials;  the 
purification  of  those  who  persevered,  and  their 
deliverance  from  all  evil ;  the  day  of  judgment, 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  eternal  damna¬ 
tion  of  the  community  of  the  ungodly,  ancLthe 
eternal  kingdom  of  the  most  glorious  city  of 
God,  ever-blessed  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  vision 
of  God — these  things  were  predicted  and  prom¬ 
ised  in  the  Scriptures  of  this  way;  and  of  these 
we  see  so  many  fulfilled,  that  we  justly  and  pi¬ 


ously  trust  that  the  rest  will  also  come  to  pass. 
As  for  those  who  do  not  believe  and  conse¬ 
quently  do  not  understand  that  this  is  the  way 
which  leads  straight  to  the  vision  of  God  and  to 
eternal  fellowship  with  Him.  according  to  the 
true  predictions  and  statements  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  they  may  storm  at  our  position,  but 
they  cannot  storm  it. 

And  therefore,  in  these  ten  books,  though  not 
meeting,  I  dare  say,  the  expectation  of  some, 
yet  I  have,  as  the  true  God  and  Lord  has  vouch¬ 
safed  to  aid  me,  satisfied  the  desire  of  certain 
persons,  by  refuting  the  objections  of  the  un¬ 
godly,  who  prefer  their  own  gods  to  the  Founder 
of  the  holy  city,  about  which  we  undertook  to 
speak.  Of  these  ten  books,  the  first  five  were  di¬ 
rected  against  those  who  think  we  should  wor¬ 
ship  the  gods  for  the  sake  of  the  blessings  of  this 
life,  and  the  second  five  against  those  who  think 
we  should  worship  them  for  the  sake  of  the  life 
which  is  to  be  after  death.  And  now,  in  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  the  promise  I  made  in  the  first  book,  I 
shall  go  on  to  say,  as  God  shall  aid  me,  what  I 
think  needs  to  be  said  regarding  the  origin,  his¬ 
tory,  and  deserved  ends  of  the  two  cities,  which, 
as  already  remarked,  are  in  this  world  com¬ 
mingled  and  implicated  with  one  another. 


BOOK  XI 

ARGUMENT .  Here  begins  the  second  part1  of  this  work,  w7hich  treats  of 

THE  ORIGIN,  HISTORY,  AND  DESTINIES  OF  THE  TWO  CITIES,  THE  EARTHLY  AND  THE 
HEAVENLY.  In  THE  FIRST  PLACE,  AUGUSTINE  SHOWS  IN  THIS  BOOK  HOW7  THE  TW70 
CITIES  WERE  FORMED  ORIGINALLY,  BY  THE  SEPARATION  OF  THE  GOOD  AND  BAD  AN¬ 
GELS  ;  AND  TAKES  OCCASION  TO  TREAT  OF  THE  CREATION  OF  THE  WORLD,  AS  IT  IS 
DESCRIBED  IN  HOLY  SCRIPTURE  IN  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS. 


Chap.  i.  Of  this  part  of  the  work ,  wherein  we 
begin  to  explain  the  origin  and  end  of  the  two 
cities 

The  city  of  God  we  speak  of  is  the  same  to 
which  testimony  is  borne  by  that  Scripture, 
which  excels  all  the  writings  of  all  nations  by  its 
divine  authority,  and  has  brought  under  its  in¬ 
fluence  all  kinds  of  minds,  and  this  not  by  a  cas¬ 
ual  intellectual  movement,  but  obviously  by  an 
express  providential  arrangement.  For  there  it 
is  written,  “Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee, 
O  city  of  God.”2  And  in  another  psalm  we  read, 
“Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  praised  in 
the  city  of  our  God,  in  the  mountain  of  His  holi- 

^ritten  in  the  year  416  or  417. 

2Ps.  87.  3. 


ness,  increasing  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.”3 
And,  a  little  after,  in  the  same  psalm,  “As  we 
have  heard,  so  have  we  seen  in  the  city  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  in  the  city  of  our  God.  God  has 
established  it  for  ever.”  And  in  another,  “There 
is  a  river  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad 
the  city  of  our  God,  the  holy  place  of  the  taber¬ 
nacles  of  the  Most  High.  God  is  in  the  midst  of 
her,  she  shall  not  be  moved.”4  From  these  and 
similar  testimonies,  all  of  which  it  were  tedious 
to  cite,  we  have  learned  that  there  is  a  city  of 
God,  and  its  Founder  has  inspired  us  with  a  love 
which  makes  us  covet  its  citizenship.  To  this 
Founder  of  the  holy  city  the  citizens  of  the 
earthly  city  prefer  their  own  gods,  not  knowing 
that  He  is  the  God  of  gods,  not  of  false,  i.e.,  of 
3Ps.  47.  1.  4Ps.  46.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XI.  1-3  323 


impious  and  proud  gods,  who,  being  deprived  of 
His  unchangeable  and  freely  communicated 
light,  and  so  reduced  to  a  kind  of  poverty-strick¬ 
en  power,  eagerly  grasp  at  their  own  private 
privileges,  and  seek  divine  honours  from  their 
deluded  subjects;  but  of  the  pious  and  holy 
gods,  who  are  better  pleased  to  submit  them¬ 
selves  to  one  than  to  subject  many  to  them¬ 
selves,  and  who  would  rather  worship  God  than 
be  worshipped  as  God.  But  to  the  enemies  of 
this  city  we  have  replied  in  the  ten  preceding 
books,  according  to  our  ability  and  the  help  af¬ 
forded  by  our  Lord  and  King.  Now,  recognizing 
what  is  expected  of  me,  and  not  unmindful  of 
my  promise,  and  relying,  too,  on  the  same  suc¬ 
cour,  I  will  endeavour  to  treat  of  the  origin,  and 
progress,  and  deserved  destinies  of  the  two  cities 
(the  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  to  wit),  which, 
as  we  said,  are  in  this  present  world  commingled, 
and  as  it  were  entangled  together.  And,  first,  I 
will  explain  how  the  foundations  of  these  two 
cities  were  originally  laid,  in  the  difference  that 
arose  among  the  angels. 

Chap.  2.  Of  the  knowledge  of  God,  to  which  no 
man  can  attain  save  through  the  Mediator  be - 
tween  god  and  7nen,  the  man  Christ  Jesus 
It  is  a  great  and  very  rare  thing  for  a  man, 
after  he  has  contemplated  the  whole  creation, 
corporeal  and  incorporeal,  and  has  discerned  its 
mutability,  to  pass  beyond  it,  and,  by  the  con¬ 
tinued  soaring  of  his  mind,  to  attain  to  the  un¬ 
changeable  substance  of  God,  and,  in  that  height 
of  contemplation,  to  learn  from  God  Himself 
that  none  but  He  has  made  all  that  is  not  of  the 
divine  essence.  For  God  speaks  with  a  man  not 
by  means  of  some  audible  creature  dinning  in 
his  ears,  so  that  atmospheric  vibrations  connect 
Him  that  makes  with  him  that  hears  the  sound, 
nor  even  by  means  of  a  spiritual  being  with  the 
semblance  of  a  body,  such  as  we  see  in  dreams 
or  similar  states;  for  even  in  this  case  He  speaks 
as  if  to  the  ears  of  the  body,  because  it  is  by 
means  of  the  semblance  of  a  body  He  speaks, 
and  with  the  appearance  of  a  real  interval  of 
space — for  visions  are  exact  representations  of 
bodily  objects.  Not  by  these,  then,  does  God 
speak,  but  by  the  truth  itself,  if  any  one  is  pre¬ 
pared  to  hear  with  the  mind  rather  than  with  the 
body.  For  He  speaks  to  that  part  of  man  which 
is  better  than  all  else  that  is  in  him  and  than 
which  God  Himself  alone  is  better.  For  since 
man  is  most  properly  understood  (or,  if  that 
cannot  be,  then,  at  least,  believed)  to  be  made  in 
God’s  image,  no  doubt  it  is  that  part  of  him  by 
which  he  rises  above  those  lower  parts  he  has  in 


common  with  the  beasts,  which  brings  him  near¬ 
er  to  the  Supreme.  But  since  the  mind  itself, 
though  naturally  capable  of  reason  and  intelli¬ 
gence,  is  disabled  by  besotting  and  inveterate 
vices  not  merely  from  delighting  and  abiding  in, 
but  even  from  tolerating  His  unchangeable  light, 
until  it  has  been  gradually  healed,  and  renewed, 
and  made  capable  of  such  felicity,  it  had,  in  the 
first  place,  to  be  impregnated  with  faith,  and  so 
purified.  And  that  in  this  faith  it  might  advance 
the  more  confidently  towards  the  truth,  the 
truth  itself,  God,  God’s  Son,  assuming  human¬ 
ity  without  destroying  His  divinity,  established 
and  founded  this  faith,  that  there  might  be  a 
way  for  man  to  man’s  God  through  a  God-man. 
For  this  is  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men, 
the  man  Christ  Jesus.  For  it  is  as  man  that  He  is 
the  Mediator  and  the  Way.  Since,  if  the  way  li- 
eth  between  him  who  goes  and  the  place  whither 
he  goes,  there  is  hope  of  his  reaching  it;  but  if 
there  be  no  way,  or  if  he  know  not  where  it  is, 
what  boots  it  to  know  whither  he  should  go? 
Now  the  only  way  that  is  infallibly  secured 
against  all  mistakes,  is  when  the  very  same  per¬ 
son  is  at  once  God  and  man,  God  our  end,  man 
our  way.1 

Chap.  3.  Of  the  authority  of  the  canonical 

Scriptures  composed  by  the  Divine  Spirit 

This  Mediator,  having  spoken  what  He 
judged  sufficient  first  by  the  prophets,  then  by 
His  own  lips,  and  afterwards  by  the  apostles, 
has  besides  produced  the  Scripture  which  is 
called  canonical,  which  has  paramount  author¬ 
ity,  and  to  which  we  yield  assent  in  all  matters 
of  which  we  ought  not  to  be  ignorant,  and  yet 
cannot  know  of  ourselves.  For  if  we  attain  the 
knowledge  of  present  objects  by  the  testimony 
of  our  own  senses,2  whether  internal  or  external, 
then,  regarding  objects  remote  from  our  own 
senses,  we  need  others  to  bring  their  testimony, 
since  we  cannot  know  them  by  our  own,  and  we 
credit  the  persons  to  whom  the  objects  have 
been  or  are  sensibly  present.  Accordingly,  as  in 
the  case  of  visible  objects  which  we  have  not 
seen,  we  trust  those  who  have  (and  likewise 
with  all  sensible  objects),  so  in  the  case  of  things 
which  are  perceived3  by  the  mind  and  spirit, 
i.e.,  which  are  remote  from  our  interior  sense,  it 
behoves  us  to  trust  those  who  have  seen  them 
set  in  that  incorporeal  light,  or  abidingly  con¬ 
template  them. 

lQuo  itur  Deus,  qua  itur  homo. 

2A  clause  is  here  inserted  to  give  the  etymology  of 
prcesentia  from  prce  sensibus. 

3Another  derivation,  sententia  from  sensus ,  the  inward 
perception  of  the  mind. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  4.  That  the  world  is  neither  without  be¬ 
ginning,  nor  yet  created  by  a  new  decree  of 
God,  by  which  He  afterwards  willed  what  He 
had  not  before  willed 

Of  all  visible  things,  the  world  is  the  greatest; 
of  all  invisible,  the  greatest  is  God.  But.  that  the 
world  is,  we  see;  that  God  is,  we  believe.  That 
God  made  the  world,  we  can  believe  from  no 
one  more  safely  than  from  God  Himself.  But 
where  have  we  heard  Him?  Nowhere  more  dis¬ 
tinctly  than  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  where  His 
prophet  said,  “In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth.”1  Was  the  prophet  pres¬ 
ent  when  God  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth? 
No;  but  the  wisdom  of  God,  by  whom  all  things 
were  made,  was  there,2  and  wisdom  insinuates 
itself  into  holy  souls,  and  makes  them  the 
friends  of  God  and  His  prophets,  and  noiselessly 
informs  them  of  His  works.  They  are  taught 
also  by  the  angels  of  God,  who  always  behold 
the  face  of  the  Father,3  and  announce  His  will 
to  whom  it  befits.  Of  these  prophets  was  he  who 
said  and  wrote,  “In  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.”  And  so  fit  a  witness 
was  he  of  God,  that  the  same  Spirit  of  God,  who 
revealed  these  things  to  him,  enabled  him  also 
so  long  before  to  predict  that  our  faith  also 
would  be  forthcoming. 

But  why  did  God  choose  then  to  create  the 
heavens  and  earth  which  up  to  that  time  He  had 
not  made?4  If  they  who  put  this  question  wish 
to  make  out  that  the  world  is  eternal  and  with¬ 
out  beginning,  and  that  consequently  it  has  not 
been  made  by  God,  they  are  strangely  deceived 
and  rave  in  the  incurable  madness  of  impiety. 
For,  though  the  voices  of  the  prophets  were  si¬ 
lent,  the  world  itself,  by  its  well-ordered  changes 
and  movements  and  by  the  fair  appearance  of  all 
visible  things,  bears  a  testimony  of  its  own,  both 
that  it  has  been  created  and  also  that  it  could 
not  have  been  created  save  by  God,  whose  great¬ 
ness  and  beauty  are  unutterable  and  invisible. 
As  for  those5  who  own,  indeed,  that  it  was  made 
by  God,  and  yet  ascribe  to  it  not  a  temporal  but 
only  a  creational  beginning,  so  that  in  some 
scarcely  intelligible  way  the  world  should  al¬ 
ways  have  existed  a  created  world,  they  make  an 
assertion  which  seems  to  them  to  defend  God 
from  the  charge  of  arbitrary  hastiness  or  of  sud¬ 
denly  conceiving  the  idea  of  creating  the  world 
as  a  quite  new  idea,  or  of  casually  changing  His 

^en.  1.  1.  2Prov.  8.  27.  3Matt.  18.  10. 

4See  Augustine,  Confessions ,  bk.  xi.  12,  14. 

^he  Neo-Platonists. 


will,  though  He  be  unchangeable.  But  I  do  not 
see  how  this  supposition  of  theirs  can  stand  in 
other  respects,  and  chiefly  in  respect  of  the  soul; 
for  if  they  contend  that  it  is  co-eternal  with 
God,  they  will  be  quite  at  a  loss  to  explain 
whence  there  has  accrued  to  it  new  misery, 
which  through  a  previous  eternity  had  not  exist¬ 
ed.  For  if  they  said  that  its  happiness  and  mis¬ 
ery  ceaselessly  alternate,  they  must  say,  further, 
that  this  alternation  will  continue  for  ever; 
whence  will  result  this  absurdity,  that,  though 
the  soul  is  called  blessed,  it  is  not  so  in  this,  that 
it  foresees  its  own  misery  and  disgrace.  And  yet, 
if  it  does  not  foresee  it  and  supposes  that  it  will 
be  neither  disgraced  nor  wretched,  but  always 
blessed,  then  it  is  blessed  because  it  is  deceived; 
and  a  more  foolish  statement  one  cannot  make. 
But  if  their  idea  is  that  the  soul’s  misery  has  al¬ 
ternated  with  its  bliss  during  the  ages  of  the  past 
eternity,  but  that  now,  when  once  the  soul  has 
been  set  free,  it  will  return  henceforth  no  more 
to  misery,  they  are  nevertheless  of  opinion  that 
it  has  never  been  truly  blessed  before,  but  be¬ 
gins  at  last  to  enjoy  a  new  and  uncertain  happi¬ 
ness  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  must  acknowledge  that 
some  new  thing,  and  that  an  important  and 
signal  thing,  happens  to  the  soul  which  never  in 
a  whole  past  eternity  happened  it  before.  And  if 
they  deny  that  God’s  eternal  purpose  included 
this  new  experience  of  the  soul,  they  deny  that 
He  is  the  Author  of  its  blessedness,  which  is  un¬ 
speakable  impiety.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
say  that  the  future  blessedness  of  the  soul  is  the 
result  of  a  new  decree  of  God,  how  will  they 
show  that  God  is  not  chargeable  with  that  mu¬ 
tability  which  displeases  them?  Further,  if  they 
acknowledge  that  it  was  created  in  time,  but  will 
never  perish  in  time — that  it  has,  like  number, 
a  beginning  but  no  end — and  that,  therefore, 
having  once  made  trial  of  misery  and  been  deliv¬ 
ered  from  it,  it  will  never  again  return  thereto, 
they  will  certainly  admit  that  this  takes  place 
without  any  violation  of  the  immutable  counsel 
of  God.  Let  them,  then,  in  like  manner  believe 
regarding  the  world  that  it  too  could  be  made  in 
time,  and  yet  that  God,  in  making  it,  did  not 
alter  His  eternal  design. 

Chap.  5.  That  we  ought  not  to  seek  to  compre¬ 
hend  the  infinite  ages  of  time  before  the 
world,  nor  the  infinite  realms  of  space 
Next,  we  must  see  what  reply  can  be  made  to 
those  who  agree  that  God  is  the  Creator  of  the 
world,  but  have  difficulties  about  the  time  of  its 
creation,  and  what  reply,  also,  they  can  make  to 


THE  CITY  OF 


difficulties  we  might  raise  about  the  place  of  its 
creation.  For,  as  they  demand  why  the  world 
was  created  then  and  no  sooner,  we  may  ask 
why  it  was  created  just  here  where  it  is,  and  not 
elsewhere.  For  if  they  imagine  infinite  spaces  of 
time  before  the  world,  during  which  God  could 
not  have  been  idle,  in  like  manner  they  may  con¬ 
ceive  outside  the  world  infinite  realms  of  space, 
in  which,  if  any  one  says  that  the  Omnipotent 
cannot  hold  His  hand  from  working,  will  it  not 
follow  that  they  must  adopt  Epicurus’  dream  of 
innumerable  worlds?  with  this  difference  only, 
that  he  asserts  that  they  are  formed  and  de¬ 
stroyed  by  the  fortuitous  movements  of  atoms, 
while  they  will  hold  that  they  are  made  by  God’s 
hand,  if  they  maintain  that,  throughout  the 
boundless  immensity  of  space,  stretching  inter¬ 
minably  in  every  direction  round  the  world,  God 
cannot  rest,  and  that  the  worlds  which  they  sup¬ 
pose  Him  to  make  cannot  be  destroyed.  For 
here  the  question  is  with  those  who,  with  our¬ 
selves,  believe  that  God  is  spiritual,  and  the  Cre¬ 
ator  of  all  existences  but  Himself.  As  for  others, 
it  is  a  condescension  to  dispute  with  them  on  a 
religious  question,  for  they  have  acquired  a  rep¬ 
utation  only  among  men  who  pay  divine  honours 
to  a  number  of  gods,  and  have  become  conspicu¬ 
ous  among  the  other  philosophers  for  no  other 
reason  than  that,  though  they  are  still  far  from 
the  truth,  they  are  near  it  in  comparison  with 
the  rest.  While  these,  then,  neither  confine  in 
any  place,  nor  limit,  nor  distribute  the  divine 
substance,  but,  as  is  worthy  of  God,  own  it  to  be 
wholly  though  spiritually  present  everywhere, 
will  they  perchance  say  that  this  substance  is 
absent  from  such  immense  spaces  outside  the 
world,  and  is  occupied  in  one  only  (and  that  a 
very  little  one  compared  with  the  infinity  be¬ 
yond),  the  one,  namely,  in  which  is  the  wrorld? 
I  think  they  will  not  proceed  to  this  absurdity. 
Since  they  maintain  that  there  is  but  one  world, 
of  vast  material  bulk,  indeed,  yet  finite,  and  in 
its  own  determinate  position,  and  that  this  was 
made  by  the  working  of  God,  let  them  give  the 
same  account  of  God’s  resting  in  the  infinite 
times  before  the  world  as  they  give  of  His  rest¬ 
ing  in  the  infinite  spaces  outside  of  it.  And  as  it 
does  not  follow  that  God  set  the  world  in  the 
very  spot  it  occupies  and  no  other  by  accident 
rather  than  by  divine  reason,  although  no  human 
reason  can  comprehend  why  it  was  so  set,  and 
though  there  was  no  merit  in  the  spot  chosen  to 
give  it  the  precedence  of  infinite  others,  so  nei¬ 
ther  does  it  follow  that  we  should  suppose  that 
God  was  guided  by  chance  when  He  created  the 


GOD  XI.  4-6  325 

world  in  that  and  no  earlier  time,  although  pre¬ 
vious  times  had  been  running  by  during  an  in¬ 
finite  past,  and  though  there  was  no  difference 
by  which  one  time  could  be  chosen  in  preference 
to  another.  But  if  they  say  that  the  thoughts  of 
men  are  idle  when  they  conceive  infinite  places, 
since  there  is  no  place  beside  the  world,  we  re¬ 
ply  that,  by  the  same  showing,  it  is  vain  to  con¬ 
ceive  of  the  past  times  of  God’s  rest,  since  there 
is  no  time  before  the  world. 

Chap.  6.  That  the  world  and  time  had  both  one 
beginning ,  and  the  one  did  not  anticipate  the 
other 

For  if  eternity  and  time  are  rightly  distin¬ 
guished  by  this,  that  time  does  not  exist  without 
some  movement  and  transition,  while  in  eternity 
there  is  no  change,  who  does  not  see  that  there 
could  have  been  no  time  had  not  some  creature 
been  made,  which  by  some  motion  could  give 
birth  to  change — the  various  parts  of  which  mo¬ 
tion  and  change,  as  they  cannot  be  simultaneous, 
succeed  one  another— and  thus,  in  these  shorter 
or  longer  intervals  of  duration,  time  would  be¬ 
gin?  Since  then,  God,  in  Whose  eternity  is  no 
change  at  all,  is  the  Creator  and  Ordainer  of 
time,  I  do  not  see  how  He  can  be  said  to  have 
created  the  world  after  spaces  of  time  had 
elapsed,  unless  it  be  said  that  prior  to  the  world 
there  was  some  creature  by  whose  movement 
time  could  pass.  And  if  the  sacred  and  infallible 
Scriptures  say  that  in  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  in  order  that  it  may 
be  understood  that  He  had  made  nothing  pre¬ 
viously — for  if  He  had  made  anything  before 
the  rest,  this  thing  would  rather  be  said  to 
have  been  made  “in  the  beginning” — then  as¬ 
suredly  the  world  was  made,  not  in  time,  but 
simultaneously  with  time.  For  that  which  is 
made  in  time  is  made  both  after  and  before  some 
time — after  that  which  is  past,  before  that 
which  is  future.  But  none  could  then  be  past,  for 
there  was  no  creature  by  whose  movements  its 
duration  could  be  measured.  But  simultaneously 
with  time  the  world  was  made,  if  in  the  world’s 
creation  change  and  motion  were  created,  as 
seems  evident  from  the  order  of  the  first  six  or 
seven  days.  For  in  these  days  the  morning  and 
evening  are  counted,  until,  on  the  sixth  day,  all 
things  which  God  then  made  were  finished,  and 
on  the  seventh  the  rest  of  God  was  mysteri¬ 
ously  and  sublimely  signalized.  What  kind  of 
days  these  were  it  is  extremely  difficult,  or  per¬ 
haps  impossible  for  us  to  conceive,  and  how 
much  more  to  say! 


326 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  7.  Of  the  nature  of  the  first  days,  which 
are  said  to  have  had  morning  and  evening,  be- 
fore  there  was  a  sun 

We  see,  indeed,  that  our  ordinary  days  have 
no  evening  but  by  the  setting,  and  no  morning 
but  by  the  rising,  of  the  sun;  but  the  first  three 
days  of  all  were  passed  without  sun,  since  it  is 
reported  to  have  been  made  on  the  fourth  day. 
And  first  of  all,  indeed,  light  was  made  by  the 
word  of  God,  and  God,  we  read,  separated  it 
from  the  darkness,  and  called  the  light  Day,  and 
the  darkness  Night ;  but  what  kind  of  light  that 
was,  and  by  what  periodic  movement  it  made 
evening  and  morning,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  our 
senses;  neither  can  we  understand  how  it  was 
and  yet  must  unhesitatingly  believe  it.  For 
either  it  was  some  material  light,  whether  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  upper  parts  of  the  world,  far 
removed  from  our  sight,  or  from  the  spot  where 
the  sun  was  afterwards  kindled;  or  under  the 
name  of  light  the  holy  city  was  signified,  com¬ 
posed  of  holy  angels  and  blessed  spirits,  the  city 
of  which  the  apostle  says,  “Jerusalem  which  is 
above  is  our  eternal  mother  in  heaven”;1  and 
in  another  place,  “For  ye  are  all  the  children  of 
the  light,  and  the  children  of  the  day;  we  are  not 
of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness.”2  Yet  in  some  re¬ 
spects  we  may  appropriately  speak  of  a  morn¬ 
ing  and  evening  of  this  day  also.  For  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  creature  is,  in  comparison  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Creator,  but  a  twilight;  and  so 
it  dawns  and  breaks  into  morning  when  the  crea¬ 
ture  is  drawn  to  the  praise  and  love  of  the  Crea¬ 
tor  ;  and  night  never  falls  when  the  Creator  is 
not  forsaken  through  love  of  the  creature.  In 
fine.  Scripture,  when  it  would  recount  those  days 
in  order,  never  mentions  the  word  night.  It  nev¬ 
er  says,  “Night  was,”  but  “The  evening  and  the 
morning  were  the  first  day.”  So  of  the  second 
and  the  rest.  And.  indeed,  the  knowledge  of  cre¬ 
ated  things  contemplated  by  themselves  is,  so  to 
speak,  more  colorless  than  when  they  are  seen  in 
the  wisdom  of  God,  as  in  the  art  by  which  they 
were  made.  Therefore  evening  is  a  more  suitable 
figure  than  night;  and  yet,  as  I  said,  morning  re¬ 
turns  when  the  creature  returns  to  the  praise 
and  love  of  the  Creator.  When  it  does  so  in  the 
knowledge  of  itself,  that  is  the  first  day;  when 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  firmament,  which  is  the 
name  given  to  the  sky  between  the  waters  above 
and  those  beneath,  that  is  the  second  day;  when 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 
all  things  that  grow  out  of  the  earth,  that  is  the 
third  day;  when  in  the  knowledge  of  the  greater 
1Gal.  4.  26.  2I  Thess.  5.  5. 


and  less  luminaries,  and  all  the  stars,  that  is  the 
fourth  day;  when  in  the  knowledge  of  all  ani¬ 
mals  that  swim  in  the  waters  and  that  fly  in  the 
air,  that  is  the  fifth  day;  when  in  the  knowledge 
of  all  animals  that  live  on  the  earth,  and  of  man 
himself,  that  is  the  sixth  day. 

Chap.  8.  What  we  are  to  understand  of  God}s 
resting  on  the  seventh  day,  after  the  six  days ’ 
work 

When  it  is  said  that  God  rested  on  the  seventh 
day  from  all  His  works,  and  hallowed  it,  we  are 
not  to  conceive  of  this  in  a  childish  fashion,  as 
if  work  were  a  toil  to  God,  who  “spake  and  it 
was  done” — spake  by  the  spiritual  and  eternal, 
not  audible  and  transitory  word.  But  God’s  rest 
signifies  the  rest  of  those  who  rest  in  God,  as  the 
joy  of  a  house  means  the  joy  of  those  in  the 
house  who  rejoice,  though  not  the  house,  but 
something  else,  causes  the  joy.  How  much  more 
intelligible  is  such  phraseology,  then,  if  the 
house  itself,  by  its  own  beauty,  makes  the  in¬ 
habitants  joyful!  For  in  this  case  we  not  only 
call  it  joyful  by  that  figure  of  speech  in  which 
the  thing  containing  is  used  for  the  thing  con¬ 
tained  (as  when  we  say,  “The  theatres  applaud,” 
“The  meadows  low,”  meaning  that  the  men  in 
the  one  applaud,  and  the  oxen  in  the  other  low), 
but  also  by  that  figure  in  which  the  cause  is 
spoken  of  as  if  it  were  the  effect,  as  when  a  let¬ 
ter  is  said  to  be  joyful,  because  it  makes  its  read¬ 
ers  so.  Most  appropriately,  therefore,  the  sacred 
narrative  states  that  God  rested,  meaning  there¬ 
by  that  those  rest  who  are  in  Him  and  whom  He 
makes  to  rest.  And  this  the  prophetic  narrative 
promises  also  to  the  men  to  whom  it  speaks,  and 
for  whom  it  was  written,  that  they  themselves, 
after  those  good  works  which  God  does  in  and 
by  them,  if  they  have  managed  by  faith  to  get 
near  to  God  in  this  life,  shall  enjoy  in  Him  eter¬ 
nal  rest.  This  was  pre-figured  to  the  ancient  peo¬ 
ple  of  God  by  the  rest  enjoined  in  their  sabbath 
law,  of  which,  in  its  own  place,  I  shall  speak 
more  at  large. 

Chap.  9.  What  the  Scriptures  teach  us  to  be - 
lieve  concerning  the  creation  of  the  angels 
At  present,  since  I  have  undertaken  to  treat 
of  the  origin  of  the  holy  city,  and  first  of  the 
holy  angels,  who  constitute  a  large  part  of  this 
city,  and  indeed  the  more  blessed  part,  since 
they  have  never  been  expatriated,  I  will  give 
myself  to  the  task  of  explaining,  by  God’s  help, 
and  as  far  as  seems  suitable,  the  Scriptures 
which  relate  to  this  point.  Where  Scripture 
speaks  of  the  world’s  creation,  it  is  not  plainly 


THE  CITY  OF 

said  whether  or  when  the  angels  were  created ; 
but  if  mention  of  them  is  made,  it  is  implicitly 
under  the  name  of  “heaven,”  when  it  is  said, 
“In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and 
the  earth,”  or  perhaps  rather  under  the  name  of 
“light,”  of  which  presently.  But  that  they  were 
wholly  omitted,  I  am  unable  to  believe,  because 
it  is  written  that  God  on  the  seventh  day  rested 
from  all  His  works  which  He  made;  and  this 
very  book  itself  begins,  “In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,”  so  that  be¬ 
fore  heaven  and  earth  God  seems  to  have  made 
nothing.  Since,  therefore,  He  began  with  the 
heavens  and  the  earth — and  the  earth  itself,  as 
Scripture  adds,  was  at  first  invisible  and  form¬ 
less,  light  not  being  as  yet  made,  and  darkness 
covering  the  face  of  the  deep  (that  is  to  say, 
covering  an  undefined  chaos  of  earth  and  sea, 
for  where  light  is  not,  darkness  must  needs  be) 
— and  then  when  all  things,  which  are  recorded 
to  have  been  completed  in  six  days,  were  cre¬ 
ated  and  arranged,  how  should  the  angels  be 
omitted,  as  if  they  were  not  among  the  works 
of  God,  from  which  on  the  seventh  day  He  rest¬ 
ed?  Yet,  though  the  fact  that  the  angels  are  the 
work  of  God  is  not  omitted  here,  it  is  indeed  not 
explicitly  mentioned;  but  elsewhere  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture  asserts  it  in  the  clearest  manner.  For  in  the 
“Song  of  the  Three  Children  in  the  Furnace”  it 
was  said,  “0  all  ye  works  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye 
the  Lord”;1  and  among  these  works  mentioned 
afterwards  in  detail,  the  angels  are  named.  And 
in  the  psalm  it  is  said,  “Praise  ye  the  Lord  from 
the  heavens,  praise  Him  in  the  heights.  Praise 
ye  Him,  all  His  angels;  praise  ye  Him,  all  His 
hosts.  Praise  ye  Him,  sun  and  moon;  praise  him, 
all  ye  stars  of  light.  Praise  Him,  ye  heaven  of 
heavens ;  and  ye  waters  that  be  above  the  heav¬ 
ens.  Let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord;  for 
He  commanded,  and  they  were  created.”2  Here 
the  angels  are  most  expressly  and  by  divine  au¬ 
thority  said  to  have  been  made  by  God,  for  of 
them  among  the  other  heavenly  things  it  is  said, 
“He  commanded,  and  they  were  created.”  Who, 
then,  will  be  bold  enough  to  suggest  that  the  an¬ 
gels  were  made  after  the  six  days’  creation?  If 
any  one  is  so  foolish,  his  folly  is  disposed  of  by 
a  scripture  of  like  authority,  where  God  says, 
“When  the  stars  were  made,  the  angels  praised 
me  with  a  loud  voice.”3  The  angels  therefore  ex¬ 
isted  before  the  stars;  and  the  stars  were  made 
the  fourth  day.  Shall  we  then  say  that  they  were 
made  the  third  day?  Far  from  it;  for  we  know 
what  was  made  that  day.  The  earth  was  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  water,  and  each  element  took  its 
Werse  35.  2Ps.  148.  1-5.  3Job,  38.  7. 


GOD  XI.  7-10  327 

own  distinct  form,  and  the  earth  produced  all 
that  grows  on  it.  On  the  second  day,  then?  Not 
even  on  this;  for  on  it  the  firmament  was  made 
between  the  waters  above  and  beneath,  and  was 
called  “Heaven,”  in  which  firmament  the  stars 
were  made  on  the  fourth  day.  There  is  no  ques¬ 
tion,  then,  that  if  the  angels  are  included  in  the 
works  of  God  during  these  six  days,  they  are 
that  light  which  was  called  “Day,”  and  whose 
unity  Scripture  signalizes  by  calling  that  day  not 
the  “first  day,”  but  “one  day.”  For  the  second 
day,  the  third,  and  the  rest  are  not  other  days ; 
but  the  same  “one”  day  is  repeated  to  complete 
the  number  six  or  seven,  so  that  there  should  be 
knowledge  both  of  God’s  works  and  of  His  rest. 
For  when  God  said,  “Let  there  be  light,  and 
there  was  light,”  if  we  are  justified  in  under¬ 
standing  in  this  light  the  creation  of  the  angels, 
then  certainly  they  were  created  partakers  of 
the  eternal  light  which  is  the  unchangeable  Wis¬ 
dom  of  God,  by  which  all  things  were  made,  and 
whom  we  call  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God;  so 
that  they,  being  illumined  by  the  Light  that  cre¬ 
ated  them,  might  themselves  become  light  and 
be  called  “Day,”  in  participation  of  that  un¬ 
changeable  Light  and  Day  which  is  the  Word  of 
God,  by  whom  both  themselves  and  all  else 
were  made.  “The  true  Light,  which  lighteth  ev¬ 
ery  man  that  cometh  into  the  world”4 — this 
Light  lighteth  also  every  pure  angel,  that  he  may 
be  light  not  in  himself,  but  in  God;  from  whom 
if  an  angel  turn  away,  he  becomes  impure,  as  are 
all  those  who  are  called  unclean  spirits,  and  are 
no  longer  light  in  the  Lord,  but  darkness  in 
themselves,  being  deprived  of  the  participation 
of  Light  eternal.  For  evil  has  no  positive  nature; 
but  the  loss  of  good  has  received  the  name 
“evil.” 

Chap.  10.  Of  the  simple  and  unchangeable  Trin¬ 
ity ,  Father ,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  one  God ,  in 
Whom  substance  and  quality  are  identical 
There  is,  accordingly,  a  good  which  is  alone 
simple  and  therefore  alone  unchangeable,  and 
this  is  God.  By  this  Good  have  all  others  been 
created,  but  not  simple,  and  therefore  not  un¬ 
changeable.  “Created,”  I  say — that  is,  made, 
not  begotten.  For  that  which  is  begotten  of  the 
simple  Good  is  simple  as  itself,  and  the  same  as 
itself.  These  two  we  call  the  Father  and  the  Son ; 
and  both  together  with  the  Holy  Spirit  are  one 
God;  and  to  this  Spirit  the  epithet  Holy  is  in 
Scripture,  as  it  were,  appropriated.  And  He  is 
another  than  the  Father  and  the  Son,  for  He  is 
neither  the  Father  nor  the  Son.  I  say  “another,” 
4John,  1.  9. 


328  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


not  “another  thing,”  because  He  is  equally  with 
them  the  simple  Good,  unchangeable  and  co¬ 
eternal.  And  this  Trinity  is  one  God;  and  none 
the  less  simple  because  a  Trinity.  For  we  do  not 
say  that  the  nature  of  the  good  is  simple,  be¬ 
cause  the  Father  alone  possesses  it,  or  the  Son 
alone,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  alone;  nor  do  we  say, 
with  the  Sabellian  heretics,  that  it  is  only  nom¬ 
inally  a  Trinity,  and  has  no  real  distinction  of 
persons;  but  we  say  it  is  simple,  because  it  is 
what  it  has,  with  the  exception  of  the  relation 
of  the  persons  to  one  another.  For,  in  regard  to 
this  relation,  it  is  true  that  the  Father  has  a  Son 
and  yet  is  not  Himself  the  Son ;  and  the  Son  has 
a  Father  and  is  not  Himself  the  Father.  But,  as 
regards  Himself,  irrespective  of  relation  to  the 
other,  each  is  what  He  has;  thus.  He  is  in  Him¬ 
self  living,  for  He  has  life,  and  is  Himself  the 
Life  which  He  has. 

It  is  for  this  reason,  then,  that  the  nature  of 
the  Trinity  is  called  simple,  because  it  has  not 
anything  which  it  can  lose,  and  because  it  is  not 
one  thing  and  its  contents  another,  as  a  cup  and 
the  liquor,  or  a  body  and  its  colour,  or  the  air 
and  the  light  or  heat  of  it,  or  a  mind  and  its  wis¬ 
dom.  For  none  of  these  is  what  it  has :  the  cup  is 
not  liquor,  nor  the  body  colour,  nor  the  air  light 
and  heat,  nor  the  mind  wisdom.  And  hence  they 
can  be  deprived  of  what  they  have  and  can  be 
turned  or  changed  into  other  qualities  and 
states,  so  that  the  cup  may  be  emptied  of  the 
liquid  of  which  it  is  full,  the  body  be  discol¬ 
oured,  the  air  darken,  the  mind  grow  silly.  The 
incorruptible  body  which  is  promised  to  the 
saints  in  the  resurrection  cannot,  indeed,  lose  its 
quality  of  incorruption,  but  the  bodily  substance 
and  the  quality  of  incorruption  are  not  the  same 
thing.  For  the  quality  of  incorruption  resides  en¬ 
tire  in  each  several  part,  not  greater  in  one  and 
less  in  another;  for  no  part  is  more  incorruptible 
than  another.  The  body,  indeed,  is  itself  greater 
in  whole  than  in  part ;  and  one  part  of  it  is  larger, 
another  smaller,  yet  is  not  the  larger  more  in¬ 
corruptible  than  the  smaller.  The  body,  then, 
which  is  not  in  each  of  its  parts  a  whole  body,  is 
one  thing;  incorruptibility,  which  is  throughout 
complete,  is  another  thing;  for  every  part  of  the 
incorruptible  body,  however  unequal  to  the  rest 
otherwise,  is  equally  incorrupt.  For  the  hand, 
e.g.,  is  not  more  incorrupt  than  the  finger  be¬ 
cause  it  is  larger  than  the  finger ;  so,  though  fin¬ 
ger  and  hand  are  unequal,  their  incorruptibility 
is  equal.  Thus,  although  incorruptibility  is  in¬ 
separable  from  an  incorruptible  body,  yet  the 
substance  of  the  body  is  one  thing,  the  quality 
of  incorruption  another.  And  therefore  the  body 


is  not  what  it  has.  The  soul  itself,  too,  though  it 
be  always  wise  (as  it  will  be  eternally  when  it  is 
redeemed),  will  be  so  by  participating  in  the 
unchangeable  wisdom,  which  it  is  not;  for 
though  the  air  be  never  robbed  of  the  light  that 
is  shed  abroad  in  it,  it  is  not  on  that  account  the 
same  thing  as  the  light.  I  do  not  mean  that  the 
soul  is  air,  as  has  been  supposed  by  some  who 
could  not  conceive  a  spiritual  nature;  but,  with 
much  dissimilarity,  the  two  things  have  a  kind 
of  likeness,  which  makes  it  suitable  to  say  that 
the  immaterial  soul  is  illumined  with  the  imma¬ 
terial  light  of  the  simple  wisdom  of  God,  as  the 
material  air  is  irradiated  with  material  light, 
and  that,  as  the  air,  when  deprived  of  this  light, 
grows  dark  (for  material  darkness  is  nothing 
else  than  air  wanting  light),  so  the  soul,  deprived 
of  the  light  of  wisdom,  grows  dark. 

According  to  this,  then,  those  things  which 
are  essentially  and  truly  divine  are  called  simple, 
because  in  them  quality  and  substance  are  iden¬ 
tical,  and  because  they  are  divine,  or  wise,  or 
blessed  in  themselves,  and  without  extraneous 
supplement.  In  Holy  Scripture,  it  is  true,  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  is  called  “manifold”1  because 
it  contains  many  things  in  it;  but  what  it  con¬ 
tains  it  also  is,  and  it  being  one  is  all  these 
things.  For  neither  are  there  many  wisdoms,  but 
one,  in  which  are  untold  and  infinite  treasures  of 
things  intellectual,  wherein  are  all  invisible  and 
unchangeable  reasons  of  things  visible  and 
changeable  which  were  created  by  it.  For  God 
made  nothing  unwittingly;  not  even  a  human 
workman  can  be  said  to  do  so.  But  if  He  knew 
all  that  He  made,  He  made  only  those  things 
which  He  had  known.  Whence  flows  a  very  strik¬ 
ing  but  true  conclusion,  that  this  world  could  not 
be  known  to  us  unless  it  existed,  but  could  not 
have  existed  unless  it  had  been  known  to  God. 

Chap.  ii.  Whether  the  angels  that  fell  partook 
of  the  blessedness  which  the  holy  angels  have 
always  enjoyed  from  the  time  of  their  creation 
And  since  these  things  are  so,  those  spirits 
whom  we  call  angels  were  never  at  any  time  or 
in  any  way  darkness,  but,  as  soon  as  they  were 
made,  were  made  light;  yet  they  were  not  so 
created  in  order  that  they  might  exist  and  live  in 
any  way  whatever,  but  were  enlightened  that 
they  might  live  wisely  and  blessedly.  Some  of 
them,  having  turned  away  from  this  light,  have 
not  won  this  wise  and  blessed  life,  which  is  cer¬ 
tainly  eternal,  and  accompanied  with  the  sure 
confidence  of  its  eternity;  but  they  have  still  the 
life  of  reason,  though  darkened  with  folly,  and 
^Viscl.  7.  22. 


THE  CITY  OF 

this  they  cannot  lose  even  if  they  would.  But 
who  can  determine  to  what  extent  they  were 
partakers  of  that  wisdom  before  they  fell?  And 
how  shall  we  say  that  they  participated  in  it 
equally  with  those  who  through  it  are  truly  and 
fully  blessed,  resting  in  a  true  certainty  of  eter¬ 
nal  felicity?  For  if  they  had  equally  participated 
in  this  true  knowledge,  then  the  evil  angels 
would  have  remained  eternally  blessed  equally 
with  the  good,  because  they  were  equally  expect¬ 
ant  of  it.  For,  though  a  life  be  never  so  long,  it 
cannot  be  truly  called  eternal  if  it  is  destined  to 
have  an  end;  for  it  is  called  life  inasmuch  as  it  is 
lived,  but  eternal  because  it  has  no  end.  Where¬ 
fore,  although  everything  eternal  is  not  there¬ 
fore  blessed  (for  hell-fire  is  eternal),  yet  if  no 
life  can  be  truly  and  perfectly  blessed  except  it 
be  eternal,  the  life  of  these  angels  was  not 
blessed,  for  it  was  doomed  to  end,  and  therefore 
not  eternal,  whether  they  knew  it  or  not.  In  the 
one  case  fear,  in  the  other  ignorance,  prevented 
them  from  being  blessed.  And  even  if  their  ig¬ 
norance  was  not  so  great  as  to  breed  in  them  a 
wholly  false  expectation,  but  left  them  wavering 
in  uncertainty  whether  their  good  would  be  eter¬ 
nal  or  would  some  time  terminate,  this  very 
doubt  concerning  so  grand  a  destiny  was  incom¬ 
patible  with  the  plenitude  of  blessedness  which 
we  believe  the  holy  angels  enjoyed.  For  we  do 
not  so  narrow  and  restrict  the  application  of  the 
term  “blessedness”  as  to  apply  it  to  God  only, 
though  doubtless  He  is  so  truly  blessed  that 
greater  blessedness  cannot  be;  and.  in  compari¬ 
son  of  His  blessedness,  what  is  that  of  the  an¬ 
gels,  though,  according  to  their  capacity,  they 
be  perfectly  blessed? 

Chap.  12.  A  comparison  of  the  blessedness  of 
the  righteous ,  who  have  not  yet  received  the 
divine  reward ,  with  that  of  our  first  parents 
in  Paradise 

And  the  angels  are  not  the  only  members  of 
the  rational  and  intellectual  creation  whom  we 
call  blessed.  For  who  will  take  upon  him  to  deny 
that  those  first  men  in  Paradise  were  blessed 
previously  to  sin,  although  they  were  uncertain 
how  long  their  blessedness  was  to  last  and 
whether  it  would  be  eternal  (and  eternal  it 
would  have  been  had  they  not  sinned)- — who,  I 
say,  will  do  so,  seeing  that  even  now  we  not  un¬ 
becomingly  call  those  blessed  whom  we  see  lead¬ 
ing  a  righteous  and  holy  life,  in  hope  of  immor¬ 
tality,  who  have  no  harrowing  remorse  of  con¬ 
science,  but  obtain  readily  divine  remission  of 
the  sins  of  their  present  infirmity?  These,  though 
they  are  certain  that  they  shall  be  rewarded  if 


GOD  XI.  n-13  329 

they  persevere,  are  not  certain  that  they  will 
persevere.  For  what  man  can  know  that  he  will 
persevere  to  the  end  in  the  exercise  and  increase 
of  grace,  unless  he  has  been  certified  by  some 
revelation  from  Him  Who,  in  His  just  and  secret 
judgment,  while  He  deceives  none,  informs 
few  regarding  this  matter?  Accordingly,  so  far 
as  present  comfort  goes,  the  first  man  in  Para¬ 
dise  was  more  blessed  than  any  just  man  in  this 
insecure  state;  but  as  regards  the  hope  of  future 
good,  every  man  who  not  merely  supposes,  but 
certainly  knows  that  he  shall  eternally  enjoy  the 
most  high  God  in  the  company  of  angels,  and 
beyond  the  reach  of  ill — this  man,  no  matter 
what  bodily  torments  afflict  him,  is  more  blessed 
than  was  he  who,  even  in  that  great  felicity  of 
Paradise,  was  uncertain  of  his  fate. 

Chap.  13.  Whether  all  the  angels  were  so  cre¬ 
ated  in  one  common  state  of  felicity ,  that 
those  who  fell  were  not  aware  that  they  would 
fall,  and  that  those  who  stood  received  assur¬ 
ance  of  their  own  perseverance  after  the  ruin 
0 f  the  fallen 

From  all  this,  it  will  readily  occur  to  any  one 
that  the  blessedness  which  an  intelligent  being 
desires  as  its  legitimate  object  results  from  a 
combination  of  these  two  things,  namely,  that 
it  uninterruptedly  enjoy  the  unchangeable  good, 
which  is  God;  and  that  it  be  delivered  from  all 
dubiety,  and  know  certainly  that  it  shall  eter¬ 
nally  abide  in  the  same  enjoyment.  That  it  is  so 
with  the  angels  of  light  we  piously  believe;  but 
that  the  fallen  angels,  who  by  their  own  default 
lost  that  light,  did  not  enjoy  this  blessedness 
even  before  they  sinned,  reason  bids  us  con¬ 
clude.  Yet  if  their  life  was  of  any  duration  be¬ 
fore  they  fell,  we  must  allow  them  a  blessedness 
of  some  kind,  though  not  that  which  is  accom¬ 
panied  with  foresight.  Or,  if  it  seems  hard  to  be¬ 
lieve  that,  when  the  angels  were  created,  some 
were  created  in  ignorance  either  of  their  perse¬ 
verance  or  their  fall,  while  others  were  most 
certainly  assured  of  the  eternity  of  their  felicity 
— if  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  they  were  not  all 
from  the  beginning  on  an  equal  footing,  until 
these  who  are  now  evil  did  of  their  own  will  fall 
away  from  the  light  of  goodness,  certainly  it  is 
much  harder  to  believe  that  the  holy  angels  are 
now  uncertain  of  their  eternal  blessedness  and 
do  not  know  regarding  themselves  as  much  as  we 
have  been  able  to  gather  regarding  them  from 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  For  what  Catholic  Christian 
does  not  know  that  no  new  devil  will  ever  arise 
among  the  good  angels,  as  he  knows  that  this 
present  devil  will  never  again  return  into  the  fel- 


330  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


lowship  of  the  good?  For  the  truth  in  the  gospel 
promises  to  the  saints  and  the  faithful  that  they 
will  be  equal  to  the  angels  of  God;  and  it  is  also 
promised  them  that  they  will  “go  away  into  life 
eternal.”1  But  if  we  are  certain  that  we  shall 
never  lapse  from  eternal  felicity,  while  they  are 
not  certain,  then  we  shall  not  be  their  equals, 
but  their  superiors.  But  as  the  truth  never  de¬ 
ceives,  and  as  we  shall  be  their  equals,  they  must 
be  certain  of  their  blessedness.  And  because  the 
evil  angels  could  not  be  certain  of  that,  since 
their  blessedness  was  destined  to  come  to  an  end, 
it  follows  either  that  the  angels  were  unequal,  or 
that,  if  equal,  the  good  angels  were  assured  of 
the  eternity  of  their  blessedness  after  the  perdi¬ 
tion  of  the  others;  unless,  possibly,  some  one 
may  say  that  the  words  of  the  Lord  about  the 
devil,  “He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning, 
and  abode  not  in  the  truth,”2  are  to  be  under¬ 
stood  as  if  he  was  not  only  a  murderer  from  the 
beginning  of  the  human  race,  when  man,  whom 
he  could  kill  by  his  deceit,  was  made,  but  also 
that  he  did  not  abide  in  the  truth  from  the  time 
of  his  own  creation  and  was  accordingly  never 
blessed  with  the  holy  angels,  but  refused  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  his  Creator,  and  proudly  exulted  as  if  in 
a  private  lordship  of  his  own  and  was  thus  de¬ 
ceived  and  deceiving.  For  the  dominion  of  the 
Almighty  cannot  be  eluded;  and  he  who  will  not 
piously  submit  himself  to  things  as  they  are, 
proudly  feigns,  and  mocks  himself  with  a  state 
of  things  that  does  not  exist;  so  that  what  the 
blessed  Apostle  John  says  thus  becomes  intel¬ 
ligible  :  “The  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning”3 
— that  is,  from  the  time  he  was  created  he  re¬ 
fused  righteousness,  which  none  but  a  will  pious¬ 
ly  subject  to  God  can  enjoy.  Whoever  adopts 
this  opinion  at  least  disagrees  with  those  her¬ 
etics,  the  Manichees,  and  with  any  other  pesti¬ 
lential  sect  that  may  suppose  that  the  devil  has 
derived  from  some  adverse  evil  principle  a  na¬ 
ture  proper  to  himself.  These  persons  are  so  be¬ 
fooled  by  error,  that,  although  they  acknowl¬ 
edge  with  ourselves  the  authority  of  the  gospels, 
they  do  not  notice  that  the  Lord  did  not  say, 
“The  devil  was  naturally  a  stranger  to  the 
truth,”  but  “The  devil  abode  not  in  the  truth,” 
by  which  He  meant  us  to  understand  that  he  had 
fallen  from  the  truth,  in  which,  if  he  had  abode, 
he  would  have  become  a  partaker  of  it,  and  have 
remained  in  blessedness  along  with  the  holy 
angels. 

lMatt.  25.  46. 

2John,  8.  44. 

H  John,  3.  8. 


Chap.  14.  An  explanation  of  what  is  said  of  the 

devil ,  that  he  did  not  abide  in  the  truth ,  be¬ 
cause  the  truth  was  not  in  him 

Moreover,  as  if  we  had  been  inquiring  why  the 
devil  did  not  abide  in  the  truth,  our  Lord  sub¬ 
joins  the  reason,  saying,  “because  the  truth  is 
not  in  him.”  Now,  it  would  be  in  him  had  he 
abode  in  it.  But  the  phraseology  is  unusual.  For, 
as  the  words  stand,  “He  abode  not  in  the  truth, 
because  the  truth  is  not  in  him,”  it  seems  as  if 
the  truth’s  not  being  in  him  were  the  cause  of 
his  not  abiding  in  it;  whereas  his  not  abiding  in 
the  truth  is  rather  the  cause  of  its  not  being  in 
him.  The  same  form  of  speech  is  found  in  the 
psalm:  “I  have  called  upon  Thee,  for  Thou  hast 
heard  me,  0  God,”4  where  we  should  expect  it  to 
be  said,  “Thou  hast  heard  me,  0  God,  for  I  have 
called  upon  Thee.”  But  when  he  had  said,  “I 
have  called,”  then,  as  if  some  one  were  seeking 
proof  of  this,  he  demonstrates  the  effectual 
earnestness  of  his  prayer  by  the  effect  of  God’s 
hearing  it;  as  if  he  had  said,  “The  proof  that  I 
have  prayed  is  that  Thou  hast  heard  me.” 

Chap.  15.  How  we  are  to  understand  the  words , 

“ The  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning” 

As  for  what  John  says  about  the  devil,  “The 
devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning,”5  they6  who 
suppose  it  is  meant  hereby  that  the  devil  was 
made  with  a  sinful  nature,  misunderstand  it;  for 
if  sin  be  natural,  it  is  not  sin  at  all.  And  how  do 
they  answer  the  prophetic  proofs — either  what 
Isaiah  says  when  he  represents  the  devil  under 
the  person  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  “How  art 
thou  fallen,  0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning!”7  or 
what  Ezekiel  says,  “Thou  hast  been  in  Eden,  the 
garden  of  God;  every  precious  stone  was  thy 
covering,”8  where  it  is  meant  that  he  was  some 
time  without  sin;  for  a  little  after  it  is  still  more 
explicitly  said,  “Thou  wast  perfect  in  thy 
ways”?  And  if  these  passages  cannot  well  be 
otherwise  interpreted,  we  must  understand  by 
this  one  also,  “He  abode  not  in  the  truth,”  that 
he  was  once  in  the  truth,  but  did  not  remain  in 
it.  And  from  this  passage,  “The  devil  sinneth 
from  the  beginning,”  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  he  sinned  from  the  beginning  of  his  created 
existence,  but  from  the  beginning  of  his  sin, 
when  by  his  pride  he  had  once  commenced  to 
sin.  There  is  a  passage,  too,  in  the  Book  of  Job, 
of  which  the  devil  is  the  subject:  “This  is  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  of  God,  which  He 

4Ps.  17.  6.  6I  John,  3.  8.  6The  Manichaeans. 

7Isa.  14.  12.  8Ezek.  28.  13. 


THE  CITY  OF 

made  to  be  a  sport  to  His  angels,”1  which  agrees 
with  the  psalm,  where  it  is  said,  “There  is  that 
dragon  which  Thou  hast  made  to  be  a  sport 
therein.”2  But  these  passages  are  not  to  lead  us 
to  suppose  that  the  devil  was  originally  created 
to  be  the  sport  of  the  angels,  but  that  he  was 
doomed  to  this  punishment  after  his  sin.  His 
beginning,  then,  is  the  handiwork  of  God;  for 
there  is  no  nature,  even  among  the  least,  and 
lowest,  and  last  of  the  beasts,  which  was  not  the 
work  of  Him  from  Whom  has  proceeded  all 
measure,  all  form,  all  order,  without  which  noth¬ 
ing  can  be  planned  or  conceived.  How  much 
more,  then,  is  this  angelic  nature,  which  sur¬ 
passes  in  dignity  all  else  that  He  has  made,  the 
handiwork  of  the  Most  High! 

Chap.  16.  Of  the  ranks  and  differences  of  the 
creatures,  estimated  by  their  utility,  or  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  natural  gradations  of  being 
For  among  those  beings  which  exist,  and 
which  are  not  of  God  the  Creator’s  essence, 
those  which  have  life  are  ranked  above  those 
which  have  none ;  those  that  have  the  power  of 
generation,  or  even  of  desiring,  above  those 
which  want  this  faculty.  And,  among  things  that 
have  life,  the  sentient  are  higher  than  those 
which  have  no  sensation,  as  animals  are  ranked 
above  trees.  And,  among  the  sentient,  the  intelli¬ 
gent  are  above  those  that  have  not  intelligence 
— men,  e.g.,  above  cattle.  And,  among  the  intelli¬ 
gent,  the  immortal,  such  as  the  angels,  above  the 
mortal,  such  as  men.  These  are  the  gradations 
according  to  the  order  of  nature;  but  according 
to  the  utility  each  man  finds  in  a  thing,  there  are 
various  standards  of  value,  so  that  it  comes  to 
pass  that  we  prefer  some  things  that  have  no 
sensation  to  some  sentient  beings.  And  so  strong 
is  this  preference,  that,  had  we  the  power,  we 
would  abolish  the  latter  from  nature  altogether, 
whether  in  ignorance  of  the  place  they  hold  in 
nature,  or,  though,  we  know  it,  sacrificing  them 
to  our  own  convenience.  Who,  e.g.,  would  not 
rather  have  bread  in  his  house  than  mice,  gold 
than  fleas?  But  there  is  little  to  wonder  at  in 
this,  seeing  that  even  when  valued  by  men  them¬ 
selves  (whose  nature  is  certainly  of  the  highest 
dignity),  more  is  often  given  for  a  horse  than  for 
a  slave,  for  a  jewel  than  for  a  maid.  Thus  the 
reason  of  one  contemplating  nature  prompts 
very  different  judgments  from  those  dictated 
by  the  necessity  of  the  needy,  or  the  desire  of 
the  voluptuous;  for  the  former  considers  what 
value  a  thing  in  itself  has  in  the  scale  of  crea- 
^ob,  40.  14.  (LXX).  2Ps.  104.  26. 


GOD  XI.  14-18  331 

tion,  while  necessity  considers  how  it  meets  its 
need;  reason  looks  for  what  the  mental  light  will 
judge  to  be  true,  while  pleasure  looks  for  what 
pleasantly  titilates  the  bodily  sense.  But  of  such 
consequence  in  rational  natures  is  the  weight,  so 
to  speak,  of  will  and  of  love,  that  though  in  the 
order  of  nature  angels  rank  above  men,  yet,  by 
the  scale  of  justice,  good  men  are  of  greater  val¬ 
ue  than  bad  angels. 

Chap.  17.  That  the  flaw  of  wickedness  is  not  na¬ 
ture,  but  contrary  to  nature,  and  has  its  ori¬ 
gin,  not  in  the  Creator,  but  in  the  will 
It  is  with  reference  to  the  nature,  then,  and 
not  to  the  wickedness  of  the  devil,  that  we  are 
to  understand  these  words,  “This  is  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  God’s  handiwork”;3  for,  without  doubt, 
wickedness  can  be  a  flaw  or  vice  only  where  the 
nature  previously  was  not  vitiated.  Vice,  too,  is 
so  contrary  to  nature,  that  it  cannot  but  damage 
it.  And  therefore  departure  from  God  would  be 
no  vice,  unless  in  a  nature  whose  property  it  was 
to  abide  with  God.  So  that  even  the  wicked  will  is 
a  strong  proof  of  the  goodness  of  the  nature. 
But  God,  as  He  is  the  supremely  good  Creator 
of  good  natures,  so  is  He  of  evil  wills  the  most 
just  Ruler ;  so  that,  while  they  make  an  ill  use  of 
good  natures.  He  makes  a  good  use  even  of  evil 
wills.  Accordingly,  He  caused  the  devil  (good  by 
God’s  creation,  wicked  by  his  own  will)  to  be 
cast  down  from  his  high  position  and  to  become 
the  mockery  of  His  angels — that  is,  He  caused 
his  temptations  to  benefit  those  whom  he  wishes 
to  injure  by  them.  And  because  God,  when  He 
created  him,  was  certainly  not  ignorant  of  his 
future  malignity,  and  foresaw  the  good  which 
He  Himself  would  bring  out  of  his  evil,  there¬ 
fore  says  the  psalm,  “This  leviathan  whom 
Thou  hast  made  to  be  a  sport  therein,”4  that  we 
may  see  that,  even  while  God  in  His  goodness 
created  him  good,  He  yet  had  already  foreseen 
and  arranged  how  He  would  make  use  of  him 
when  he  became  wicked. 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  beauty  of  the  universe,  which 
becomes,  by  God’s  ordinance,  more  brilliant 
by  the  opposition  of  contraries 
For  God  would  never  have  created  any,  I  do 
not  say  angel,  but  even  man,  whose  future  wick¬ 
edness  He  foreknew,  unless  He  had  equally 
known  to  what  uses  in  behalf  of  the  good  He 
could  turn  him,  thus  embellishing  the  course  of 
the  ages,  as  it  were  an  exquisite  poem  set  off 
with  antitheses.  For  what  are  called  antitheses 
3Job,  40.  14  (LXX).  4Ps.  104.  26. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


are  among  the  most  elegant  of  the  ornaments  of 
speech.  They  might  be  called  in  Latin  “opposi¬ 
tions,”  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  “contra¬ 
positions”;  but  this  word  is  not  in  common  use 
among  us,  though  the  Latin,  and  indeed  the  lan¬ 
guages  of  all  nations,  avail  themselves  of  the 
same  ornaments  of  style.  In  the  Second  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians  the  Apostle  Paul  also  makes 
a  graceful  use  of  antithesis,  in  that  place  where 
he  says,  “By  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left,  by  honour  and  dis¬ 
honour,  by  evil  report  and  good  report:  as  de¬ 
ceivers,  and  yet  true;  as  unknown,  and  yet  well 
known;  as  dying,  and,  behold,  we  live;  as  chas¬ 
tened,  and  not  killed;  as  sorrowful,  yet  always 
rejoicing;  as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich;  as 
having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things.”1 
As,  then,  these  oppositions  of  contraries  lend 
beauty  to  the  language,  so  the  beauty  of  the 
course  of  this  world  is  achieved  by  the  opposi¬ 
tion  of  contraries,  arranged,  as  it  were,  by  an 
eloquence  not  of  words,  but  of  things.  This  is 
quite  plainly  stated  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasti- 
cus,  in  this  way:  “Good  is  set  against  evil, -and 
life  against  death:  so  is  the  sinner  against  the 
godly.  So  look  upon  all  the  works  of  the  Most 
High,  and  these  are  two  and  two,  one  against 
another.”2 

Chap.  19.  What,  seemingly ,  we  are  to  under¬ 
stand  by  the  words ,  “God  divided  the  light 
from  the  darkness ” 

Accordingly,  though  the  obscurity  of  the  di¬ 
vine  word  has  certainly  this  advantage,  that  it 
causes  many  opinions  about  the  truth  to  be 
started  and  discussed,  each  reader  seeing  some 
fresh  meaning  in  it,  yet,  whatever  is  said  to  be 
meant  by  an  obscure  passage  should  be  either 
confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  obvious  facts,  or 
should  be  asserted  in  other  and  less  ambiguous 
texts.  This  obscurity  is  beneficial,  whether  the 
sense  of  the  author  is  at  last  reached  after  the 
discussion  of  many  other  interpretations,  or 
whether,  though  that  sense  remain  concealed, 
other  truths  are  brought  out  by  the  discussion  of 
the  obscurity.  To  me  it  does  not  seem  incongru¬ 
ous  with  the  working  of  God.  if  we  understand 
that  the  angels  were  created  when  that  first  light 
was  made  and  that  a  separation  was  made  be¬ 
tween  the  holy  and  the  unclean  angels,  when,  as 
is  said,  “God  divided  the  light  from  the  dark¬ 
ness;  and  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the 
darkness  He  called  Night.”  For  He  alone  could 
make  this  discrimination,  who  was  able  also  be¬ 
fore  they  fell,  to  foreknow  that  they  would  fall, 
1II  Cor.  6.  7-10.  2Ecclus.  33.  15. 


and  that,  being  deprived  of  the  light  of  truth, 
they  would  abide  in  the  darkness  of  pride.  For, 
so  far  as  regards  the  day  and  night,  with  which 
we  are  familiar,  He  commanded  those  lumina¬ 
ries  of  heaven  that  are  obvious  to  our  senses  to 
divide  between  the  light  and  the  darkness.  “Let 
there  be,”  He  says,  “lights  in  the  firmament  of 
the  heaven,  to  divide  the  day  from  the  night”; 
and  shortly  after  He  says,  “And  God  made  two 
great  lights;  the  greater  light  to  rule  the  day, 
and  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  night:  the  stars 
also.  And  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the 
heaven,  to  give  light  upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule 
over  the  day  and  over  the  night,  and  to  divide 
the  light  from  the  darkness.”3  But  between  that 
light,  which  is  the  holy  company  of  the  angels 
spiritually  radiant  with  the  illumination  of  the 
truth,  and  that  opposing  darkness,  which  is  the 
noisome  foulness  of  the  spiritual  condition  of 
those  angels  who  are  turned  away  from  the  light 
of  righteousness,  only  He  Himself  could  divide, 
from  whom  their  wickedness  (not  of  nature,  but 
of  will),  while  yet  it  was  future,  could  not  be 
hidden  or  uncertain. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  words  which  follow  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  light  and  darkness ,  “and  God  saw  the 
light  that  it  was  good” 

Then,  we  must  not  pass  from  this  passage  of 
Scripture  without  noticing  that  when  God  said, 
“Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,”  it  was 
immediately  added,  “And  God  saw  the  light  that 
it  was  good.”  No  such  expression  followed  the 
statement  that  He  separated  the  light  from  the 
darkness,  and  called  the  light  Day  and  the  dark¬ 
ness  Night,  lest  the  seal  of  His  approval  might 
seem  to  be  set  on  such  darkness,  as  well  as  on 
the  light.  For  when  the  darkness  was  not  subject 
of  disapprobation,  as  when  it  was  divided  by  the 
heavenly  bodies  from  this  light  which  our  eyes 
discern,  the  statement  that  God  saw  that  it  was 
good  is  inserted,  not  before,  but  after  the  divi¬ 
sion  is  recorded.  “And  God  set  them,”  so  runs 
the  passage,  “in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to 
give  light  upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule  over  the 
day  and  over  the  night,  and  to  divide  the  light 
from  the  darkness:  and  God  saw  that  it  was 
good.”  For  He  approved  of  both,  because  both 
were  sinless.  But  where  God  said,  “Let  there  be 
light,  and  there  was  light;  and  God  saw  the  light 
that  it  was  good”;  and  the  narrative  goes  on, 
“and  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness! 
and  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness 
He  called  Night,”  there  was  not  in  this  place 
subjoined  the  statement,  “And  God  saw  that  it 
3Gen.  1.  14-18. 


THE  CITY  OF 

was  good,”  lest  both  should  be  designated  good, 
while  one  of  them  was  evil,  not  by  nature,  but 
by  its  own  fault.  And  therefore,  in  this  case,  the 
light  alone  received  the  approbation  of  the 
Creator,  while  the  angelic  darkness,  though  it 
had  been  ordained,  was  yet  not  approved. 

Chap.  21  .Of  God's  eternal  and  unchangeable 
knowledge  and  will,  whereby  all  he  has  made 
pleased  him  in  the  eternal  design  as  well  as 
in  the  actual  results 

For  what  else  is  to  be  understood  by  that  in¬ 
variable  refrain,  “And  God  saw  that  it  was 
good,”  than  the  approval  of  the  work  in  its  de¬ 
sign.  which  is  the  wisdom  of  God?  For  certainly 
God  did  not  in  the  actual  achievement  of  the 
work  first  learn  that  it  was  good,  but,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  nothing  would  have  been  made  had  it  not 
been  first  known  by  Him.  While,  therefore,  He 
sees  that  that  is  good  which,  had  He  not  seen  it 
before  it  was  made,  would  never  have  been 
made,  it  is  plain  that  He  is  not  discovering,  but 
teaching  that  it  is  good.  Plato,  indeed,  was  bold 
enough  to  say  that,  when  the  universe  was  com¬ 
pleted,  God  was,  as  it  were,  elated  with  joy.1 
And  Plato  was  not  so  foolish  as  to  mean  by  this 
that  God  was  rendered  more  blessed  by  the  nov¬ 
elty  of  His  creation;  but  he  wished  thus  to  indi¬ 
cate  that  the  work  now  completed  met  with  its 
Maker’s  approval,  as  it  had  while  yet  in  design. 
It  is  not  as  if  the  knowledge  of  God  were  of  vari¬ 
ous  kinds,  knowing  in  different  ways  things 
which  as  yet  are  not,  things  which  are,  and 
things  which  have  been.  For  not  in  our  fashion 
does  He  look  forward  to  what  is  future,  nor  at 
what  is  present,  nor  back  upon  what  is  past ;  but 
in  a  manner  quite  different  and  far  and  pro¬ 
foundly  remote  from  our  way  of  thinking.  For 
He  does  not  pass  from  this  to  that  by  transition 
of  thought,  but  beholds  all  things  with  absolute 
unchangeableness ;  so  that  of  those  things  which 
emerge  in  time,  the  future,  indeed,  are  not  yet, 
and  the  present  are  now,  and  the  past  no  longer 
are;  but  all  of  these  are  by  Him  comprehended 
in  His  stable  and  eternal  presence.  Neither  does 
He  see  in  one  fashion  by  the  eye,  in  another  by 
the  mind,  for  He  is  not  composed  of  mind  and 
body;  nor  does  His  present  knowledge  differ 
from  that  which  it  ever  was  or  shall  be,  for  those 
variations  of  time,  past,  present,  and  future, 
though  they  alter  our  knowledge,  do  not  affect 
His,  “with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  sha¬ 
dow  of  turning.”2  Neither  is  there  any  growth 
from  thought  to  thought  in  the  conceptions  of 

1Timceus,  37. 

2Jas.  1.  17. 


GOD  XI.  19-22  333 

Him  in  Whose  spiritual  vision  all  things  which 
He  knows  are  at  once  embraced.  For  as  without 
any  movement  that  time  can  measure,  He  Him¬ 
self  moves  all  temporal  things,  so  He  knows  all 
times  with  a  knowledge  that  time  cannot  meas¬ 
ure.  And  therefore  He  saw  that  what  He  had 
made  was  good,  when  He  saw  that  it  was  good  to 
make  it.  And  when  He  saw  it  made,  He  had  not 
on  that  account  a  twofold  nor  any  way  increased 
knowledge  of  it;  as  if  He  had  less  knowledge  be¬ 
fore  He  made  what  He  saw.  For  certainly  He 
would  not  be  the  perfect  worker  He  is,  unless 
His  knowledge  Were  so  perfect  as  to  receive  no 
addition  from  His  finished  works.  Wherefore,  if 
the  only  object  had  been  to  inform  us  who  made 
the  light,  it  had  been  enough  to  say,  “God  made 
the  light”;  and  if  further  information  regarding 
the  means  by  which  it  was  made  had  been  in¬ 
tended,  it  would  have  sufficed  to  say,  “And  God 
said,  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,” 
that  we  might  know  not  only  that  God  had  made 
the  world,  but  also  that  He  had  made  it  by  the 
word.  But  because  it  was  right  that  three  leading 
truths  regarding  the  creature  be  intimated  to  us, 
viz.,  who  made  it,  by  what  means,  and  why,  it  is 
written,  “God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and  there 
was  light.  And  God  saw  the  light  that  it  was 
good.”  If,  then,  we  ask  who  made  it,  it  was 
“God.”  If,  by  what  means,  He  said  “Let  it  be,” 
and  it  was.  If  we  ask,  why  He  made  it,  “it  was 
good.”  Neither  is  there  any  author  more  excel¬ 
lent  than  God,  nor  any  skill  more  efficacious 
than  the  word  of  God,  nor  any  cause  better  than 
that  good  might  be  created  by  the  good  God. 
This  also  Plato  has  assigned  as  the  most  suffi¬ 
cient  reason  for  the  creation  of  the  world,  that 
good  works  might  be  made  by  a  good  God;3 
whether  he  read  this  passage,  or,  perhaps,  was 
informed  of  these  things  by  those  who  had  read 
them,  or,  by  his  quick-sighted  genius,  penetrated 
to  things  spiritual  and  invisible  through  the 
things  that  are  created,  or  was  instructed  regard¬ 
ing  them  by  those  who  had  discerned  them. 

Chap.  22.  Of  those  who  do  not  approve  of  cer¬ 
tain  things  which  are  a  part  of  this  good  crea¬ 
tion  of  a  good  Creator ,  and  who  think  that 
there  is  some  natural  evil 
This  cause,  however,  of  a  good  creation, 
namely,  the  goodness  of  God — this  cause,  I  say, 
so  just  and  fit,  which,  when  piously  and  care¬ 
fully  weighed,  terminates  all  the  controversies 
of  those  who  inquire  into  the  origin  of  the  world, 
has  not  been  recognized  by  some  heretics,4  be- 

3Timaus,  29. 

4The  Manichaeans. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


334 

cause  there  are,  forsooth,  many  things,  such  as 
fire,  frost,  wild  beasts,  and  so  forth,  which  do 
not  suit  but  injure  this  thin-blooded  and  frail 
mortality  of  our  flesh,  which  is  at  present  under 
just  punishment.  They  do  not  consider  how  ad¬ 
mirable  these  things  are  in  their  own  places,  how 
excellent  in  their  own  natures,  how  beautifully 
adjusted  to  the  rest  of  creation,  and  how  much 
grace  they  contribute  to  the  universe  by  their 
own  contributions  as  to  a  commonwealth;  and 
how  serviceable  they  are  even  to  ourselves,  if  we 
use  them  with  a  knowledge  of  their  fit  adapta¬ 
tions — so  that  even  poisons,  which  are  destruc¬ 
tive  when  used  injudiciously,  become  whole¬ 
some  and  medicinal  when  used  in  conformity 
with  their  qualities  and  design;  just  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  those  things  which  give  us  pleasure, 
such  as  food,  drink,  and  the  light  of  the  sun,  are 
found  to  be  hurtful  when  immoderately  or  un¬ 
seasonably  used.  And  thus  divine  providence  ad¬ 
monishes  us  not  foolishly  to  vituperate  things, 
but  to  investigate  their  utility  with  care;  and, 
where  our  mental  capacity  or  infirmity  is  at 
fault,  to  believe  that  there  is  a  utility,  though 
hidden,  as  we  have  experienced  that  there  were 
other  things  which  we  all  but  failed  to  discover. 
For  this  concealment  of  the  use  of  things  is  it¬ 
self  either  an  exercise  of  our  humility  or  a  level¬ 
ling  of  our  pride;  for  no  nature  at  all  is  evil,  and 
this  is  a  name  for  nothing  but  the  want  of  good. 
But  from  things  earthly  to  things  heavenly, 
from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  there  are  some 
things  better  than  others;  and  for  this  purpose 
are  they  unequal,  in  order  that  they  might  all  ex¬ 
ist.  Now  God  is  in  such  sort  a  great  worker  in 
great  things,  that  He  is  not  less  in  little  things — 
for  these  little  things  are  to  be  measured  not  by 
their  own  greatness  (which  does  not  exist),  but 
by  the  wisdom  of  their  Designer;  as,  in  the  visi¬ 
ble  appearance  of  a  man,  if  one  eyebrow  be 
shaved  off,  how  nearly  nothing  is  taken  from  the 
body,  but  how  much  from  the  beauty! — for  that 
is  not  constituted  by  bulk,  but  by  the  proportion 
and  arrangement  of  the  members.  But  we  do  not 
greatly  wonder  that  persons,  who  suppose  that 
some  evil  nature  has  been  generated  and  propa¬ 
gated  by  a  kind  of  opposing  principle  proper  to 
it,  refuse  to  admit  that  the  cause  of  the  creation 
was  this,  that  the  good  God  produced  a  good 
creation.  For  they  believe  that  He  was  driven  to 
this  enterprise  of  creation  by  the  urgent  neces¬ 
sity  of  repulsing  the  evil  that  warred  against 
Him.  and  that  He  mixed  His  good  nature  with 
the  evil  for  the  sake  of  restraining  and  conquer¬ 
ing  it;  and  that  this  nature  of  His,  being  thus 
shamefully  polluted  and  most  cruelly  oppressed 


and  held  captive,  He  labours  to  cleanse  and  de¬ 
liver  it,  and  with  all  His  pains  does  not  wholly 
succeed;  but  such  part  of  it  as  could  not  be 
cleansed  from  that  defilement  is  to  serve  as  a 
prison  and  chain  of  the  conquered  and  incarcer¬ 
ated  enemy.  The  Manichaeans  would  not  drivel, 
or  rather,  rave  in  such  a  style  as  this,  if  they  be¬ 
lieved  the  nature  of  God  to  be,  as  it  is,  unchange¬ 
able  and  absolutely  incorruptible,  and  subject  to 
no  injury;  and  if,  moreover,  they  held  in  Chris¬ 
tian  sobriety  that  the  soul  which  has  shown  it¬ 
self  capable  of  being  altered  for  the  worse  by  its 
own  will,  and  of  being  corrupted  by  sin,  and  so, 
of  being  deprived  of  the  light  of  eternal  truth — 
that  this  soul,  I  say,  is  not  a  part  of  God,  nor  of 
the  same  nature  as  God,  but  is  created  by  Him, 
and  is  far  different  from  its  Creator. 

Chap.  23.  Of  the  error  in  which  the  doctrine  of 

Origen  is  involved 

But  it  is  much  more  surprising  that  some  even 
of  those  who,  with  ourselves,  believe  that  there 
is  one  only  source  of  all  things,  and  that  no  na¬ 
ture  which  is  not  divine  can  exist  unless  orig¬ 
inated  by  that  Creator,  have  yet  refused  to  ac¬ 
cept  with  a  good  and  simple  faith  this  so  good 
and  simple  a  reason  of  the  world’s  creation,  that 
a  good  God  made  it  good;  and  that  the  things 
created,  being  different  from  God,  were  inferior 
to  Him,  and  yet  were  good,  being  created  by 
none  other  than  He.  But  they  say  that  souls, 
though  not,  indeed,  parts  of  God,  but  created  by 
Him,  sinned  by  abandoning  God;  that,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  their  various  sins,  they  merited  dif¬ 
ferent  degrees  of  debasement  from  heaven  to 
earth,  and  diverse  bodies  as  prison-houses;  and 
that  this  is  the  world,  and  this  the  cause  of  its 
creation,  not  the  production  of  good  things,  but 
the  restraining  of  evil.  Origen  is  justly  blamed 
for  holding  this  opinion.  For  in  the  books  which 
he  entitles  irepl  apxiiv,  that  is,  Of  Origins,  this 
is  his  sentiment,  this  his  utterance.  And  I  can¬ 
not  sufficiently  express  my  astonishment  that 
a  man  so  erudite  and  well  versed  in  ecclesias¬ 
tical  literature  should  not  have  observed,  in  the 
first  place,  how  opposed  this  is  to  the  meaning 
of  this  authoritative  Scripture,  which,  in  re¬ 
counting  all  the  works  of  God,  regularly  adds, 
“And  God  saw  that  it  was  good”;  and,  when  all 
were  completed,  inserts  the  words,  “And  God 
saw  everything  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold, 
it  was  very  good.”1  Was  it  not  obviously  meant 
to  be  understood  that  there  was  no  other  cause 
of  the  world’s  creation  than  that  good  creatures 
should  be  made  by  a  good  God?  In  this  creation, 

^en.  1.  31. 


THE  CITY  OF 

had  no  one  sinned,  the  world  would  have  been 
filled  and  beautified  with  natures  good  without 
exception;  and  though  there  is  sin,  all  things  are 
not  therefore  full  of  sin,  for  the  great  majority 
of  the  heavenly  inhabitants  preserve  their  na¬ 
ture’s  integrity.  And  the  sinful  will,  though  it  vi¬ 
olated  the  order  of  its  own  nature,  did  not  on 
that  account  escape  the  laws  of  God,  who  justly 
orders  all  things  for  good.  For  as  the  beauty  of 
a  picture  is  increased  by  well-managed  shadows, 
so,  to  the  eye  that  has  skill  to  discern  it,  the  uni¬ 
verse  is  beautified  even  by  sinners,  though,  con¬ 
sidered  by  themselves,  their  deformity  is  a  sad 
blemish. 

In  the  second  place,  Origen,  and  all  who  think 
with  him,  ought  to  have  seen  that  if  it  were  the 
true  opinion  that  the  world  was  created  in  order 
that  souls  might,  for  their  sins,  be  accommo¬ 
dated  with  bodies  in  which  they  should  be  shut 
up  as  in  houses  of  correction,  the  more  venial 
sinners  receiving  lighter  and  more  ethereal  bod¬ 
ies,  while  the  grosser  and  graver  sinners  received 
bodies  more  crass  and  grovelling,  then  it  would 
follow  that  the  devils,  who  are  deepest  in  wick¬ 
edness,  ought,  rather  than  even  wicked  men,  to 
have  earthly  bodies,  since  these  are  the  grossest 
and  least  ethereal  of  all.  But  in  point  of  fact, 
that  we  might  see  that  the  deserts  of  souls  are 
not  to  be  estimated  by  the  qualities  of  bodies, 
the  wickedest  devil  possesses  an  ethereal  body, 
while  man,  wicked,  it  is  true,  but  with  a  wicked¬ 
ness  small  and  venial  in  comparison  with  his, 
received  even  before  his  sin  a  body  of  clay.  And 
what  more  foolish  assertion  can  be  advanced 
than  that  God,  by  this  sun  of  ours,  did  not  de¬ 
sign  to  benefit  the  material  creation,  or  lend  lus¬ 
tre  to  its  loveliness,  and  therefore  created  one 
single  sun  for  this  single  world,  but  that  it  so 
happened  that  one  soul  only  had  so  sinned  as  to 
deserve  to  be  enclosed  in  such  a  body  as  it  is? 
On  this  principle,  if  it  had  chanced  that  not  one, 
but  two,  yea,  or  ten,  or  a  hundred  had  sinned 
similarly,  and  with  a  like  degree  of  guilt,  then 
this  world  would  have  one  hundred  suns.  And 
that  suth  is  not  the  case  is  due  not  to  the  con¬ 
siderate  foresight  of  the  Creator,  contriving  the 
safety  and  beauty  of  things  material,  but  rather 
to  the  fact  that  so  fine  a  quality  of  sinning  was 
hit  upon  by  only  one  soul,  so  that  it  alone  has 
merited  such  a  body.  Manifestly  persons  hold¬ 
ing  such  opinions  should  aim  at  confining,  not 
souls  of  which  they  know  not  what  they  say, 
but  themselves,  lest  they  fall,  and  deservedly, 
far  indeed  from  the  truth.  And  as  to  these  three 
answers  which  I  formerly  recommended  when  in 
the  case  of  any  creature  the  questions  are  put, 


GOD  XI.  23-24  335 

“Who  made  it?”  “By  what  means?”  “Why?” 
that  it  should  be  replied, “God,”  “By  the  Word,” 
“Because  it  was  good” — as  to  these  three  an¬ 
swers,  it  is  very  questionable  whether  the  Trin¬ 
ity  itself  is  thus  mystically  indicated,  that  is,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  whether 
there  is  some  good  reason  for  this  acceptation 
in  this  passage  of  Scripture, — this,  I  say,  is 
questionable,  and  one  can’t  be  expected  to  ex¬ 
plain  everything  in  one  volume. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  divine  Trinity ,  and  the  indica¬ 
tions  of  its  presence  scattered  everywhere 
among  its  works 

We  believe,  we  maintain,  we  faithfully  preach, 
that  the  Father  begat  the  Word,  that  is,  Wis¬ 
dom,  by  which  all  things  were  made,  the  only- 
begotten  Son,  one  as  the  Father  is  one,  eternal 
as  the  Father  is  eternal,  and,  equally  with  the 
Father,  supremely  good;  and  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  Spirit  alike  of  Father  and  of  Son, 
and  is  Himself  consubstantial  and  co-eternal 
with  both;  and  that  this  whole  is  a  Trinity  by 
reason  of  the  individuality1  of  the  persons,  and 
one  God  by  reason  of  the  indivisible  divine  sub¬ 
stance,  as  also  one  Almighty  by  reason  of  the 
indivisible  omnipotence;  yet  so  that,  when 
we  inquire  regarding  each  singly,  it  is  said 
that  each  is  God  and  Almighty;  and,  when  we 
speak  of  all  together,  it  is  said  that  there  are  not 
three  Gods,  nor  three  Almighties,  but  one  God 
Almighty;  so  great  is  the  indivisible  unity  of 
these  Three,  which  requires  that  it  be  so  stated. 
But,  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  Father  and 
of  the  Son,  who  are  both  good,  can  be  with  pro¬ 
priety  called  the  goodness  of  both,  because  He 
is  common  to  both,  I  do  not  presume  to  deter¬ 
mine  hastily.  Nevertheless,  I  would  have  less 
hesitation  in  saying  that  He  is  the  holiness  of 
both,  not  as  if  He  were  a  divine  attribute  mere¬ 
ly,  but  Himself  also  the  divine  substance,  and 
the  third  person  in  the  Trinity.  I  am  the  rather 
emboldened  to  make  this  statement,  because, 
though  the  Father  is  a  spirit,  and  the  Son  a 
spirit,  and  the  Father  holy,  and  the  Son  holy, 
yet  the  third  person  is  distinctively  called  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  if  He  were  the  substantial  holi¬ 
ness  consubstantial  with  the  other  two.  But  if 
the  divine  goodness  is  nothing  else  than  the  di¬ 
vine  holiness,  then  certainly  it  is  a  reasonable 
studiousness  and  not  presumptuous  intrusion  to 
inquire  whether  the  same  Trinity  be  not  hinted 
at  in  an  enigmatical  mode  of  speech,  by  which 
our  inquiry  is  stimulated,  when  it  is  written  who 
made  each  creature,  and  by  what  means,  and 
1Proprietas . 


336  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


why.  For  it  is  the  Father  of  the  Word  who  said, 
“Let  there  be.”  And  that  which  was  made  when 
He  spoke  was  certainly  made  by  means  of  the 
Word.  And  by  the  words,  “God  saw  that  it  was 
good,”  it  is  sufficiently  intimated  that  God  made 
what  was  made  not  from  any  necessity,  nor  for 
the  sake  of  supplying  any  want,  but  solely  from 
His  own  goodness,  i.e.,  because  it  was  good.  And 
this  is  stated  after  the  creation  had  taken  place, 
that  there  might  be  no  doubt  that  the  thing 
made  satisfied  the  goodness  on  account  of  which 
it  was  made.  And  if  we  are  right  in  understand¬ 
ing  that  this  goodness  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  then 
the  whole  Trinity  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  crea¬ 
tion.  In  this,  too,  is  the  origin,  the  enlighten¬ 
ment,  the  blessedness  of  the  holy  city  which  is 
above  among  the  holy  angels.  For  if  we  inquire 
whence  it  is,  God  created  it ;  or  whence  its  wis¬ 
dom,  God  illumined  it;  or  whence  its  blessed¬ 
ness,  God  is  its  bliss.  It  has  its  form  by  subsist¬ 
ing  in  Him ;  its  enlightenment  by  contemplating 
Him;  its  joy  by  abiding  in  Him.  It  is;  it  sees;  it 
loves.  In  God’s  eternity  is  its  life;  in  God’s  truth 
its  light;  in  God’s  goodness  its  joy. 

Chap.  25.  Of  the  division  of  philosophy  into 

three  parts 

As  far  as  one  can  judge,  it  is  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son  that  philosophers  have  aimed  at  a  threefold 
division  of  science,  or  rather,  were  enabled  to 
see  that  there  was  a  threefold  division  (for  they 
did  not  invent,  but  only  discovered  it),  of  which 
one  part  is  called  physical,  another  logical,  the 
third  ethical.  The  Latin  equivalents  of  these 
names  are  now  naturalized  in  the  writings  of 
many  authors,  so  that  these  divisions  are  called 
natural,  rational,  and  moral,  on  which  I  have 
touched  slightly  in  the  eighth  book.  Not  that  I 
would  conclude  that  these  philosophers,  in  this 
threefold  division,  had  any  thought  of  a  trinity 
in  God,  although  Plato  is  said  to  have  been  the 
first  to  discover  and  promulgate  this  distribu¬ 
tion,  and  he  saw  that  God  alone  could  be  the  au¬ 
thor  of  nature,  the  bestower  of  intelligence,  and 
the  kindler  of  love  by  which  life  becomes  good 
and  blessed.  But  certain  it  is  that,  though  phi¬ 
losophers  disagree  regarding  the  nature  of 
things,  and  the  mode  of  investigating  truth,  and 
of  the  good  to  which  all  our  actions  ought  to 
tend,  yet  in  these  three  great  general  questions 
all  their  intellectual  energy  is  spent.  And  though 
there  be  a  confusing  diversity  of  opinion,  every 
man  striving  to  establish  his  own  opinion  in  re¬ 
gard  to  each  of  these  questions,  yet  no  one  of 
them  all  doubts  that  nature  has  some  cause,  sci¬ 


ence  some  method,  life  some  end  and  aim.  Then, 
again,  there  are  three  things  which  every  artifi¬ 
cer  must  possess  if  he  is  to  effect  anything — na¬ 
ture,  education,  practice.  Nature  is  to  be  judged 
by  capacity,  education  by  knowledge,  practice 
by  its  fruit.  I  am  aware  that,  properly  speaking, 
fruit  is  what  one  enjoys,  use  [practice]  what 
one  uses.  And  this  seems  to  be  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  them,  that  we  are  said  to  enjoy  that  which 
in  itself  and  irrespective  of  other  ends  delights 
us;  to  use  that  which  we  seek  for  the  sake  of 
some  end  beyond.  For  which  reason  the  things 
of  time  are  to  be  used  rather  than  enjoyed,  that 
we  may  deserve  to  enjoy  things  eternal ;  and  not 
as  those  perverse  creatures  who  would  fain  en¬ 
joy  money  and  use  God — not  spending  money 
for  God’s  sake,  but  worshipping  God  for  mon¬ 
ey’s  sake.  However,  in  common  parlance,  we 
both  use  fruits  and  enjoy  uses.  For  we  correctly 
speak  of  the  “fruits  of  the  field,”  which  certain¬ 
ly  we  all  use  in  the  present  life.  And  it  was  in 
accordance  with  this  usage  that  I  said  that  there 
were  three  things  to  be  observed  in  a  man,  na¬ 
ture,  education,  practice.  From  these  the  philos¬ 
ophers  have  elaborated,  as  I  said,  the  threefold 
division  of  that  science  by  which  a  blessed  life 
is  attained:  the  natural  having  respect  to  na¬ 
ture,  the  rational  to  education,  the  moral  to 
practice.  If,  then,  we  were  ourselves  the  authors 
of  our  nature,  we  should  have  generated  knowl¬ 
edge  in  ourselves,  and  should  not  require  to 
reach  it  by  education,  i.e.,  by  learning  it  from 
others.  Our  love,  too,  proceeding  from  ourselves 
and  returning  to  us,  would  suffice  to  make  our 
life  blessed,  and  would  stand  in  need  of  no  ex¬ 
traneous  enjoyment.  But  now,  since  our  nature 
has  God  as  its  requisite  author,  it  is  certain  that 
we  must  have  Him  for  our  teacher  that  we  may 
be  wise;  Him,  too,  to  dispense  to  us  spiritual 
sweetness  that  we  may  be  blessed. 

Chap.  26.  Of  the  image  of  the  supreme  Trinity , 
which  we  find  in  some  sort  in  human  nature 
even  in  its  present  state 
And  we  indeed  recognize  in  ourselves  the 
image  of  God,  that  is,  of  the  supreme  Trinity, 
an  image  which,  though  it  be  not  equal  to  God, 
or  rather,  though  it  be  very  far  removed  from 
Him — being  neither  co-eternal,  nor,  to  say  all 
in  a  word,  consubstantial  with  Him — is  yet 
nearer  to  Him  in  nature  than  any  other  of  His 
works  and  is  destined  to  be  yet  restored,  that  it 
may  bear  a  still  closer  resemblance.  For  we  are, 
and  know  that  we  are,  and  delight  in  our  being, 
and  our  knowledge  of  it.  Moreover,  in  these 


THE  CITY  OF 

three  things  no  true-seeming  illusion  disturbs 
us;  for  we  do  not  come  into  contact  with  these 
by  some  bodily  sense,  as  we  perceive  the  things 
outside  of  us — colours,  e.g.,  by  seeing,  sounds 
by  hearing,  smells  by  smelling,  tastes  by  tasting, 
hard  and  soft  objects  by  touching — of  all  which 
sensible  objects  it  is  the  images  resembling 
them  but  not  themselves  which  we  perceive  in 
the  mind  and  hold  in  the  memory,  and  which  ex¬ 
cite  us  to  desire  the  objects.  But,  without  any 
delusive  representation  of  images  or  phantasms, 

I  am  most  certain  that  I  am  and  that  I  know  and 
delight  in  this.  In  respect  of  these  truths,  I  am 
not  at  all  afraid  of  the  arguments  of  the  Acad¬ 
emicians,  who  say,  “What  if  you  are  deceived?” 
For  if  I  am  deceived,  I  am.  For  he  who  is  not, 
cannot  be  deceived;  and  if  I  am  deceived,  by 
this  same  token  I  am.  And  since  I  am  if  I  am 
deceived,  how  am  I  deceived  in  believing  that 
lam?  for  it  is  certain  that  I  am  if  I  am  deceived. 
Since,  therefore,  I,  the  person  deceived,  should 
be,  even  if  I  were  deceived,  certainly  I  am  not 
deceived  in  this  knowledge  that  I  am.  And,  con¬ 
sequently,  neither  am  I  deceived  in  knowing 
that  I  know.  For,  as  I  know  that  I  am,  so  I  know 
this  also,  that  I  know.  And  when  I  love  these 
two  things,  I  add  to  them  a  certain  third  thing, 
namely,  my  love,  which  is  of  equal  moment.  For 
neither  am  I  deceived  in  this,  that  I  love,  since 
in  those  things  which  I  love  I  am  not  deceived; 
though  even  if  these  were  false,  it  would  still  be 
true  that  I  loved  false  things.  For  how  could  I 
justly  be  blamed  and  prohibited  from  loving 
false  things,  if  it  were  false  that  I  loved  them? 
But,  since  they  are  true  and  real,  who  doubts 
that  when  they  are  loved,  the  love  of  them  is  it¬ 
self  true  and  real?  Further,  as  there  is  no  one 
who  does  not  wish  to  be  happy,  so  there  is  no 
one  who  does  not  wish  to  be.  For  how  can  he  be 
happy,  if  he  is  nothing? 

Chap.  27.  Of  existence,  and  knowledge  of  it,  and 

the  love  of  both 

And  truly  the  very  fact  of  existing  is  by  some 
natural  spell  so  pleasant,  that  even  the  wretched 
are,  for  no  other  reason,  unwilling  to  perish; 
and,  when  they  feel  that  they  are  wretched,  wish 
not  that  they  themselves  be  annihilated,  but 
that  their  misery  be  so.  Take  even  those  who, 
both  in  their  own  esteem  and  in  point  of  fact, 
are  utterly  wretched  and  who  are  reckoned  so, 
not  only  by  wise  men  an  account  of  their  folly, 
but  by  those  who  count  themselves  blessed,  and 
who  think  them  wretched  because  they  are  poor 
and  destitute — if  any  one  should  give  these  men 


GOD  XI.  25-27  337 

an  immortality,  in  which  their  misery  should  be 
deathless,  and  should  offer  the  alternative  that 
if  they  shrank  from  existing  eternally  in  the 
same  misery  they  might  be  annihilated  and  ex¬ 
ist  nowhere  at  all,  nor  in  any  condition,  on  the 
instant  they  would  joyfully,  nay  exultantly, 
make  election  to  exist  always,  even  in  such  a 
condition,  rather  than  not  exist  at  all.  The  well- 
known  feeling  of  such  men  witnesses  to  this. 
For  when  we  see  that  they  fear  to  die,  and  will 
rather  live  in  such  misfortune  than  end  it  by 
death,  is  it  not  obvious  enough  how  nature 
shrinks  from  annihilation?  And,  accordingly, 
when  they  know  that  they  must  die,  they  seek, 
as  a  great  boon,  that  this  mercy  be  shown  them, 
that  they  may  a  little  longer  live  in  the  same 
misery,  and  delay  to  end  it  by  death.  And  so 
they  indubitably  prove  with  what  glad  alacrity 
they  would  accept  immortality,  even  though  it 
secured  to  them  endless  destruction.  What!  do 
not  even  all  irrational  animals,  to  whom  such 
calculations  are  unknown,  from  the  huge  drag¬ 
ons  down  to  the  least  worms,  all  testify  that 
they  wish  to  exist,  and  therefore  shun  death  by 
every  movement  in  their  power?  Nay,  the  very 
plants  and  shrubs,  which  have  no  such  life  as 
enables  them  to  shun  destruction  by  movements 
we  can  see,  do  not  they  all  seek  in  their  own 
fashion  to  conserve  their  existence,  by  rooting 
themselves  more  and  more  deeply  in  the  earth, 
that  so  they  may  draw  nourishment  and  throw 
out  healthy  branches  towards  the  sky?  In  fine, 
even  the  lifeless  bodies,  which  want  not  only 
sensation  but  seminal  life,  yet  either  seek  the 
upper  air  or  sink  deep,  or  are  balanced  in  an  in¬ 
termediate  position,  so  that  they  may  protect 
their  existence  in  that  situation  where  they  can 
exist  in  most  accordance  with  their  nature. 

And  how  much  human  nature  loves  the 
knowledge  of  its  existence,  and  how  it  shrinks 
from  being  deceived,  will  be  sufficiently  under¬ 
stood  from  this  fact,  that  every  man  prefers  to 
grieve  in  a  sane  mind,  rather  than  to  be  glad  in 
madness.  And  this  grand  and  wonderful  instinct 
belongs  to  men  alone  of  all  animals;  for,  though 
some  of  them  have  keener  eyesight  than  our¬ 
selves  for  this  world’s  light,  they  cannot  attain 
to  that  spiritual  light  with  which  our  mind  is 
somehow  irradiated,  so  that  we  can  form  right 
judgments  of  all  things.  For  our  power  to  judge 
is  proportioned  to  our  acceptance  of  this  light. 
Nevertheless,  the  irrational  animals,  though 
they  have  not  knowledge,  have  certainly  some¬ 
thing  resembling  knowledge ;  whereas  the  other 
material  things  are  said  to  be  sensible,  not  be- 


338  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


cause  they  have  senses,  but  because  they  are  the 
objects  of  our  senses.  Yet  among  plants,  their 
nourishment  and  generation  have  some  resem¬ 
blance  to  sensible  life.  However,  both  these  and 
all  material  things  have  their  causes  hidden  in 
their  nature;  but  their  outward  forms,  which 
lend  beauty  to  this  visible  structure  of  the 
world,  are  perceived  by  our  senses,  so  that  they 
seem  to  wish  to  compensate  for  their  own  want 
of  knowledge  by  providing  us  with  knowledge. 
But  we  perceive  them  by  our  bodily  senses  in 
such  a  way  that  we  do  not  judge  of  them  by 
these  senses.  For  we  have  another  and  far  supe¬ 
rior  sense,  belonging  to  the  inner  man,  by  which 
we  perceive  what  things  are  just,  and  what  un¬ 
just — just  by  means  of  an  intelligible  idea,  un¬ 
just  by  the  want  of  it.  This  sense  is  aided  in  its 
functions  neither  by  the  eyesight,  nor  by  the 
orifice  of  the  ear,  nor  by  the  air-holes  of  the  nos¬ 
trils,  nor  by  the  palate’s  taste,  nor  by  any  bodily 
touch.  By  it  I  am  assured  both  that  I  am  and 
that  I  know  this;  and  these  two  I  love  and  in 
the  same  manner  I  am  assured  that  I  love  them. 

Chap.  28.  Whether  we  ought  to  love  the  love  it¬ 
self  with  which  we  love  our  existence  and  our 
knowledge  of  it,  that  so  we  may  more  nearly 
resemble  the  image  of  the  divine  Trinity 
We  have  said  as  much  as  the  scope  of  this 
work  demands  regarding  these  two  things,  to 
wit,  our  existence,  and  our  knowledge  of  it,  and 
how  much  they  are  loved  by  us,  and  how  there 
is  found  even  in  the  lower  creatures  a  kind  of 
likeness  of  these  things,  and  yet  with  a  differ¬ 
ence.  We  have  yet  to  speak  of  the  love  where¬ 
with  they  are  loved,  to  determine  whether  this 
love  itself  is  loved.  And  doubtless  it  is ;  and  this 
is  the  proof.  Because  in  men  who  are  justly 
loved,  it  is  rather  love  itself  that  is  loved;  for  he 
is  not  justly  called  a  good  man  who  knows  what 
is  good,  but  who  loves  it.  Is  it  not  then  obvious 
that  we  love  in  ourselves  the  very  love  where¬ 
with  we  love  whatever  good  we  love?  For  there 
is  also  a  love  wherewith  we  love  that  which  we 
ought  not  to  love ;  and  this  love  is  hated  by  him 
who  loves  that  wherewith  he  loves  what  ought 
to  be  loved.  For  it  is  quite  possible  for  both  to 
exist  in  one  man.  And  this  co-existence  is  good 
for  a  man,  to  the  end  that  this  love  which  con¬ 
duces  to  our  living  well  may  grow,  and  the  other, 
which  leads  us  to  evil  may  decrease,  until  our 
whole  life  be  perfectly  healed  and  transmuted 
into  good.  For  if  we  were  beasts,  we  should  love 
the  fleshly  and  sensual  life,  and  this  would  be 
our  sufficient  good;  and  when  it  was  well  with 
us  in  respect  of  it,  we  should  seek  nothing  be¬ 


yond.  In  like  manner,  if  we  were  trees,  we  could 
not,  indeed,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  love 
anything;  nevertheless  we  should  seem,  as  it 
were,  to  long  for  that  by  which  we  might  become 
more  abundantly  and  luxuriantly  fruitful.  If  we 
were  stones,  or  waves,  or  wind,  or  flame,  or  any¬ 
thing  of  that  kind,  we  should  want,  indeed,  both 
sensation  and  life,  yet  should  possess  a  kind  of 
attraction  towards  our  own  proper  position  and 
natural  order.  For  the  specific  gravity  of  bodies 
is,  as  it  were,  their  love,  whether  they  are  car¬ 
ried  downwards  by  their  weight,  or  upwards  by 
their  levity.  For  the  body  is  borne  by  its  gravity, 
as  the  spirit  by  love,  whithersoever  it  is  borne.1 
But  we  are  men,  created  in  the  image  of  our 
Creator,  Whose  eternity  is  true,  and  Whose 
truth  is  eternal,  Whose  love  is  eternal  and  true, 
and  Who  Himself  is  the  eternal,  true,  and  ador¬ 
able  Trinity,  without  confusion,  without  separa¬ 
tion;  and,  therefore,  while,  as  we  run  over  all  the 
works  which  He  has  established,  we  may  detect, 
as  it  were,  His  footprints,  now  more  and  now 
less  distinct  even  in  those  things  that  are  be¬ 
neath  us,  since  they  could  not  so  much  as  exist, 
or  be  bodied  forth  in  any  shape,  or  follow  and 
observe  any  law,  had  they  not  been  made  by 
Him  Who  supremely  is,  and  is  supremely  good 
and  supremely  wise ;  yet  in  ourselves  beholding 
His  image,  let  us,  like  that  younger  son  of  the 
gospel,  come  to  ourselves,  and  arise  and  return 
to  Him  from  Whom  by  our  sin  we  had  departed. 
There  our  being  will  have  no  death,  our  knowl¬ 
edge  no  error,  our  love  no  mishap.  But  now, 
though  we  are  assured  of  our  possession  of  these 
three  things,  not  on  the  testimony  of  others,  but 
by  our  own  consciousness  of  their  presence  and 
because  we  see  them  with  our  own  most  truthful 
interior  vision,  yet,  as  we  cannot  of  ourselves 
know  how  long  they  are  to  continue,  and  wheth¬ 
er  they  shall  never  cease  to  be,  and  what  issue 
their  good  or  bad  use  will  lead  to,  we  seek  for 
others  who  can  acquaint  us  of  these  things,  if  we 
have  not  already  found  them.  Of  the  trust¬ 
worthiness  of  these  witnesses,  there  will,  not 
now,  but  subsequently,  be  an  opportunity  of 
speaking.  But  in  this  book  let  us  go  on  as  we 
have  begun,  with  God’s  help,  to  speak  of  the  city 
of  God,  not  in  its  state  of  pilgrimage  and  mor¬ 
tality,  but  as  it  exists  ever  immortal  in  the  heav¬ 
ens — that  is,  let  us  speak  of  the  holy  angels  who 
maintain  their  allegiance  to  God,  who  never 
were,  nor  ever  shall  be,  apostate,  between  whom 
and  those  who  forsook  light  eternal  and  became 
darkness,  God,  as  we  have  already  said,  made  at 
the  first  a  separation. 

1Compare  the  Confessions,  bk.  xiii.  10. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XI.  28-31 


339 


Chap.  29.  Of  the  knowledge  by  which  the  holy 
angels  know  God  in  His  essence ,  and  by  which 
they  see  the  causes  of  His  works  in  the  art  of 
the  worker ,  before  they  see  them  in  the  works 
0}  the  artist 

Those  holy  angels  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
God  not  by  audible  words,  but  by  the  presence 
to  their  souls  of  immutable  truth,  i.e.,  of  the 
only-begotten  Word  of  God;  and  they  know  this 
Word  Himself,  and  the  Father,  and  their  Holy 
Spirit,  and  that  this  Trinity  is  indivisible,  and 
that  the  three  persons  of  it  are  one  substance, 
and  that  there  are  not  three  Gods  but  one  God; 
and  this  they  so  know,  that  it  is  better  under¬ 
stood  by  them  than  we  are  by  ourselves.  Thus, 
too,  they  know  the  creature  also,  not  in  itself, 
but  by  this  better  way,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  as 
if  in  the  art  by  which  it  was  created;  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  they  know  themselves  better  in  God 
than  in  themselves,  though  they  have  also  this 
latter  knowledge.  For  they  were  created,  and  are 
different  from  their  Creator.  In  Him,  therefore, 
they  have,  as  it  were,  a  noonday  knowledge;  in 
themselves,  a  twilight  knowledge,  according  to 
our  former  explanations.1  For  there  is  a  great 
difference  between  knowing  a  thing  in  the  design 
in  conformity  to  which  it  was  made,  and  know¬ 
ing  it  in  itself — e.g.,  the  straightness  of  lines  and 
correctness  of  figures  is  known  in  one  way  when 
mentally  conceived,  in  another  when  described 
on  paper;  and  justice  is  known  in  one  way  in  the 
unchangeable  truth,  in  another  in  the  spirit  of  a 
just  man.  So  is  it  with  all  other  things — as,  the 
firmament  between  the  water  above  and  below, 
which  was  called  the  heaven;  the  gathering  of 
the  waters  beneath,  and  the  laying  bare  of  the 
dry  land,  and  the  production  of  plants  and 
trees;  the  creation  of  sun,  moon,  and  stars;  and 
of  the  animals  out  of  the  waters,  fowls,  and 
fish,  and  monsters  of  the  deep;  and  of  every¬ 
thing  that  walks  or  creeps  on  the  earth,  and 
of  man  himself,  who  excels  all  that  is  on  the 
earth — all  these  things  are  known  in  one 
way  by  the  angels  in  the  Word  of  God,  in  which 
they  see  the  eternally  abiding  causes  and  rea¬ 
sons  according  to  which  they  were  made,  and 
in  another  way  in  themselves:  in  the  former, 
with  a  clearer  knowledge;  in  the  latter,  with 
a  knowledge  dimmer,  and  rather  of  the  bare 
works  than  of  the  design.  Yet,  when  these 
works  are  referred  to  the  praise  and  adoration 
of  the  Creator  Himself,  it  is  as  if  morning 
dawned  in  the  minds  of  those  who  contem¬ 
plate  them. 
lChap.  7. 


Chap.  30.  Of  the  perfection  of  the  number  six , 
which  is  the  first  of  the  numbers  which  is 
composed  of  its  aliquot  parts 

These  works  are  recorded  to  have  been  com¬ 
pleted  in  six  days  (the  same  day  being  six  times 
repeated),  because  six  is  a  perfect  number — not 
because  God  required  a  protracted  time,  as  if 
He  could  not  at  once  create  all  things,  which 
then  should  mark  the  course  of  time  by  the 
movements  proper  to  them,  but  because  the  per¬ 
fection  of  the  works  was  signified  by  the  number 
six.  For  the  number  six  is  the  first  which  is  made 
up  of  its  own2  parts,  i.e.,  of  its  sixth,  third,  and 
half,  which  are  respectively  one,  two,  and  three, 
and  which  make  a  total  of  six.  In  this  way  of 
looking  at  a  number,  those  are  said  to  be  its 
parts  which  exactly  divide  it,  as  a  half,  a  third, 
a  fourth,  or  a  fraction  with  any  denominator — 
e.g.,  four  is  a  part  of  nine,  but  not  therefore  an 
aliquot  part;  but  one  is,  for  it  is  the  ninth  part; 
and  three  is,  for  it  is  the  third.  Yet  these  two 
parts,  the  ninth  and  the  third,  or  one  and  three, 
are  far  from  making  its  whole  sum  of  nine.  So 
again,  in  the  number  ten,  four  is  a  part,  yet  does 
not  divide  it;  but  one  is  an  aliquot  part,  for  it  is 
a  tenth;  so  it  has  a  fifth,  which  is  two;  and  a 
half,  which  is  five.  But  these  three  parts,  a  tenth, 
a  fifth,  and  a  half,  or  one,  two,  and  five,  added 
together,  do  not  make  ten,  but  eight.  Of  the 
number  twelve,  again,  the  parts  added  together 
exceed  the  whole;  for  it  has  a  twelfth,  that  is, 
one;  a  sixth,  or  two;  a  fourth,  which  is  three;  a 
third,  which  is  four;  and  a  half,  which  is  six.  But 
one,  two,  three,  four,  and  six  make  up,  not 
twelve,  but  more,  viz.,  sixteen.  So  much  I  have 
thought  fit  to  state  for  the  sake  of  illustrating 
the  perfection  of  the  number  six,  which  is,  as  I 
said,  the  first  which  is  exactly  made  up  of  its 
own  parts  added  together;  and  in  this  number 
of  days  God  finished  His  work.  And,  therefore, 
we  must  not  despise  the  science  of  numbers, 
which,  in  many  passages  of  holy  Scripture,  is 
found  to  be  of  eminent  service  to  the  careful  in¬ 
terpreter.  Neither  has  it  been  without  reason 
numbered  among  God’s  praises,  “Thou  hast  or¬ 
dered  all  things  in  number,  and  measure,  and 
weight.”3 

Chap.  31  .Of  the  seventh  day ,  in  which  com¬ 
pleteness  and  repose  are  celebrated 
But,  on  the  seventh  day  (i.e.,  the  same  day 
repeated  seven  times,  which  number  is  also  a 
perfect  one,  though  for  another  reason),  the  rest 
of  God  is  set  forth,  and  then,  too,  we  first  hear 
*Or  aliquot  parts.  3Wisd.  n.  20. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  its  being  hallowed.  So  that  God  did  not  wish 
to  hallow  this  day  by  His  works,  but  by  His  rest, 
which  has  no  evening,  for  it  is  not  a  creature ;  so 
that,  being  known  in  one  way  in  the  Word  of 
God,  and  in  another  in  itself,  it  should  make  a 
twofold  knowledge,  daylight  and  dusk  (day  and 
evening).  Much  more  might  be  said  about  the 
perfection  of  the  number  seven,  but  this  book  is 
already  too  long,  and  I  fear  lest  I  should  seem  to 
catch  at  an  opportunity  of  airing  my  little  smat¬ 
tering  of  science  more  childishly  than  profitably. 
I  must  speak,  therefore,  in  moderation  and  with 
dignity,  lest,  in  too  keenly  following  “number,” 
I  be  accused  of  forgetting  “weight”  and  “meas¬ 
ure.”  Suffice  it  here  to  say,  that  three  is  the  first 
whole  number  that  is  odd,  four  the  first  that  is 
even,  and  of  these  two,  seven  is  composed.  On 
this  account  it  is  often  put  for  all  numbers  to¬ 
gether,  as,  “A  just  man  falleth  seven  times,  and 
riseth  up  again,”1 — that  is,  let  him  fall  never  so 
often,  he  will  not  perish  (and  this  was  meant  to 
be  understood  not  of  sins,  but  of  afflictions  con¬ 
ducing  to  lowliness).  Again,  “Seven  times  a  day 
will  I  praise  Thee,”2  which  elsewhere  is"  ex¬ 
pressed  thus,  “I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all 
times .”3  And  many  such  instances  are  found  in 
the  divine  authorities,  in  which  the  number  sev¬ 
en  is,  as  I  said,  commonly  used  to  express  the 
whole,  or  the  completeness  of  anything.  And  so 
the  Holy  Spirit,  of  whom  the  Lord  says,  “He 
will  teach  you  all  truth,”4  is  signified  by  this  num¬ 
ber.5  In  it  is  the  rest  of  God,  the  rest  His  peo¬ 
ple  find  in  Him.  For  rest  is  in  the  whole,  i.e.,  in 
perfect  completeness,  while  in  the  part  there  is 
labour.  And  thus  we  labour  as  long  as  we  know 
in  part ;  “but  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come, 
then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away.”6 
It  is  even  with  toil  we  search  into  the  Scriptures 
themselves.  But  the  holy  angels,  towards  whose 
society  and  assembly  we  sigh  while  in  this  our 
toilsome  pilgrimage,  as  they  already  abide  in 
their  eternal  home,  so  do  they  enjoy  perfect  fa¬ 
cility  of  knowledge  and  felicity  of  rest.  It  is 
without  difficulty  that  they  help  us;  for  their 
spiritual  movements,  pure  and  free,  cost  them 
no  effort. 

Chap.  32  .Of  the  opinion  that  the  angels  were 
created  before  the  world 
But  if  some  one  oppose  our  opinion,  and  say 
that  the  holy  angels  are  not  referred  to  when  it  is 
said,  “Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light”; 

^rov.  24.  16.  2Ps.  1 19.  164.  *Ps.  34.  1. 

4John  16.  13.  6Isa.  11.  2. 

*1  Cor.  13.  10. 


if  he  suppose  or  teach  that  some  material  light, 
then  first  created,  was  meant,  and  that  the  an¬ 
gels  were  created,  not  only  before  the  firmament 
dividing  the  waters  and  named  “the  heaven,” 
but  also  before  the  time  signified  in  the  words, 
“In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and 
the  earth” ;  if  he  allege  that  this  phrase,  “In  the 
beginning,”  does  not  mean  that  nothing  was 
made  before  (for  the  angels  were),  but  that  God 
made  all  things  by  His  Wisdom  or  Word,  Who  is 
named  in  Scripture  “the  Beginning,”  as  He  Him¬ 
self,  in  the  gospel,  replied  to  the  Jews  when  they 
asked  Him  who  He  was,  that  He  was  the  Begin¬ 
ning;7  I  will  not  contest  the  point,  chiefly  be¬ 
cause  it  gives  me  the  liveliest  satisfaction  to  find 
the  Trinity  celebrated  in  the  very  beginning  of 
the  book  of  Genesis.  For  having  said  “In  the 
Beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth,”  meaning  that  the  Father  made  them  in 
the  Son  (as  the  psalm  testifies  where  it  says, 
“How  manifold  are  Thy  works,  0  Lord!  in  Wis¬ 
dom  hast  Thou  made  them  all”8),  a  little  after¬ 
wards  mention  is  fitly  made  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
also.  For,  when  it  had  been  told  us  what  kind 
of  earth  God  created  at  first,  or  what  the  mass 
or  matter  was  which  God,  under  the  name  of 
“heaven  and  earth,”  had  provided  for  the  con¬ 
struction  of  the  world,  as  is  told  in  the  addition¬ 
al  words,  “And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and 
void;  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the 
deep,”  then,  for  the  sake  of  completing  the  men¬ 
tion  of  the  Trinity,  it  is  immediately  added, 
“And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters.”  Let  each  one,  then,  take  it  as  he 
pleases;  for  it  is  so  profound  a  passage,  that  it 
may  well  suggest,  for  the  exercise  of  the  reader’s 
tact,  many  opinions,  and  none  of  them  widely 
departing  from  the  rule  of  faith.  At  the  same 
time,  let  none  doubt  that  the  holy  angels  in  their 
heavenly  abodes  are,  though  not,  indeed,  co¬ 
eternal  with  God,  yet  secure  and  certain  of  eter¬ 
nal  and  true  felicity.  To  their  company  the  Lord 
teaches  that  His  little  ones  belong ;  and  not  only 
says,  “They  shall  be  equal  to  the  angels  of 
God,”9  but  shows,  too,  what  blessed  contempla¬ 
tion  the  angels  themselves  enjoy,  saying,  “Take 
heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones; 
for  I  say  unto  you,  that  in  heaven  their  angels 
do  always  behold  the  face  of  my  Father  which  is 
in  heaven.”10 

7John  8.  25;  see  p.  313.  He  might  rather  have  referred 
to  Rev.  3.  14. 

8Ps.  104.  24. 

9Matt.  22.  30. 

10Matt.  18.  10. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  33.  Of  the  two  different  and  dissimilar 
communities  of  angels ,  which  are  not  inap¬ 
propriately  signified  by  the  names  light  and 
darkness 

That  certain  angels  sinned,  and  were  thrust 
down  to  the  lowest  parts  of  this  world,  where 
they  are,  as  it  were,  incarcerated  till  their  final 
damnation  in  the  day  of  judgment,  the  Apostle 
Peter  very  plainly  declares,  when  he  says  that 
“God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast 
them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into 
chains  of  darkness  to  be  reserved  into  judg¬ 
ment.”1  Who,  then,  can  doubt  that  God,  either 
in  foreknowledge  or  in  act,  separated  between 
these  and  the  rest?  And  who  will  dispute  that 
the  rest  are  justly  called  “light”?  For  even  we 
who  are  yet  living  by  faith,  hoping  only  and  not 
yet  enjoying  equality  with  them,  are  already 
called  “light”  by  the  apostle:  “For  ye  were 
sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the 
Lord.”2  But  as  for  these  apostate  angels,  all  who 
understand  or  believe  them  to  be  worse  than  un¬ 
believing  men  are  well  aware  that  they  are  called 
“darkness.”  Wherefore,  though  light  and  dark¬ 
ness  are  to  be  taken  in  their  literal  signification 
in  these  passages  of  Genesis  in  which  it  is  said, 
“God  said.  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was 
light,”  and  “God  divided  the  light  from  the 
darkness,”  yet,  for  our  part,  we  understand 
these  two  societies  of  angels — the  one  enjoying 
God,  the  other  swelling  with  pride;  the  one  to 
whom  it  is  said,  “Praise  ye  Him,  all  His  an¬ 
gels,”3  the  other  whose  prince  says,  “All  these 
things  will  I  give  Thee  if  Thou  wilt  fall  down 
and  worship  me”;4  the  one  blazing  with  the  holy 
love  of  God,  the  other  reeking  with  the  unclean 
lust  of  self-advancement.  And  since,  as  it  is 
written,  “God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth 
grace  unto  the  humble,”5  we  may  say,  the  one 
dwelling  in  the  heaven  of  heavens,  the  other  cast 
thence,  and  raging  through  the  lower  regions  of 
the  air;  the  one  tranquil  in  the  brightness  of 
piety,  the  other  tempest-tossed  with  beclouding 
desires ;  the  one,  at  God’s  pleasure,  tenderly  suc¬ 
couring,  justly  avenging — the  other,  set  on  by  its 
own  pride,  boiling  with  the  lust  of  subduing  and 
hurting ;  the  one  the  minister  of  God’s  goodness 
to  the  utmost  of  their  good  pleasure,  the  other 
held  in  by  God’s  power  from  doing  the  harm  it 
would;  the  former  laughing  at  the  latter  when 
it  does  good  unwillingly  by  its  persecutions,  the 
latter  envying  the  former  when  it  gathers  in  its 
pilgrims.  These  two  angelic  communities,  then, 

1II  Peter  2.  4.  2Eph.  5.  8.  3Ps.  148.  2. 

4Matt.  4.  9.  6Jas.  4.  6. 


GOD  XI.  32-34  341 

dissimilar  and  contrary  to  one  another,  the  one 
both  by  nature  good  and  by  will  upright,  the 
other  also  good  by  nature  but  by  will  depraved, 
as  they  are  exhibited  in  other  and  more  explicit 
passages  of  holy  writ,  so  I  think  they  are  spoken 
of  in  this  book  of  Genesis  under  the  names  of 
“light”  and  “darkness”;  and  even  if  the  author 
perhaps  had  a  different  meaning,  yet  our  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  obscure  language  has  not  been  wasted 
time;  for,  though  we  have  been  unable  to  dis¬ 
cover  his  meaning,  yet  we  have  adhered  to  the 
rule  of  faith,  which  is  sufficiently  ascertained  by 
the  faithful  from  other  passages  of  equal  au¬ 
thority.  For,  though  it  is  the  material  works  of 
God  which  are  here  spoken  of,  they  have  cer¬ 
tainly  a  resemblance  to  the  spiritual,  so  that 
Paul  can  say,  “Ye  are  all  the  children  of  light, 
and  the  children  of  the  day:  we  are  not  of  the 
night,  nor  of  darkness.”6  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  author  of  Genesis  saw  in  the  words  what  we 
see,  then  our  discussion  reaches  this  more  satis¬ 
factory  conclusion,  that  the  man  of  God,  so 
eminently  and  divinely  wise,  or  rather,  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  who  by  him  recorded  God’s  works 
which  were  finished  on  the  sixth  day,  may  be 
supposed  not  to  have  omitted  all  mention  of  the 
angels  whether  he  included  them  in  the  words 
“in  the  beginning,”  because  He  made  them  first, 
or,  which  seems  most  likely,  because  He  made 
them  in  the  only-begotten  Word.  And,  under 
these  names  heaven  and  earth,  the  whole  crea¬ 
tion  is  signified,  either  as  divided  into  spiritual 
and  material,  which  seems  the  more  likely,  or 
into  the  two  great  parts  of  the  world  in  which 
all  created  things  are  contained,  so  that,  first  of 
all,  the  creation  is  presented  in  sum,  and  then  its 
parts  are  enumerated  according  to  the  mystic 
number  of  the  days. 

Chap.  34.  Of  the  idea  that  the  angels  were 
meant  where  the  separation  of  the  waters  by 
the  firmament  is  spoken  of,  and  of  that  other 
idea  that  the  waters  were  not  created 
Some,7  however,  have  supposed  that  the  an¬ 
gelic  hosts  are  somehow  referred  to  under  the 
name  of  waters,  and  that  this  is  what  is  meant 
by  “Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters”:8  that  the  waters  above  should  be  un¬ 
derstood  of  the  angels,  and  those  below  either 
of  the  visible  waters,  or  of  the  multitude  of  bad 
angels,  or  of  the  nations  of  men.  If  this  be  so, 
then  it  does  not  here  appear  when  the  angels 
were  created,  but  when  they  were  separated. 
Though  there  have  not  been  wanting  men  fool- 

6I  Thess.  5.  5. 

7See  Augustine’s  Confessions ,  bk.  xiii.  47.  8Gen.  1.  6. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ish  and  wicked  enough1  to  deny  that  the  waters 
were  made  by  God,  because  it  is  nowhere  writ¬ 
ten,  “God  said,  Let  there  be  waters.”  With  equal 
folly  they  might  say  the  same  of  the  earth,  for 
nowhere  do  we  read,  “God  said,  Let  the  earth 
be.”  But,  say  they,  it  is  written,  “In  the  begin¬ 
ning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.” 
Yes,  and  there  the  water  is  meant,  for  both  are 
included  in  one  word.  For  “the  sea  is  His,”  as 
the  psalm  says,  “and  He  made  it ;  and  His  hands 
formed  the  dry  land.”2  But  those  who  would  un¬ 
derstand  the  angels  by  the  waters  above  the 
skies  have  a  difficulty  about  the  specific  gravity 
of  the  elements,  and  fear  that  the  waters,  owing 
to  their  fluidity  and  weight,  could  not  be  set  in 
the  upper  parts  of  the  world.  So  that,  if  they 
were  to  construct  a  man  upon  their  own  princi¬ 
ples,  they  would  not  put  in  his  head  any  moist 
humours,  or  “phlegm”  as  the  Greeks  call  it,  and 
which  acts  the  part  of  water  among  the  elements 

Namely,  the  Audians  and  Sampsaeans,  insignificant 
heretical  sects.  2Ps.  95.  5. 


of  our  body.  But,  in  God’s  handiwork,  the  head 
is  the  seat  of  the  phlegm,  and  surely  most  fitly; 
and  yet,  according  to  their  supposition,  so  ab¬ 
surdly  that  if  we  were  not  aware  of  the  fact,  and 
were  informed  by  this  same  record  that  God  had 
put  a  moist  and  cold  and  therefore  heavy  hu¬ 
mour  in  the  uppermost  part  of  man’s  body, 
these  world-weighers  would  refuse  belief.  And 
if  they  were  confronted  with  the  authority  of 
Scripture,  they  would  maintain  that  something 
else  must  be  meant  by  the  words.  But,  were  we 
to  investigate  and  discover  all  the  details  which 
are  written  in  this  divine  book  regarding  the 
creation  of  the  world,  we  should  have  much  to 
say,  and  should  widely  digress  from  the  pro¬ 
posed  aim  of  this  work.  Since,  then,  we  have 
now  said  what  seemed  needful  regarding  these 
two  diverse  and  contrary  communities  of  angels, 
in  which  the  origin  of  the  two  human  communi¬ 
ties  (of  which  we  intend  to  speak  anon)  is  also 
found,  let  us  at  once  bring  this  book  also  to  a 
conclusion. 


BOOK  XII 

ARGUMENT .  Augustine  first  institutes  two  inquiries  regarding  the  an¬ 
gels;  NAMELY,  WHENCE  IS  THERE  IN  SOME  A  GOOD,  AND  IN  OTHERS  AN  EVIL  WILL? 
AND,  WHAT  IS  THE  REASON  OF  THE  BLESSEDNESS  OF  THE  GOOD,  AND  THE  MISERY  OF 

the  evil?  Afterwards  he  treats  of  the  creation  of  man,  and  teaches  that 

HE  IS  NOT  FROM  ETERNITY,  BUT  WAS  CREATED,  AND  BY  NONE  OTHER  THAN  GOD. 


Chap.  i.  That  the  nature  of  the  angels,  both 
good  and  bad,  is  one  and  the  same 
It  has  already,  in  the  preceding  book,  been 
shown  how  the  two  cities  originated  among  the 
angels.  Before  I  speak  of  the  creation  of  man 
and  show  how  the  cities  took  their  rise,  so  far  as 
regards  the  race  of  rational  mortals,  I  see  that  I 
must  first,  so  far  as  I  can.  adduce  what  may 
demonstrate  that  it  is  not  incongruous  and  un¬ 
suitable  to  speak  of  a  society  composed  of  an¬ 
gels  and  men  together;  so  that  there  are  not  four 
cities  or  societies — two,  namely,  of  angels,  and 
as  many  of  men — but  rather  two  in  all,  one  com¬ 
posed  of  the  good,  the  other  of  the  wicked,  an¬ 
gels  or  men  indifferently. 

That  the  contrary  propensities  in  good  and 
bad  angels  have  arisen,  not  from  a  difference  in 
their  nature  and  origin,  since  God,  the  good  Au¬ 
thor  and  Creator  of  all  essences,  created  them 
both,  but  from  a  difference  in  their  wills  and  de¬ 
sires,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt.  While  some 
steadfastly  continued  in  that  which  was  the 
common  good  of  all,  namely,  in  God  Himself, 


and  in  His  eternity,  truth,  and  love;  others,  be¬ 
ing  enamoured  rather  of  their  own  power,  as  if 
they  could  be  their  own  good,  lapsed  to  this  pri¬ 
vate  good  of  their  own,  from  that  higher  and 
beatific  good  which  was  common  to  all,  and,  bar¬ 
tering  the  lofty  dignity  of  eternity  for  the  infla¬ 
tion  of  pride,  the  most  assured  verity  for  the 
slyness  of  vanity,  uniting  love  for  factious  par¬ 
tisanship,  they  became  proud,  deceived,  envious. 
The  cause,  therefore,  of  the  blessedness  of  the 
good  is  adherence  to  God.  And  so  the  cause  of 
the  others’  misery  will  be  found  in  the  contrary, 
that  is,  in  their  not  adhering  to  God.  Wherefore, 
if  when  the  question  is  asked,  why  are  the  for¬ 
mer  blessed,  it  is  rightly  answered,  because  they 
adhere  to  God;  and  when  it  is  asked,  why  are 
the  latter  miserable,  it  is  rightly  answered,  be¬ 
cause  they  do  not  adhere  to  God — then  there  is 
no  other  good  for  the  rational  or  intellectual 
creature  save  God  only.  Thus,  though  it  is  not 
every  creature  that  can  be  blessed  (for  beasts, 
trees,  stones,  and  things  of  that  kind  have  not 
this  capacity),  yet  that  creature  which  has  the 
capacity  cannot  be  blessed  of  itself,  since  it  is 


THE  CITY  OF 

created  out  of  nothing,  but  only  by  Him  by 
whom  it  has  been  created.  For  it  is  blessed  by 
the  possession  of  that  whose  loss  makes  it  mis¬ 
erable.  He,  then,  who  is  blessed  not  in  another, 
but  in  himself,  cannot  be  miserable,  because  he 
cannot  lose  himself. 

Accordingly  we  say  that  there  is  no  unchange¬ 
able  good  but  the  one,  true,  blessed  God;  that 
the  things  which  He  made  are  indeed  good  be¬ 
cause  from  Him,  yet  mutable  because  made  not 
out  of  Him,  but  out  of  nothing.  Although,  there¬ 
fore,  they  are  not  the  supreme  good,  for  God  is 
a  greater  good,  yet  those  mutable  things  which 
can  adhere  to  the  immutable  good,  and  so  be 
blessed,  are  very  good;  for  so  completely  is  He 
their  good,  that  without  Him  they  cannot  but  be 
wretched.  And  the  other  created  things  in  the 
universe  are  not  better  on  this  account,  that 
they  cannot  be  miserable.  For  no  one  would  say 
that  the  other  members  of  the  body  are  superior 
to  the  eyes,  because  they  cannot  be  blind.  But  as 
the  sentient  nature,  even  when  it  feels  pain,  is 
superior  to  the  stony,  which  can  feel  none,  so 
the  rational  nature,  even  when  wretched,  is  more 
excellent  than  that  which  lacks  reason  or  feel¬ 
ing,  and  can  therefore  experience  no  misery. 
And  since  this  is  so,  then  in  this  nature  which 
has  been  created  so  excellent  that  though  it  be 
mutable  itself  it  can  yet  secure  its  blessedness 
by  adhering  to  the  immutable  good,  the  supreme 
God;  and  since  it  is  not  satisfied  unless  it  be 
perfectly  blessed,  and  cannot  be  thus  blessed 
save  in  God — in  this  nature,  I  say,  not  to  adhere 
to  God  is  manifestly  a  fault.1  Now  every  fault 
injures  the  nature,  and  is  consequently  contrary 
to  the  nature.  The  creature,  therefore,  which 
cleaves  to  God,  differs  from  those  who  do  not, 
not  by  nature,  but  by  fault ;  and  yet  by  this  very 
fault  the  nature  itself  is  proved  to  be  very  noble 
and  admirable.  For  that  nature  is  certainly 
praised,  the  fault  of  which  is  justly  blamed.  For 
we  justly  blame  the  fault  because  it  mars  the 
praiseworthy  nature.  As,  then,  when  we  say  that 
blindness  is  a  defect  of  the  eyes,  we  prove  that 
sight  belongs  to  the  nature  of  the  eyes;  and 
when  we  say  that  deafness  is  a  defect  of  the 
ears,  hearing  is  thereby  proved  to  belong  to  their 
nature;  so,  when  we  say  that  it  is  a  fault  of  the 
angelic  creature  that  it  does  not  cleave  to  God, 
we  hereby  most  plainly  declare  that  it  pertained 
to  its  nature  to  cleave  to  God.  And  who  can 
worthily  conceive  or  express  how  great  a  glory 
that  is.  to  cleave  to  God,  so  as  to  live  to  Him,  to 
draw  wisdom  from  Him,  to  delight  in  Him,  and 

lVitium:  perhaps  “fault”  most  nearly  embraces  all  the 
uses  of  this  word. 


GOD  XIT.  1-3  343 

to  enjoy  this  so  great  good,  without  death,  error, 
or  grief?  And  thus,  since  every  vice  is  an  injury 
of  the  nature,  that  very  vice  of  the  wicked  an¬ 
gels,  their  departure  from  God.  is  sufficient 
proof  that  God  created  their  nature  so  good, 
that  it  is  an  injury  to  it  not  to  be  with  God. 

Chap.  2.  That  there  is  no  entity  contrary  to  the 
divine ,  because  nonentity  seems  to  be  that 
which  is  wholly  opposite  to  Him  Who  su¬ 
premely  and  always  is 

This  may  be  enough  to  prevent  any  one  from 
supposing,  when  we  speak  of  the  apostate  an¬ 
gels,  that  they  could  have  another  nature,  de¬ 
rived,  as  it  were,  from  some  different  origin  and 
not  from  God.  From  the  great  impiety  of  this 
error  we  shall  disentangle  ourselves  the  more 
readily  and  easily,  the  more  distinctly  we  under¬ 
stand  that  which  God  spoke  by  the  angel  when 
He  sent  Moses  to  the  children  of  Israel:  “I  am 
that  I  am.”2  For  since  God  is  the  supreme  ex¬ 
istence,  that  is  to  say,  supremely  is,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  unchangeable,  the  things  that  He  made  He 
empowered  to  be,  but  not  to  be  supremely  like 
Himself.  To  some  He  communicated  a  more 
ample,  to  others  a  more  limited  existence,  and 
thus  arranged  the  natures  of  beings  in  ranks. 
For  as  from  sapere  comes  sapientia,  so  from  esse 
comes  essentia — a  new  word  indeed,  which  the 
old  Latin  writers  did  not  use,  but  which  is  nat¬ 
uralized  in  our  day,  that  our  language  may  not 
want  an  equivalent  for  the  Greek  ovaia.  For 
this  is  expressed  word  for  word  by  essentia. 
Consequently,  to  that  nature  which  supremely 
is,  and  which  created  all  else  that  exists,  no  na¬ 
ture  is  contrary  save  that  which  does  not  exist. 
For  nonentity  is  the  contrary  of  that  which  is. 
And  thus  there  is  no  being  contrary  to  God,  the 
Supreme  Being,  and  Author  of  all  beings  what¬ 
soever. 

Chap.  3.  That  the  enemies  of  God  are  so,  not  by 
nature,  but  by  will,  which,  as  it  injures  them, 
•  injures  a  good  nature;  for  if  vice  does  not  in¬ 
jure,  it  is  not  vice 

In  Scripture  they  are  called  God’s  enemies 
who  oppose  His  rule,  not  by  nature,  but  by  vice; 
having  no  power  to  hurt  Him,  but  only  them¬ 
selves.  For  they  are  His  enemies,  not  through 
their  power  to  hurt,  but  by  their  will  to  oppose 
Him.  For  God  is  unchangeable,  and  wholly 
proof  against  injury.  Therefore  the  vice  which 
makes  those  who  are  called  His  enemies  resist 
Him,  is  an  evil  not  to  God,  but  to  themselves. 
And  to  them  it  is  an  evil,  solely  because  it  cor- 

2Ex.  3.  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


rupts  the  good  of  their  nature.  It  is  not  nature, 
therefore,  but  vice,  which  is  contrary  to  God. 
For  that  which  is  evil  is  contrary  to  the  good. 
And  who  will  deny  that  God  is  the  supreme 
good?  Vice,  therefore,  is  contrary  to  God,  as 
evil  to  good.  Further,  the  nature  it  vitiates  is  a 
good,  and  therefore  to  this  good  also  it  is  con¬ 
trary.  But  while  it  is  contrary  to  God  only  as 
evil  to  good,  it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  it  viti¬ 
ates,  both  as  evil  and  as  hurtful.  For  to  God  no 
evils  are  hurtful;  but  only  to  natures  mutable 
and  corruptible,  though,  by  the  testimony  of 
the  vices  themselves,  originally  good.  For  were 
they  not  good,  vices  could  not  hurt  them.  For 
how  do  they  hurt  them  but  by  depriving  them 
of  integrity,  beauty,  welfare,  virtue,  and,  in 
short,  whatever  natural  good  vice  is  wont  to 
diminish  or  destroy?  But  if  there  be  no  good  to 
take  away,  then  no  injury  can  be  done,  and  con¬ 
sequently  there  can  be  no  vice.  For  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  that  there  should  be  a  harmless  vice. 
Whence  we  gather,  that  though  vice  cannot  in¬ 
jure  the  unchangeable  good,  it  can  injure  noth¬ 
ing  but  good;  because  it  does  not  exist  where  it 
does  not  injure.  This,  then,  may  be  thus  formu¬ 
lated:  Vice  cannot  be  in  the  highest  good,  and 
cannot  be  but  in  some  good.  Things  solely  good, 
therefore,  can  in  some  circumstances  exist; 
things  solely  evil,  never;  for  even  those  natures 
which  are  vitiated  by  an  evil  will,  so  far  indeed 
as  they  are  vitiated,  are  evil,  but  in  so  far  as  they 
are  natures  they  are  good.  And  when  a  vitiated 
nature  is  punished,  besides  the  good  it  has  in  be¬ 
ing  a  nature,  it  has  this  also,  that  it  is  not  un¬ 
punished.1  For  this  is  just,  and  certainly  every¬ 
thing  just  is  a  good.  For  no  one  is  punished  for 
natural,  but  for  voluntary  vices.  For  even  the 
vice  which  by  the  force  of  habit  and  long  con¬ 
tinuance  has  become  a  second  nature,  had  its  ori¬ 
gin  in  the  will.  For  at  present  we  are  speaking  of 
the  vices  of  the  nature,  which  has  a  mental  ca¬ 
pacity  for  that  enlightenment  which  discrimi¬ 
nates  between  what  is  just  and  what  is  unjust. 


Chap.  4.  Of  the  nature  of  irrational  and  lifeless 
creatures,  which  in  their  own  kind  and  order 
do  not  mar  the  beauty  of  the  universe 
But  it  is  ridiculous  to  condemn  the  faults  of 
beasts  and  trees,  and  other  such  mortal  and  mu¬ 
table  things  as  are  void  of  intelligence,  sensa¬ 
tion,  or  life,  even  though  these  faults  should  de¬ 
stroy  their  corruptible  nature;  for  these  crea¬ 
tures  received,  at  their  Creator’s  will,  an  exis¬ 
tence  fitting  them,  by  passing  away  and  giving 
place  to  others,  to  secure  that  lowest  form  of 
lCompare  Plato,  Gorgias. 


beauty,  the  beauty  of  seasons,  which  in  its  own 
place  is  a  requisite  part  of  this  world.  For 
things  earthly  were  neither  to  be  made  equal  to 
things  heavenly,  nor  were  they,  though  inferior, 
to  be  quite  omitted  from  the  universe.  Since, 
then,  in  those  situations  where  such  things  are 
appropriate,  some  perish  to  make  way  for  oth¬ 
ers  that  are  born  in  their  room,  and  the  less 
succumb  to  the  greater,  and  the  things  that  are 
overcome  are  transformed  into  the  quality  of 
those  that  have  the  mastery,  this  is  the  ap¬ 
pointed  order  of  things  transitory.  Of  this  or¬ 
der  the  beauty  does  not  strike  us,  because  by 
our  mortal  frailty  we  are  so  involved  in  a  part 
of  it  that  we  cannot  perceive  the  whole,  in 
which  these  fragments  that  offend  us  are  har¬ 
monized  with  the  most  accurate  fitness  and 
beauty.  And  therefore,  where  we  are  not  so 
well  able  to  perceive  the  wisdom  of  the  Cre¬ 
ator,  we  are  very  properly  enjoined  to  believe 
it,  lest  in  the  vanity  of  human  rashness  we  pre¬ 
sume  to  find  any  fault  with  the  work  of  so 
great  an  Artificer.  At  the  same  time,  if  we  at¬ 
tentively  consider  even  these  faults  of  earthly 
things,  which  are  neither  voluntary  nor  penal, 
they  seem  to  illustrate  the  excellence  of  the 
natures  themselves,  which  are  all  originated 
and  created  by  God;  for  it  is  that  which  pleases 
us  in  this  nature  which  we  are  displeased  to  see 
removed  by  the  fault — unless  even  the  natures 
themselves  displease  men,  as  often  happens 
when  they  become  hurtful  to  them,  and  then 
men  estimate  them  not  by  their  nature,  but  by 
their  utility,  as  in  the  case  of  those  animals 
whose  swarms  scourged  the  pride  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tians.  But  in  this  way  of  estimating,  they  may 
find  fault  with  the  sun  itself;  for  certain  crim¬ 
inals  or  debtors  are  sentenced  by  the  judges  to 
be  set  in  the  sun.  Therefore  it  is  not  with  re¬ 
spect  to  our  convenience  or  discomfort,  but 
with  respect  to  their  own  nature  that  the  crea¬ 
tures  are  glorifying  to  their  Artificer.  Thus 
even  the  nature  of  the  eternal  fire,  penal  though 
it  be  to  the  condemned  sinners,  is  most  as¬ 
suredly  worthy  of  praise.  For  what  is  more 
beautiful  than  fire  flaming,  blazing,  and  shining? 
What  more  useful  than  fire  for  warming,  restor¬ 
ing,  cooking,  though  nothing  is  more  destructive 
than  fire  burning  and  consuming?  The  same 
thing,  then,  when  applied  in  one  way,  is  de¬ 
structive,  but  when  applied  suitably,  is  most 
beneficial.  For  who  can  find  words  to  tell  its 
uses  throughout  the  whole  world?  We  must  not 
listen,  then,  to  those  who  praise  the  light  of 
fire  but  find  fault  with  its  heat,  judging  it  not 
by  its  nature,  but  by  their  convenience  or  dis- 


THE  CITY  OF 

comfort.  For  they  wish  to  see,  but  not  to  be 
burnt.  But  they  forget  that  this  very  light 
which  is  so  pleasant  to  them,  disagrees  with 
and  hurts  weak  eyes ;  and  in  that  heat  which  is 
disagreeable  to  them,  some  animals  find  the 
most  suitable  conditions  of  a  healthy  life. 

Chap.  5.  That  in  all  natures,  of  every  kind  and 

rank ,  God  is  glorified 

All  natures,  then,  inasmuch  as  they  are,  and 
have  therefore  a  rank  and  species  of  their  own, 
and  a  kind  of  internal  harmony,  are  certainly 
good.  And  when  they  are  in  the  places  assigned 
to  them  by  the  order  of  their  nature,  they  pre¬ 
serve  such  being  as  they  have  received.  And 
those  things  which  have  not  received  everlast¬ 
ing  being  are  altered  for  better  or  for  worse,  so 
as  to  suit  the  wants  and  motions  of  those  things 
to  which  the  Creator’s  law  has  made  them  sub¬ 
servient  ;  and  thus  they  tend  in  the  divine  provi¬ 
dence  to  that  end  which  is  embraced  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  scheme  of  the  government  of  the  universe. 
So  that,  though  the  corruption  of  transitory  and 
perishable  things  brings  them  to  utter  destruc¬ 
tion,  it  does  not  prevent  their  producing  that 
which  was  designed  to  be  their  result.  And  this 
being  so,  God,  who  supremely  is,  and  who  there¬ 
fore  created  every  being  which  has  not  supreme 
existence  (for  that  which  was  made  of  nothing 
could  not  be  equal  to  Him,  and  indeed  could  not 
be  at  all  had  He  not  made  it),  is  not  to  be  found 
fault  with  on  account  of  the  creature’s  faults, 
but  is  to  be  praised  in  view  of  the  natures  He 
has  made. 

Chap.  6.  What  the  cause  of  the  blessedness  of 

the  good  angels  is,  and  what  the  cause  of  the 

misery  of  the  wicked 

Thus  the  true  cause  of  the  blessedness  of  the 
good  angels  is  found  to  be  this,  that  they  cleave 
to  Him  who  supremely  is.  And  if  we  ask  the 
cause  of  the  misery  of  the  bad,  it  occurs  to  us, 
and  not  unreasonably,  that  they  are  miserable 
because  tl^ey  have  forsaken  Him  who  supremely 
is  and  have  turned  to  themselves  who  have  no 
such  essence.  And  this  vice,  what  else  is  it  called 
than  pride?  For  “pride  is  the  beginning  of  sin.”1 
They  were  unwilling,  then,  to  preserve  their 
strength  for  God;  and  as  adherence  to  God  was 
the  condition  of  their  enjoying  an  ampler  being, 
they  diminished  it  by  preferring  themselves  to 
Him.  This  was  the  first  defect,  and  the  first  im¬ 
poverishment,  and  the  first  flaw  of  their  nature, 
which  was  created,  not  indeed  supremely  exis¬ 
tent,  but  finding  its  blessedness  in  the  enjoy- 

^ccles.  10.  13. 


GOD  XII.  4-6  345 

ment  of  the  Supreme  Being;  whilst  by  abandon¬ 
ing  Him  it  should  become,  not  indeed  no  nature 
at  all,  but  a  nature  with  a  less  ample  existence 
and  therefore  wretched. 

If  the  further  question  be  asked,  What  was 
the  efficient  cause  of  their  evil  will?  there  is 
none.  For  what  is  it  which  makes  the  will  bad, 
when  it  is  the  will  itself  which  makes  the  action 
bad?  And  consequently  the  bad  will  is  the  cause 
of  the  bad  action,  but  nothing  is  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  bad  will.  For  if  anything  is  the 
cause,  this  thing  either  has  or  has  not  a  will.  If 
it  has,  the  will  is  either  good  or  bad.  If  good, 
who  is  so  left  to  himself  as  to  say  that  a  good 
will  makes  a  will  bad?  For  in  this  case  a  good 
will  would  be  the  cause  of  sin ;  a  most  absurd  sup¬ 
position.  On  the  other  hand,  if  this  hypothetical 
thing  has  a  bad  will,  I  wish  to  know  what  made 
it  so ;  and  that  we  may  not  go  on  forever,  I  ask 
at  once,  what  made  the  first  evil  will  bad?  For 
that  is  not  the  first  which  was  itself  corrupted 
by  an  evil  will,  but  that  is  the  first  which  was 
made  evil  by  no  other  will.  For  if  it  were  pre¬ 
ceded  by  that  which  made  it  evil,  that  will  was 
first  which  made  the  other  evil.  But  if  it  is  re¬ 
plied,  “Nothing  made  it  evil;  it  always  was 
evil,”  I  ask  if  it  has  been  existing  in  some  na¬ 
ture.  For  if  not,  then  it  did  not  exist  at  all;  and 
if  it  did  exist  in  some  nature,  then  it  vitiated  and 
corrupted  it,  and  injured  it,  and  consequently 
deprived  it  of  good.  And  therefore  the  evil  will 
could  not  exist  in  an  evil  nature,  but  in  a  nature 
at  once  good  and  mutable,  which  this  vice  could 
injure.  For  if  it  did  no  injury,  it  was  no  vice; 
and  consequently  the  will  in  which  it  was  could 
not  be  called  evil.  But  if  it  did  injury,  it  did  it 
by  taking  away  or  diminishing  good.  And  there¬ 
fore  there  could  not  be  from  eternity,  as  was 
suggested,  an  evil  will  in  that  thing  in  which 
there  had  been  previously  a  natural  good,  which 
the  evil  will  was  able  to  diminish  by  corrupting 
it.  If,  then,  it  was  not  from  eternity,  who,  I  ask, 
made  it?  The  only  thing  that  can  be  suggested 
in  reply  is  that  something  which  itself  had  no 
will,  made  the  will  evil.  I  ask,  then,  whether  this 
thing  was  superior,  inferior,  or  equal  to  it?  If 
superior,  then  it  is  better.  How,  then,  has  it  no 
will,  and  not  rather  a  good  will?  The  same  rea¬ 
soning  applies  if  it  was  equal ;  for  so  long  as  two 
things  have  equally  a  good  will,  the  one  cannot 
produce  in  the  other  an  evil  will.  Then  remains 
the  supposition  that  that  which  corrupted  the 
will  of  the  angelic  nature  which  first  sinned  was 
itself  an  inferior  thing  without  a  will.  But  that 
thing,  be  it  of  the  lowest  and  most  earthly  kind, 
is  certainly  itself  good,  since  it  is  a  nature  and 


346  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


being,  with  a  form  and  rank  of  its  own  in  its 
own  kind  and  order.  How,  then,  can  a  good  thing 
be  the  efficient  cause  of  an  evil  will?  How,  I  say, 
can  good  be  the  cause  of  evil?  For  when  the  will 
abandons  what  is  above  itself,  and  turns  to  what 
is  lower,  it  becomes  evil — not  because  that  is 
evil  to  which  it  turns,  but  because  the  turning 
itself  is  wicked.  Therefore  it  is  not  an  inferior 
thing  which  has  made  the  will  evil,  but  it  is  itself 
which  has  become  so  by  wickedly  and  inordi¬ 
nately  desiring  an  inferior  thing.  For  if  two  men, 
alike  in  physical  and  moral  constitution,  see  the 
same  corporal  beauty,  and  one  of  them  is  ex¬ 
cited  by  the  sight  to  desire  an  illicit  enjoyment 
while  the  other  steadfastly  maintains  a  modest 
restraint  of  his  will,  what  do  we  suppose  brings 
it  about  that  there  is  an  evil  will  in  the  one  and 
not  in  the  other?  What  produces  it  in  the  man  in 
whom  it  exists?  Not  the  bodily  beauty,  for  that 
was  presented  equally  to  the  gaze  of  both  and 
yet  did  not  produce  in  both  an  evil  will.  Did  the 
flesh  of  the  one  cause  the  desire  as  he  looked? 
But  why  did  not  the  flesh  of  the  other?  Or  was  it 
the  disposition?  But  why  not  the  disposition  of 
both?  For  we  are  supposing  that  both  were  of  a 
like  temperament  of  body  and  soul.  Must  we, 
then,  say  that  the  one  was  tempted  by  a  secret 
suggestion  of  the  evil  spirit?  As  if  it  was  not  by 
his  own  will  that  he  consented  to  this  suggestion 
and  to  any  inducement  whatever!  This  consent, 
then,  this  evil  will  which  he  presented  to  the  evil 
suasive  influence — what  was  the  cause  of  it,  we 
ask?  For,  not  to  delay  on  such  a  difficulty  as  this, 
if  both  are  tempted  equally  and  one  yields  and 
consents  to  the  temptation  while  the  other  re¬ 
mains  unmoved  by  it,  what  other  account  can  we 
give  of  the  matter  than  this,  that  the  one  is  will¬ 
ing,  the  other  unwilling,  to  fall  away  from  chas¬ 
tity?  And  what  causes  this  but  their  own  wills, 
in  cases  at  least  such  as  we  are  supposing,  where 
the  temperament  is  identical?  The  same  beauty 
was  equally  obvious  to  the  eyes  of  both;  the 
same  secret  temptation  pressed  on  both  with 
equal  violence.  However  minutely  we  examine 
the  case,  therefore,  we  can  discern  nothing 
which  caused  the  will  of  the  one  to  be  evil.  For 
if  we  say  that  the  man  himself  made  his  will 
evil,  what  was  the  man  himself  before  his  will 
was  evil  but  a  good  nature  created  by  God,  the 
unchangeable  good?  Here  are  two  men  who,  be¬ 
fore  the  temptation,  were  alike  in  body  and  soul, 
and  of  whom  one  yielded  to  the  tempter  who 
persuaded  him.  while  the  other  could  not  be 
persuaded  to  desire  that  lovely  body  which  was 
equally  before  the  eyes  of  both.  Shall  we  say  of 
the  successfully  tempted  man  that  he  corrupted 


his  own  will,  since  he  was  certainly  good  before 
his  will  became  bad?  Then,  why  did  he  do  so? 
Was  it  because  his  will  was  a  nature,  or  because 
it  was  made  of  nothing?  We  shall  find  that  the 
latter  is  the  case.  For  if  a  nature  is  the  cause  of 
an  evil  will,  what  else  can  we  say  than  that  evil 
arises  from  good  or  that  good  is  the  cause  of 
evil?  And  how  can  it  come  to  pass  that  a  nature, 
good  though  mutable,  should  produce  any  evil 
— that  is  to  say,  should  make  the  will  itself 
wicked? 

Chap.  7.  That  we  ought  not  to  expect  to  find 
any  efficient  cause  of  the  evil  will 
Let  no  one,  therefore,  look  for  an  efficient 
cause  of  the  evil  will;  for  it  is  not  efficient,  but 
deficient,  as  the  will  itself  is  not  an  effecting  of 
something,  but  a  defect.  For  defection  from  that 
which  supremely  is  to  that  which  has  less  of  be¬ 
ing,  this  is  to  begin  to  have  an  evil  will.  Now,  to 
seek  to  discover  the  causes  of  these  defections — 
causes,  as  I  have  said,  not  efficient,  but  deficient 
— is  as  if  some  one  sought  to  see  darkness,  or 
hear  silence.  Yet  both  of  these  are  known  by  us, 
and  the  former  by  means  only  of  the  eye,  the 
latter  only  by  the  ear ;  but  not  by  their  positive 
actuality,1  but  by  their  want  of  it.  Let  no  one. 
then  seek  to  know  from  me  what  I  know  that  I 
do  not  know;  unless  he  perhaps  wishes  to  learn 
to  be  ignorant  of  that  of  which  all  we  know  is, 
that  it  cannot  be  known.  For  those  things  which 
are  known  not  by  their  actuality,  but  by  their 
want  of  it,  are  known,  if  our  expression  may  be 
allowed  and  understood,  by  not  knowing  them, 
that  by  knowing  them  they  may  be  not  known. 
For  when  the  eyesight  surveys  objects  that 
strike  the  sense,  it  nowhere  sees  darkness  but 
where  it  begins  not  to  see.  And  so  no  other  sense 
but  the  ear  can  perceive  silence,  and  yet  it  is 
only  perceived  by  not  hearing.  Thus,  too,  our 
mind  perceives  intelligible  forms  by  understand¬ 
ing  them;  but  when  they  are  deficient,  it  knows 
them  by  not  knowing  them;  for  “who  can  un¬ 
derstand  defects?”2 

Chap.  8.  Of  the  misdirected  love  whereby  the 
will  fell  away  from  the  immutable  to  the  mu - 
table  good 

This  I  do  know,  that  the  nature  of  God  can 
never,  nowhere,  nowise  be  defective,  and  that 
natures  made  of  nothing  can.  These  latter,  how¬ 
ever,  the  more  being  they  have  and  the  more 
good  they  do  (for  then  they  do  something  posi¬ 
tive),  the  more  they  have  efficient  causes;  but 
in  so  far  as  they  are  defective  in  being,  and  con- 
lSpecie.  2Ps.  19.  12. 


THE  CITY  OF 

sequently  do  evil  (for  then  what  is  their  work 
but  vanity?),  they  have  deficient  causes.  And  I 
know  likewise,  that  the  will  could  not  become 
evil,  were  it  unwilling  to  become  so ;  and  there¬ 
fore  its  failings  are  justly  punished,  being  not 
necessary,  but  voluntary.  For  its  defections  are 
not  to  evil  things,  but  are  themselves  evil;  that 
is  to  say,  are  not  towards  things  that  are  natu¬ 
rally  and  in  themselves  evil,  but  the  defection  of 
the  will  is  evil,  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  or¬ 
der  of  nature,  and  an  abandonment  of  that 
which  has  supreme  being  for  that  which  has  less. 
For  avarice  is  not  a  fault  inherent  in  gold,  but  in 
the  man  who  inordinately  loves  gold,  to  the  det¬ 
riment  of  justice,  which  ought  to  be  held  in  in¬ 
comparably  higher  regard  than  gold.  Neither  is 
luxury  the  fault  of  lovely  and  charming  objects, 
but  of  the  heart  that  inordinately  loves  sensual 
pleasures,  to  the  neglect  of  temperance,  which 
attaches  us  to  objects  more  lovely  in  their  spir¬ 
ituality,  and  more  delectable  by  their  incorrupti¬ 
bility.  Nor  yet  is  boasting  the  fault  of  human 
praise,  but  of  the  soul  that  is  inordinately  fond 
of  the  applause  of  men,  and  that  makes  light  of 
the  voice  of  conscience.  Pride,  too,  is  not  the 
fault  of  him  who  delegates  power,  nor  of  power 
itself,  but  of  the  soul  that  is  inordinately  enam¬ 
oured  of  its  own  power,  and  despises  the  more 
just  dominion  of  a  higher  authority.  Conse¬ 
quently  he  who  inordinately  loves  the  good 
which  any  nature  possesses,  even  though  he  ob¬ 
tain  it,  himself  becomes  evil  in  the  good,  and 
wretched  because  deprived  of  a  greater  good. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  the  angels ,  besides  receiving 
from  God  their  nature ,  received  from  Him 
also  their  good  will  by  the  Holy  Spirit  imbu¬ 
ing  them  with  love 

There  is,  then,  no  natural  efficient  cause,  or, 
if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression,  no  essential 
cause,  of  the  evil  will,  since  itself  is  the  origin  of 
evil  in  mutable  spirits,  by  which  the  good  of 
their  nature  is  diminished  and  corrupted;  and 
the  will  is  made  evil  by  nothing  else  than  defec¬ 
tion  from  God — a  defection  of  which  the  cause, 
too,  is  certainly  deficient.  But  as  to  the  good 
will,  if  we  should  say  that  there  is  no  efficient 
cause  of  it,  we  must  beware  of  giving  currency 
to  the  opinion  that  the  good  will  of  the  good  an¬ 
gels  is  not  created,  but  is  co-eternal  with  God. 
For  if  they  themselves  are  created,  how  can  we 
say  that  their  good  will  was  eternal?  But  if  cre¬ 
ated,  was  it  created  along  with  themselves,  or 
did  they  exist  for  a  time  without  it?  If  along 
with  themselves,  then  doubtless  it  was  created 
by  Him  Who  created  them,  and,  as  soon  as  ever 


GOD  XII.  7-9  347 

they  were  created,  they  attached  themselves  to 
Him  Who  created  them,  with  the  love  He  created 
in  them.  And  they  are  separated  from  the  soci¬ 
ety  of  the  rest,  because  they  have  continued  in 
the  same  good  will;  while  the  others  have  fallen 
away  to  another  will,  which  is  an  evil  one,  by  the 
very  fact  of  its  being  a  falling  away  from  the 
good;  from  which,  we  may  add,  they  would  not 
have  fallen  away  had  they  been  unwilling  to  do 
so.  But  if  the  good  angels  existed  for  a  time 
without  a  good  will,  and  produced  it  in  them¬ 
selves  without  God’s  interference,  then  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  they  made  themselves  better  than  He 
made  them.  Away  with  such  a  thought!  For 
without  a  good  will,  what  were  they  but  evil?  Or 
if  they  were  not  evil,  because  they  had  not  an 
evil  will  any  more  than  a  good  one  (for  they  had 
not  fallen  away  from  that  which  as  yet  they  had 
not  begun  to  enjoy),  certainly  they  were  not  the 
same,  not  so  good,  as  when  they  came  to  have  a 
good  will.  Or  if  they  could  not  make  themselves 
better  than  they  were  made  by  Him  Who  is  sur¬ 
passed  by  none  in  His  work,  then  certainly, 
without  His  helpful  operation,  they  could  not 
come  to  possess  that  good  will  which  made  them 
better.  And  though  their  good  will  effected  that 
they  did  not  turn  to  themselves,  who  had  a  more 
stinted  existence,  but  to  Him  Who  supremely  is, 
and  that,  being  united  to  Him,  their  own  being 
was  enlarged,  and  they  lived  a  wise  and  blessed 
life  by  His  communications  to  them,  what  does 
this  prove  but  that  the  will,  however  good  it 
might  be,  would  have  continued  helplessly  only 
to  desire  Him,  had  not  He  Who  had  made  their 
nature  out  of  nothing,  and  yet  capable  of  enjoy¬ 
ing  Him,  first  stimulated  it  to  desire  Him  and 
then  filled  it  with  Himself,  and  so  made  it  better  ? 

Besides,  this  too  has  to  be  inquired  into, 
whether,  if  the  good  angels  made  their  own  will 
good,  they  did  so  with  or  without  will?  If  with¬ 
out,  then  it  was  not  their  doing.  If  with,  was  the 
will  good  or  bad?  If  bad,  how  could  a  bad  will 
give  birth  to  a  good  one?  If  good,  then  already 
they  had  a  good  will.  And  who  made  this  will, 
which  already  they  had,  but  He  Who  created 
them  with  a  good  will,  or  with  that  chaste  love 
by  which  they  cleaved  to  Him,  in  one  and  the 
same  act  creating  their  nature,  and  endowing  it 
with  grace?  And  thus  we  are  driven  to  believe 
that  the  holy  angels  never  existed  without  a 
good  will  or  the  love  of  God.  But  the  angels  who, 
though  created  good,  are  yet  evil  now,  became 
so  by  their  own  will.  And  this  will  was  not  made 
evil  by  their  good  nature,  unless  by  its  voluntary 
defection  from  good;  for  good  is  not  the  cause 
of  evil,  but  a  defection  from  good  is.  These 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


348 

angels,  therefore  either  received  less  of  the  grace 
of  the  divine  love  than  those  who  persevered  in 
the  same;  or  if  both  were  created  equally  good, 
then,  while  the  one  fell  by  their  evil  will,  the 
others  were  more  abundantly  assisted,  and  at¬ 
tained  to  that  pitch  of  blessedness  at  which  they 
became  certain  they  should  never  fall  from  it — 
as  we  have  already  shown  in  the  preceding 
book.1  We  must  therefore  acknowledge,  with 
the  praise  due  to  the  Creator,  that  not  only  of 
holy  men,  but  also  of  the  holy  angels,  it  can  be 
said  that  “the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  their 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  given  unto 
them.”2  And  that  not  only  of  men,  but  primarily 
and  principally  of  angels  it  is  true,  as  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “It  is  good  to  draw  near  to  God.”3  And 
those  who  have  this  good  in  common,  have,  both 
with  Him  to  Whom  they  draw  near  and  with  one 
another,  a  holy  fellowship,  and  form  one  city  of 
God — His  living  sacrifice  and  His  living  temple. 
And  I  see  that,  as  I  have  now  spoken  of  the  rise 
of  this  city  among  the  angels,  it  is  time  to  speak 
of  the  origin  of  that  part  of  it  which  is  hereafter 
to  be  united  to  the  immortal  angels,  and  'syhich 
at  present  is  being  gathered  from  among  mortal 
men,  and  is  either  sojourning  on  earth,  or,  in  the 
persons  of  those  who  have  passed  through  death, 
is  resting  in  the  secret  receptacles  and  abodes  of 
disembodied  spirits.  For  from  one  man,  whom 
God  created  as  the  first,  the  whole  human  race 
descended,  according  to  the  faith  of  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture,  which  deservedly  is  of  wonderful  author¬ 
ity  among  all  nations  throughout  the  world; 
since,  among  its  other  true  statements,  it  pre¬ 
dicted,  by  its  divine  foresight,  that  all  nations 
would  give  credit  to  it. 

Chap.  10  .Of  the  falseness  of  the  history  which 

allots  many  thousand  years  to  the  worlds  past 

Let  us,  then,  omit  the  conjectures  of  men  who 
know  not  what  they  say,  when  they  speak  of  the 
nature  and  origin  of  the  human  race.  For  some 
hold  the  same  opinion  regarding  men  that  they 
hold  regarding  the  world  itself,  that  they  have 
always  been.  Thus  Apuleius  says  when  he  is  de¬ 
scribing  our  race,  “Individually  they  are  mortal, 
but  collectively,  and  as  a  race,  they  are  immor¬ 
tal.”  And  when  they  are  asked,  how,  if  the  hu¬ 
man  race  has  always  been,  they  vindicate  the 
truth  of  their  history,  which  narrates  who  were 
the  inventors,  and  what  they  invented,  and  who 
first  instituted  the  liberal  studies  and  the  other 
arts,  and  who  first  inhabited  this  or  that  region, 
and  this  or  that  island?  they  reply4  that  most, 

^hap.  13.  2Rom.  5.  5.  3Ps.  73.  28. 

4See  Plato,  Timceus. 


if  not  all  lands,  were  so  desolated  at  intervals  by 
fire  and  flood,  that  men  were  greatly  reduced  in 
numbers,  and  from  these,  again,  the  population 
was  restored  to  its  former  numbers,  and  that 
thus  there  was  at  intervals  a  new  beginning 
made,  and  though  those  things  which  had  been 
interrupted  and  checked  by  the  severe  devasta¬ 
tions  were  only  renewed,  yet  they  seemed  to  be 
originated  then ;  but  that  man  could  not  exist  at 
all  save  as  produced  by  man.  But  they  say  what 
they  think,  not  what  they  know. 

They  are  deceived,  too,  by  those  highly  men¬ 
dacious  documents  which  profess  to  give  the  his¬ 
tory  of  many  thousand  years,  though,  reckon¬ 
ing  by  the  sacred  writings,  we  find  that  not  6000 
years  have  yet  passed.5  And,  not  to  spend  many 
words  in  exposing  the  baselessness  of  these  doc¬ 
uments,  in  which  so  many  thousands  of  years 
are  accounted  for,  nor  in  proving  that  their  au¬ 
thorities  are  totally  inadequate,  let  me  cite  only 
that  letter  which  Alexander  the  Great  wrote  to 
his  mother  Olympias,6  giving  her  the  narrative 
he  had  from  an  Egyptian  priest,  which  he  had 
extracted  from  their  sacred  archives,  and  which 
gave  an  account  of  kingdoms  mentioned  also  by 
the  Greek  historians.  In  this  letter  of  Alexan¬ 
der’s  a  term  of  upwards  of  5000  years  is  assigned 
to  the  kingdom  of  Assyria;  while  in  the  Greek 
history  only  1300  years  are  reckoned  from  the 
reign  of  Bel  himself,  whom  both  Greek  and 
Egyptian  agree  in  counting  the  first  king  of  As¬ 
syria.  Then  to  the  empire  of  the  Persians  and 
Macedonians  this  Egyptian  assigned  more  than 
8000  years,  counting  to  the  time  of  Alexander, 
to  whom  he  was  speaking;  while  among  the 
Greeks,  485  years  are  assigned  to  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans  down  to  the  death  of  Alexander,  and  to  the 
Persians  233  years,  reckoning  to  the  termina¬ 
tion  of  his  conquests.  Thus  these  give  a  much 
smaller  number  of  years  than  the  Egyptians; 
and  indeed,  though  multiplied  three  times,  the 
Greek  chronology  would  still  be  shorter.  For  the 
Egyptians  are  said  to  have  formerly  reckoned 
only  four  months  to  their  year;  so  that  one  year, 
according  to  the  fuller  and  truer  computation 
now  in  use  among  them  as  well  as  among  our¬ 
selves,  would  comprehend  three  of  their  old 
years.  But  not  even  thus,  as  I  said,  does  the 
Greek  history  correspond  with  the  Egyptian  in 
its  chronology.  And  therefore  the  former  must 
receive  the  greater  credit,  because  it  does  not 

5Augustine  here  follows  the  chronology  of  Eusebius, 
who  reckons  5611  years  from  the  Creation  to  the  taking 
of  Rome  by  the  Goths,  adopting  the  Septuagint  version  of 
the  Patriarchal  ages. 

6See  above,  bk.  vih.  5. 


THE  CITY  OF 

exceed  the  true  account  of  the  duration  of  the 
world  as  it  is  given  by  our  documents,  which  are 
truly  sacred.  Further,  if  this  letter  of  Alexander, 
which  has  become  so  famous,  differs  widely  in 
this  matter  of  chronology  from  the  probable 
credible  account,  how  much  less  can  we  believe 
these  documents  which,  though  full  of  fabulous 
and  fictitious  antiquities,  they  would  fain  op¬ 
pose  to  the  authority  of  our  well-known  and  di¬ 
vine  books,  which  predicted  that  the  whole 
world  would  believe  them,  and  which  the  whole 
world  accordingly  has  believed;  which  proved, 
too,  that  it  had  truly  narrated  past  events  by  its 
prediction  of  future  events,  which  have  so  ex¬ 
actly  come  to  pass! 

Chap.  ii.  Of  those  who  suppose  that  this  world 
indeed  is  not  eternal,  but  that  either  there  are 
numberless  worlds,  or  that  one  and  the  same 
world  is  perpetually  resolved  into  its  ele¬ 
ments,  and  renewed  at  the  conclusion  of  fixed 
cycles 

There  are  some,  again,  who,  though  they  do 
not  suppose  that  this  world  is  eternal,  are  of 
opinion  either  that  this  is  not  the  only  world, 
but  that  there  are  numberless  worlds,  or  that  in¬ 
deed  it  is  the  only  one,  but  that  it  dies,  and  is 
born  again  at  fixed  intervals,  and  this  times 
without  number;  but  they  must  acknowledge 
that  the  human  race  existed  before  there  were 
other  men  to  beget  them.  For  they  cannot  sup¬ 
pose  that,  if  the  whole  world  perish,  some  men 
would  be  left  alive  in  the  world,  as  they  might 
survive  in  floods  and  conflagrations,  which  those 
other  speculators  suppose  to  be  partial,  and 
from  which  they  can  therefore  reasonably  argue 
that  a  few  men  survived  whose  posterity  would 
renew  the  population ;  but  as  they  believe  that 
the  world  itself  is  renewed  out  of  its  own  mate¬ 
rial,  so  they  must  believe  that  out  of  its  ele¬ 
ments  the  human  race  was  produced,  and  then 
that  the  progeny  of  mortals  sprang  like  that  of 
other  animals  from  their  parents. 

Chap.  j2.  How  these  persons  are  to  be  an¬ 
swered,  who  find  fault  with  the  creation  of 
man  on  the  score  of  its  recent  date 
As  to  those  who  are  always  asking  why  man 
was  not  created  during  these  countless  ages  of 
the  infinitely  extended  past,  and  came  into  being 
so  lately  that,  according  to  Scripture,  less  than 
6000  years  have  elapsed  since  He  began  to  be,  I 
would  reply  to  them  regarding  the  creation  of 
man,  just  as  I  replied  regarding  the  origin  of  the 
world  to  those  who  will  not  believe  that  it  is  not 
eternal,  but  had  a  beginning,  which  even  Plato 


GOD  XII.  10-12  349 

himself  most  plainly  declares,  though  some 
think  his  statement  was  not  consistent  with  his 
real  opinion.1  If  it  offends  them  that  the  time 
that  has  elapsed  since  the  creation  of  man  is  so 
short,  and  his  years  so  few  according  to  our  au¬ 
thorities,  let  them  take  this  into  consideration, 
that  nothing  that  has  a  limit  is  long,  and  that  all 
the  ages  of  time  being  finite,  are  very  little,  or 
indeed  nothing  at  all,  when  compared  to  the  in¬ 
terminable  eternity.  Consequently,  if  there  had 
elapsed  since  the  creation  of  man,  I  do  not  say 
five  or  six,  but  even  sixty  or  six  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  years,  or  sixty  times  as  many,  or  six  hun¬ 
dred  or  six  hundred  thousand  times  as  many,  or 
this  sum  multiplied  until  it  could  no  longer  be 
expressed  in  numbers,  the  same  question  could 
still  be  put,  “Why  was  he  not  made  before?” 
For  the  past  and  boundless  eternity  during 
which  God  abstained  from  creating  man  is  so 
great  that,  compare  it  with  what  vast  and  untold 
number  of  ages  you  please,  so  long  as  there  is  a 
definite  conclusion  of  this  term  of  time,  it  is  not 
even  as  if  you  compared  the  minutest  drop  of 
water  with  the  ocean  that  everywhere  flows 
around  the  globe.  For  of  these  two,  one  indeed 
is  very  small,  the  other  incomparably  vast,  yet 
both  are  finite;  but  that  space  of  time  which 
starts  from  some  beginning,  and  is  limited  by 
some  termination,  be  it  of  what  extent  it  may,  if 
you  compare  it  with  that  which  has  no  begin¬ 
ning,  I  know  not  whether  to  say  we  should  count 
it  the  very  minutest  thing,  or  nothing  at  all.  For, 
take  this  limited  time,  and  deduct  from  the  end 
of  it,  one  by  one,  the  briefest  moments  (as  you 
might  take  day  by  day  from  a  man’s  life,  begin¬ 
ning  at  the  day  in  which  he  now  lives,  back  to 
that  of  his  birth),  and  though  the  number  of 
moments  you  must  subtract  in  this  backward 
movement  be  so  great  that  no  word  can  express 
it,  yet  this  subtraction  will  sometime  carry  you 
to  the  beginning.  But  if  you  take  away  from  a 
time  which  has  no  beginning,  I  do  not  say  brief 
moments  one  by  one,  nor  yet  hours,  or  days,  or 
months,  or  years  even  in  quantities,  but  terms 
of  years  so  vast  that  they  cannot  be  named  by 
the  most  skillful  arithmeticians — take  away 
terms  of  years  as  vast  as  that  which  we  have 
supposed  to  be  gradually  consumed  by  the  de¬ 
duction  of  moments — and  take  them  away  not 
once  and  again  repeatedly,  but  always,  and  what 
do  you  effect,  what  do  you  make  by  your  deduc¬ 
tion,  since  you  never  reach  the  beginning,  which 
has  no  existence?  Wherefore,  that  which  we  now 
demand  after  five  thousand  odd  years,  our 

1The  Alexandrian  Neo-Platonists  endeavoured  in  this 
way  to  escape  from  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  Timaus. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


descendants  might  with  like  curiosity  demand 
after  six  hundred  thousand  years,  supposing 
these  dying  generations  of  men  continue  so  long 
to  decay  and  be  renewed,  and  supposing  poster¬ 
ity  continues  as  weak  and  ignorant  as  ourselves. 
The  same  question  might  have  been  asked  by 
those  who  have  lived  before  us  and  while  man 
was  even  newer  upon  earth.  The  first  man  him¬ 
self  in  short  might  the  day  after  or  the  very  day 
of  his  creation  have  asked  why  he  was  created 
no  sooner.  And  no  matter  at  what  earlier  or  later 
period  he  had  been  created,  this  controversy 
about  the  commencement  of  this  world’s  history 
would  have  had  precisely  the  same  difficulties  as 
it  has  now. 

Chap.  13.  Of  the  revolution  of  the  ages ,  which 
some  philosophers  believe  will  bring  all  things 
round  again ,  after  a  certain  fixed  cycle ,  to  the 
same  order  and  form  as  at  first 
This  controversy  some  philosophers  have  seen 
no  other  approved  means  of  solving  than  by  in¬ 
troducing  cycles  of  time,  in  which  there  should 
be  a  constant  renewal  and  repetition  of  the  or¬ 
der  of  nature;1  and  they  have  therefore  asserted 
that  these  cycles  will  ceaselessly  recur,  one  pass¬ 
ing  away  and  another  coming,  though  they  are 
not  agreed  as  to  whether  one  permanent  world 
shall  pass  through  all  these  cycles,  or  whether 
the  world  shall  at  fixed  intervals  die  out  and  be 
renewed  so  as  to  exhibit  a  recurrence  of  the 
same  phenomena — the  things  which  have  been 
and  those  which  are  to  be  coinciding.  And  from 
this  fantastic  vicissitude  they  exempt  not  even 
the  immortal  soul  that  has  attained  wisdom, 
consigning  it  to  a  ceaseless  transmigration  be¬ 
tween  delusive  blessedness  and  real  misery.  For 
how  can  that  be  truly  called  blessed  which  has 
no  assurance  of  being  so  eternally,  and  is  either 
in  ignorance  of  the  truth,  and  blind  to  the  mis¬ 
ery  that  is  approaching,  or,  knowing  it,  is  in 
misery  and  fear?  Or  if  it  passes  to  bliss,  and 
leaves  miseries  forever,  then  there  happens  in 
time  a  new  thing  which  time  shall  not  end.  Why 
not,  then,  the  world  also?  Why  may  not  man, 
too,  be  a  similar  thing?  So  that,  by  following  the 
straight  path  of  sound  doctrine,  we  escape,  I 
know  not  what  circuitous  paths,  discovered  by 
deceiving  and  deceived  sages. 

Some,  too,  in  advocating  these  recurring  cy¬ 
cles  that  restore  all  things  to  their  original  cite 
in  favour  of  their  supposition  what  Solomon  says 
in  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes :  “What  is  that  which 
hath  been?  It  is  that  which  shall  be.  And  what  is 

XM.  Aurelius  says  (n.  14):  “All  things  from  eternity  are 
of  like  forms,  and  come  round  in  a  circle. ”Ibid., rx.  28. 


that  which  is  done?  It  is  that  which  shall  be 
done :  and  there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun. 
Who  can  speak  and  say,  See,  this  is  new?  It  hath 
been  already  of  old  time,  which  was  before  us.”2 
This  he  said  either  of  those  things  of  which  he 
had  just  been  speaking — the  succession  of  gen¬ 
erations,  the  orbit  of  the  sun,  the  course  of  riv¬ 
ers — or  else  of  all  kinds  of  creatures  that  are 
born  and  die.  For  men  were  before  us,  are  with 
us,  and  shall  be  after  us;  and  so  all  living  things 
and  all  plants.  Even  monstrous  and  irregular 
productions,  though  differing  from  one  another, 
and  though  some  are  reported  as  solitary  in¬ 
stances,  yet  resemble  one  another  generally,  in 
so  far  as  they  are  miraculous  and  monstrous, 
and,  in  this  sense,  have  been,  and  shall  be,  and 
are  no  new  and  recent  things  under  the  sun. 
However,  some  would  understand  these  words 
as  meaning  that  in  the  predestination  of  God 
all  things  have  already  existed,  and  that  thus 
there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun.  At  all 
events,  far  be  it  from  any  true  believer  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  by  these  words  of  Solomon  those  cy¬ 
cles  are  meant,  in  which,  according  to  those  phi¬ 
losophers,  the  same  periods  and  events  of  time 
are  repeated;  as  if,  for  example,  the  philosopher 
Plato,  having  taught  in  the  school  at  Athens 
which  is  called  the  Academy,  so,  numberless 
ages  before,  at  long  but  certain  intervals,  this 
same  Plato  and  the  same  school,  and  the  same 
disciples  existed,  and  so  also  are  to  be  repeated 
during  the  countless  cycles  that  are  yet  to  be — 
far  be  it,  I  say,  from  us  to  believe  this.  For  once 
Christ  died  for  our  sins;  and,  rising  from  the 
dead,  He  dieth  no  more.  “Death  hath  no  more 
dominion  over  Him”;3  and  we  ourselves  after 
the  resurrection  shall  be  “ever  with  the  Lord,”4 
to  whom  we  now  say,  as  the  sacred  Psalmist  dic¬ 
tates,  “Thou  shalt  keep  us,  0  Lord,  Thou  shalt 
preserve  us  from  this  generation.”5  And  that  too 
which  follows,  is,  I  think,  appropriate  enough : 
“The  wicked  walk  in  a  circley)\  not  because  their 
life  is  to  recur  by  means  of  these  circles,  which 
these  philosophers  imagine,  but  because  the 
path  in  which  their  false  doctrine  now  runs  is 
circuitous. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  creation  of  the  human  race  in 
time y  and  how  this  was  effected  without  any 
new  design  or  change  of  purpose  on  Godys 
part 

What  wonder  is  it  if,  entangled  in  these  cir¬ 
cles,  they  find  neither  entrance  nor  egress?  For 
they  know  not  how  the  human  race,  and  this 

2Eccles.  1.  9,  10.  3Rom.  6.  9.  4I  Thess.  4.  16. 

6Ps.  12.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF 

mortal  condition  of  ours,  took  its  origin,  nor 
how  it  will  be  brought  to  an  end,  since  they  can¬ 
not  penetrate  the  inscrutable  wisdom  of  God. 
For,  though  Himself  eternal  and  without  begin¬ 
ning,  yet  He  caused  time  to  have  a  beginning; 
and  man,  whom  He  had  not  previously  made  He 
made  in  time,  not  from  a  new  and  sudden  resolu¬ 
tion,  but  by  His  unchangeable  and  eternal  de¬ 
sign.  Who  can  search  out  the  unsearchable  depth 
of  this  purpose,  who  can  scrutinize  the  inscru¬ 
table  wisdom,  wherewith  God,  without  change 
of  will,  created  man,  who  had  never  before  been, 
and  gave  him  an  existence  in  time,  and  increased 
the  human  race  from  one  individual?  For  the 
Psalmist  himself,  when  he  had  first  said,  “Thou 
shalt  keep  us,  0  Lord,  Thou  shalt  preserve  us 
from  this  generation  for  ever,”  and  had  then  re¬ 
buked  those  whose  foolish  and  impious  doctrine 
preserves  for  the  soul  no  eternal  deliverance  and 
blessedness,  adds  immediately,  “The  wicked 
walk  in  a  circle.”  Then,  as  if  it  were  said  to  him, 
“What  then  do  you  believe,  feel,  know?  Are  we 
to  believe  that  it  suddenly  occurred  to  God  to 
create  man,  whom  He  had  never  before  made  in 
a  past  eternity — God,  to  whom  nothing  new  can 
occur,  and  in  Whom  is  no  changeableness?”  the 
Psalmist  goes  on  to  reply,  as  if  addressing  God 
Himself,  “According  to  the  depth  of  Thy  wis¬ 
dom  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  children  of  men.” 
Let  men,  he  seems  to  say,  fancy  what  they 
please,  let  them  conjecture  and  dispute  as  seems 
good  to  them,  but  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  men  according  to  the  depth  of  Thy  wis¬ 
dom.  which  no  man  can  comprehend.  For  this  is 
a  depth  indeed,  that  God  always  has  been,  and 
that  man,  whom  He  had  never  made  before,  He 
willed  to  make  in  time,  and  this  without  chang¬ 
ing  His  design  and  will. 

Chap.  15.  Whether  we  are  to  believe  that  God , 
as  he  has  always  been  sovereign  Lord ,  has  al¬ 
ways  had  creatures  over  whom  He  exercised 
his  sovereignty  ;  and  in  what  sense  we  can  say 
that  the  creature  has  always  been ,  and  yet 
cannot  say  it  is  co-eternal 
For  my  own  part,  indeed,  as  I  dare  not  say 
that  there  ever  was  a  time  when  the  Lord  God 
was  not  Lord,  so  I  ought  not  to  doubt  that  man 
had  no  existence  before  time,  and  was  first  cre¬ 
ated  in  time.  But  when  I  consider  what  God 
could  be  the  Lord  of,  if  there  was  not  always 
some  creature,  I  shrink  from  making  any  asser¬ 
tion,  remembering  my  own  insignificance  and 
that  it  is  written,  “What  man  is  he  that  can 
know  the  counsel  of  God?  or  who  can  think 
what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is?  For  the  thoughts 


GOD  XII.  13-15  351 

of  mortal  men  are  timid,  and  our  devices  are  but 
uncertain.  For  the  corruptible  body  presseth 
down  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  tabernacle  weigh- 
eth  down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many 
things.”1  Many  things  certainly  do  I  muse  upon 
in  this  earthly  tabernacle,  because  the  one  thing 
which  is  true  among  the  many,  or  beyond  the 
many,  I  cannot  find.  If,  then,  among  these  many 
thoughts,  I  say  that  there  have  always  been 
creatures  for  Him  to  be  Lord  of,  Who  is  always 
and  ever  has  been  Lord,  but  that  these  creatures 
have  not  always  been  the  same,  but  succeeded 
one  another  (for  we  would  not  seem  to  say  that 
any  is  co-eternal  with  the  Creator,  an  assertion 
condemned  equally  by  faith  and  sound  reason), 
I  must  take  care  lest  I  fall  into  the  absurd  and 
ignorant  error  of  maintaining  that  by  these  suc¬ 
cessions  and  changes  mortal  creatures  have  al¬ 
ways  existed,  whereas  the  immortal  creatures 
had  not  begun  to  exist  until  the  date  of  our 
own  world,  when  the  angels  were  created;  if  at 
least  the  angels  are  intended  by  that  light  which 
was  first  made,  or,  rather,  by  that  heaven  of 
which  it  is  said,  “In  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.”2  The  angels,  at  least, 
did  not  exist  before  they  were  created;  for  if  we 
say  that  they  have  always  existed,  we  shall  seem 
to  make  them  co-eternal  with  the  Creator. 
Again,  if  I  say  that  the  angels  were  not  created 
in  time,  but  existed  before  all  times,  as  those 
over  whom  God,  Who  has  ever  been  Sovereign, 
exercised  His  sovereignty,  then  I  shall  be  asked 
whether,  if  they  were  created  before  all  time, 
they,  being  creatures,  could  possibly  always  ex¬ 
ist.  It  may  perhaps  be  replied,  “Why  not  always , 
since  that  which  is  in  all  time  may  very  properly 
be  said  to  be  ‘always’?”  Now  so  true  is  it  that 
these  angels  have  existed  in  all  time  that  even 
before  time  was  they  were  created;  if  at  least 
time  began  with  the  heavens,  and  the  angels  ex¬ 
isted  before  the  heavens.  And  if  time  was  even 
before  the  heavenly  bodies,  not  indeed  marked 
by  hours,  days,  months,  and  years — for  these 
measures  of  time’s  periods  which  are  commonly 
and  properly  called  times,  did  manifestly  begin 
with  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  so 
God  said,  when  He  appointed  them,  “Let  them  be 
for  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  for 
years”3 — if,  I  say,  time  was  before  these  heav¬ 
enly  bodies  by  some  changing  movement,  whose 
parts  succeeded  one  another  and  could  not  exist 
simultaneously,  and  if  there  was  some  such 
movement  among  the  angels  which  necessitated 
the  existence  of  time,  and  that  they  from  their 
very  creation  should  be  subject  to  these  temporal 
lWisd.  9.  13-15.  2Gen.  1.  1.  3Gen.  1.  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


changes,  then  they  have  existed  in  all  time,  for 
time  came  into  being  along  with  them.  And  who 
will  say  that  what  was  in  all  time,  was  not  al¬ 
ways. 

But  if  I  make  such  a  reply,  it  will  be  said  to 
me,  “How,  then,  are  they  not  co-eternal  with 
the  Creator,  if  He  and  they  always  have  been? 
How  even  can  they  be  said  to  have  been  created, 
if  we  are  to  understand  that  they  have  always 
existed?”  What  shall  we  reply  to  this?  Shall  we 
say  that  both  statements  are  true?  that  they  al¬ 
ways  have  been,  since  they  have  been  in  all 
time,  they  being  created  along  with  time,  or 
time  along  with  them,  and  yet  that  also  they 
were  created?  For,  similarly,  we  will  not  deny 
that  time  itself  was  created,  though  no  one 
doubts  that  time  has  been  in  all  time;  for  if  it 
has  not  been  in  all  time,  then  there  was  a  time 
when  there  was  no  time.  But  the  most  foolish 
person  could  not  make  such  an  assertion.  For 
we  can  reasonably  say  there  was  a  time  when 
Rome  was  not;  there  was  a  time  when  Jeru¬ 
salem  was  not;  there  was  a  time  when  Abra¬ 
ham  was  not;  there  was  a  time  when  man  was 
not,  and  so  on:  in  fine,  if  the  world  was  not 
made  at  the  commencement  of  time,  but  after 
some  time  had  elapsed,  we  can  say  there  was  a 
time  when  the  world  was  not.  But  to  say  there 
was  a  time  when  time  was  not,  is  as  absurd  as 
to  say  there  was  a  man  when  there  was  no  man ; 
or,  this  world  was  when  this  world  was  not.  For 
if  we  are  not  referring  to  the  same  object,  the 
form  of  expression  may  be  used,  as,  there  was 
another  man  when  this  man  was  not.  Thus  we 
can  reasonably  say  there  was  another  time 
when  this  time  was  not;  but  not  the  merest 
simpleton  could  say  there  was  a  time  when  there 
was  no  time.  As,  then,  we  say  that  time  was  cre¬ 
ated,  though  we  also  say  that  it  always  has 
been,  since  in  all  time  time  has  been,  so  it  does 
not  follow  that  if  the  angels  have  always  been, 
they  were  therefore  not  created.  For  we  say  that 
they  have  always  been,  because  they  have  been 
in  all  time;  and  we  say  they  have  been  in  all 
time,  because  time  itself  could  no  wise  be  with¬ 
out  them.  For  where  there  is  no  creature  whose 
changing  movements  admit  of  succession,  there 
cannot  be  time  at  all.  And  consequently,  even  if 
they  have  always  existed,  they  were  created; 
neither,  if  they  have  always  existed,  are  they 
therefore  co-eternal  with  the  Creator.  For  He 
has  always  existed  in  unchangeable  eternity; 
while  they  were  created,  and  are  said  to  have 
been  always,  because  they  have  been  in  all  time, 
time  being  impossible  without  the  creature.  But 
time  passing  away  by  its  changefulness,  cannot 


be  co-eternal  with  changeless  eternity.  And 
consequently,  though  the  immortality  of  the  an¬ 
gels  does  not  pass  in  time,  does  not  become  past 
as  if  now  it  were  not,  nor  has  a  future  as  if  it 
were  not  yet,  still  their  movements,  which  are 
the  basis  of  time,  do  pass  from  future  to  past; 
and  therefore  they  cannot  be  co-eternal  with 
the  Creator,  in  whose  movement  we  cannot  say 
that  there  has  been  that  which  now  is  not,  or 
shall  be  that  which  is  not  yet.  Wherefore,  if  God 
always  has  been  Lord,  He  has  always  had  crea¬ 
tures  under  His  dominion — creatures,  however, 
not  begotten  of  Him,  but  created  by  Him  out  of 
nothing;  nor  co-eternal  with  Him,  for  He  was 
before  them  though  at  no  time  without  them, 
because  He  preceded  them,  not  by  the  lapse  of 
time,  but  by  His  abiding  eternity.  But  if  I  make 
this  reply  to  those  who  demand  how  He  was  al¬ 
ways  Creator,  always  Lord,  if  there  were  not  al¬ 
ways  a  subject  creation;  or  how  this  was  cre¬ 
ated,  and  not  rather  co-eternal  with  its  Creator, 
if  it  always  was,  I  fear  I  may  be  accused  of  reck¬ 
lessly  affirming  what  I  know  not,  instead  of 
teaching  what  I  know.  I  return,  therefore,  to 
that  which  our  Creator  has  seen  fit  that  we 
should  know;  and  those  things  which  He  has 
allowed  the  abler  men  to  know  in  this  life,  or  has 
reserved  to  be  known  in  the  next  by  the  perfect¬ 
ed  saints,  I  acknowledge  to  be  beyond  my  capac¬ 
ity.  But  I  have  thought  it  right  to  discuss  these 
matters  without  making  positive  assertions,  that 
they  who  read  may  be  warned  to  abstain  from 
hazardous  questions,  and  may  not  deem  them¬ 
selves  fit  for  everything.  Let  them  rather  en¬ 
deavour  to  obey  the  wholesome  injunction  of 
the  apostle,  when  he  says,  “For  I  say,  through 
the  grace  given  unto  me,  to  every  man  that  is 
among  you,  not  to  think  of  himself  more  highly 
than  he  ought  to  think;  but  to  think  soberly, 
according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every  man  the 
measure  of  faith.”1  For  if  an  infant  receive  nour¬ 
ishment  suited  to  its  strength,  it  becomes  capa¬ 
ble,  as  it  grows,  of  taking  more;  but  if  its 
strength  and  capacity  be  overtaxed,  it  dwines 
away  in  place  of  growing. 

Chap.  16.  How  we  are  to  understand  God’s 
promise  of  life  eternal ,  which  was  uttered  be - 
fore  the  “eternal  times” 

I  own  that  I  do  not  know  what  ages  passed 
before  the  human  race  was  created,  yet  I  have 
no  doubt  that  no  created  thing  is  co-eternal  with 
the  Creator.  But  even  the  apostle  speaks  of  time 
as  eternal,  and  this  with  reference,  not  to  the 
future,  but,  which  is  more  surprising,  to  the 
^om.  12.  3. 


THE  CITY  OF 

past.  For  he  says,  “In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which 
God  that  cannot  lie  promised  before  the  eternal 
times,  but  hath  in  due  times  manifested  His 
word.”1  You  see  he  says  that  in  the  past  there 
have  been  eternal  times,  which,  however,  were 
not  co-eternal  with  God.  And  since  God  before 
these  eternal  times  not  only  existed,  but  also, 
“promised”  life  eternal,  which  He  manifested  in 
its  own  times  (that  is  to  say,  in  due  times),  what 
else  is  this  than  His  word?  For  this  is  life  eter¬ 
nal.  But  then,  how  did  He  promise;  for  the 
promise  was  made  to  men,  and  yet  they  had  no 
existence  before  eternal  times?  Does  this  not 
mean  that,  in  His  own  eternity  and  in  His  co¬ 
eternal  word,  that  which  was  to  be  in  its  own 
time  was  already  predestined  and  fixed? 

Chap.  17.  What  defence  is  made  by  sound  faith 
regarding  God’s  unchangeable  counsel  and 
willy  against  the  reasonings  of  those  who  hold 
that  the  works  of  God  are  eternally  repeated 
in  revolving  cycles  that  restore  all  things  as 
they  were 

Of  this,  too,  I  have  no  doubt,  that  before  the 
first  man  was  created,  there  never  had  been  a 
man  at  all,  neither  this  same  man  himself  recur¬ 
ring  by  I  know  not  what  cycles,  and  having 
made  I  know  not  how  many  revolutions,  nor  any 
other  of  similar  nature.  From  this  belief  I  am 
not  frightened  by  philosophical  arguments, 
among  which  that  is  reckoned  the  most  acute 
which  is  founded  on  the  assertion  that  the  infi¬ 
nite  cannot  be  comprehended  by  any  mode  of 
knowledge.  Consequently,  they  argue,  God  has 
in  his  own  mind  finite  conceptions  of  all  finite 
things  which  He  makes.  Now  it  cannot  be  sup¬ 
posed  that  His  goodness  was  ever  idle;  for  if  it 
were,  there  should  be  ascribed  to  Him  an  awak¬ 
ening  to  activity  in  time,  from  a  past  eternity  of 
inactivity,  as  if  He  repented  of  an  idleness  that 
had  no  beginning,  and  proceeded,  therefore,  to 
make  a  beginning  of  work.  This  being  the  case, 
they  say  it  must  be  that  the  same  things  are  al¬ 
ways  repeated,  and  that  as  they  pass,  so  they  are 
destined  always  to  return,  whether  amidst  all 
these  changes  the  world  remains  the  same — the 
world  which  has  always  been,  and  yet  was  cre¬ 
ated — or  that  the  world  in  these  revolutions  is 
perpetually  dying  out  and  being  renewed;  other¬ 
wise,  if  we  point  to  a  time  when  the  works  of 
God  were  begun,  it  would  be  believed  that  He 
considered  His  past  eternal  leisure  to  be  inert 
and  indolent,  and  therefore  condemned  and  al¬ 
tered  it  as  displeasing  to  Himself.  Now  if  God  is 

]Titus,  1.  2,  3.  Augustine  here  follows  the  version  of 
Jerome,  and  not  the  Vulgate. 


GOD  XII.  16-17  353 

supposed  to  have  been  indeed  always  making 
temporal  things,  but  different  from  one  another, 
and  one  after  the  other,  so,  that  He  thus  came  at 
last  to  make  man,  whom  He  had  never  made  be¬ 
fore,  then  it  may  seem  that  He  made  man  not 
with  knowledge  (for  they  suppose  no  knowledge 
can  comprehend  the  infinite  succession  of  crea¬ 
tures),  but  at  the  dictate  of  the  hour,  as  it  struck 
Him  at  the  moment,  with  a  sudden  and  acciden¬ 
tal  change  of  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  say  they, 
if  those  cycles  be  admitted,  and  if  we  suppose 
that  the  same  temporal  things  are  repeated, 
while  the  world  either  remains  identical  through 
all  these  rotations,  or  else  dies  away  and  is  re¬ 
newed,  then  there  is  ascribed  to  God  neither  the 
slothful  ease  of  a  past  eternity,  nor  a  rash  and 
unforeseen  creation.  And  if  the  same  things  be 
not  thus  repeated  in  cycles,  then  they  cannot  by 
any  science  or  prescience  be  comprehended  in 
their  endless  diversity.  Even  though  reason 
could  not  refute,  faith  would  smile  at  these  ar¬ 
gumentations,  with  which  the  godless  endeav¬ 
our  to  turn  our  simple  piety  from  the  right  way 
that  we  may  walk  with  them  “in  a  circle.”  But 
by  the  help  of  the  Lord  our  God,  even  reason, 
and  that  readily  enough,  shatters  these  revolving 
circles  which  conjecture  frames.  For  that  which 
specially  leads  these  men  astray  to  prefer  their 
own  circles  to  the  straight  path  of  truth  is  that 
they  measure  by  their  own  human,  changeable, 
and  narrow  intellect  the  divine  mind,  which  is 
absolutely  unchangeable,  infinitely  capacious, 
and  without  succession  of  thought,  counting  all 
things  without  number.  So  that  saying  of  the 
apostle  comes  true  of  them,  for,  “comparing 
themselves  with  themselves,  they  do  not  under¬ 
stand.”2  For  because  they  do,  in  virtue  of  a  new 
purpose,  whatever  new  thing  has  occurred  to 
them  to  be  done  (their  minds  being  changeable), 
they  conclude  it  is  so  with  God;  and  thus  com¬ 
pare,  not  God — for  they  cannot  conceive  God. 
but  think  of  one  like  themselves  when  they 
think  of  Him — not  God,  but  themselves,  and  not 
with  Him,  but  with  themselves.  For  our  part,  we 
dare  not  believe  that  God  is  affected  in  one  way 
when  He  works,  in  another  when  He  rests.  In¬ 
deed,  to  say  that  He  is  affected  at  all,  is  an  abuse 
of  language,  since  it  implies  that  there  comes  to 
be  something  in  His  nature  which  was  not  there 
before.  For  he  who  is  affected  is  acted  upon,  and 
whatever  is  acted  upon  is  changeable.  His  lei¬ 
sure,  therefore,  is  no  laziness,  indolence,  inac¬ 
tivity;  as  in  His  work  is  no  labour,  effort,  indus¬ 
try.  He  can  act  while  He  reposes,  and  repose 

*11  Cor.  10.  12.  Here  Augustine  follows  the  Greek,  and 
not  the  Vulgate. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


while  He  acts.  He  can  begin  a  new  work  with 
(not  a  new,  but)  an  eternal  design ;  and  what  He 
has  not  made  before.  He  does  not  now  begin  to 
make  because  He  repents  of  His  former  repose. 
But  when  one  speaks  of  His  former  repose  and 
subsequent  operation  (and  I  know  not  how  men 
can  understand  these  things),  this  “former”  and 
“subsequent”  are  applied  only  to  the  things  cre¬ 
ated,  which  formerly  did  not  exist  and  subse¬ 
quently  came  into  existence.  But  in  God  the 
former  purpose  is  not  altered  and  obliterated  by 
the  subsequent  and  different  purpose,  but  by  one 
and  the  same  eternal  and  unchangeable  will  He 
effected  regarding  the  things  He  created,  both 
that  formerly,  so  long  as  they  were  not,  they 
should  not  be,  and  that  subsequently,  when  they 
began  to  be,  they  should  come  into  existence. 
And  thus,  perhaps,  He  would  show,  in  a  very 
striking  way,  to  those  who  have  eyes  for  such 
things,  how  independent  He  is  of  what  He 
makes,  and  how  it  is  of  His  own  gratuitous  good¬ 
ness  He  creates,  since  from  eternity  He  dwelt 
without  creatures  in  no  less  perfect  a  blessed¬ 
ness. 

Chap.  18.  Against  those  who  assert  that  things 
that  are  infinite  cannot  he  comprehended  by 
the  knowledge  of  God 

As  for  their  other  assertion,  that  God’s  knowl¬ 
edge  cannot  comprehend  things  infinite,  it  only 
remains  for  them  to  affirm,  in  order  that  they 
may  sound  the  depths  of  their  impiety,  that  God 
does  not  know  all  numbers.  For  it  is  very  certain 
that  they  are  infinite;  since,  no  matter  of  what 
number  you  suppose  an  end  to  be  made,  this 
number  can  be,  I  will  not  say,  increased  by  the 
addition  of  one  more,  but  however  great  it  be, 
and  however  vast  be  the  multitude  of  which  it  is 
the  rational  and  scientific  expression,  it  can  still 
be  not  only  doubled,  but  even  multiplied.  More¬ 
over,  each  number  is  so  defined  by  its  own  prop¬ 
erties,  that  no  two  numbers  are  equal.  They  are 
therefore  both  unequal  and  different  from  one 
another;  and  while  they  are  simply  finite,  col¬ 
lectively  they  are  infinite.  Does  God,  therefore, 
not  know  numbers  on  account  of  this  infinity; 
and  does  His  knowledge  extend  only  to  a  certain 
height  in  numbers,  while  of  the  rest  He  is  igno¬ 
rant?  Who  is  so  left  to  himself  as  to  say  so?  Yet 
they  can  hardly  pretend  to  put  numbers  out  of 
the  question,  or  maintain  that  they  have  nothing 
to  do  with  the  knowledge  of  God;  for  Plato,1 
their  great  authority,  represents  God  as  framing 
the  world  on  numerical  principles :  and  in  our 
books  also  it  is  said  to  God,  “Thou  hast  ordered 
1In  the  Timceus. 


all  things  in  number,  and  measure,  and  weight.”2 
The  prophet  also  says,  “Who  bringeth  out  their 
host  by  number.”3  And  the  Saviour  says  in  the 
Gospel,  “The  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all 
numbered.”4  Far  be  it,  then,  from  us  to  doubt 
that  all  number  is  known  to  Him  “whose  under¬ 
standing,”  according  to  the  Psalmist,  “is  infi¬ 
nite.”5  The  infinity  of  number,  though  there  be 
no  numbering  of  infinite  numbers,  is  yet  not  in¬ 
comprehensible  by  Him  whose  understanding  is 
infinite.  And  thus,  if  everything  which  is  com¬ 
prehended  is  defined  or  made  finite  by  the  com¬ 
prehension  of  him  who  knows  it,  then  all  infinity 
is  in  some  ineffable  way  made  finite  to  God,  for 
it  is  comprehensible  by  His  knowledge.  Where¬ 
fore,  if  the  infinity  of  numbers  cannot  be  infi¬ 
nite  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  by  which  it  is 
comprehended,  what  are  we  poor  creatures  that 
we  should  presume  to  fix  limits  to  His  knowl¬ 
edge  and  say  that  unless  the  same  temporal 
thing  be  repeated  by  the  same  periodic  revolu¬ 
tions,  God  cannot  either  foreknow  His  creatures 
that  He  may  make  them,  or  know  them  when  He 
has  made  them?  God,  whose  knowledge  is  sim¬ 
ply  manifold,  and  uniform  in  its  variety,  com¬ 
prehends  all  incomprehensibles  with  so  incom¬ 
prehensible  a  comprehension  that,  though  He 
willed  always  to  make  His  later  works  novel  and 
unlike  what  went  before  them,  He  could  not 
produce  them  without  order  and  foresight,  nor 
conceive  them  suddenly,  but  by  His  eternal  fore¬ 
knowledge. 

Chap.  19.  Of  worlds  without  end ,  or  ages  of  ages 
I  do  not  presume  to  determine  whether  God 
does  so,  and  whether  these  times  which  are 
called  “ages  of  ages”  are  joined  together  in  a 
continuous  series,  and  succeed  one  another  with 
a  regulated  diversity,  and  leave  exempt  from 
their  vicissitudes  only  those  who  are  freed  from 
their  misery,  and  abide  without  end  in  a  blessed 
immortality;  or  whether  these  are  called  “ages 
of  ages,”  that  we  may  understand  that  the  ages 
remain  unchangeable  in  God’s  unwavering  wis¬ 
dom,  and  are  the  efficient  causes,  as  it  were,  of 
those  ages  which  are  being  spent  in  time.  Possi¬ 
bly  “ages”  is  used  for  “age,”  so  that  nothing  else 
is  meant  by  “ages  of  ages”  than  by  “age  of  age,” 
as  nothing  else  is  meant  by  “heavens  of  heav¬ 
ens”  than  by  “heaven  of  heaven.”  For  God 
called  the  firmament,  above  which  are  the  wa¬ 
ters,  “Heaven,”  and  yet  the  psalm  says,  “Let  the 
waters  that  are  above  the  heavens  praise  the 
name  of  the  Lord.”6  Which  of  these  two  mean- 

^isd.  11.  20.  3Isa.  40.  26.  4Matt.  io.  30. 

6Ps.  147.  5.  6Ps.  148.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XII.  18-20  355 


ings  we  are  to  attach  to  “ages  of  ages,”  or  wheth¬ 
er  there  is  not  some  other  and  better  meaning 
still,  is  a  very  profound  question;  and  the  sub¬ 
ject  we  are  at  present  handling  presents  no  ob¬ 
stacle  to  our  meanwhile  deferring  the  discussion 
of  it,  whether  we  may  be  able  to  determine  any¬ 
thing  about  it,  or  may  only  be  made  more  cau¬ 
tious  by  its  further  treatment,  so  as  to  be  de¬ 
terred  from  making  any  rash  affirmations  in  a 
matter  of  such  obscurity.  For  at  present  we  are 
disputing  the  opinion  that  affirms  the  existence 
of  those  periodic  revolutions  by  which  the  same 
things  are  always  recurring  at  intervals  of  time. 
Now,  whichever  of  these  suppositions  regarding 
the  “ages  of  ages”  be  the  true  one,  it  avails 
nothing  for  the  substantiating  of  those  cycles; 
for  whether  the  ages  of  ages  be  not  a  repetition 
of  the  same  world,  but  different  wTorlds  succeed¬ 
ing  one  another  in  a  regulated  connection,  the 
ransomed  souls  abiding  in  well-assured  bliss 
without  any  recurrence  of  misery,  or  whether 
the  ages  of  ages  be  the  eternal  causes  which  rule 
what  shall  be  and  is  in  time,  it  equally  follows 
that  those  cycles  which  bring  round  the  same 
things  have  no  existence;  and  nothing  more 
thoroughly  explodes  them  than  the  fact  of  the 
eternal  life  of  the  saints. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  impiety  of  those  who  assert 
that  the  souls  which  enfoy  true  and  perfect 
blessedness,  must  yet  again  and  again  in  these 
periodic  revolutions  return  to  labour  and  mis¬ 
ery 

What  pious  ears  could  bear  to  hear  that  after 
a  life  spent  in  so  many  and  severe  distresses  (if, 
indeed,  that  should  be  called  a  life  at  all  which 
is  rather  a  death,  so  utter  that  the  love  of  this 
present  death  makes  us  fear  that  death  which 
delivers  us  from  it),  that  after  evils  so  disas¬ 
trous  and  miseries  of  all  kinds  have  at  length 
been  expiated  and  finished  by  the  help  of  true  re¬ 
ligion  and  wisdom,  and  when  we  have  thus  at¬ 
tained  to  the  vision  of  God.  and  have  entered  in¬ 
to  blis^  by  the  contemplation  of  spiritual  light 
and  participation  in  His  unchangeable  immor¬ 
tality,  which  we  burn  to  attain — that  we  must  at 
some  time  lose  all  this,  and  that  they  who  do 
lose  it  are  cast  down  from  that  eternity,  truth, 
and  felicity  to  infernal  mortality  and  shameful 
foolishness,  and  are  involved  in  accursed  woes, 
in  -which  God  is  lost,  truth  held  in  detestation, 
and  happiness  sought  in  iniquitous  impurities? 
and  that  this  will  happen  endlessly  again  and 
again,  recurring  at  fixed  intervals,  and  in  regu¬ 
larly  returning  periods?  and  that  this  everlast¬ 
ing  and  ceaseless  revolution  of  definite  cycles, 


which  remove  and  restore  true  misery  and  de¬ 
ceitful  bliss  in  turn,  is  contrived  in  order  that 
God  may  be  able  to  know  His  own  works,  since 
on  the  one  hand  He  cannot  rest  from  creating 
and  on  the  other,  cannot  know  the  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  His  creatures,  if  He  always  makes  crea¬ 
tures?  Who,  I  say,  can  listen  to  such  things? 
Who  can  accept  or  suffer  them  to  be  spoken? 
Were  they  true,  it  were  not  only  more  prudent 
to  keep  silence  regarding  them,  but  even  (to  ex¬ 
press  myself  as  best  I  can)  it  were  the  part  of 
wisdom  not  to  know  them.  For  if  in  the  future 
world  we  shall  not  remember  these  things  and 
by  this  oblivion  be  blessed,  why  should  we  now 
increase  our  misery,  already  burdensome  enough, 
by  the  knowledge  of  them?  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  knowledge  of  them  will  be  forced  up¬ 
on  us  hereafter,  now  at  least  let  us  remain  in  ig¬ 
norance,  that  in  the  present  expectation  we  may 
enjoy  a  blessedness  which  the  future  reality  is 
not  to  bestow;  since  in  this  life  we  are  expecting 
to  obtain  life  everlasting,  but  in  the  world  to 
come  are  to  discover  it  to  be  blessed,  but  not 
everlasting. 

And  if  they  maintain  that  no  one  can  attain  to 
the  blessedness  of  the  world  to  come,  unless  in 
this  life  he  has  been  indoctrinated  in  those  cycles 
in  which  bliss  and  misery  relieve  one  another, 
how  do  they  avow  that  the  more  a  man  loves 
God,  the  more  readily  he  attains  to  blessedness 
— they  who  teach  what  paralyzes  love  itself? 
For  who  would  not  be  more  remiss  and  luke¬ 
warm  in  his  love  for  a  person  whom  he  thinks  he 
shall  be  forced  to  abandon,  and  whose  truth  and 
wisdom  he  shall  come  to  hate;  and  this.  too.  aft¬ 
er  he  has  quite  attained  to  the  utmost  and  most 
blissful  knowledge  of  Him  that  he  is  capable  of? 
Can  any  one  be  faithful  in  his  love,  even  to  a  hu¬ 
man  friend,  if  he  knows  that  he  is  destined  to 
become  his  enemy?  God  forbid  that  there  be 
any  truth  in  an  opinion  which  threatens  us  with 
a  real  misery  that  is  never  to  end.  but  is  often 
and  endlessly  to  be  interrupted  by  intervals  of 
fallacious  happiness.  For  what  happiness  can  be 
more  fallacious  and  false  than  that  in  whose 
blaze  of  truth  we  yet  remain  ignorant  that  we 
shall  be  miserable,  or  in  whose  most  secure  cita¬ 
del  we  yet  fear  that  we  shall  be  so?  For  if.  on 
the  one  hand,  we  are  to  be  ignorant  of  coming 
calamity,  then  our  present  misery  is  not  so 
short-sighted  for  it  is  assured  of  coming  bliss.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  disaster  that  threatens  is 
not  concealed  from  us  in  the  world  to  come, 
then  the  time  of  misery  which  is  to  be  at  last  ex¬ 
changed  for  a  state  of  blessedness,  is  spent  by 
the  soul  more  happily  than  its  time  of  happiness, 


356  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


which  is  to  end  in  a  return  to  misery.  And  thus 
our  expectation  of  unhappiness  is  happy,  but  of 
happiness  unhappy.  And  therefore,  as  we  here 
suffer  present  ills,  and  hereafter  fear  ills  that  are 
imminent,  it  were  truer  to  say  that  we  shall  al¬ 
ways  be  miserable  than  that  we  can  some  time 
be  happy. 

But  these  things  are  declared  to  be  false  by 
the  loud  testimony  of  religion  and  truth;  for 
religion  truthfully  promises  a  true  blessedness, 
of  which  we  shall  be  eternally  assured,  and 
which  cannot  be  interrupted  by  any  disaster. 
Let  us  therefore  keep  to  the  straight  path,  which 
is  Christ,  and,  with  Him  as  our  Guide  and  Sav¬ 
iour,  let  us  turn  away  in  heart  and  mind  from 
the  unreal  and  futile  cycles  of  the  godless.  Por¬ 
phyry,  Platonist  though  he  was,  abjured  the 
opinion  of  his  school  that  in  these  cycles  souls 
are  ceaselessly  passing  away  and  returning,  ei¬ 
ther  being  struck  with  the  extravagance  of  the 
idea,  or  sobered  by  his  knowledge  of  Christian¬ 
ity.  As  I  mentioned  in  the  tenth  book,1  he  pre¬ 
ferred  saying  that  the  soul,  as  it  had  been  ^sent 
into  the  world  that  it  might  know  evil  and  be 
purged  and  delivered  from  it,  was  never  again 
exposed  to  such  an  experience  after  it  had  once 
returned  to  the  Father.  And  if  he  abjured  the 
tenets  of  his  school,  how  much  more  ought  we 
Christians  to  abominate  and  avoid  an  opinion 
so  unfounded  and  hostile  to  our  faith?  But  hav¬ 
ing  disposed  of  these  cycles  and  escaped  out  of 
them,  no  necessity  compels  us  to  suppose  that 
the  human  race  had  no  beginning  in  time,  on  the 
ground  that  there  is  nothing  new  in  nature 
which,  by  I  know  not  what  cycles,  has  not  at 
some  previous  period  existed,  and  is  not  here¬ 
after  to  exist  again.  For  if  the  soul,  once  deliv¬ 
ered,  as  it  never  was  before,  is  never  to  return  to 
misery,  then  there  happens  in  its  experience 
something  which  never  happened  before;  and 
this,  indeed,  something  of  the  greatest  conse¬ 
quence,  to  wit,  the  secure  entrance  into  eternal 
felicity.  And  if  in  an  immortal  nature  there  can 
occur  a  novelty,  which  never  has  been,  nor  ever 
shall  be,  reproduced  by  any  cycle,  why  is  it  dis¬ 
puted  that  the  same  may  occur  in  mortal  na¬ 
tures?  If  they  maintain  that  blessedness  is  no 
new  experience  to  the  soul,  but  only  a  return  to 
that  state  in  which  it  has  been  eternally,  then  at 
least  its  deliverance  from  misery  is  something 
new,  since,  by  their  own  showing,  the  misery 
from  which  it  is  delivered  is  itself,  too,  a  new  ex¬ 
perience.  And  if  this  new  experience  fell  out  by 
accident,  and  was  not  embraced  in  the  order  of 
things  appointed  by  Divine  Providence,  then 

^hap.  30. 


where  are  those  determinate  and  measured  cy¬ 
cles  in  which  no  new  thing  happens,  but  all 
things  are  reproduced  as  they  were  before?  If, 
however,  this  new  experience  was  embraced  in 
that  providential  order  of  nature  (whether  the 
soul  was  exposed  to  the  evil  of  this  world  for  the 
sake  of  discipline,  or  fell  into  it  by  sin),  then  it 
is  possible  for  new  things  to  happen  which  never 
happened  before  and  which  yet  are  not  extrane¬ 
ous  to  the  order  of  nature.  And  if  the  soul  is  able 
by  its  own  imprudence  to  create  for  itself  a  new 
misery,  which  was  not  unforeseen  by  the  Divine 
Providence,  but  was  provided  for  in  the  order 
of  nature  along  with  the  deliverance  from  it, 
how  can  we,  even  with  all  the  rashness  of  hu¬ 
man  vanity,  presume  to  deny  that  God  can 
create  new  things — new  to  the  world,  but  not  to 
Him — which  He  never  before  created,  but  yet 
foresaw  from  all  eternity?  If  they  say  that  it  is 
indeed  true  that  ransomed  souls  return  no  more 
to  misery,  but  that  even  so  no  new  thing  hap¬ 
pens,  since  there  always  have  been,  now  are,  and 
ever  shall  be  a  succession  of  ransomed  souls, 
they  must  at  least  grant  that  in  this  case  there 
are  new  souls  to  whom  the  misery  and  the  de¬ 
liverance  from  it  are  new.  For  if  they  maintain 
that  those  souls  out  of  which  new  men  are  daily 
being  made  (from  whose  bodies,  if  they  have 
lived  wisely,  they  are  so  delivered  that  they  nev¬ 
er  return  to  misery)  are  not  new,  but  have  ex¬ 
isted  from  eternity,  they  must  logically  admit 
that  they  are  infinite.  For  however  great  a  finite 
number  of  souls  there  were,  that  would  not  have 
sufficed  to  make  perpetually  new  men  from 
eternity — men  whose  souls  were  to  be  eternally 
freed  from  this  mortal  state,  and  never  after¬ 
wards  to  return  to  it.  And  our  philosophers  will 
find  it  hard  to  explain  how  there  is  an  infinite 
number  of  souls  in  an  order  of  nature  which 
they  require  shall  be  finite,  that  it  may  be  known 
by  God. 

And  now  that  we  have  exploded  these  cycles 
which  were  supposed  to  bring  back  the  soul  at 
fixed  periods  to  the  same  miseries,  what  can 
seem  more  in  accordance  with  godly  reason  than 
to  believe  that  it  is  possible  for  God  both  to 
create  new  things  never  before  created,  and  in 
doing  so,  to  preserve  His  will  unaltered?  But 
whether  the  number  of  eternally  redeemed  souls 
can  be  continually  increased  or  not,  let  the  phi¬ 
losophers  themselves  decide,  who  are  so  subtle 
in  determining  where  infinity  cannot  be  admit¬ 
ted.  For  our  own  part,  our  reasoning  holds  in  ei¬ 
ther  case.  For  if  the  number  of  souls  can  be  in¬ 
definitely  increased,  what  reason  is  there  to 
deny  that  what  had  never  before  been  created, 


357 


THE  CITY  OF 

could  be  created?  since  the  number  of  ransomed 
souls  never  existed  before,  and  has  yet  not  only 
been  once  made,  but  will  never  cease  to  be  anew 
coming  into  being.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be 
more  suitable  that  the  number  of  eternally  ran¬ 
somed  souls  be  definite,  and  that  this  number 
will  never  be  increased,  yet  this  number,  what¬ 
ever  it  be,  did  assuredly  never  exist  before,  and 
it  cannot  increase,  and  reach  the  amount  it  sig¬ 
nifies,  without  having  some  beginning ;  and  this 
beginning  never  before  existed.  That  this  begin¬ 
ning,  therefore,  might  be,  the  first  man  was 
created. 

Chap.  21.  That  there  was  created  at  first  but 
one  individual,  and  that  the  human  race  was 
created  in  him 

Now  that  we  have  solved,  as  well  as  we  could, 
this  very  difficult  question  about  the  eternal 
God  creating  new  things,  without  any  novelty  of 
will,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  much  better  it  is  that 
God  was  pleased  to  produce  the  human  race 
from  the  one  individual  whom  He  created,  than 
if  He  had  originated  it  in  several  men.  For  as  to 
the  other  animals,  He  created  some  solitary,  and 
naturally  seeking  lonely  places — as  the  eagles, 
kites,  lions,  wolves,  and  such  like;  others  grega¬ 
rious,  which  herd  together,  and  prefer  to  live  in 
company — as  pigeons,  starlings,  stags,  and  little 
fallow  deer,  and  the  like:  but  neither  class  did 
He  cause  to  be  propagated  from  individuals,  but 
called  into  being  several  at  once.  Man,  on  the 
other  hand,  whose  nature  was  to  be  a  mean  be¬ 
tween  the  angelic  and  bestial,  He  created  in  such 
sort  that  if  he  remained  in  subjection  to  His 
Creator  as  his  rightful  Lord,  and  piously  kept 
His  Commandments,  he  should  pass  into  the 
company  of  the  angels,  and  obtain,  without  the 
intervention  of  death,1  a  blessed  and  endless  im¬ 
mortality;  but  if  he  offended  the  Lord  his  God 
by  a  proud  and  disobedient  use  of  his  free  will, 
he  should  become  subject  to  death,  and  live  as 
the  beasts  do — the  slave  of  appetite  and  doomed 
to  eternal  punishment  after  death.  And  there¬ 
fore  God  created  only  one  single  man,  not,  cer¬ 
tainly,  that  he  might  be  a  solitary,  bereft  of  all 
society,  but  that  by  this  means  the  unity  of  so¬ 
ciety  and  the  bond  of  concord  might  be  more 
effectually  commended  to  him,  men  being  bound 
together  not  only  by  similarity  of  nature,  but  by 
family  affection.  And  indeed  He  did  not  even 
create  the  woman  that  was  to  be  given  him  as 
his  wife,  as  he  created  the  man,  but  created  her 
out  of  the  man,  that  the  whole  human  race 
might  derive  from  one  man. 

1This  is  levelled  against  the  Pelagians. 


GOD  XII.  21-23 

Chap.  22.  That  God  foreknew  that  the  first  man 
would  sin,  and  that  he  at  the  same  time  fore - 
saw  how  large  a  multitude  of  godly  persons 
would  by  His  grace  be  translated  to  the  fel¬ 
lowship  of  the  angels 

And  God  was  not  ignorant  that  man  would 
sin,  and  that,  being  himself  made  subject  now  to 
death,  he  would  propagate  men  doomed  to  die, 
and  that  these  mortals  would  run  to  such  enor¬ 
mities  in  sin  that  even  the  beasts  devoid  of  ra¬ 
tional  will,  and  who  were  created  in  numbers 
from  the  waters  and  the  earth,  would  live  more 
securely  and  peaceably  with  their  own  kind  than 
men,  who  had  been  propagated  from  one  indi¬ 
vidual  for  the  very  purpose  of  commending 
concord.  For  not  even  lions  or  dragons  have 
ever  waged  with  their  kind  such  wars  as  men 
have  waged  with  one  another.  But  God  foresaw 
also  that  by  His  grace  a  people  would  be  called 
to  adoption,  and  that  they,  being  justified  by 
the  remission  of  their  sins,  would  be  united  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  holy  angels  in  eternal 
peace,  the  last  enemy,  death,  being  destroyed; 
and  He  knew  that  this  people  would  derive 
profit  from  the  consideration  that  God  had 
caused  all  men  to  be  derived  from  one,  for  the 
sake  of  showing  how  highly  He  prizes  unity  in  a 
multitude. 

Chap.  23.  Of  the  nature  of  the  human  soul 
created  in  the  image  of  God 
God,  then,  made  man  in  His  own  image.  For 
He  created  for  him  a  soul  endowed  with  reason 
and  intelligence,  so  that  he  might  excel  all  the 
creatures  of  earth,  air,  and  sea,  which  were  not 
so  gifted.  And  when  He  had  formed  the  man  out 
of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  had  willed  that  his 
soul  should  be  such  as  I  have  said — whether  He 
had  already  made  it,  and  now  by  breathing  im¬ 
parted  it  to  man,  or  rather  made  it  by  breathing, 
so  that  that  breath  which  God  made  by  breath¬ 
ing  (for  what  else  is  “to  breathe”  than  to  make 
breath?)  is  the  soul — He  made  also  a  wife  for 
him,  to  aid  him  in  the  work  of  generating  his 
kind,  and  her  He  formed  of  a  bone  taken  out  of 
the  man’s  side,  working  in  a  divine  manner.  For 
we  are  not  to  conceive  of  this  work  in  a  carnal 
fashion,  as  if  God  wrought  as  we  commonly  see 
artisans,  who  use  their  hands  and  material  fur¬ 
nished  to  them  that  by  their  artistic  skill  they 
may  fashion  some  material  object.  God’s  hand 
is  God’s  power;  and  He,  working  invisibly,  ef¬ 
fects  visible  results.  But  this  seems  fabulous 
rather  than  true  to  men,  who  measure  by  cus¬ 
tomary  and  everyday  works  the  power  and  wis- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


358 

dom  of  God,  whereby  He  understands  and  pro¬ 
duces  without  seeds  even  seeds  themselves;  and 
because  they  cannot  understand  the  things 
which  at  the  beginning  were  created,  they  are 
sceptical  regarding  them — as  if  the  very  things 
which  they  do  know  about  human  propagation, 
conceptions  and  births,  would  seem  less  incredi¬ 
ble  if  told  to  those  who  had  no  experience  of 
them ;  though  these  very  things,  too,  are  attrib¬ 
uted  by  many  rather  to  physical  and  natural 
causes  than  to  the  work  of  the  divine  mind. 

Chap.  24.  Whether  the  angels  can  he  said  to  be 
the  creators  of  any,  even  the  least  creature 
But  in  this  book  we  have  nothing  to  do  with 
those  who  do  not  believe  that  the  divine  mind 
made  or  cares  for  this  world.  As  for  those  who 
believe  their  own  Plato,  that  all  mortal  animals — 
among  whom  man  holds  the  pre-eminent  place, 
and  is  near  to  the  gods  themselves — were  cre¬ 
ated  not  by  that  most  high  God  Who  made  the 
world,  but  by  other  lesser  gods  created  by  the 
Supreme,  and  exercising  a  delegated  power  un¬ 
der  His  control — if  only  those  persons  be  deliv¬ 
ered  from  the  superstition  which  prompts  them 
to  seek  a  plausible  reason  for  paying  divine  hon¬ 
ours  and  sacrificing  to  these  gods  as  their  crea¬ 
tors,  they  will  easily  be  disentangled  also  from 
this  their  error.  For  it  is  blasphemy  to  believe  or 
to  say  (even  before  it  can  be  understood)  that 
any  other  than  God  is  creator  of  any  nature,  be 
it  never  so  small  and  mortal.  And  as  for  the  an¬ 
gels,  whom  those  Platonists  prefer  to  call  gods, 
although  they  do,  so  far  as  they  are  permitted 
and  commissioned,  aid  in  the  production  of  the 
things  around  us,  yet  not  on  that  account  are  we 
to  call  them  creators,  any  more  than  we  call 
gardeners  the  creators  of  fruits  and  trees. 

Chap.  25.  That  God  alone  is  the  Creator  of  ev¬ 
ery  kind  of  creature,  whatever  its  nature  or 
form 

For  whereas  there  is  one  form  which  is  given 
from  without  to  every  bodily  substance — such 
as  the  form  which  is  constructed  by  potters  and 
smiths,  and  that  class  of  artists  who  paint  and 
fashion  forms  like  the  body  of  animals — but  an¬ 
other  and  internal  form  which  is  not  itself  con¬ 
structed,  but,  as  the  efficient  cause,  produces 
not  only  the  natural  bodily  forms,  but  even  the 
life  itself  of  the  living  creatures,  and  which  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  the  secret  and  hidden  choice  of  an  in¬ 
telligent  and  living  nature — let  that  first-men¬ 
tioned  form  be  attributed  to  every  artificer,  but 
this  latter  to  one  only,  God,  the  Creator  and 
Originator  Who  made  the  world  itself  and  the 


angels,  without  the  help  of  world  or  angels.  For 
the  same  divine  and,  so  to  speak,  creative  ener¬ 
gy,  which  cannot  be  made,  but  makes,  and  which 
gave  to  the  earth  and  sky  their  roundness — this 
same  divine,  effective,  and  creative  energy  gave 
their  roundness  to  the  eye  and  to  the  apple;  and 
the  other  natural  objects  which  we  anywhere 
see,  received  also  their  form,  not  from  without, 
but  from  the  secret  and  profound  might  of  the 
Creator,  Who  said,  “Do  not  I  fill  heaven  and 
earth?”1  and  Whose  wisdom  it  is  that  “reacheth 
from  one  end  to  another  mightily;  and  sweetly 
doth  she  order  all  things.”2  Wherefore  I  know 
not  what  kind  of  aid  the  angels,  themselves  cre¬ 
ated  first,  afforded  to  the  Creator  in  making 
other  things.  I  cannot  ascribe  to  them  what  per¬ 
haps  they  cannot  do,  neither  ought  I  to  deny 
them  such  faculty  as  they  have.  But,  by  their 
leave,  I  attribute  the  creating  and  originating 
work  which  gave  being  to  all  natures  to  God,  to 
Whom  they  themselves  thankfully  ascribe  their 
existence.  We  do  not  call  gardeners  the  creators 
of  their  fruits,  for  we  read,  “Neither  is  he  that 
planteth  anything,  neither  he  that  watereth,  but 
God  that  giveth  the  increase.”3  Nay,  not  even 
the  earth  itself  do  we  call  a  creator,  though  she 
seems  to  be  the  prolific  mother  of  all  things 
which  she  aids  in  germinating  and  bursting  forth 
from  the  seed,  and  which  she  keeps  rooted  in  her 
own  breast;  for  we  likewise  read,  “God  giveth 
it  a  body,  as  it  hath  pleased  Him,  and  to  every 
seed  his  own  body.”4  We  ought  not  even  to  call 
a  woman  the  creatress  of  her  own  offspring;  for 
He  rather  is  its  creator  Who  said  to  His  servant, 
“Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  womb,  I  knew 
thee.”5  And  although  the  various  mental  emo¬ 
tions  of  a  pregnant  woman  do  produce  in  the 
fruit  of  her  womb  similar  qualities — as  Jacob 
with  his  peeled  wands  caused  piebald  sheep  to  be 
produced — yet  the  mother  as  little  creates  her 
offspring  as  she  created  herself.  Whatever  bod¬ 
ily  or  seminal  causes,  then,  may  be  used  for  the 
production  of  things,  either  by  the  co-operation 
of  angels,  men,  or  the  lower  animals,  or  by  sex¬ 
ual  generation ;  and  whatever  power  the  desires 
and  mental  emotions  of  the  mother  have  to  pro¬ 
duce  in  the  tender  and  plastic  foetus  correspond¬ 
ing  lineaments  and  colours;  yet  the  natures 
themselves,  which  are  thus  variously  affected, 
are  the  production  of  none  but  the  most  high 
God.  It  is  His  occult  power  which  pervades  all 
things,  and  is  present  in  all  without  being  con¬ 
taminated,  which  gives  being  to  all  that  is,  and 
modifies  and  limits  its  existence ;  so  that  without 

^er.  23.  24.  2Wisd.  8.  1.  8I  Cor.  3.  7. 

4I  Cor.  15.  38.  6Jer.  1.  5. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XII.  24-27  359 


Him  it  would  not  be  thus,  or  thus,  nor  would 
have  any  being  at  all.  If,  then,  in  regard  to  that 
outward  form  which  the  workman’s  hand  im¬ 
poses  on  his  work,  we  do  not  say  that  Rome  and 
Alexandria  were  built  by  masons  and  architects, 
but  by  the  kings  by  whose  will,  plan,  and  re¬ 
sources  they  were  built,  so  that  the  one  has 
Romulus,  the  other  Alexander,  for  its  founder; 
with  how  much  greater  reason  ought  we  to  say 
that  God  alone  is  the  Author  of  all  natures,  since 
He  neither  uses  for  His  work  any  material  which 
was  not  made  by  Him,  nor  any  workmen  who 
were  not  also  made  by  Him,  and  since,  if  He 
were,  so  to  speak,  to  withdraw  from  created 
things  His  creative  power,  they  would  straight¬ 
way  relapse  into  the  nothingness  in  which  they 
were  before  they  were  created?  ‘‘Before,”  I 
mean,  in  respect  of  eternity,  not  of  time.  For 
what  other  creator  could  there  be  of  time,  than 
He  who  created  those  things  whose  movements 
make  time?1 

Chap.  26.  Of  that  opinion  of  the  Platonists,  that 
the  angels  were  themselves  indeed  created  by 
Gody  but  that  afterwards  they  created  manfs 
body 

It  is  obvious,  that  in  attributing  the  creation 
of  the  other  animals  to  those  inferior  gods  who 
were  made  by  the  Supreme,  he  meant  it  to  be 
understood  that  the  immortal  part  was  taken 
from  God  Himself,  and  that  these  minor  crea¬ 
tors  added  the  mortal  part;  that  is  to  say,  he 
meant  them  to  be  considered  the  creators  of  our 
bodies,  but  not  of  our  souls.  But  since  Porphyry 
maintains  that  if  the  soul  is  to  be  purified,  all  en¬ 
tanglement  with  a  body  must  be  escaped  from ; 
and  at  the  same  time  agrees  with  Plato  and  the 
Platonists  in  thinking  that  those  who  have  not 
spent  a  temperate  and  honourable  life  return  to 
mortal  bodies  as  their  punishment  (to  bodies  of 
brutes  in  Plato’s  opinion,  to  human  bodies  in 
Porphyry’s);  it  follows  that  those  whom  they 
would  have  us  worship  as  our  parents  and  au¬ 
thors,  that  they  may  plausibly  call  them  gods, 
are,  after  all,  but  the  forgers  of  our  fetters  and 
chains — not  our  creators,  but  our  jailers  and 
turnkeys,  who  lock  us  up  in  the  most  bitter  and 
melancholy  house  of  correction.  Let  the  Plato¬ 
nists,  then,  either  cease  menacing  us  with  our 
bodies  as  the  punishment  of  our  souls,  or  preach¬ 
ing  that  we  are  to  worship  as  gods  those  whose 
work  upon  us  they  exhort  us  by  all  means  in  our 
power  to  avoid  and  escape  from.  But,  indeed, 
both  opinions  are  quite  false.  It  is  false  that 
souls  return  again  to  this  life  to  be  punished; 
1See  bk.  xi,  chap.  5. 


and  it  is  false  that  there  is  any  other  creator  of 
anything  in  heaven  or  earth,  then  He  Who  made 
the  heaven  and  the  earth.  For  if  we  live  in  a 
body  only  to  expiate  our  sins,  how  says  Plato  in 
another  place,  that  the  world  could  not  have 
been  the  most  beautiful  and  good,  had  it  not 
been  filled  with  all  kinds  of  creatures,  mor¬ 
tal  and  immortal?2  But  if  our  creation  even  as 
mortals  be  a  divine  benefit,  how  is  it  a  punish¬ 
ment  to  be  restored  to  a  body,  that  is,  to  a  di¬ 
vine  benefit?  And  if  God,  as  Plato  continually 
maintains,  embraced  in  His  eternal  intelligence 
the  ideas  both  of  the  universe  and  of  all  the  ani¬ 
mals,  how,  then,  should  He  not  with  His  own 
hand  make  them  all?  Could  He  be  unwilling  to 
be  the  constructor  of  works,  the  idea  and  plan 
of  which  called  for  His  ineffable  and  ineffably  to 
be  praised  intelligence? 

Chap.  27.  That  the  whole  plentitude  of  the  hu¬ 
man  race  was  embraced  in  the  first  man,  and 
that  God  there  saw  the  portion  of  it  which  was 
to  be  honoured  and  rewarded ,  and  that  which 
was  to  be  condemned  and  punished 
With  good  cause,  therefore,  does  the  true  re¬ 
ligion  recognize  and  proclaim  that  the  same  God 
who  created  the  universal  cosmos,  created  also 
all  the  animals,  souls  as  well  as  bodies.  Among 
the  terrestrial  animals  man  was  made  by  Him  in 
His  own  image,  and,  for  the  reason  I  have  given, 
was  made  one  individual,  though  he  was  not  left 
solitary.  For  there  is  nothing  so  social  by  nature, 
so  unsocial  by  its  corruption,  as  this  race.  And 
human  nature  has  nothing  more  appropriate, 
either  for  the  prevention  of  discord,  or  for  the 
healing  of  it,  where  it  exists,  than  the  remem¬ 
brance  of  that  first  parent  of  us  all,  whom  God 
was  pleased  to  create  alone,  that  all  men  might 
be  derived  from  one,  and  that  they  might  thus 
be  admonished  to  preserve  unity  among  their 
whole  multitude.  But  from  the  fact  that  the 
woman  was  made  for  him  from  his  side,  it  was 
plainly  meant  that  we  should  learn  how  dear  the 
bond  between  man  and  wife  should  be.  These 
works  of  God  do  certainly  seem  extraordinary, 
because  they  are  the  first  works.  They  who  do 
not  believe  them,  ought  not  to  believe  any  prodi¬ 
gies;  for  these  would  not  be  called  prodigies  did 
they  not  happen  out  of  the  ordinary  course  of 
nature.  But,  is  it  possible  that  anything  should 
happen  in  vain,  however  hidden  be  its  cause,  in 
so  grand  a  government  of  divine  providence? 
One  of  the  sacred  Psalmists  says,  “Come,  behold 
the  works  of  the  Lord,  what  prodigies  He  hath 
wrought  in  the  earth.”3  Why  God  made  woman 
2See  Timceus,  41.  3Ps.  46.  8. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


36° 

out  of  man’s  side,  and  what  this  first  prodigy 
prefigured,  I  shall,  with  God’s  help,  tell  in  an¬ 
other  place.  But  at  present,  since  this  book  must 
be  concluded,  let  us  merely  say  that  in  this  first 
man,  who  was  created  in  the  beginning,  there 
was  laid  the  foundation,  not  indeed  evidently, 
but  in  God’s  foreknowledge,  of  these  two  cities 
or  societies,  so  far  as  regards  the  human  race. 
For  from  that  man  all  men  were  to  be  derived — 


some  of  them  to  be  associated  with  the  good  an¬ 
gels  in  their  reward,  others  with  the  wicked  in 
punishment ;  all  being  ordered  by  the  secret  yet 
just  judgment  of  God.  For  since  it  is  written, 
“All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and 
truth,”1  neither  can  His  grace  be  unjust,  nor  His 
justice  cruel. 

Ts.  25.  10. 


BOOK  XIII 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  it  is  taught  that  death  is  penal,  and  had  its 

ORIGIN  IN  ADAM’S  SIN 


Chap.  i.  Of  the  fall  of  the  first  man ,  through 
which  mortality  has  been  contracted 
Having  disposed  of  the  very  difficult  ques¬ 
tions  concerning  the  origin  of  our  world  and  the 
beginning  of  the  human  race,  the  natural  order 
requires  that  we  now  discuss  the  fall  of  the  first 
man  (we  may  say  of  the  first  men),  and  of  the 
origin  and  propagation  of  human  death.  For  God 
had  not  made  man  like  the  angels,  in  such  a  con¬ 
dition  that,  even  though  they  had  sinned,  they 
could  none  the  more  die.  He  had  so  made  them, 
that  if  they  discharged  the  obligations  of  obe¬ 
dience,  an  angelic  immortality  and  a  blessed 
eternity  might  ensue,  without  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  death;  but  if  they  disobeyed,  death 
should  be  visited  on  them  with  just  sentence — 
which,  too,  has  been  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
book. 

Chap.  2.  Of  that  death  which  can  affect  an  im¬ 
mortal  soul ,  and  of  that  to  which  the  body  is 
subject 

But  I  see  I  must  speak  a  little  more  carefully 
of  the  nature  of  death.  For  although  the  human 
soul  is  truly  affirmed  to  be  immortal,  yet  it  also 
has  a  certain  death  of  its  own.  For  it  is  therefore 
called  immortal,  because,  in  a  sense,  it  does  not 
cease  to  live  and  to  feel;  while  the  body  is  called 
mortal,  because  it  can  be  forsaken  of  all  life, 
and  cannot  by  itself  live  at  all.  The  death,  then, 
of  the  soul  takes  place  when  God  forsakes  it,  as 
the  death  of  the  body  when  the  soul  forsakes  it. 
Therefore  the  death  of  both — that  is,  of  the 
whole  man — occurs  when  the  soul,  forsaken  by 
God,  forsakes  the  body.  For,  in  this  case,  nei¬ 
ther  is  God  the  life  of  the  soul,  nor  the  soul  the 
life  of  the  body.  And  this  death  of  the  whole 
man  is  followed  by  that  which,  on  the  author¬ 
ity  of  the  divine  oracles,  we  call  the  second 


death.  This  the  Saviour  referred  to  when  He 
said,  “Fear  Him  which  is  able  to  destroy  both 
soul  and  body  in  hell.”2  And  since  this  does  not 
happen  before  the  soul  is  so  joined  to  its  body 
that  they  cannot  be  separated  at  all,  it  may  be 
matter  of  wonder  how  the  body  can  be  said  to 
be  killed  by  that  death  in  which  it  is  not  for¬ 
saken  by  the  soul,  but,  being  animated  and  ren¬ 
dered  sensitive  by  it,  is  tormented.  For  in  that 
penal  and  everlasting  punishment,  of  which  in 
its  own  place  we  are  to  speak  more  at  large,  the 
soul  is  justly  said  to  die,  because  it  does  not  live 
in  connection  with  God;  but  how  can  we  say 
that  the  body  is  dead,  seeing  that  it  lives  by  the 
soul?  For  it  could  not  otherwise  feel  the  bodily 
torments  which  are  to  follow  the  resurrection. 
Is  it  because  life  of  every  kind  is  good,  and  pain 
an  evil,  that  we  decline  to  say  that  that  body 
lives,  in  which  the  soul  is  the  cause,  not  of  life, 
but  of  pain?  The  soul,  then,  lives  by  God  when 
it  lives  well,  for  it  cannot  live  well  unless  by  God 
working  in  it  what  is  good ;  and  the  body  lives  by 
the  soul  when  the  soul  lives  in  the  body,  whether 
itself  be  living  by  God  or  no.  For  the  wicked 
man’s  life  in  the  body  is  a  life  not  of  the  soul, 
but  of  the  body,  which  even  dead  souls — that  is, 
souls  forsaken  of  God — can  confer  upon  bodies, 
how  little  soever  of  their  own  proper  life,  by 
which  they  are  immortal,  they  retain.  But  in  the 
last  damnation,  though  man  does  not  cease  to 
feel,  yet  because  this  feeling  of  his  is  neither 
sweet  with  pleasure  nor  wholesome  with  repose, 
but  painfully  penal,  it  is  not  without  reason 
called  death  rather  than  life.  And  it  is  called  the 
second  death  because  it  follows  the  first,  which 
sunders  the  two  cohering  essences,  whether 
these  be  God  and  the  soul,  or  the  soul  and  the 
body.  Of  the  first  and  bodily  death,  then,  we 
may  say  that  to  the  good  it  is  good,  and  evil  to 
2Matt.  10.  28. 


THE  CITY  OF 

the  evil.  But,  doubtless,  the  second,  as  it  happens 
to  none  of  the  good,  so  it  can  be  good  for  none. 

Chap.  3.  Whether  death ,  which  by  the  sin  of  our 
first  parents  has  passed  upon  all  men ,  is  the 
punishment  of  sin ,  even  to  the  good 
But  a  question  not  to  be  shirked  arises: 
Whether  in  very  truth  death,  which  separates 
soul  and  body,  is  good  to  the  good?  For  if  it  be, 
how  has  it  come  to  pass  that  such  a  thing  should 
be  the  punishment  of  sin?  For  the  first  men 
would  not  have  suffered  death  had  they  not 
sinned.  How,  then,  can  that  be  good  to  the 
good,  which  could  not  have  happened  except  to 
the  evil?  Then,  again,  if  it  could  only  happen  to 
the  evil,  to  the  good  it  ought  not  to  be  good, 
but  non-existent.  For  why  should  there  be  any 
punishment  where  there  is  nothing  to  punish? 
Wherefore  we  must  say  that  the  first  men  were 
indeed  so  created  that  if  they  had  not  sinned, 
they  would  not  have  experienced  any  kind  of 
death;  but  that,  having  become  sinners,  they 
were  so  punished  with  death  that  whatsoever 
sprang  from  their  stock  should  also  be  punished 
with  the  same  death.  For  nothing  else  could  be 
born  of  them  than  that  which  they  themselves 
had  been.  Their  nature  was  deteriorated  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  greatness  of  the  condemnation 
of  their  sin,  so  that  what  existed  as  punishment 
in  those  who  first  sinned,  became  a  natural  con¬ 
sequence  in  their  children.  For  man  is  not  pro¬ 
duced  by  man,  as  he  was  from  the  dust.  For 
dust  was  the  material  out  of  which  man  was 
made:  man  is  the  parent  by  whom  man  is  be¬ 
gotten.  Wherefore  earth  and  flesh  are  not  the 
same  thing,  though  flesh  be  made  of  earth.  But 
as  man  the  parent  is,  such  is  man  the  offspring. 
In  the  first  man,  therefore,  there  existed  the 
whole  human  nature,  which  was  to  be  transmit¬ 
ted  by  the  woman  to  posterity,  when  that  con¬ 
jugal  union  received  the  divine  sentence  of  its 
own  condemnation;  and  what  man  was  made, 
not  when  created,  but  when  he  sinned  and  was 
punished,  this  he  propagated,  so  far  as  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  sin  and  death  are  concerned.  For  neither 
by  sin  nor  its  punishment  was  he  himself  re¬ 
duced  to  that  infantine  and  helpless  infirmity  of 
body  and  mind  which  we  see  in  children.  For 
God  ordained  that  infants  should  begin  the 
world  as  the  young  of  beasts  begin  it,  since  their 
parents  had  fallen  to  the  level  of  the  beasts  in 
the  fashion  of  their  life  and  of  their  death;  as  it 
is  written,  “Man  when  he  was  in  honour  under¬ 
stood  not;  he  became  like  the  beasts  that  have 
no  understanding.”1  Nay  more,  infants,  we  see, 

^s.  49.  12. 


GOD  XIII.  1-4  361 

are  even  feebler  in  the  use  and  movement  of 
their  limbs,  and  more  infirm  to  choose  and  re¬ 
fuse,  than  the  most  tender  offspring  of  other 
animals;  as  if  the  force  that  dwells  in  human  na¬ 
ture  were  destined  to  surpass  all  other  living 
things  so  much  the  more  eminently,  as  its  ener¬ 
gy  has  been  longer  restrained,  and  the  time  of 
its  exercise  delayed,  just  as  an  arrow  flies  the 
higher  the  further  back  it  has  been  drawn.  To 
this  infantine  imbecility  the  first  man  did  not  fall 
by  his  lawless  presumption  and  just  sentence; 
but  human  nature  was  in  his  person  vitiated  and 
altered  to  such  an  extent  that  he  suffered  in  his 
members  the  warring  of  disobedient  lust,  and 
became  subject  to  the  necessity  of  dying.  And 
what  he  himself  had  become  by  sin  and  punish¬ 
ment,  such  he  generated  those  whom  he  begot; 
that  is  to  say,  subject  to  sin  and  death.  And  if 
infants  are  delivered  from  this  bondage  of  sin 
by  the  Redeemer’s  grace,  they  can  suffer  only 
this  death  which  separates  soul  and  body;  but 
being  redeemed  from  the  obligation  of  sin,  they 
do  not  pass  to  that  second  endless  and  penal 
death. 

Chap.  4.  Why  death,  the  punishment  of  sin,  is 
not  withheld  from  those  who  by  the  grace  of 
regeneration  are  absolved  from  sin 
If,  moreover,  any  one  is  solicitous  about  this 
point,  how,  if  death  be  the  very  punishment  of 
sin,  they  whose  guilt  is  cancelled  by  grace  do  yet 
suffer  death,  this  difficulty  has  already  been  han¬ 
dled  and  solved  in  our  other  work  which  we 
have  written  on  the  baptism  of  infants.  There 
it  was  said  that  the  parting  of  soul  and  body  was 
left,  though  its  connection  with  sin  was  re¬ 
moved,  for  this  reason,  that  if  the  immortality 
of  the  body  followed  immediately  upon  the  sac¬ 
rament  of  regeneration,  faith  itself  would  be 
thereby  enervated.  For  faith  is  then  only  faith 
when  it  waits  in  hope  for  what  is  not  yet  seen  in 
substance.  And  by  the  vigour  and  conflict  of 
faith,  at  least  in  times  past,  was  the  fear  of 
death  overcome.  Specially  was  this  conspicuous 
in  the  holy  martyrs,  who  could  have  had  no  vic¬ 
tory,  no  glory,  to  whom  there  could  not  even 
have  been  any  conflict,  if,  after  the  laver  of  re¬ 
generation,  saints  could  not  suffer  bodily  death. 
Who  would  not,  then,  in  company  with  the  in¬ 
fants  presented  for  baptism,  run  to  the  grace  of 
Christ,  that  so  he  might  not  be  dismissed  from 
the  body?  And  thus  faith  would  not  be  tested 
with  an  unseen  reward;  and  so  would  not  even 
be  faith,  seeking  and  receiving  an  immediate 
recompense  of  its  works.  But  now,  by  the  great¬ 
er  and  more  admirable  grace  of  the  Saviour,  the 


362  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


punishment  of  sin  is  turned  to  the  service  of 
righteousness.  For  then  it  was  proclaimed  to 
man,  “If  thou  sinnest,  thou  shalt  die”;  now  it  is 
said  to  the  martyr,  “Die,  that  thou  sin  not.” 
Then  it  was  said,  “If  ye  transgress  the  com¬ 
mandments,  ye  shall  die”;  now  it  is  said,  “If  ye 
decline  death,  ye  transgress  the  commandment.” 
That  which  was  formerly  set  as  an  object  of 
terror,  that  men  might  not  sin,  is  now  to  be  un¬ 
dergone  if  we  would  not  sin.  Thus,  by  the  un¬ 
utterable  mercy  of  God,  even  the  very  punish¬ 
ment  of  wickedness  has  become  the  armour  of 
virtue,  and  the  penalty  of  the  sinner  becomes 
the  reward  of  the  righteous.  For  then  death  was 
incurred  by  sinning,  now  righteousness  is  ful¬ 
filled  by  dying.  In  the  case  of  the  holy  martyrs 
it  is  so;  for  to  them  the  persecutor  proposes  the 
alternative,  apostasy  or  death.  For  the  righteous 
prefer  by  believing  to  suffer  what  the  first  trans¬ 
gressors  suffered  by  not  believing.  For  unless 
they  had  sinned,  they  would  not  have  died ;  but 
the  martyrs  sin  if  they  do  not  die.  The  one  died 
because  they  sinned,  the  others  do  not  sin  be¬ 
cause  they  die.  By  the  guilt  of  the  first,  punish¬ 
ment  was  incurred;  by  the  punishment  of  the 
second,  guilt  is  prevented.  Not  that  death,  which 
was  before  an  evil,  has  become  something  good, 
but  only  that  God  has  granted  to  faith  this 
grace,  that  death,  which  is  the  admitted  oppo¬ 
site  to  life,  should  become  the  instrument  by 
which  life  is  reached. 

Chap.  5.  As  the  wicked  make  an  ill  use  of  the 
law,  which  is  good,  so  the  good  make  a  good 
use  of  death,  which  is  an  ill 
The  apostle,  wishing  to  show  how  hurtful  a 
thing  sin  is,  when  grace  does  not  aid  us,  has  not 
hesitated  to  say  that  the  strength  of  sin  is  that 
very  law  by  which  sin  is  prohibited.  “The  sting 
of  death  is  sin,  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the 
law.”1  Most  certainly  true;  for  prohibition  in¬ 
creases  the  desire  of  illicit  action,  if  righteous¬ 
ness  is  not  so  loved  that  the  desire  of  sin  is  con¬ 
quered  by  that  love.  But  unless  divine  grace  aid 
us,  we  cannot  love  nor  delight  in  true  righteous¬ 
ness.  But  lest  the  law  should  be  thought  to  be 
an  evil,  since  it  is  called  the  strength  of  sin,  the 
apostle,  when  treating  a  similar  question  in  an¬ 
other  place,  says,  “The  law  indeed  is  holy,  and 
the  commandment  holy,  and  just,  and  good. 
Was  then  that  which  is  holy  made  death  unto 
me?  God  forbid.  But  sin,  that  it  might  appear 
sin,  working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good; 
that  sin  by  the  commandment  might  become  ex¬ 
ceeding  sinful.”2  Exceeding,  he  says,  because 
ll  Cor.  15.  56.  2Rom.  7.  12,  13. 


the  transgression  is  more  heinous  when  through 
the  increasing  lust  of  sin  the  law  itself  also  is  de¬ 
spised.  Why  have  we  thought  it  worth  while  to 
mention  this?  For  this  reason,  because,  as  the 
law  is  not  an  evil  when  it  increases  the  lust  of 
those  who  sin,  so  neither  is  death  a  good  thing 
when  it  increases  the  glory  of  those  who  suffer 
it,  since  either  the  former  is  abandoned  wicked¬ 
ly,  and  makes  transgressors,  or  the  latter  is  em¬ 
braced  for  the  truth’s  sake,  and  makes  martyrs. 
And  thus  the  law  is  indeed  good,  because  it  is 
prohibition  of  sin,  and  death  is  evil  because  it  is 
the  wages  of  sin;  but  as  wicked  men  make  an 
evil  use  not  only  of  evil,  but  also  of  good  things, 
so  the  righteous  make  a  good  use  not  only  of 
good,  but  also  of  evil  things.  Whence  it  comes 
to  pass  that  the  wicked  make  an  ill  use  of  the 
law,  though  the  law  is  good ;  and  that  the  good 
die  well,  though  death  is  an  evil. 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  evil  of  death  in  general,  consid¬ 
ered  as  the  separation  of  sold  and  body 
Wherefore,  as  regards  bodily  death,  that  is, 
the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body,  it  is 
good  unto  none  while  it  is  being  endured  by 
those  whom  we  say  are  in  the  article  of  death. 
For  the  very  violence  with  which  body  and  soul 
are  wrenched  asunder,  which  in  the  living  had 
been  conjoined  and  closely  intertwined,  brings 
with  it  a  harsh  experience,  jarring  horridly  on 
nature  so  long  as  it  continues,  till  there  comes  a 
total  loss  of  sensation,  which  arose  from  the 
very  interpenetration  of  spirit  and  flesh.  And  all 
this  anguish  is  sometimes  forestalled  by  one 
stroke  of  the  body  or  sudden  flitting  of  the  soul, 
the  swiftness  of  which  prevents  it  from  being 
felt.  But  whatever  that  may  be  in  the  dying 
which  with  violently  painful  sensation  robs  of 
all  sensation,  yet,  when  it  is  piously  and  faith¬ 
fully  borne,  it  increases  the  merit  of  patience, 
but  does  not  make  the  name  of  punishment  in¬ 
applicable.  Death,  proceeding  by  ordinary  gen¬ 
eration  from  the  first  man,  is  the  punishment  of 
all  who  are  born  of  him,  yet,  if  it  be  endured  for 
righteousness’  sake,  it  becomes  the  glory  of 
those  who  are  born  again ;  and  though  death  be 
the  award  of  sin,  it  sometimes  secures  that  noth¬ 
ing  be  awarded  to  sin. 

Chap.  7.  Of  the  death  which  the  unbaptized 
suffer  for  the  confession  of  Christ 
For  whatever  unbaptized3  persons  die  con¬ 
fessing  Christ,  this  confession  is  of  the  same 
efficacy  for  the  remission  of  sins  as  if  they  were 
washed  in  the  sacred  font  of  baptism.  For  He 
3Literally,  “unregenerate.” 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIII.  5-0  363 


who  said,  “Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and 
of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God,”1  made  also  an  exception  in  their  fa¬ 
vour,  in  that  other  sentence  where  He  no  less 
absolutely  said,  “Whosoever  shall  confess  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven”;2  and  in  another 
place,  “Whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake, 
shall  find  it.”3  And  this  explains  the  verse,  “Pre¬ 
cious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His 
saints.”4  For  what  is  more  precious  than  a  death 
by  which  a  man’s  sins  are  all  forgiven,  and  his 
merits  increased  an  hundredfold?  For  those  who 
have  been  baptized  when  they  could  no  longer 
escape  death,  and  have  departed  this  life  with 
all  their  sins  blotted  out,  have  not  equal  merit 
with  those  who  did  not  defer  death,  though  it 
was  in  their  power  to  do  so,  but  preferred  to  end 
their  life  by  confessing  Christ,  rather  than  by 
denying  Him  to  secure  an  opportunity  of  bap¬ 
tism.  And  even  had  they  denied  Him  under  pres¬ 
sure  of  the  fear  of  death,  this  too  would  have 
been  forgiven  them  in  that  baptism,  in  which 
was  remitted  even  the  enormous  wickedness  of 
those  who  had  slain  Christ.  But  how  abundant 
in  these  men  must  have  been  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit,  Who  breathes  where  He  listeth,  seeing 
that  they  so  dearly  loved  Christ  as  to  be  unable 
to  deny  Him  even  in  so  sore- an  emergency,  and 
with  so  sure  a  hope  of  pardon!  Precious,  there¬ 
fore,  is  the  death  of  the  saints,  to  whom  the 
grace  of  Christ  has  been  applied  with  such  gra¬ 
cious  effects,  that  they  do  not  hesitate  to  meet 
death  themselves,  if  so  be  they  might  meet  Him. 
And  precious  is  it  also,  because  it  has  proved 
that  what  was  originally  ordained  for  the  pun¬ 
ishment  of  the  sinner,  has  been  used  for  the 
production  of  a  richer  harvest  of  righteousness. 
But  not  on  this  account  should  we  look  upon 
death  as  a  good  thing,  for  it  is  diverted  to  such 
useful  purposes,  not  by  any  virtue  of  its  own, 
but  by  the  divine  interference.  Death  was  ori¬ 
ginally  proposed  as  an  object  of  dread,  that  sin 
might  not  be  committed;  now  it  must  be  under¬ 
gone  that'sin  may  not  be  committed,  or,  if  com¬ 
mitted,  be  remitted,  and  the  award  of  righteous¬ 
ness  bestowed  on  him  whose  victory  has  earned 
it. 

Chap.  8.  That  the  saints y  by  suffering  the  first 

death  for  the  trutWs  sakey  are  freed  from  the 

second 

For  if  we  look  at  the  matter  a  little  more  care¬ 
fully,  we  shall  see  that  even  when  a  man  dies 

Tohn,  3.  5.  2Matt.  io.  32.  3Matt.  16.  25. 

4Ps.  116.  15. 


faithfully  and  laudably  for  the  truth’s  sake,  it  is 
still  death  he  is  avoiding.  For  he  submits  to  some 
part  of  death,  for  the  very  purpose  of  avoiding 
the  whole,  and  the  second  and  eternal  death 
over  and  above.  He  submits  to  the  separation  of 
soul  and  body,  lest  the  soul  be  separated  both 
from  God  and  from  the  body,  and  so  the  whole 
first  death  be  completed,  and  the  second  death 
receive  him  everlastingly.  Wherefore  death  is 
indeed,  as  I  said,  good  to  none  while  it  is  being 
actually  suffered,  and  while  it  is  subduing  the 
dying  to  its  power;  but  it  is  meritoriously  en¬ 
dured  for  the  sake  of  retaining  or  winning  what 
is  good.  And  regarding  what  happens  after 
death,  it  is  no  absurdity  to  say  that  death  is 
good  to  the  good,  and  evil  to  the  evil.  For  the 
disembodied  spirits  of  the  just  are  at  rest;  but 
those  of  the  wicked  suffer  punishment  till  their 
bodies  rise  again — those  of  the  just  to  life  ever¬ 
lasting,  and  of  the  others  to  death  eternal,  which 
is  called  the  second  death. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  we  should  say  that  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  death y  in  which  sensation  ceases y  oc¬ 
curs  in  the  experience  of  the  dying  or  in  that 
of  the  dead 

The  point  of  time  in  which  the  souls  of  the 
good  and  evil  are  separated  from  the  body,  are 
we  to  say  it  is  after  death,  or  in  death  rather? 
If  it  is  after  death,  then  it  is  not  death  which  is 
good  or  evil,  since  death  is  done  with  and  past, 
but  it  is  the  life  which  the  soul  has  now  entered 
on.  Death  was  an  evil  when  it  was  present,  that 
is  to  say,  when  it  was  being  suffered  by  the  dy¬ 
ing;  for  to  them  it  brought  with  it  a  severe  and 
grievous  experience,  which  the  good  make  a 
good  use  of.  But  when  death  is  past,  how  can 
that  which  no  longer  is  be  either  good  or  evil? 
Still  further,  if  we  examine  the  matter  more 
closely,  we  shall  see  that  even  that  sore  and 
grievous  pain  which  the  dying  experience  is  not 
death  itself.  For  so  long  as  they  have  any  sensa¬ 
tion,  they  are  certainly  still  alive;  and,  if  still 
alive,  must  rather  be  said  to  be  in  a  state  previ¬ 
ous  to  death  than  in  death.  For  when  death  ac¬ 
tually  comes,  it  robs  us  of  all  bodily  sensation, 
which,  while  death  is  only  approaching  is  pain¬ 
ful.  And  thus  it  is  difficult  to  explain  how  we 
speak  of  those  who  are  not  yet  dead,  but  are 
agonized  in  their  last  and  mortal  extremity,  as 
being  in  the  article  of  death.  Yet  what  else  can 
we  call  them  than  dying  persons?  for  when 
death  which  was  imminent  shall  have  actually 
come,  we  can  no  longer  call  them  dying  but 
dead.  No  one,  therefore,  is  dying  unless  living; 
since  even  he  who  is  in  the  last  extremity  of  life, 


364  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and,  as  we  say.  giving  up  the  ghost,  yet  lives. 
The  same  person  is  therefore  at  once  dying  and 
living,  but  drawing  near  to  death,  departing 
from  life;  yet  in  life,  because  his  spirit  yet 
abides  in  the  body;  not  yet  in  death,  because 
not  yet  has  his  spirit  forsaken  the  body.  But  if, 
when  it  has  forsaken  it,  the  man  is  not  even  then 
in  death,  but  after  death,  who  shall  say  when  he 
is  in  death?  On  the  one  hand,  no  one  can  be 
called  dying,  if  a  man  cannot  be  dying  and  liv¬ 
ing  at  the  same  time;  and  as  long  as  the  soul  is  in 
the  body,  we  cannot  deny  that  he  is  living.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  man  who  is  approaching 
death  be  rather  called  dying,  I  know  not  who  is 
living. 

Chap.  io.  Of  the  life  of  mortals ,  which  is  rather 
to  be  called  death  than  life 
For  no  sooner  do  we  begin  to  live  in  this  dying 
body,  than  we  begin  to  move  ceaselessly  to¬ 
wards  death.  For  in  the  whole  course  of  this  life 
(if  life  we  must  call  it)  its  mutability  tends  to¬ 
wards  death.  Certainly  there  is  no  one  who  is  not 
nearer  it  this  year  than  last  year,  and  to-morrow 
than  to-day,  and  to-day  than  yesterday,  and  a 
short  while  hence  than  now,  and  now  than  a 
short  while  ago.  For  whatever  time  we  live  is 
deducted  from  our  whole  term  of  life,  and  that 
which  remains  is  daily  becoming  less  and  less; 
so  that  our  whole  life  is  nothing  but  a  race  to¬ 
wards  death,  in  which  no  one  is  allowed  to  stand 
still  for  a  little  space,  or  to  go  somewhat  more 
slowly,  but  all  are  driven  forwards  with  an  im¬ 
partial  movement,  and  with  equal  rapidity.  For 
he  whose  life  is  short  spends  a  day  no  more 
swiftly  than  he  whose  life  is  longer.  But  while 
the  equal  moments  are  impartially  snatched 
from  both,  the  one  has  a  nearer  and  the  other  a 
more  remote  goal  to  reach  with  this  their  equal 
speed.  It  is  one  thing  to  make  a  longer  journey, 
and  another  to  walk  more  slowly.  He,  therefore, 
who  spends  longer  time  on  his  way  to  death  does 
not  proceed  at  a  more  leisurely  pace,  but  goes 
over  more  ground.  Further,  if  every  man  begins 
to  die,  that  is,  is  in  death,  as  soon  as  death  has 
begun  to  show  itself  in  him  (by  taking  away  life, 
to  wit;  for  when  life  is  all  taken  away,  the  man 
will  be  then  not  in  death;  but  after  death),  then 
he  begins  to  die  so  soon  as  he  begins  to  live.  For 
what  else  is  going  on  in  all  his  days,  hours,  and 
moments,  until  this  slow-working  death  is  fully 
consummated?  And  then  comes  the  time  after 
death ,  instead  of  that  in  which  life  was  being 
withdrawn,  and  which  we  called  being  in  death. 
Man,  then,  is  never  in  life  from  the  moment  he 


dwells  in  this  dying  rather  than  living  body,  if, 
at  least,  he  cannot  be  in  life  and  death  at  once. 
Or  rather,  shall  we  say,  he  is  in  both? — in  life, 
namely,  which  he  lives  till  all  is  consumed ;  but 
in  death  also,  which  he  dies  as  his  life  is  con¬ 
sumed?  For  if  he  is  not  in  life,  what  is  it  which 
is  consumed  till  all  be  gone?  And  if  he  is  not  in 
death,  what  is  this  consumption  itself?  For  when 
the  whole  of  life  has  been  consumed,  the  expres¬ 
sion  “after  death”  would  be  meaningless,  had 
that  consumption  not  been  death.  And  if,  when 
it  has  all  been  consumed,  a  man  is  not  in  death 
but  after  death,  when  is  he  in  death,  unless  when 
life  is  being  consumed  away? 

Chap.  ii.  Whether  one  can  both  be  living  and 

dead  at  the  same  time 

But  if  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  a  man  is  in 
death  before  he  reaches  death  (for  to  what  is  his 
course  running  as  he  passes  through  life,  if  al¬ 
ready  he  is  in  death?),  and  if  it  outrage  common 
usage  to  speak  of  a  man  being  at  once  alive  and 
dead,  as  much  as  it  does  so  to  speak  of  him  as  at 
once  asleep  and  awake,  it  remains  to  be  asked 
when  a  man  is  dying?  For,  before  death  comes, 
he  is  not  dying  but  living;  and  when  death  has 
come,  he  is  not  dying  but  dead.  The  one  is  be¬ 
fore,  the  other  after  death.  When,  then,  is  he  in 
death  so  that  we  can  say  he  is  dying?  For  as 
there  are  three  times,  before  death,  in  death,  aft¬ 
er  death,  so  there  are  three  states  correspond¬ 
ing,  living,  dying,  dead.  And  it  is  very  hard  to  de¬ 
fine  when  a  man  is  in  death  or  dying,  when  he  is 
neither  living,  which  is  before  death,  nor  dead, 
which  is  after  death,  but  dying,  which  is  in 
death.  For  so  long  as  the  soul  is  in  the  body, 
especially  if  consciousness  remain,  the  man  cer¬ 
tainly  lives;  for  body  and  soul  constitute  the 
man.  And  thus,  before  death,  he  cannot  be  said 
to  be  in  death,  but  when,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
soul  has  departed,  and  all  bodily  sensation  is  ex¬ 
tinct,  death  is  past,  and  the  man  is  dead.  Be¬ 
tween  these  two  states  the  dying  condition  finds 
no  place;  for  if  a  man  yet  lives,  death  has  not 
arrived;  if  he  has  ceased  to  live,  death  is  past. 
Never,  then,  is  he  dying,  that  is,  comprehended 
in  the  state  of  death.  So  also  in  the  passing  of 
time — you  try  to  lay  your  finger  on  the  present 
and  cannot  find  it,  because  the  present  occupies 
no  space,  but  is  only  the  transition  of  time  from 
the  future  to  the  past.  Must  we  then  conclude 
that  there  is  thus  no  death  of  the  body  at  all? 
For  if  there  is,  where  is  it,  since  it  is  in  no  one, 
and  no  one  can  be  in  it?  Since,  indeed,  if  there  is 
yet  life,  death  is  not  yet;  for  this  state  is  before 


THE  CITY  OF 

death,  not  in  death:  and  if  life  has  already 
ceased,  death  is  not  present ;  for  this  state  is  aft¬ 
er  death,  not  in  death.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
there  is  no  death  before  or  after,  what  do  we 
mean  when  we  say  “after  death/’  or  “before 
death”?  This  is  a  foolish  way  of  speaking  if 
there  is  no  death.  And  would  that  we  had  lived 
so  well  in  Paradise  that  in  very  truth  there  were 
now  no  death!  But  not  only  does  it  now  exist, 
but  so  grievous  a  thing  is  it,  that  no  skill  is  suf¬ 
ficient  either  to  explain  or  to  escape  it. 

Let  us,  then,  speak  in  the  customary  way — no 
man  ought  to  speak  otherwise — and  let  us  call 
the  time  before  death  comes,  “before  death”;  as 
it  is  written,  “Praise  no  man  before  his  death.”1 
And  when  it  has  happened,  let  us  say  that  “after 
death”  this  or  that  took  place.  And  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  time  let  us  speak  as  best  we  can,  as  when  we 
say,  “He.  when  dying,  made  his  will,  and  left 
this  or  that  to  such  and  such  persons” — though, 
of  course,  he  could  not  do  so  unless  he  were  liv¬ 
ing,  and  did  this  rather  before  death  than  in 
death.  And  let  us  use  the  same  phraseology  as 
Scripture  uses;  for  it  makes  no  scruple  of  saying 
that  the  dead  are  not  after  but  in  death.  So  that 
verse,  “For  in  death  there  is  no  remembrance  of 
thee.”2  For  until  the  resurrection  men  are  justly 
said  to  be  in  death;  as  every  one  is  said  to  be  in 
sleep  till  he  awakes.  However,  though  we  can 
say  of  persons  in  sleep  that  they  are  sleeping, 
we  cannot  speak  in  this  way  of  the  dead,  and  say 
they  are  dying.  For,  so  far  as  regards  the  death 
of  the  body,  of  which  we  are  now  speaking,  one 
cannot  say  that  those  who  are  already  separated 
from  their  bodies  continue  dying.  But  this,  you 
see,  is  just  what  I  was  saying — that  no  words 
can  explain  how  either  the  dying  are  said  to  live, 
or  how  the  dead  are  said,  even  after  death,  to  be 
in  death.  For  how  can  they  be  after  death  if  they 
be  in  death,  especially  when  we  do  not  even  call 
them  dying,  as  we  call  those  in  sleep,  sleeping; 
and  those  in  languor,  languishing;  and  those  in 
grief,  grieving;  and  those  in  life,  living?  And  yet 
the  dead,  until  they  rise  again,  are  said  to  be  in 
death,  but  cannot  be  called  dying. 

And  therefore  I  think  it  has  not  unsuitably 
nor  inappropriately  come  to  pass,  though  not  by 
the  intention  of  man,  yet  perhaps  with  divine 
purpose,  that  this  Latin  word  moritur  cannot  be 
declined  by  the  grammarians  according  to  the 
rule  followed  by  similar  wTords.  For  oritur  gives 
the  form  ortus  est  for  the  perfect;  and  all  sim¬ 
ilar  verbs  form  this  tense  from  their  perfect 
participles.  But  if  we  ask  the  perfect  of  moritur y 

lEcclus.  ii.  28.  2Ps.  6.  5. 


GOD  XIII.  10-12  365 

we  get  the  regular  answer  mortuus  est ,  with  a 
double  u.  For  thus  mortuus  is  pronounced,  like 
fatuus,  arduus ,  conspicuus,  and  similar  words, 
which  are  not  perfect  participles  but  adjectives, 
and  are  declined  without  regard  to  tense.  But 
mortuus,  though  in  form  an  adjective,  is  used  as 
perfect  participle,  as  if  that  were  to  be  declined 
which  cannot  be  declined;  and  thus  it  has  suit¬ 
ably  come  to  pass  that,  as  the  thing  itself  can¬ 
not  in  point  of  fact  be  declined,  so  neither  can 
the  word  significant  of  the  act  be  declined.  Yet. 
by  the  aid  of  our  Redeemer’s  grace,  we  may 
manage  at  least  to  decline  the  second.  For  that 
is  more  grievous  still,  and,  indeed,  of  all  evils  the 
worst,  since  it  consists  not  in  the  separation  of 
soul  and  body,  but  in  the  uniting  of  both  in 
death  eternal.  And  there,  in  striking  contrast  to 
our  present  conditions,  men  will  not  be  before 
or  after  death,  but  always  in  death;  and  thus 
never  living,  never  dead,  but  endlessly  dying. 
And  never  can  a  man  be  more  disastrously  in 
death  than  when  death  itself  shall  be  death¬ 
less. 

Chap.  12.  What  death  God  intended,  when  He 
threatened  our  first  parents  with  death  if  they 
should  disobey  His  comma?idment 
When,  therefore,  it  is  asked  what  death  it  was 
with  which  God  threatened  our  first  parents  if 
they  should  transgress  the  commandment  they 
had  received  from  Him  and  should  fail  to  pre¬ 
serve  their  obedience — whether  it  was  the  death 
of  soul,  or  of  body,  or  of  the  whole  man,  or  that 
which  is  called  second  death — we  must  answer, 
“It  is  all.”  For  the  first  consists  of  two;  the  sec¬ 
ond  is  the  complete  death,  which  consists  of  all. 
For,  as  the  whole  earth  consists  of  many  lands, 
and  the  Church  universal  of  many  churches,  so 
death  universal  consists  of  all  deaths.  The  first 
consists  of  two,  one  of  the  body,  and  another  of 
the  soul.  So  that  the  first  death  is  a  death  of  the 
whole  man,  since  the  soul  without  God  and  with¬ 
out  the  body  suffers  punishment  for  a  time;  but 
the  second  is  when  the  soul,  without  God  but 
with  the  body,  suffers  punishment  everlasting. 
When,  therefore,  God  said  to  that  first  man 
whom  he  had  placed  in  Paradise,  referring  to  the 
forbidden  fruit,  “In  the  day  that  thou  eatest 
thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die,”3  that  threatening 
included  not  only  the  first  part  of  the  first  death, 
by  which  the  soul  is  deprived  of  God;  nor  only 
the  subsequent  part  of  the  first  death,  by  which 
the  body  is  deprived  of  the  soul;  nor  only  the 
whole  first  death  itself,  by  which  the  soul  is 
3Gen.  2.  17. 


366  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


punished  in  separation  from  God  and  from  the 
body;  but  it  includes  whatever  of  death  there 
is,  even  to  that  final  death  which  is  called  sec¬ 
ond,  and  to  which  none  is  subsequent. 

Chap.  13.  What  was  the  first  punishment  of  the 
transgression  of  our  first  parents? 

For,  as  soon  as  our  first  parents  had  trans¬ 
gressed  the  commandment,  divine  grace  forsook 
them,  and  they  were  confounded  at  their  own 
wickedness;  and  therefore  they  took  fig-leaves 
(which  were  possibly  the  first  that  came  to  hand 
in  their  troubled  state  of  mind),  and  covered 
their  shame;  for  though  their  members  re¬ 
mained  the  same,  they  had  shame  now  where 
they  had  none  before.  They  experienced  a  new 
motion  of  their  flesh,  which  had  become  disobe¬ 
dient  to  them,  in  strict  retribution  of  their  own 
disobedience  to  God.  For  the  soul,  revelling  in 
its  own  liberty  and  scorning  to  serve  God,  was 
itself  deprived  of  the  command  it  had  formerly 
maintained  over  the  body.  And  because  it  had 
willfully  deserted  its  superior  Lord,  it  no  longer 
held  its  own  inferior  servant;  neither  could  it 
hold  the  flesh  subject,  as  it  would  always  have 
been  able  to  do  had  it  remained  itself  subject  to 
God.  Then  began  the  flesh  to  lust  against  the 
Spirit,1  in  which  strife  we  are  born,  deriv¬ 
ing  from  the  first  transgression  a  seed  of  death, 
and  bearing  in  our  members,  and  in  our  vitiat¬ 
ed  nature,  the  contest  or  even  victory  of  the 
flesh. 

Chap.  14.  In  what  state  man  was  made  by  God, 
and  into  what  estate  he  fell  by  the  choice  of 
his  own  will 

For  God,  the  author  of  natures,  not  of  vices, 
created  man  upright ;  but  man,  being  of  his  own 
will  corrupted  and  justly  condemned,  begot  cor¬ 
rupted  and  condemned  children.  For  we  all  were 
in  that  one  man,  since  we  all  were  that  one  man. 
who  fell  into  sin  by  the  woman  who  was  made 
from  him  before  the  sin.  For  not  yet  was  the 
particular  form  created  and  distributed  to  us,  in 
which  we  as  individuals  were  to  live,  but  already 
the  seminal  nature  was  there  from  which  we 
were  to  be  propagated;  and  this  being  vitiated 
by  sin,  and  bound  by  the  chain  of  death,  and 
justly  condemned,  man  could  not  be  born  of 
man  in  any  other  state.  And  thus,  from  the  bad 
use  of  free  will,  there  originated  the  whole  train 
of  evil,  which,  with  its  concatenation  of  miser¬ 
ies,  convoys  the  human  race  from  its  depraved 
origin,  as  from  a  corrupt  root,  on  to  the  destruc- 
!Gal.  5.  17. 


tion  of  the  second  death,  which  has  no  end, 
those  only  being  excepted  who  are  freed  by  the 
grace  of  God. 

Chap.  15.  That  Adam  in  his  sin  forsook  God  ere 
God  forsook  him,  and  that  his  falling  away 
from  God  was  the  first  death  of  the  soul 
It  may  perhaps  be  supposed  that  because  God 
said.“Ye  shall  die  the  death,”2  and  not  “deaths,” 
we  should  understand  only  that  death  which  oc¬ 
curs  when  the  soul  is  deserted  by  God.  Who  is  its 
life;  for  it  was  not  deserted  by  God,  and  so  de¬ 
serted  Him.  but  deserted  Him.  and  so  was  de¬ 
serted  by  Him.  For  its  own  will  was  the  origina¬ 
tor  of  its  evil,  as  God  was  the  originator  of  its 
motions  towards  good,  both  in  making  it  when  it 
was  not  and  in  remaking  it  when  it  had  fallen 
and  perished.  But  though  we  suppose  that  God 
meant  only  this  death,  and  that  the  words,  “In 
the  day  ye  eat  of  it  ye  shall  die  the  death,” 
should  be  understood  as  meaning,  “In  the  day 
ye  desert  me  in  disobedience,  I  will  desert  you 
in  justice,”  yet  assuredly  in  this  death  the  other 
deaths  also  were  threatened,  which  were  its  in¬ 
evitable  consequence.  For  in  the  first  stirring  of 
the  disobedient  motion  which  was  felt  in  the 
flesh  of  the  disobedient  soul,  and  which  caused 
our  first  parents  to  cover  their  shame,  one  death 
indeed  is  experienced,  that,  namely,  which  oc¬ 
curs  when  God  forsakes  the  soul.  (This  was  in¬ 
timated  by  the  words  He  uttered,  when  the  man, 
stupefied  by  fear,  had  hid  himself,  “Adam, 
where  art  thou?”3 — words  which  He  used  not  in 
ignorance  or  inquiry,  but  warning  him  to  consid¬ 
er  where  he  was,  since  God  was  not  with  him.) 
But  when  the  soul  itself  forsook  the  body,  cor¬ 
rupted  and  decayed  with  age,  the  other  death 
was  experienced  of  which  God  had  spoken  in 
pronouncing  man’s  sentence,  “Earth  thou  art, 
and  unto  earth  shalt  thou  return.”4  And  of  these 
two  deaths  that  first  death  of  the  whole  man  is 
composed.  And  this  first  death  is  finally  followed 
by  the  second,  unless  man  be  freed  by  grace. 
For  the  body  would  not  return  to  the  earth  from 
which  it  was  made,  save  only  by  the  death  prop¬ 
er  to  itself,  which  occurs  when  it  is  forsaken  of 
the  soul,  its  life.  And  therefore  it  is  agreed 
among  all  Christians  who  truthfully  hold  the 
Catholic  faith  that  we  are  subject  to  the  death  of 
the  body,  not  by  the  law  of  nature,  by  which 
God  ordained  no  death  for  man,  but  by  His 
righteous  infliction  on  account  of  sin;  for  God, 
taking  vengeance  on  sin,  said  to  the  man,  in 
whom  we  all  then  were,  “Dust  thou  art,  and  unto 
dust  shalt  thou  return.” 

2Gen.  2.  17.  3Gen.  3.  9.  4Gen.  3.  19. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  16.  Concerning  the  philosophers  who 
think  that  the  separation  of  soul  and  body  is 
not  penal,  though  Plato  represents  the  Su¬ 
preme  Deity  as  promising  to  the  inferior  gods 
that  they  shall  never  be  dismissed  from  their 
bodies 

But  the  philosophers  against  whom  we  are  de¬ 
fending  the  city  of  God,  that  is,  His  Church, 
seem  to  themselves  to  have  good  cause  to  deride 
us,  because  we  say  that  the  separatk>n  of  the 
soul  from  the  body  is  to  be  held  as  part  of  man’s 
punishment.  For  they  suppose  that  the  blessed¬ 
ness  of  the  soul  then  only  is  complete,  when  it  is 
quite  denuded  of  the  body,  and  returns  to  God 
a  pure  and  simple,  and,  as  it  were,  naked  soul. 
On  this  point,  if  I  should  find  nothing  in  their 
own  literature  to  refute  this  opinion,  I  should  be 
forced  laboriously  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  not 
the  body,  but  the  corruptibility  of  the  body, 
which  is  a  burden  to  the  soul.  Hence  that  sen¬ 
tence  of  Scripture  we  quoted  in  a  foregoing 
book,  “For  the  corruptible  body  presseth  down 
the  soul.”1  The  word  corruptible  is  added  to 
show  that  the  soul  is  burdened,  not  by  any  body 
whatsoever,  but  by  the  body  such  as  it  has  be¬ 
come  in  consequence  of  sin.  And  even  though 
the  word  had  not  been  added,  we  could  under¬ 
stand  nothing  else.  But  when  Plato  most  ex¬ 
pressly  declares  that  the  gods  who  are  made  by 
the  Supreme  have  immortal  bodies,  and  when  he 
introduces  their  Maker  himself,  promising  them 
as  a  great  boon  that  they  should  abide  in  their 
bodies  eternally,  and  never  by  any  death  be 
loosed  from  them,  why  do  these  adversaries  of 
ours,  for  the  sake  of  troubling  the  Christian 
faith,  feign  to  be  ignorant  of  what  they  quite 
well  know,  and  even  prefer  to  contradict  them¬ 
selves  rather  than  lose  an  opportunity  of  contra¬ 
dicting  us?  Here  are  Plato’s  words,  as  Cicero 
has  translated  them,2  in  which  he  introduces  the 
Supreme  addressing  the  gods  He  had  made,  and 
saying,  “Ye  who  are  sprung  from  a  divine  stock, 
consider  of  what  works  I  am  the  parent  and  au¬ 
thor.  These  (your  bodies)  are  indestructible  so 
long  as  I  will  it;  although  all  that  is  composed 
can  be  destroyed.  But  it  is  wicked  to  dissolve 
what  reason  has  compacted.  But,  seeing  that  ye 
have  been  born,  ye  cannot  indeed  be  immortal 
and  indestructible;  yet  ye  shall  by  no  means  be 
destroyed,  nor  shall  any  fates  consign  you  to 
death,  and  prove  superior  to  my  will,  which  is 
a  stronger  assurance  of  your  perpetuity  than 
those  bodies  to  which  ye  were  joined  when  ye 
were  born.”  Plato,  you  see,  says  that  the  gods 
1Wisd.  9.  15.  2Part  of  the  Timaus. 


GOD  XIII.  13-17  367 

are  both  mortal  by  the  connection  of  the  body 
and  soul,  and  yet  are  rendered  immortal  by  the 
will  and  decree  of  their  Maker.  If,  therefore,  it 
is  a  punishment  to  the  soul  to  be  connected  with 
any  body  whatever,  why  does  God  address  them 
as  if  they  were  afraid  of  death,  that  is,  of  the 
separation  of  soul  and  body?  Why  does  He  seek 
to  reassure  them  by  promising  them  immortal¬ 
ity,  not  in  virtue  of  their  nature,  which  is  com¬ 
posite  and  not  simple,  but  by  virtue  of  His  in¬ 
vincible  will,  whereby  He  can  effect  that  neither 
things  born  die,  nor  things  compounded  be  dis¬ 
solved,  but  preserved  eternally? 

Whether  this  opinion  of  Plato’s  about  the 
stars  is  true  or  not,  is  another  question.  For  we 
cannot  at  once  grant  to  him  that  these  luminous 
bodies  or  globes,  which  by  day  and  night  shine 
on  the  earth  with  the  light  of  their  bodily  sub¬ 
stance,  have  also  intellectual  and  blessed  souls 
which  animate  each  its  own  body,  as  he  confi¬ 
dently  affirms  of  the  universe  itself,  as  if  it  were 
one  huge  animal,  in  which  all  other  animals  were 
contained.3  But  this,  as  I  said,  is  another  ques¬ 
tion,  which  we  have  not  undertaken  to  discuss 
at  present.  This  much  only  I  deemed  right  to 
bring  forward,  in  opposition  to  those  who  so 
pride  themselves  on  being,  or  on  being  called 
Platonists,  that  they  blush  to  be  Christians,  and 
who  cannot  brook  to  be  called  by  a  name  which 
the  common  people  also  bear,  lest  they  vulgarize 
the  philosophers’  coterie,  which  is  proud  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  its  exclusiveness.  These  men,  seeking 
a  weak  point  in  the  Christian  doctrine,  select  for 
attack  the  eternity  of  the  body,  as  if  it  were  a 
contradiction  to  contend  for  the  blessedness  of 
the  soul,  and  to  wish  it  to  be  always  resident  in 
the  body,  bound,  as  it  were,  in  a  lamentable 
chain ;  and  this  although  Plato,  their  own  found¬ 
er  and  master,  affirms  that  it  was  granted  by  the 
Supreme  as  a  boon  to  the  gods  He  had  made, 
that  they  should  not  die,  that  is,  should  not  be 
separated  from  the  bodies  with  which  He  had 
connected  them. 

Chap.  17.  Against  those  who  affirm  that  earthly 
bodies  cannot  be  made  incorruptible  and  eter¬ 
nal 

These  same  philosophers  further  contend  that 
terrestrial  bodies  cannot  be  eternal,  though  they 
make  no  doubt  that  the  whole  earth,  which  is  it¬ 
self  the  central  member  of  their  god — not,  in¬ 
deed,  of  the  greatest,  but  yet  of  a  great  god,  that 
is,  of  this  whole  world — is  eternal.  Since,  then, 
the  Supreme  made  for  them  another  god,  that 
is,  this  world,  superior  to  the  other  gods  beneath 
3See  Plato,  Timoeus,  34,  39. 


368  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Him ;  and  since  they  suppose  that  this  god  is  an 
animal,  having,  as  they  affirm,  a  rational  or  in¬ 
tellectual  soul  enclosed  in  the  huge  mass  of  its 
body,  and  having,  as  the  fitly  situated  and  ad¬ 
justed  members  of  its  body,  the  four  elements, 
whose  union  they  wish  to  be  indissoluble  and 
eternal,  lest  perchance  this  great  god  of  theirs 
might  some  day  perish;  what  reason  is  there 
that  the  earth,  which  is  the  central  member  in 
the  body  of  a  greater  creature,  should  be  eter¬ 
nal,  and  the  bodies  of  other  terrestrial  creatures 
should  not  possibly  be  eternal  if  God  should  so 
will  it?  But  earth,  say  they,  must  return  to 
earth,  out  of  which  the  terrestrial  bodies  of  the 
animals  have  been  taken.  For  this,  they  say,  is 
the  reason  of  the  necessity  of  their  death  and 
dissolution,  and  this  the  manner  of  their  restora¬ 
tion  to  the  solid  and  eternal  earth  whence  they 
came.  But  if  any  one  says  the  same  thing  of  fire, 
holding  that  the  bodies  which  are  derived  from 
it  to  make  celestial  beings  must  be  restored  to 
the  universal  fire,  does  not  the  immortality 
which  Plato  represents  these  gods  as  receiving 
from  the  Supreme  evanesce  in  the  heat  o-f  this 
dispute?  Or  does  this  not  happen  with  those  ce¬ 
lestials  because  God,  whose  will,  as  Plato  says, 
overpowers  all  powers,  has  willed  it  should  not 
be  so?  What,  then,  hinders  God  from  ordaining 
the  same  of  terrestrial  bodies?  And  since,  in¬ 
deed,  Plato  acknowledges  that  God  can  prevent 
things  that  are  born  from  dying,  and  things  that 
are  joined  from  being  sundered,  and  things  that 
are  composed  from  being  dissolved,  and  can  or¬ 
dain  that  the  souls  once  allotted  to  their  bodies 
should  never  abandon  them,  but  enjoy  along 
with  them  immortality  and  everlasting  bliss, 
why  may  He  not  also  effect  that  terrestrial  bod¬ 
ies  die  not?  Is  God  powerless  to  do  everything 
that  is  special  to  the  Christian’s  creed,  but  pow¬ 
erful  to  effect  everything  the  Platonists  desire? 
The  philosophers,  forsooth,  have  been  admit¬ 
ted  to  a  knowledge  of  the  divine  purposes  and 
power  which  has  been  denied  to  the  prophets! 
The  truth  is,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  taught  His 
prophets  so  much  of  His  will  as  He  thought  fit 
to  reveal,  but  the  philosophers,  in  their  efforts 
to  discover  it,  were  deceived  by  human  conjec¬ 
ture. 

But  they  should  not  have  been  so  led  astray, 
I  will  not  say  by  their  ignorance,  but  by  their 
obstinacy,  as  to  contradict  themselves  so  fre¬ 
quently;  for  they  maintain,  with  all  their  vaunt¬ 
ed  might,  that  in  order  to  the  happiness  of  the 
soul,  it  must  abandon  not  only  its  earthly  body, 
but  every  kind  of  body.  And  yet  they  hold  that 
the  gods,  whose  souls  are  most  blessed,  are 


bound  to  everlasting  bodies,  the  celestials  to 
fiery  bodies,  and  the  soul  of  Jove  himself  (or 
this  world,  as  they  would  have  us  believe)  to  all 
the  physical  elements  which  compose  this  entire 
mass  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven.  For  this 
soul  Plato  believes  to  be  extended  and  diffused 
by  musical  numbers,  from  the  middle  of  the  in¬ 
side  of  the  earth,  which  geometricians  call  the 
centre,  outwards  through  all  its  parts  to  the  ut¬ 
most  heights  and  extremities  of  the  heavens;  so 
that  this  world  is  a  very  great  and  blessed  im¬ 
mortal  animal,  whose  soul  has  both  the  perfect 
blessedness  of  wisdom,  and  never  leaves  its  own 
body,  and  whose  body  has  life  everlasting  from 
the  soul,  and  by  no  means  clogs  or  hinders  it, 
though  itself  be  not  a  simple  body,  but  compact¬ 
ed  of  so  many  and  so  huge  materials.  Since, 
therefore,  they  allow  so  much  to  their  own  con¬ 
jectures,  why  do  they  refuse  to  believe  that  by 
the  divine  will  and  power  immortality  can  be 
conferred  on  earthly  bodies,  in  which  the  souls 
would  be  neither  oppressed  with  the  burden  of 
them,  nor  separated  from  them  by  any  death, 
but  live  eternally  and  blessedly?  Do  they  not  as¬ 
sert  that  their  own  gods  so  live  in  bodies  of  fire, 
and  that  Jove  himself,  their  king,  so  lives  in  the 
physical  elements?  If,  in  order  to  its  blessed¬ 
ness,  the  soul  must  quit  every  kind  of  body,  let 
their  gods  flit  from  the  starry  spheres,  and  Jupi¬ 
ter  from  earth  to  sky;  or,  if  they  cannot  do  so, 
let  them  be  pronounced  miserable.  But  neither 
alternative  will  these  men  adopt.  For,  on  the  one 
hand,  they  dare  not  ascribe  to  their  own  gods  a 
departure  from  the  body,  lest  they  should  seem 
to  worship  mortals;  on  the  other  hand,  they 
dare  not  deny  their  happiness,  lest  they  should 
acknowledge  wretches  as  gods.  Therefore,  to  ob¬ 
tain  blessedness,  we  need  not  quit  every  kind  of 
body,  but  only  the  corruptible,  cumbersome, 
painful,  dying — not  such  bodies  as  the  goodness 
of  God  contrived  for  the  first  man,  but  such 
only  as  man’s  sin  entailed. 

Chap.  18.  Of  earthly  bodies ,  which  the  philoso¬ 
phers  affirm  cannot  be  in  heavenly  places ,  be¬ 
cause  whatever  is  of  earth  is  by  its  natural 
weight  attracted  to  earth 
But  it  is  necessary,  they  say,  that  the  natural 
weight  of  earthly  bodies  either  keeps  them  on 
earth  or  draws  them  to  it;  and  therefore  they 
cannot  be  in  heaven.  Our  first  parents  were  in¬ 
deed  on  earth,  in  a  well-wooded  and  fruitful 
spot,  which  has  been  named  Paradise.  But  let 
our  adversaries  a  little  more  carefully  consider 
this  subject  of  earthly  weight,  because  it  has  im¬ 
portant  bearings,  both  on  the  ascension  of  the 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIII.  18-19  369 


body  of  Christ,  and  also  on  the  resurrection 
body  of  the  saints.  If  human  skill  can  by  some 
contrivance  fabricate  vessels  that  float,  out  of 
metals  which  sink  as  soon  as  they  are  placed  on 
the  water,  how  much  more  credible  is  it  that 
God,  by  some  occult  mode  of  operation,  should 
even  more  certainly  effect  that  these  earthy 
masses  be  emancipated  from  the  downward 
pressure  of  their  weight?  This  cannot  be  impos¬ 
sible  to  that  God  by  whose  almighty  will,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  neither  things  born  perish,  nor 
things  composed  dissolve,  especially  since  it  is 
much  more  wonderful  that  spiritual  and  bodily 
essences  be  conjoined  than  that  bodies  be  ad¬ 
justed  to  other  material  substances.  Can  we  not 
also  easily  believe  that  souls,  being  made  per¬ 
fectly  blessed,  should  be  endowed  with  the  pow¬ 
er  of  moving  their  earthly  but  incorruptible 
bodies  as  they  please,  with  almost  spontaneous 
movement,  and  of  placing  them  where  they 
please  with  the  readiest  action?  If  the  angels 
transport  whatever  terrestrial  creatures  they 
please  from  any  place  they  please,  and  convey 
them  whither  they  please,  is  it  to  be  believed 
that  they  cannot  do  so  without  toil  and  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  burden?  Why,  then,  may  we  not  believe 
that  the  spirits  of  the  saints,  made  perfect  and 
blessed  by  divine  grace,  can  carry  their  own 
bodies  where  they  please,  and  set  them  where 
they  will?  For,  though  we  have  been  accustomed 
to  notice,  in  bearing  weights,  that  the  larger  the 
quantity  the  greater  the  weight  of  earthly  bodies 
is,  and  that  the  greater  the  weight  the  more  bur¬ 
densome  it  is.  yet  the  soul  carries  the  members 
of  its  own  flesh  with  less  difficulty  when  they  are 
massive  with  health,  than  in  sickness  when  they 
are  wasted.  And  though  the  hale  and  strong  man 
feels  heavier  to  other  men  carrying  him  than  the 
lank  and  sickly,  yet  the  man  himself  moves  and 
carries  his  own  body  with  less  feeling  of  burden 
when  he  has  the  greater  bulk  of  vigorous  health, 
than  when  his  frame  is  reduced  to  a  minimum 
by  hunger  or  disease.  Of  such  consequence,  in 
estimating  the  weight  of  earthly  bodies,  even 
while  yetf  corruptible  and  mortal,  is  the  consid¬ 
eration  not  of  dead  weight,  but  of  the  healthy 
equilibrium  of  the  parts.  And  what  words  can 
tell  the  difference  between  what  we  now  call 
health  and  future  immortality?  Let  not  the  phi¬ 
losophers,  then,  think  to  upset  our  faith  with 
arguments  from  the  weight  of  bodies;  for  I  do 
not  care  to  inquire  why  they  cannot  believe  an 
earthly  body  can  be  in  heaven,  while  the  whole 
earth  is  suspended  on  nothing.  For  perhaps  the 
world  keeps  its  central  place  by  the  same  law 
that  attracts  to  its  centre  all  heavy  bodies.  But 


this  I  say,  if  the  lesser  gods,  to  whom  Plato  com¬ 
mitted  the  creation  of  man  and  the  other  ter¬ 
restrial  creatures,  were  able,  as  he  affirms,  to 
withdraw  from  the  fire  its  quality  of  burning, 
while  they  left  it  that  of  lighting,  so  that  it 
should  shine  through  the  eyes ;  and  if  to  the  Su¬ 
preme  God  Plato  also  concedes  the  power  of 
preserving  from  death  things  that  have  been 
born,  and  of  preserving  from  dissolution  things 
that  are  composed  of  parts  so  different  as  body 
and  spirit ;  are  we  to  hesitate  to  concede  to  this 
same  God  the  power  to  operate  on  the  flesh  of 
him  whom  He  has  endowed  with  immortality, 
so  as  to  withdraw  its  corruption  but  leave  its  na¬ 
ture,  remove  its  burdensome  weight  but  retain 
its  seemly  form  and  members?  But  concerning 
our  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and 
concerning  their  immortal  bodies,  we  shall  speak 
more  at  large,  God  willing,  in  the  end  of  this 
work. 

Chap.  19.  Against  the  opinion  of  those  who  do 
not  believe  that  the  primitive  men  would  have 
been  immortal  if  they  had  not  sinned 
At  present  let  us  go  on,  as  we  have  begun,  to 
give  some  explanation  regarding  the  bodies  of 
our  first  parents.  I  say  then,  that,  except  as  the 
just  consequence  of  sin,  they  would  not  have 
been  subjected  even  to  this  death,  which  is  good 
to  the  good — this  death,  which  is  not  exclusively 
known  and  believed  in  by  a  few,  but  is  known  to 
all,  by  which  soul  and  body  are  separated,  and 
by  which  the  body  of  an  animal  which  was  but 
now  visibly  living  is  now  visibly  dead.  For  though 
there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt  that  the  souls 
of  the  just  and  holy  dead  live  in  peaceful  rest, 
yet  so  much  better  would  it  be  for  them  to  be 
alive  in  healthy,  well-conditioned  bodies,  that 
even  those  who  hold  the  tenet  that  it  is  most 
blessed  to  be  quit  of  every  kind  of  body,  con¬ 
demn  this  opinion  in  spite  of  themselves.  For  no 
one  will  dare  to  set  wise  men,  whether  yet  to  die 
or  already  dead — in  other  words,  whether  al¬ 
ready  quit  of  the  body,  or  shortly  to  be  so — 
above  the  immortal  gods,  to  whom  the  Supreme, 
in  Plato,  promises  as  a  munificent  gift  life  indis¬ 
soluble,  or  in  eternal  union  with  their  bodies. 
But  this  same  Plato  thinks  that  nothing  better 
can  happen  to  men  than  that  they  pass  through 
life  piously  and  justly,  and,  being  separated 
from  their  bodies,  be  received  into  the  bosom  of 
the  gods,  who  never  abandon  theirs;  “that,  ob¬ 
livious  of  the  past,  they  may  revisit  the  upper 
air,  and  conceive  the  longing  to  return  again  to 
the  body.”1  Virgil  is  applauded  for  borrowing 
1Virgil,  Aineid ,  bk.  vi.  750,  751. 


370  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


this  from  the  Platonic  system.  Assuredly  Plato 
thinks  that  the  souls  of  mortals  cannot  always 
be  in  their  bodies,  but  must  necessarily  be  dis¬ 
missed  by  death;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
thinks  that  without  bodies  they  cannot  endure 
for  ever,  but  with  ceaseless  alteration  pass  from 
life  to  death,  and  from  death  to  life.  This  differ¬ 
ence,  however,  he  sets  between  wise  men  and  the 
rest,  that  they  are  carried  after  death  to  the 
stars,  that  each  man  may  repose  for  a  while  in  a 
star  suitable  for  him,  and  may  thence  return  to 
the  labours  and  miseries  of  mortals  when  he  has 
become  oblivious  of  his  former  misery  and  pos¬ 
sessed  with  the  desire  of  being  embodied.  Those, 
again,  who  have  lived  foolishly  transmigrate  in¬ 
to  bodies  fit  for  them,  whether  human  or  bestial. 
Thus  he  has  appointed  even  the  good  and  wise 
souls  to  a  very  hard  lot  indeed,  since  they  do  not 
receive  such  bodies  as  they  might  always  and 
even  immortally  inhabit,  but  such  only  as  they 
can  neither  permanently  retain  nor  enjoy  eternal 
purity  without.  Of  this  notion  of  Plato’s,  we 
have  in  a  former  book  already  said1  that  Por¬ 
phyry  was  ashamed  in  the  light  of  these  Chris¬ 
tian  times,  so  that  he  not  only  emancipated  hu¬ 
man  souls  from  a  destiny  in  the  bodies  of  beasts, 
but  also  contended  for  the  liberation  of  the  souls 
of  the  wise  from  all  bodily  ties,  so  that,  escaping 
from  all  flesh,  they  might,  as  bare  and  blessed 
souls,  dwell  with  the  Father  time  without  end. 
And  that  he  might  not  seem  to  be  outbid  by 
Christ’s  promise  of  life  everlasting  to  His  saints, 
he  also  established  purified  souls  in  endless  felic¬ 
ity,  without  return  to  their  former  woes;  but, 
that  he  might  contradict  Christ,  he  denies  the 
resurrection  of  incorruptible  bodies  and  main¬ 
tains  that  these  souls  will  live  eternally,  not  only 
without  earthly  bodies,  but  without  any  bodies 
at  all.  And  yet,  whatever  he  meant  by  this  teach¬ 
ing,  he  at  least  did  not  teach  that  these  souls 
should  offer  no  religious  observance  to  the  gods 
who  dwelt  in  bodies.  And  why  did  he  not,  unless 
because  he  did  not  believe  that  the  souls,  even 
though  separate  from  the  body,  were  superior 
to  those  gods?  Wherefore,  if  these  philosophers 
will  not  dare  (as  I  think  they  will  not)  to  set  hu¬ 
man  souls  above  the  gods  who  are  most  blessed, 
and  yet  are  tied  eternally  to  their  bodies,  why 
do  they  find  that  absurd  which  the  Christian 
faith  preaches,  namely,  that  our  first  parents 
were  so  created  that,  if  they  had  not  sinned, 
they  would  not  have  been  dismissed  from  their 
bodies  by  any  death,  but  would  have  been  en¬ 
dowed  with  immortality  as  the  reward  of  their 
obedience,  and  would  have  lived  eternally  with 
1bk.  x,  chap.  30. 


their  bodies ;  and  further,  that  the  saints  will  in 
the  resurrection  inhabit  those  very  bodies  in 
which  they  have  here  toiled,  but  in  such  sort 
that  neither  shall  any  corruption  or  unwieldi¬ 
ness  be  suffered  to  attach  to  their  flesh,  nor  any 
grief  or  trouble  to  cloud  their  felicity? 

Chap.  20.  That  the  flesh  now  resting  in  peace 
shall  he  raised  to  a  perfection  not  enjoyed  by 
the  flesh  of  our  first  parents 
Thus  the  souls  of  departed  saints  are  not  af¬ 
fected  by  the  death  which  dismisses  them  from 
their  bodies,  because  their  flesh  rests  in  hope,  no 
matter  what  indignities  it  receives  after  sensa¬ 
tion  is  gone.  For  they  do  not  desire  that  their 
bodies  be  forgotten,  as  Plato  thinks  fit,  but  rath¬ 
er,  because  they  remember  what  has  been  prom¬ 
ised  by  Him  Who  deceives  no  man,  and  Who  gave 
them  security  for  the  safe  keeping  even  of  the 
hairs  of  their  head,  they  with  a  longing  patience 
wait  in  hope  of  the  resurrection  of  their  bodies, 
in  which  they  have  suffered  many  hardships,  and 
are  now  to  suffer  never  again.  For  if  they  did  not 
“hate  their  own  flesh”  when  it,  with  its  native 
infirmity,  opposed  their  will  and  had  to  be  con¬ 
strained  by  the  spiritual  law,  how  much  more 
shall  they  love  it  when  it  shall  even  itself  have 
become  spiritual!  For  as,  when  the  spirit  serves 
the  flesh,  it  is  fitly  called  carnal,  so,  when  the 
flesh  serves  the  spirit,  it  will  justly  be  called 
spiritual.  Not  that  it  is  converted  into  spirit,  as 
some  fancy  from  the  words,  “It  is  sown  in  cor¬ 
ruption,  it  is  raised  in  incorruption,”2  but  because 
it  is  subject  to  the  spirit  with  a  perfect  and  mar¬ 
vellous  readiness  of  obedience,  and  responds  in 
all  things  to  the  will  that  has  entered  on  immor¬ 
tality — all  reluctance,  all  corruption,  and  all 
slowness  being  removed.  For  the  body  will  not 
only  be  better  than  it  was  here  in  its  best  estate 
of  health,  but  it  will  surpass  the  bodies  of  our 
first  parents  ere  they  sinned.  For,  though  they 
were  not  to  die  unless  they  should  sin,  yet  they 
used  food  as  men  do  now,  their  bodies  not  being 
as  yet  spiritual,  but  animal  only.  And  though 
they  decayed  not  with  years,  nor  drew  nearer  to 
death — a  condition  secured  to  them  in  God’s 
marvellous  grace  by  the  tree  of  life,  which  grew 
along  with  the  forbidden  tree  in  the  midst  of 
Paradise — yet  they  took  other  nourishment, 
though  not  of  that  one  tree,  which  was  inter¬ 
dicted  not  because  it  was  itself  bad,  but  for  the 
sake  of  commending  a  pure  and  simple  obedi¬ 
ence,  which  is  the  great  virtue  of  the  rational 
creature  set  under  the  Creator  as  his  Lord.  For, 
though  no  evil  thing  was  touched,  yet  if  a  thing 
2I  Cor.  15.  42. 


THE  CITY  OF 

forbidden  was  touched,  the  very  disobedience 
was  sin.  They  were,  then,  nourished  by  other 
fruit,  which  they  took  that  their  animal  bodies 
might  not  suffer  the  discomfort  of  hunger  or 
thirst ;  but  they  tasted  the  tree  of  life,  that  death 
might  not  steal  upon  them  from  any  quarter, 
and  that  they  might  not,  spent  with  age,  decay. 
Other  fruits  were,  so  to  speak,  their  nourish¬ 
ment,  but  this  their  sacrament.  So  that  the  tree 
of  life  would  seem  to  have  been  in  the  terrestrial 
Paradise  what  the  wisdom  of  God  is  in  the  spir¬ 
itual,  of  which  it  is  written,  “She  is  a  tree  of  life 
to  them  that  lay  hold  upon  her.”1 

Chap.  21  .Of  Paradise,  that  it  can  be  understood 
in  a  spiritual  sense  without  sacrificing  the  his¬ 
toric  truth  of  the  narrative  regarding  the  real 
place 

On  this  account  some  allegorize  all  that  con¬ 
cerns  Paradise  itself,  where  the  first  men,  the 
parents  of  the  human  race,  are,  according  to  the 
truth  of  holy  Scripture,  recorded  to  have  been; 
and  they  understand  all  its  trees  and  fruit-bear¬ 
ing  plants  as  virtues  and  habits  of  life,  as  if  they 
had  no  existence  in  the  external  world,  but  were 
only  so  spoken  of  or  related  for  the  sake  of  spir¬ 
itual  meanings.  As  if  there  could  not  be  a  real 
terrestrial  Paradise!  As  if  there  never  existed 
these  two  women,  Sarah  and  Hagar,  nor  the  two 
sons  who  were  born  to  Abraham,  the  one  of  the 
bond  woman,  the  other  of  the  free,  because  the 
apostle  says  that  in  them  the  two  covenants 
wrere  prefigured;  or  as  if  water  never  flowed 
from  the  rock  when  Moses  struck  it,  because 
therein  Christ  can  be  seen  in  a  figure,  as  the 
same  apostle  says,  “Now  that  rock  was  Christ!”2 
No  one,  then,  denies  that  Paradise  may  signify 
the  life  of  the  blessed;  its  four  rivers,  the  four 
virtues,  prudence,  fortitude,  temperance,  and 
justice;  its  trees,  all  useful  knowledge;  its  fruits, 
the  customs  of  the  godly;  its  tree  of  life,  wis¬ 
dom  herself,  the  mother  of  all  good;  and  the 
tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  a  broken  commandment.  The  pun- 
ishment'which  God  appointed  was  in  itself,  a 
just,  and  therefore  a  good  thing;  but  man’s  ex¬ 
perience  of  it  is  not  good. 

These  things  can  also  and  more  profitably  be 
understood  of  the  Church,  so  that  they  become 
prophetic  foreshadowings  of  things  to  come. 
Thus  Paradise  is  the  Church,  as  it  is  called  in  the 
Canticles;3  the  four  rivers  of  Paradise  are  the 
four  gospels ;  the  fruit-trees  the  saints,  and  the 
fruit  their  works;  the  tree  of  life  is  the  holy  of 

^rov.  3.  18.  2I  Cor.  10.  4. 

3Song  of  Sol.  4.  13. 


GOD  XIII.  20-22  371 

holies,  Christ;  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  the  will’s  free  choice.  For  if  man  de¬ 
spise  the  will  of  God,  he  can  only  destroy  him¬ 
self;  and  so  he  learns  the  difference  between 
consecrating  himself  to  the  common  good  and 
revelling  in  his  own.  For  he  who  loves  himself  is 
abandoned  to  himself,  in  order  that,  being  over¬ 
whelmed  with  fears  and  sorrows,  he  may  cry,  if 
there  be  yet  soul  in  him  to  feel  his  ills,  in  the 
words  of  the  psalm,  “My  soul  is  cast  down  with¬ 
in  me,”4  and  when  chastened,  may  say,  “Be¬ 
cause  of  his  strength  I  will  wait  upon  Thee.”5 
These  and  similar  allegorical  interpretations 
may  be  suitably  put  upon  Paradise  without  giv¬ 
ing  offence  to  any  one,  while  yet  we  believe  the 
strict  truth  of  the  history,  confirmed  by  its  cir¬ 
cumstantial  narrative  of  facts. 

Chap.  22.  That  the  bodies  of  the  saints  shall 
after  the  resurrection  be  spiritual ,  and  yet 
flesh  shall  not  be  changed  into  spirit 
The  bodies  of  the  righteous,  then,  such  as  they 
shall  be  in  the  resurrection,  shall  need  neither 
any  fruit  to  preserve  them  from  dying  of  dis¬ 
ease  or  the  wasting  decay  of  old  age,  nor  any 
other  physical  nourishment  to  allay  the  cravings 
of  hunger  or  of  thirst ;  for  they  shall  be  invested 
with  so  sure  and  every  way  inviolable  an  im¬ 
mortality,  that  they  shall  not  eat  save  when  they 
choose,  nor  be  under  the  necessity  of  eating, 
while  they  enjoy  the  power  of  doing  so.  For  so 
also  was  it  with  the  angels  who  presented  them¬ 
selves  to  the  eye  and  touch  of  men,  not  because 
they  could  do  no  otherwise,  but  because  they 
were  able  and  desirous  to  suit  themselves  to 
men  by  a  kind  of  manhood  ministry.  For  neither 
are  we  to  suppose,  when  men  receive  them  as 
guests,  that  the  angels  eat  only  in  appearance, 
though  to  any  who  did  not  know  them  to  be  an¬ 
gels  they  might  seem  to  eat  from  the  same  ne¬ 
cessity  as  ourselves.  So  these  words  spoken  in 
the  Book  of  Tobit,  “You  saw  me  eat,  but  you 
saw  it  but  in  vision”;6  that  is,  you  thought  I 
took  food  as  you  do  for  the  sake  of  refreshing 
my  body.  But  if  in  the  case  of  the  angels  another 
opinion  seems  more  capable  of  defence,  certain¬ 
ly  our  faith  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  regarding 
our  Lord  Himself,  that  even  after  His  resurrec¬ 
tion,  and  when  now  in  spiritual  but  yet  real  flesh, 
He  ate  and  drank  with  His  disciples;  for  not  the 
power,  but  the  need,  of  eating  and  drinking  is 
taken  from  these  bodies.  And  so  they  will  be 
spiritual,  not  because  they  shall  cease  to  be 
bodies,  but  because  they  shall  subsist  by  the 
quickening  spirit. 

4Ps.  43.  6.  6Ps.  59.  9. 


6Tobit,  12.  19. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  23.  What  we  are  to  understand  by  the 
animal  and  spiritual  body;  or  of  those  who  die 
in  Adam,  and  of  those  who  are  made  alive  in 
Christ 

For  as  those  bodies  of  ours,  that  have  a  living 
soul,  though  not  as  yet  a  quickening  spirit,  are 
called  soul-informed  bodies,  and  yet  are  not 
souls  but  bodies,  so  also  those  bodies  are  called 
spiritual — yet  God  forbid  we  should  therefore 
suppose  them  to  be  spirits  and  not  bodies — 
which,  being  quickened  by  the  Spirit,  have  the 
substance,  but  not  the  unwieldiness  and  corrup¬ 
tion  of  flesh.  Man  will  then  be  not  earthly  but 
heavenly — not  because  the  body  will  not  be  that 
very  body  which  was  made  of  earth,  but  because 
by  its  heavenly  endowment  it  will  be  a  fit  in¬ 
habitant  of  heaven,  and  this  not  by  losing  its 
nature,  but  by  changing  its  quality.  The  first 
man,  of  the  earth  earthy,  was  made  a  living 
soul,  not  a  quickening  spirit — which  rank  was 
reserved  for  him  as  the  reward  of  obedience. 
And  therefore  his  body,  which  required  meat 
and  drink  to  satisfy  hunger  and  thirst,  and  which 
had  no  absolute  and  indestructible  immortality, 
but  by  means  of  the  tree  of  life  warded  off  the 
necessity  of  dying,  and  was  thus  maintained  in 
the  flower  of  youth — this  body,  I  say,  was 
doubtless  not  spiritual,  but  animal;  and  yet  it 
would  not  have  died  but  that  it  provoked  God’s 
threatened  vengeance  by  offending.  And  though 
sustenance  was  not  denied  him  even  outside 
Paradise,  yet,  being  forbidden  the  tree  of  life, 
he  was  delivered  over  to  the  wasting  of  time,  at 
least  in  respect  of  that  life  which,  had  he  not 
sinned,  he  might  have  retained  perpetually  in 
Paradise,  though  only  in  an  animal  body,  till 
such  time  as  it  became  spiritual  in  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  his  obedience. 

Wherefore,  although  we  understand  that  this 
manifest  death,  which  consists  in  the  separation 
of  soul  and  body,  was  also  signified  by  God  when 
He  said,  “In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 
shalt  surely  die,”1  it  ought  not  on  that  account 
to  seem  absurd  that  they  were  not  dismissed 
from  the  body  on  that  very  day  on  which  they 
took  the  forbidden  and  death-bringing  fruit.  For 
certainly  on  that  very  day  their  nature  was  al¬ 
tered  for  the  worse  and  vitiated,  and  by  their 
most  just  banishment  from  the  tree  of  life  they 
were  involved  in  the  necessity  even  of  bodily 
death,  in  which  necessity  we  are  born.  And 
therefore  the  apostle  does  not  say,  “The  body 
indeed  is  doomed  to  die  on  account  of  sin,”  but 
he  says,  “The  body  indeed  is  dead  because  of 
^en.  2.  17. 


sin.”  Then  he  adds,  “But  if  the  Spirit  of  Him 
that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you, 
He  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall 
also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  His  Spirit 
that  dwelleth  in  you.”2  Then  accordingly  shall 
the  body  become  a  quickening  spirit  which  is 
now  a  living  soul;  and  yet  the  apostle  calls  it 
“dead,”  because  already  it  lies  under  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  dying.  But  in  Paradise  it  was  so  made  a 
living  soul,  though  not  a  quickening  spirit,  that 
it  could  not  properly  be  called  dead,  for,  save 
through  the  commission  of  sin,  it  could  not 
come  under  the  power  of  death.  Now,  since  God 
by  the  words,  “Adam,  where  art  thou?”  pointed 
to  the  death  of  the  soul,  which  results  when  He 
abandons  it,  and  since  in  the  words,  “Earth 
thou  art,  and  unto  earth  shalt  thou  return,”3  He 
signified  the  death  of  the  body,  which  results 
when  the  soul  departs  from  it,  we  are  led.  there¬ 
fore,  to  believe  that  He  said  nothing  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  death,  wishing  it  to  be  kept  hidden,  and  re¬ 
serving  it  for  the  New  Testament  dispensation, 
in  which  it  is  most  plainly  revealed.  And  this  He 
did  in  order  that,  first  of  all,  it  might  be  evident 
that  this  first  death,  which  is  common  to  all,  was 
the  result  of  that  sin  which  in  one  man  became 
common  to  all.  But  the  second  death  is  not  com¬ 
mon  to  all,  those  being  excepted  who  were 
“called  according  to  His  purpose.  For  whom  He 
did  foreknow,  He  also  did  predestinate  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  that  He 
might  be  the  first-born  among  many  brethren.”4 
Those  the  grace  of  God  has,  by  a  Mediator,  de¬ 
livered  from  the  second  death. 

Thus  the  apostle  states  that  the  first  man  was 
made  in  an  animal  body.  For,  wishing  to  distin¬ 
guish  the  animal  body  which  now  is  from  the 
spiritual,  which  is  to  be  in  the  resurrection,  he 
says,  “It  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  in¬ 
corruption  :  it  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised 
in  glory:  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in 
power:  it  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a 
spiritual  body.”  Then,  to  prove  this,  he  goes 
on,  “There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spir¬ 
itual  body.”  And  to  show  what  the  animated 
body  is,  he  says,  “Thus  it  was  written.  The  first 
man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul,  the  last 
Adam  was  made  a  quickening  spirit.”5  He 
wished  thus  to  show  what  the  animated  body  is, 
though  Scripture  did  not  say  of  the  first  man 
Adam,  when  his  soul  was  created  by  the  breath 
of  God,  “Man  was  made  in  an  animated  body,” 
but  “Man  was  made  a  living  soul.”6  By  these 
words,  therefore,  “The  first  man  was  made  a  liv- 

2Rom.  8.  10,  11.  3Gen.  3.  19.  4Rom.  8.  28,  29. 

6I  Cor.  15.  42-45.  6Gen.  2.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIII.  23-24  373 


ing  soul,”  the  apostle  wishes  man’s  animated 
body  to  be  understood.  But  how  he  wishes  the 
spiritual  body  to  be  understood  he  shows  when 
he  adds,  “But  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quick¬ 
ening  spirit,”  plainly  referring  to  Christ,  who 
has  so  risen  from  the  dead  that  He  cannot  die 
any  more.  He  then  goes  on  to  say,  “But  that  was 
not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  nat¬ 
ural;  and  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual.” 
And  here  he  much  more  clearly  asserts  that  he 
referred  to  the  animal  body  when  he  said  that 
the  first  man  was  made  a  living  soul,  and  to  the 
spiritual  when  he  said  that  the  last  man  was 
made  a  quickening  spirit.  The  animal  body  is  the 
first,  being  such  as  the  first  Adam  had,  and 
which  would  not  have  died  had  he  not  sinned, 
being  such  also  as  we  now  have,  its  nature  being 
changed  and  vitiated  by  sin  to  the  extent  of 
bringing  us  under  the  necessity  of  death,  and 
being  such  as  even  Christ  condescended  first  of 
all  to  assume,  not  indeed  of  necessity,  but  of 
choice;  but  afterwards  comes  the  spiritual  body, 
which  already  is  worn  by  anticipation  by  Christ 
as  our  head,  and  will  be  worn  by  His  members 
in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 

Then  the  apostle  subjoins  a  notable  difference 
between  these  two  men,  saying,  “The  first  man 
is  of  the  earth,  earthy;  the  second  man  is  the 
Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are 
they  also  that  are  earthy,  and  as  is  the  heavenly, 
such  are  they  also  that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we 
have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.”1  So  he  else¬ 
where  says,  “As  many  of  you  as  have  been  bap¬ 
tized  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ”;2  but  in 
very  deed  this  shall  be  accomplished  when  that 
which  is  animal  in  us  by  our  birth  shall  have  be¬ 
come  spiritual  in  our  resurrection.  For,  to  use 
his  words  again,  “We  are  saved  by  hope.”3  Now 
we  bear  the  image  of  the  earthly  man  by  the 
propagation  of  sin  and  death,  which  pass  on  us 
by  ordinary  generation ;  but  we  bear  the  image 
of  the  heavenly  by  the  grace  of  pardon  and  life 
eternal,  which  regeneration  confers  upon  us 
through  the  Mediator  of  God  and  men,  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus.  And  He  is  the  heavenly  Man  of 
Paul’s  passage,  because  He  came  from  heaven 
to  be  clothed  with  a  body  of  earthly  mortality, 
that  He  might  clothe  it  with  heavenly  immor¬ 
tality.  And  he  calls  others  heavenly,  because  by 
grace  they  become  His  members,  that,  together 
with  them,  He  may  become  one  Christ,  as  head 
and  body.  In  the  same  epistle  he  puts  this  yet 
more  clearly:  “Since  by  man  came  death,  by 
Man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For 
lI  Cor.  15.  47-49.  2Gal.  3.  27.  3Rom.  8.  24. 


as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be 
made  alive”;4  that  is  to  say,  in  a  spiritual  body 
which  shall  be  made  a  quickening  spirit.  Not 
that  all  who  die  in  Adam  shall  be  members  of 
Christ — for  the  great  majority  shall  be  pun¬ 
ished  in  eternal  death — but  he  uses  the  word 
“all”  in  both  clauses,  because,  as  no  one  dies  in 
an  animal  body  except  in  Adam,  so  no  one  is 
quickened  a  spiritual  body  save  in  Christ.  We 
are  not,  then,  by  any  means  to  suppose  that  we 
shall  in  the  resurrection  have  such  a  body  as  the 
first  man  had  before  he  sinned,  nor  that  the 
words,  “As  is  the  earthy  such  are  they  also  that 
are  earthy,”  are  to  be  understood  of  that  which 
was  brought  about  by  sin;  for  we  are  not  to 
think  that  Adam  had  a  spiritual  body  before  he 
fell,  and  that,  in  punishment  of  his  sin,  it  was 
changed  into  an  animal  body.  If  this  be  thought, 
small  heed  has  been  given  to  the  words  of  so 
great  a  teacher,  who  says,  “There  is  a  natural 
body,  there  is  also  a  spiritual  body;  as  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living 
soul.”  Was  it  after  sin  he  was  made  so?  or  was 
not  this  primal  condition  of  man  from  which  the 
blessed  apostle  selects  his  testimony  to  show 
what  the  animal  body  is? 

Chap  24.  How  we  must  understand  that  breath¬ 
ing  of  God  by  which  uthe  first  man  was  made 
a  living  souly”  and  that  also  by  which  the 
Lord  conveyed  His  spirit  to  His  disci¬ 
ples  when  He  said,  “ receive  ye  the  Holy 
Ghost ” 

Some  have  hastily  supposed  from  the  words, 
“God  breathed  into  Adam’s  nostrils  the  breath 
of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul,”5  that  a 
soul  was  not  then  first  given  to  man,  but  that 
the  soul  already  given  was  quickened  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  They  are  encouraged  in  this  sup¬ 
position  by  the  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus  after 
His  resurrection  breathed  on  His  disciples  and 
said,  “Receive  ye  the  Holy  Spirit.”6  From  this 
they  suppose  that  the  same  thing  was  effected  in 
either  case,  as  if  the  evangelist  had  gone  on  to 
say,  “And  they  became  living  souls.”  But  if  he 
had  made  this  addition,  we  should  only  under¬ 
stand  that  the  Spirit  is  in  some  way  the  life  of 
souls;  and  that  without  Him  reasonable  souls 
must  be  accounted  dead,  though  their  bodies 
seem  to  live  before  our  eyes.  But  that  this  was 
not  what  happened  when  man  was  created,  the 
very  words  of  the  narrative  sufficiently  show: 
“And  God  made  man  dust  of  the  earth”;  which 
some  have  thought  to  render  more  clearly  by 
the  words,  “And  God  formed  man  of  the  clay  of 

4I  Cor.  15.  21,  22.  6Gen.  2.  7.  6John,  20.  22. 


374  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  earth.”  For  it  had  before  been  said  that 
“there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth,  and  wa¬ 
tered  the  whole  face  of  the  ground,”1  in  order 
that  the  reference  to  clay,  formed  of  this  mois¬ 
ture  and  dust,  might  be  understood.  For  on  this 
verse  there  immediately  follows  the  announce¬ 
ment,  “And  God  created  man  dust  of  the 
earth”;  so  those  Greek  manuscripts  have  it  from 
which  this  passage  has  been  translated  into  Lat¬ 
in.  But  whether  one  prefers  to  read  “created”  or 
“formed”  where  the  Greek  reads  eir'Kaoev,  is 
of  little  importance;  yet  “formed”  is  the  better 
rendering.  But  those  who  preferred  “created” 
thought  they  thus  avoided  the  ambiguity  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  fact,  that  in  the  Latin  language  the 
usage  obtains  that  those  are  said  to  form  a  thing 
who  frame  some  feigned  and  fictitious  thing. 
This  man,  then,  who  was  created  of  the  dust  of 
the  earth,  or  of  the  moistened  dust  or  clay — 
this  “dust  of  the  earth”  (that  I  may  use  the  ex¬ 
press  words  of  Scripture)  was  made,  as  the 
apostle  teaches,  an  animated  body  when  he  re¬ 
ceived  a  soul.  This  man.  he  says,  “was  made  a 
living  soul”;  that  is,  this  fashioned  du$t  was 
made  a  living  soul. 

They  say,  “Already  he  had  a  soul,  else  he 
would  not  be  called  a  man;  for  man  is  not  a 
body  alone,  nor  a  soul  alone,  but  a  being  com¬ 
posed  of  both.”  This,  indeed,  is  true,  that  the 
soul  is  not  the  whole  man,  but  the  better  part  of 
man;  the  body  not  the  whole,  but  the  inferior 
part  of  man;  and  that  then,  when  both  are 
joined,  they  receive  the  name  of  man — which, 
however,  they  do  not  severally  lose  even  when 
we  speak  of  them  singly.  For  who  is  prohibited 
from  saying,  in  colloquial  usage,  “That  man  is 
dead,  and  is  now  at  rest  or  in  torment,”  though 
this  can  be  spoken  only  of  the  soul;  or  “He  is 
buried  in  such  and  such  a  place,”  though  this 
refers  only  to  the  body?  Will  they  say  that 
Scripture  follows  no  such  usage?  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  so  thoroughly  adopts  it,  that  even  while 
a  man  is  alive,  and  body  and  soul  are  united,  it 
calls  each  of  them  singly  by  the  name  “man” 
speaking  of  the  soul  as  the  “inward  man,”  and 
of  the  body  as  the  “outward  man,”2  as  if  there 
were  two  men,  though  both  together  are  indeed 
but  one.  But  we  must  understand  in  what  sense 
man  is  said  to  be  in  the  image  of  God,  and  is 
yet  dust,  and  to  return  to  the  dust.  The  for¬ 
mer  is  spoken  of  the  rational  soul,  which  God 
by  His  breathing,  or,  to  speak  more  appropri¬ 
ately,  by  His  inspiration,  conveyed  to  man,  that 
is,  to  his  body;  but  the  latter  refers  to  his 
^en.  2.  6.  2II  Cor.  4.  16. 


body,  which  God  formed  of  the  dust,  and  to 
which  a  soul  was  given,  that  it  might  become 
a  living  body,  that  is,  that  man  might  become  a 
living  soul. 

Wherefore,  when  our  Lord  breathed  on  His 
disciples  and  said,  “Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,” 
He  certainly  wished  it  to  be  understood  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  not  only  the  Spirit  of  the  Fa¬ 
ther,  but  of  the  only  begotten  Son  Himself.  For 
the  same  Spirit  is,  indeed,  the  Spirit  of  the  Fa¬ 
ther  and  of  the  Son,  making  with  them  the  Trin¬ 
ity  of  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  not  a  creature,  but 
the  Creator.  For  neither  was  that  material 
breath  which  proceeded  from  the  mouth  of  His 
flesh  the  very  substance  and  nature  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  but  rather  the  intimation,  as  I  said,  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  common  to  the  Father 
and  to  the  Son;  for  they  have  not  each  a  sepa¬ 
rate  Spirit,  but  both  one  and  the  same.  Now  this 
Spirit  is  always  spoken  of  in  sacred  Scripture 
by  the  Greek  word  irvev fxa,  as  the  Lord,  too, 
named  Him  in  the  place  cited  when  He  gave 
Him  to  His  disciples,  and  intimated  the  gift  by 
the  breathing  of  His  lips ;  and  there  does  not  oc¬ 
cur  to  me  any  place  in  the  whole  Scriptures 
where  He  is  otherwise  named.  But  in  this  pas¬ 
sage  where  it  is  said,  “And  the  Lord  formed  man 
dust  of  the  earth,  and  breathed,  or  inspired,  into 
his  face  the  breath  of  life”;  the  Greek  has  not 
TrvevjjLa,  the  usual  word  for  the  Holy  Spirit, 
but  tvotj,  a  word  more  frequently  used  of  the 
creature  than  of  the  Creator;  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  some  Latin  interpreters  have  preferred  to 
render  it  by  “breath”  rather  than  “spirit.”  For 
this  word  occurs  also  in  the  Greek  in  Isa.  57. 
16,  where  God  says,  “I  have  made  all  breath,” 
meaning,  doubtless,  all  souls.  Accordingly,  this 
word  tvotj  is  sometimes  rendered  “breath,” 
sometimes  “spirit,”  sometimes  “inspiration,” 
sometimes  “aspiration,”  sometimes  “soul,”  even 
when  it  is  used  of  God.  Uveojiay  on  the  other 
hand,  is  uniformly  rendered  “spirit,”  whether  of 
man,  of  whom  the  apostle  says,  “For  what  man 
knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of 
man  which  is  in  him?”3  or  of  beast,  as  in  the 
book  of  Solomon,  “Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of 
man  that  goeth  upward,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
beast  that  goeth  downward  to  the  earth?”4  or 
of  that  physical  spirit  which  is  called  wind,  for 
so  the  Psalmist  calls  it:  “Fire  and  hail;  snow 
and  vapours;  stormy  wind”;5  or  of  the  un¬ 
created  Creator  Spirit,  of  whom  the  Lord  said 
in  the  gospel,  “Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,”  in¬ 
dicating  the  gift  by  the  breathing  of  His  mouth; 

3I  Cor.  2.  n.  4Eccles.  3.  21.  6Ps.  148.  8. 


THE  CITY  OF 

and  when  He  says,  “Go  ye  and  baptize  all  na¬ 
tions  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,”1  words  which  very  express¬ 
ly  and  excellently  commend  the  Trinity;  and 
where  it  is  said,  “God  is  a  Spirit”;2  and  in  very 
many  other  places  of  the  sacred  writings.  In  all 
these  quotations  from  Scripture  we  do  not  find 
in  the  Greek  the  word  irvoi)  used,  but  Tvedfia, 
and  in  the  Latin,  not  flatus ,  but  spiritus.  Where¬ 
fore,  referring  again  to  that  place  where  it  is 
written,  “He  inspired,”  or  to  speak  more  prop¬ 
erly,  “breathed  into  his  face  the  breath  of  life,” 
even  though  the  Greek  had  not  used  7 rvorj  (as 
it  has)  but  Tvedfia,  it  would  not  on  that  ac¬ 
count  necessarily  follow  that  the  Creator  Spirit, 
who  in  the  Trinity  is  distinctively  called  the 
Holy  Ghost,  was  meant,  since,  as  has  been  said, 
it  is  plain  that  irvevjia  is  used  not  only  of  the 
Creator,  but  also  of  the  creature. 

But,  say  they,  when  the  Scripture  used  the 
word  “spirit,”3  it  would  not  have  added  “of 
life”  unless  it  meant  us  to  understand  the  Holy 
Spirit;  nor,  when  it  said,  “Man  became  a  soul,” 
would  it  also  have  inserted  the  word  “living” 
unless  that  life  of  the  soul  were  signified  which 
is  imparted  to  it  from  above  by  the  gift  of  God. 
For,  seeing  that  the  soul  by  itself  has  a  proper 
life  of  its  own,  what  need,  they  ask,  was  there 
of  adding  living,  save  only  to  show  that  the  life 
which  is  given  it  by  the  Holy  Spirit  was  meant? 
What  is  this  but  to  fight  strenuously  for  their 
own  conjectures,  while  they  carelessly  neglect 
the  teaching  of  Scripture?  Without  troubling 
themselves  much,  they  might  have  found  in  a 
preceding  page  of  this  very  book  of  Genesis  the 
words,  “Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living 
soul,”4  when  all  the  terrestrial  animals  were  cre¬ 
ated.  Then  at  a  slight  interval,  but  still  in  the 
same  book,  was  it  impossible  for  them  to  notice 
this  verse,  “All  in  whose  nostrils  was  the  breath 
of  life,  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry  land,  died,”  by 
which  it  was  signified  that  all  the  animals  which 
lived  on  the  earth  had  perished  in  the  deluge? 
If,  then,  we  find  that  Scripture  is  accustomed  to 
speak  both  of  the  “living  soul”  and  the  “spirit 
of  life”  even  in  reference  to  beasts ;  and  if  in  this 
place,  where  it  is  said,  “All  things  which  have 
the  spirit  of  life,”  the  word  irvor 7,  not  irvedna , 
is  used;  why  may  we  not  say,  What  need  was 
there  to  add  “living,”  since  the  soul  cannot  exist 
without  being  alive?  or.  What  need  to  add  “of 
life”  after  the  word  spirit?  But  we  understand 
that  Scripture  used  these  expressions  in  its  or- 

1Matt.  28.  19.  2John,  4.  24.  3“Breath,”  Eng.  ver. 

4Gen.  1.  24. 


GOD  XIII.  24  375 

dinary  style  so  long  as  it  speaks  of  animals,  that 
is,  animated  bodies,  in  which  the  soul  serves  as 
the  residence  of  sensation;  but  when  man  is 
spoken  of,  we  forget  the  ordinary  and  estab¬ 
lished  usage  of  Scripture,  whereby  it  signifies 
that  man  received  a  rational  soul,  which  was  not 
produced  out  of  the  waters  and  the  earth  like 
the  other  living  creatures,  but  was  created  by 
the  breath  of  God.  Yet  this  creation  was  so  or¬ 
dered  that  the  human  soul  should  live  in  an  ani¬ 
mal  body,  like  those  other  animals  of  which  the 
Scripture  said,  “Let  the  earth  produce  every  liv¬ 
ing  soul,”  and  regarding  which  it  again  says  that 
in  them  is  the  breath  of  life,  where  the  word 
ttvot)  and  not  Tvedfia  is  used  in  the  Greek, 
and  where  certainly  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  but 
their  spirit,  is  signified  under  that  name. 

But,  again,  they  object  that  breath  is  under¬ 
stood  to  have  been  emitted  from  the  mouth  of 
God;  and  if  we  believe  that  is  the  soul,  we  must 
consequently  acknowledge  it  to  be  of  the  same 
substance,  and  equal  to  that  wisdom,  which 
says,  “I  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Most 
High.”5  Wisdom,  indeed,  does  not  say  it  was 
breathed  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  but  proceed¬ 
ed  out  of  it.  But  as  we  are  able,  when  we 
breathe,  to  make  a  breath,  not  of  our  own  hu¬ 
man  nature,  but  of  the  surrounding  air,  which 
we  inhale  and  exhale  as  we  draw  our  breath  and 
breathe  again,  so  almighty  God  was  able  to 
make  breath,  not  of  His  own  nature,  nor  of  the 
creature  beneath  Him,  but  even  of  nothing;  and 
this  breath,  when  He  communicated  it  to  man’s 
body,  He  is  most  appropriately  said  to  have 
breathed  or  inspired — the  Immaterial  breathing 
it  also  immaterial,  but  the  Immutable  not  also 
the  immutable;  for  it  was  created,  He  uncre¬ 
ated.  Yet  that  these  persons  who  are  forward  to 
quote  Scripture,  and  yet  know  not  the  usages  of 
its  language,  may  know  that  not  only  what  is 
equal  and  consubstantial  with  God  is  said  to  pro¬ 
ceed  out  of  His  mouth,  let  them  hear  or  read 
what  God  says :  “So  then  because  thou  art  luke¬ 
warm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee 
out  of  my  mouth.”6 

There  is  no  ground,  then,  for  our  objecting, 
when  the  apostle  so  expressly  distinguishes  the 
animal  body  from  the  spiritual — that  is  to  say, 
the  body  in  which  we  now  are  from  that  in 
which  we  are  to  be.  He  says,  “It  is  sown  a  nat¬ 
ural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body.  There  is 
a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body. 
And  so  it  is  written,  ‘The  first  man  Adam  was 
made  a  living  soul;  the  last  Adam  was  made  a 

6Ecclus.  24.  3.  6Rev.  3.  16. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


376 

quickening  spirit.’  Howbeit  that  was  not  first 
which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural; 
and  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual.  The  first 
man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy;  the  second  man  is 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy,  such 
are  they  also  that  are  earthy ;  and  as  is  the  heav¬ 
enly,  such  are  they  also  that  are  heavenly.  And 
as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy,  we 
shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.”1  Of 
all  which  words  of  his  we  have  previously  spok¬ 
en.  The  animal  body,  accordingly,  in  which  the 
apostle  says  that  the  first  man  Adam  was  made, 
was  not  so  made  that  it  could  not  die  at  all,  but 
so  that  it  should  not  die  unless  he  should  have 
sinned.  That  body,  indeed,  which  shall  be  made 
spiritual  and  immortal  by  the  quickening  Spirit 
shall  not  be  able  to  die  at  all;  as  the  soul  has 
been  created  immortal,  and  therefore,  although 
by  sin  it  may  be  said  to  die  and  does  lose  a  cer¬ 
tain  life  of  its  own,  namely,  the  Spirit  of  God, 
by  whom  it  was  enabled  to  live  wisely  and 
blessedly,  yet  it  does  not  cease  living  a  kind  of 
life,  though  a  miserable,  because  it  is  immortal 
by  creation.  So,  too,  the  rebellious  angels, 
though  by  sinning  they  did  in  a  sense  die,  be¬ 
cause  they  forsook  God,  the  Fountain  of  life, 
which  while  they  drank  they  were  able  to  live 
wisely  and  well,  yet  they  could  not  so  die  as  to 
utterly  cease  living  and  feeling,  for  they  are  im- 
lI  Cor.  15.  44-49. 


mortals  by  creation.  And  so,  after  the  final 
judgment,  they  shall  be  hurled  into  the  second 
death,  and  not  even  there  be  deprived  of  life  or 
of  sensation,  but  shall  suffer  torment.  But  those 
men  who  have  been  embraced  by  God’s  grace, 
and  are  become  the  fellow-citizens  of  the  holy 
angels  who  have  continued  in  bliss,  shall  never 
more  either  sin  or  die,  being  endued  with  spir¬ 
itual  bodies ;  yet,  being  clothed  with  immortal¬ 
ity,  such  as  the  angels  enjoy,  of  which  they  can¬ 
not  be  divested  even  by  sinning,  the  nature  of 
their  flesh  shall  continue  the  same,  but  all  car¬ 
nal  corruption  and  unwieldiness  shall  be  re¬ 
moved. 

There  remains  a  question  which  must  be  dis¬ 
cussed,  and.  by  the  help  of  the  Lord  God  of 
truth,  solved:  If  the  motion  of  concupiscence  in 
the  unruly  members  of  our  first  parents  arose 
out  of  their  sin,  and  only  when  the  divine  grace 
deserted  them;  and  if  it  was  on  that  occasion 
that  their  eyes  were  opened  to  see,  or,  more  ex¬ 
actly,  notice  their  nakedness,  and  that  they  cov¬ 
ered  their  shame  because  the  shameless  motion 
of  their  members  was  not  subject  to  their  will — 
how,  then,  would  they  have  begotten  children 
had  they  remained  sinless  as  they  were  created? 
But  as  this  book  must  be  concluded,  and  so  large 
a  question  cannot  be  summarily  disposed  of,  we 
may  relegate  it  to  the  following  book,  in  which 
it  will  be  more  conveniently  treated. 


BOOK  XIV 

ARGUMENT.  Augustine  again  treats  of  the  sin  of  the  first  man,  and 

TEACHES  THAT  IT  IS  THE  CAUSE  OF  THE  CARNAL  LIFE  AND  VICIOUS  AFFECTIONS  OF 

man.  Especially  he  proves  that  the  shame  which  accompanies  lust  is  the 

JUST  PUNISHMENT  OF  THAT  DISOBEDIENCE,  AND  INQUIRES  HOW  MAN,  IF  HE  HAD  NOT 
SINNED,  WOULD  HAVE  BEEN  ABLE  WITHOUT  LUST  TO  PROPAGATE  HIS  KIND. 


Chap.  i.  That  the  disobedience  of  the  first  man 
would  have  plunged  all  men  into  the  endless 
misery  of  the  second  death,  had  not  the  grace 
0 f  God  rescued  many 

We  have  already  stated  in  the  preceding  books 
that  God,  desiring  not  only  that  the  human  race 
might  be  able  by  their  similarity  of  nature  to  as¬ 
sociate  with  one  another,  but  also  that  they 
might  be  bound  together  in  harmony  and  peace 
by  the  ties  of  relationship,  was  pleased  to  derive 
all  men  from  one  individual,  and  created  man 
with  such  a  nature  that  the  members  of  the  race 
should  not  have  died,  had  not  the  two  first  (of 
whom  the  one  was  created  out  of  nothing,  and 


the  other  out  of  him)  merited  this  by  their  dis¬ 
obedience;  for  by  them  so  great  a  sin  was  com¬ 
mitted  that  by  it  the  human  nature  was  altered 
for  the  worse,  and  was  transmitted  also  to  their 
posterity,  liable  to  sin  and  subject  to  death. 
And  the  kingdom  of  death  so  reigned  over  men 
that  the  deserved  penalty  of  sin  would  have 
hurled  all  headlong  even  into  the  second  death, 
of  which  there  is  no  end,  had  not  the  undeserved 
grace  of  God  saved  some  therefrom.  And  thus 
it  has  come  to  pass  that  though  there  are  very 
many  and  great  nations  all  over  the  earth,  whose 
rites  and  customs,  speech,  arms,  and  dress,  are 
distinguished  by  marked  differences,  yet  there 
are  no  more  than  two  kinds  of  human  society, 


THE  CITY  OF 

which  we  may  justly  call  two  cities,  according 
to  the  language  of  our  Scriptures.  The  one  con¬ 
sists  of  those  who  wish  to  live  after  the  flesh, 
the  other  of  those  who  wish  to  live  after  the 
spirit;  and  when  they  severally  achieve  what 
they  wish,  they  live  in  peace,  each  after  their 
kind. 

Chap.  2.  Of  carnal  life,  which  is  to  he  under¬ 
stood  not  only  of  living  in  bodily  indulgence, 
hut  also  of  living  in  the  vices  of  the  inner  man 
First,  we  must  see  what  it  is  to  live  after  the 
flesh,  and  what  to  live  after  the  spirit.  For  any 
one  who  either  does  not  recollect,  or  does  not 
sufficiently  weigh,  the  language  of  sacred  Scrip¬ 
ture,  may,  on  first  hearing  what  we  have  said, 
suppose  that  the  Epicurean  philosophers  live  af¬ 
ter  the  flesh,  because  they  place  man’s  highest 
good  in  bodily  pleasure;  and  that  those  others 
do  so  who  have  been  of  opinion  that  in  some 
form  or  other  bodily  good  is  man’s  supreme 
good ;  and  that  the  mass  of  men  do  so  who,  with¬ 
out  dogmatizing  or  philosophizing  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  are  so  prone  to  lust  that  they  cannot  de¬ 
light  in  any  pleasure  save  such  as  they  receive 
from  bodily  sensations:  and  he  may  suppose 
that  the  Stoics,  who  place  the  supreme  good  of 
men  in  the  soul,  live  after  the  spirit;  for  what  is 
man’s  soul,  if  not  spirit?  But  in  the  sense  of  the 
divine  Scripture  both  are  proved  to  live  after 
the  flesh.  For  by  flesh  it  means  not  only  the  body 
of  a  terrestrial  and  mortal  animal,  as  when  it 
says,  “All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh,  but  there 
is  one  kind  of  flesh  of  men,  another  flesh  of 
beasts,  another  of  fishes,  another  of  birds,”1  but 
it  uses  this  word  in  many  other  significations; 
and  among  these  various  usages,  a  frequent  one 
is  to  use  flesh  for  man  himself,  the  nature  of 
man  taking  the  part  for  the  whole,  as  in  the 
words,  “By  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no 
flesh  be  justified”;2  for  what  does  he  mean  here 
by  “no  flesh”  but  “no  man?”  And  this,  indeed, 
he  shortly  after  says  more  plainly:  “No  man 
shall  be  justified  by  the  law”  ;3  and  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Galatians,  “Knowing  that  man  is  not  jus¬ 
tified  by  the  works  of  the  law.”  And  so  we  un¬ 
derstand  the  words,  “And  the  Word  was  made 
flesh”;4  that  is,  man,  which  some  not  accepting 
in  its  right  sense,  have  supposed  that  Christ  had 
not  a  human  soul.5  For  as  the  whole  is  used  for 
the  part  in  the  words  of  Mary  Magdalene  in  the 
Gospel,  “That  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I 
know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him.”6  by  which 
she  meant  only  the  flesh  of  Christ,  which  she 

*1  Cor.  15.  39.  2Rom.  3.  20.  3Gal.  3.  n. 

4John,  1.  14.  ^he  Apoliinarians.  6John,  20.  13. 


GOD  XIV.  1-2  377 

supposed  had  been  taken  from  the  tomb  where 
it  had  been  buried,  so  the  part  is  used  for  the 
whole,  flesh  being  named,  while  man  is  referred 
to,  as  in  the  quotations  above  cited. 

Since,  then,  Scripture  uses  the  word  flesh  in 
many  ways,  which  there  is  not  time  to  collect 
and  investigate,  if  we  are  to  ascertain  what  it  is 
to  live  after  the  flesh  (which  is  certainly  evil, 
though  the  nature  of  flesh  is  not  itself  evil),  we 
must  carefully  examine  that  passage  of  the  epis¬ 
tle  which  the  Apostle  Paul  wrote  to  the  Gala¬ 
tians,  in  which  he  says,  “Now  the  works  of  the 
flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  these:  adultery, 
fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idola¬ 
try,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  emulations, 
wrath,  strife,  seditions,  heresies,  envyings,  mur¬ 
ders,  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  siich  like;  of 
the  which  I  tell  you  before,  as  I  have  also  told 
you  in  time  past,  that  they  which  do  such  things 
shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.”7  This 
whole  passage  of  the  apostolic  epistle  being  con¬ 
sidered,  so  far  as  it  bears  on  the  matter  in  hand, 
will  be  sufficient  to  answer  the  question,  what  it 
is  to  live  after  the  flesh.  For  among  the  works  of 
the  flesh  which  he  said  were  manifest,  and  which 
he  cited  for  condemnation,  we  find  not  only 
those  which  concern  the  pleasure  of  the  flesh,  as 
fornications,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  drunk¬ 
enness,  revellings,  but  also  those  which,  though 
they  be  remote  from  fleshly  pleasure,  reveal  the 
vices  of  the  soul.  For  who  does  not  see  that  idol¬ 
atries,  witchcrafts,  hatreds,  variance,  emula¬ 
tions,  wrath,  strife,  heresies,  envyings,  are  vices 
rather  of  the  soul  than  of  the  flesh?  For  it  is 
quite  possible  for  a  man  to  abstain  from  fleshly 
pleasures  for  the  sake  of  idolatry  or  some  hereti¬ 
cal  error;  and  yet,  even  when  he  does  so,  he  is 
proved  by  this  apostolic  authority  to  be  living 
after  the  flesh;  and  in  abstaining  from  fleshly 
pleasure,  he  is  proved  to  be  practising  damnable 
works  of  the  flesh.  Who  that  has  enmity  has  it 
not  in  his  soul?  or  who  would  say  to  his  enemy, 
or  to  the  man  he  thinks  his  enemy,  “You  have 
a  bad  flesh  towards  me,”  and  not  rather,  “You 
have  a  bad  spirit  towards  me”?  In  fine,  if  any 
one  heard  of  what  I  may  call  “carnalities,”  he 
would  not  fail  to  attribute  them  to  the  carnal 
part  of  man;  so  no  one  doubts  that  “animosi¬ 
ties”  belong  to  the  soul  of  man.  Why  then  does 
the  doctor  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  verity  call 
all  these  and  similar  things  works  of  the  flesh, 
unless  because,  by  that  mode  of  speech  where¬ 
by  the  part  is  used  for  the  whole,  he  means 
us  to  understand  by  the  word  flesh  the  man  him¬ 
self? 

7Gal.  5.  19-21. 


378 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  3.  That  the  sin  is  caused  not  by  the  flesh , 
but  by  the  soul ,  and  that  the  corruption  con¬ 
tracted  from  sin  is  not  sin  but  sin’s  punish¬ 
ment 

But  if  any  one  says  that  the  flesh  is  the  cause 
of  all  vices  and  ill  conduct,  inasmuch  as  the  soul 
lives  wickedly  only  because  it  is  moved  by  the 
flesh,  it  is  certain  he  has  not  carefully  consid¬ 
ered  the  whole  nature  of  man.  For  “the  corrup¬ 
tible  body,  indeed,  weigheth  down  the  soul.”1 
Whence,  too,  the  apostle,  speaking  of  this  cor¬ 
ruptible  body,  of  which  he  had  shortly  before 
said,  “though  our  outward  man  perish,”2  says, 
“We  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tab¬ 
ernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of 
God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
the  heavens.  For  in  this  we  groan,  earnestly  de¬ 
siring  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which 
is  from  heaven:  if  so  be  that  being  clothed  we 
shall  not  be  found  naked.  For  we  that  are  in  this 
tabernacle  do  groan,  being  burdened:  not  for 
that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon, 
that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  in  life.”3 
We  are  then  burdened  with  this  corruptible 
body;  but  knowing  that  the  cause  of  this  bur¬ 
densomeness  is  not  the  nature  and  substance  of 
the  body,  but  its  corruption,  we  do  not  desire  to 
be  deprived  of  the  body,  but  to  be  clothed  with 
its  immortality.  For  then,  also,  there  will  be  a 
body,  but  it  shall  no  longer  be  a  burden,  being 
no  longer  corruptible.  At  present,  then,  “the 
corruptible  body  presseth  down  the  soul,  and  the 
earthly  tabernacle  weigheth  down  the  mind  that 
museth  upon  many  things.”  nevertheless  they 
are  in  error  who  suppose  that  all  the  evils  of  the 
soul  proceed  from  the  body. 

Virgil,  indeed,  seems  to  express  the  senti¬ 
ments  of  Plato  in  the  beautiful  lines,  where  he 
says: 

A  fiery  strength  inspires  their  lives, 

An  essence  that  from  heaven  derives , 

Though  clogged  in  part  by  limbs  of  clay 
And  the  dull  (<vesture  of  decay” ;4 

but  though  he  goes  on  to  mention  the  four  most 
common  mental  emotions — desire,  fear,  joy, 
sorrow — with  the  intention  of  showing  that  the 
body  is  the  origin  of  all  sins  and  vices,  saying: 
Hence  wild  desires  and  grovelling  fears, 

And  human  laughter,  human  tears, 

Immured  in  dungeon- seeming  night, 

They  look  abroad,  yet  see  no  light, b 
yet  we  believe  quite  otherwise.  For  the  corrup¬ 
tion  of  the  body,  which  weighs  down  the  soul,  is 

^isd.  9.  15.  2II  Cor.  4.  16.  3TI  Cor.  5.  1-4. 
^sEneid,  bk.  vi.  730-32.  Hhid.,  733,  734. 


not  the  cause  but  the  punishment  of  the  first 
sin;  and  it  was  not  the  corruptible  flesh  that 
made  the  soul  sinful,  but  the  sinful  soul  that 
made  the  flesh  corruptible.  And  though  from 
this  corruption  of  the  flesh  there  arise  certain  in¬ 
citements  to  vice,  and  indeed  vicious  desires, 
yet  we  must  not  attribute  to  the  flesh  all  the 
vices  of  a  wicked  life,  in  case  we  thereby  clear 
the  devil  of  all  these,  for  he  has  no  flesh.  For 
though  we  cannot  call  the  devil  a  fornicator  or 
drunkard,  or  ascribe  to  him  any  sensual  indul¬ 
gence  (though  he  is  the  secret  instigator  and 
prompter  of  those  who  sin  in  these  ways),  yet 
he  is  exceedingly  proud  and  envious.  And  this 
viciousness  has  so  possessed  him,  that  on  ac¬ 
count  of  it  he  is  reserved  in  chains  of  darkness 
to  everlasting  punishment.  Now  these  vices, 
which  have  dominion  over  the  devil,  the  apostle 
attributes  to  the  flesh,  which  certainly  the  devil 
has  not.  For  he  says  “hatred,  variance,  emula¬ 
tions.  strife,  envying”  are  the  works  of  the  flesh; 
and  of  all  these  evils  pride  is  the  origin  and  head, 
and  it  rules  in  the  devil  though  he  has  no  flesh. 
For  who  shows  more  hatred  to  the  saints?  who 
is  more  at  variance  with  them?  who  more  envi¬ 
ous,  bitter,  and  jealous?  And  since  he  exhibits 
all  these  works,  though  he  has  no  flesh,  how  are 
they  works  of  the  flesh,  unless  because  they  are 
the  works  of  man,  who  is,  as  I  said,  spoken  of 
under  the  name  of  flesh?  For  it  is  not  by  having 
flesh,  which  the  devil  has  not,  but  by  living  ac¬ 
cording  to  himself — that  is,  according  to  man — 
that  man  became  like  the  devil.  For  the  devil 
too,  wished  to  live  according  to  himself  when 
he  did  not  abide  in  the  truth ;  so  that  when  he 
lied,  this  was  not  of  God,  but  of  himself,  who  is 
not  only  a  liar,  but  the  father  of  lies,  he  being 
the  first  who  lied,  and  the  originator  of  lying  as 
of  sin. 

Chap.  4.  What  it  is  to  live  according  to  man, 
and  what  to  live  according  to  God 
When,  therefore,  man  lives  according  to  man, 
not  according  to  God.  he  is  like  the  devil.  Be¬ 
cause  not  even  an  angel  might  live  according  to 
an  angel,  but  only  according  to  God,  if  he  was  to 
abide  in  the  truth,  and  speak  God’s  truth  and 
not  his  own  lie.  And  of  man,  too,  the  same  apos¬ 
tle  says  in  another  place,  “If  the  truth  of  God 
hath  more  abounded  through  my  lie”;6  “my 
lie,”  he  said,  and  “God’s  truth.”  When,  then,  a 
man  lives  according  to  the  truth,  he  lives  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  himself,  but  according  to  God;  for 
He  was  God  who  said,  “I  am  the  truth.”7  When, 
therefore,  man  lives  according  to  himself — that 
6Rom.  3.  7.  7John,  14.  6. 


THE  CITY  OF 

is,  according  to  man.  not  according  to  God — as¬ 
suredly  he  lives  according  to  a  lie;  not  that  man 
himself  is  a  lie,  for  God  is  his  author  and  crea¬ 
tor,  Who  is  certainly  not  the  author  and  creator 
of  a  lie,  but  because  man  was  made  upright,  that 
he  might  not  live  according  to  himself,  but  ac¬ 
cording  to  Him  that  made  him — in  other  words, 
that  he  might  do  His  will  and  not  his  own ;  and 
not  to  live  as  he  was  made  to  live,  that  is  a  lie. 
For  he  certainly  desires  to  be  blessed  even  by 
not  living  so  that  he  may  be  blessed.  And  what 
is  a  lie  if  this  desire  be  not?  Wherefore  it  is  not 
without  meaning  said  that  all  sin  is  a  lie.  For  no 
sin  is  committed  save  by  that  desire  or  will  by 
which  we  desire  that  it  be  well  with  us,  and 
shrink  from  it  being  ill  with  us.  That,  therefore, 
is  a  lie  which  we  do  in  order  that  it  may  be  well 
with  us.  but  which  makes  us  more  miserable 
than  we  were.  And  why  is  this,  but  because  the 
source  of  man’s  happiness  lies  only  in  God, 
Whom  he  abandons  when  he  sins,  and  not  in 
himself,  by  living  according  to  whom  he  sins? 

In  enunciating  this  proposition  of  ours,  then, 
that  because  some  live  according  to  the  flesh  and 
others  according  to  the  spirit,  there  have  arisen 
two  diverse  and  conflicting  cities,  we  might 
equally  well  have  said,  “because  some  live  ac¬ 
cording  to  man.  others  according  to  God.”  For 
Paul  says  very  plainly  to  the  Corinthians,  “For 
whereas  there  is  among  you  envying  and  strife, 
are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  according  to  man?”1 
So  that  to  walk  according  to  man  and  to  be  car¬ 
nal  are  the  same;  for  by  flesh ,  that  is,  by  a  part 
of  man,  man  is  meant.  For  before  he  said  that 
those  same  persons  were  animal  whom  after¬ 
wards  he  calls  carnal,  saying,  “For  what  man 
knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of 
man  which  is  in  him?  even  so  the  things  of  God 
knoweth  no  man.  but  the  Spirit  of  God.  Now 
we  have  received  not  the  spirit  of  this  world,  but 
the  Spirit  which  is  of  God ;  that  we  might  know 
the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God. 
Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  the  words 
which  man’s  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  teacheth ;  comparing  spiritual  things 
with  spiritual.  But  the  animal  man  perceiveth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God;  for  they  are 
foolishness  unto  him.”2  It  is  to  men  of  this  kind, 
then,  that  is,  to  animal  men,  he  shortly  after 
says,  “And  I,  brethren,  could  not  speak  unto 
you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal.”3  And 
this  is  to  be  interpreted  by  the  same  usage,  a 
part  being  taken  for  the  whole.  For  both  the  soul 
and  the  flesh,  the  component  parts  of  man,  can 
be  used  to  signify  the  whole  man;  and  so  the 
Cor.  3.  3.  2I  Cor.  2.  n-14.  3I  Cor.  3.  1. 


GOD  XIV.  3-5  379 

animal  man  and  the  carnal  man  are  not  two  dif¬ 
ferent  things,  but  one  and  the  same  thing,  viz., 
man  living  according  to  man.  In  the  same  way  it 
is  nothing  else  than  men  that  are  meant  either 
in  the  words,  “By  the  deeds  of  the  law  there 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified”;4  or  in  the  words, 
“Seventy-five  souls  went  down  into  Egypt  with 
Jacob.”5  In  the  one  passage,  “no  flesh”  signifies 
“no  man”;  and  in  the  other,  by  “seventy-five 
souls”  seventy-five  men  are  meant.  And  the  ex¬ 
pression,  “not  in  words  which  man’s  wisdom 
teacheth,”  might  equally  be  “not  in  words  which 
fleshly  wisdom  teacheth”;  and  the  expression, 
“ye  walk  according  to  man,”  might  be  “accord¬ 
ing  to  the  flesh.”  And  this  is  still  more  apparent 
in  the  words  which  followed:  “For  while  one 
saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  another,  I  am  of  Apol- 
los,  are  ye  not  men?”  The  same  thing  which  he 
had  before  expressed  by  “ye  are  animal,”  “ye 
are  carnal,”  he  now  expresses  by  “ye  are  men” ; 
that  is,  ye  live  according  to  man,  not  according 
to  God,  for  if  you  lived  according  to  Him,  you 
should  be  gods. 

Chap.  5.  That  the  opinion  of  the  Platonists  re¬ 
garding  the  nature  of  body  and  soul  is  not  so 
censurable  as  that  of  the  Manichceans ,  but 
that  even  it  is  objectionable,  because  it  as¬ 
cribes  the  origin  of  vices  to  the  nature  of  the 
flesh 

There  is  no  need,  therefore,  that  in  our  sins 
and  vices  we  accuse  the  nature  of  the  flesh  to  the 
injury  of  the  Creator,  for  in  its  own  kind  and  de¬ 
gree  the  flesh  is  good ;  but  to  desert  the  Creator 
good,  and  live  according  to  the  created  good,  is 
not  good,  whether  a  man  choose  to  live  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  flesh,  or  according  to  the  soul,  or  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  whole  human  nature,  which  is 
composed  of  flesh  and  soul,  and  which  is  there¬ 
fore  spoken  of  either  by  the  name  flesh  alone,  or 
by  the  name  soul  alone.  For  he  who  extols  the 
nature  of  the  soul  as  the  chief  good,  and  con¬ 
demns  the  nature  of  the  flesh  as  if  it  were  evil, 
assuredly  is  fleshly  both  in  his  love  of  the  soul 
and  hatred  of  the  flesh;  for  these  his  feelings 
arise  from  human  fancy,  not  from  divine  truth. 
The  Platonists,  indeed,  are  not  so  foolish  as, 
with  the  Manichaeans,  to  detest  our  present  bod¬ 
ies  as  an  evil  nature;  for  they  attribute  all  the 
elements  of  which  this  visible  and  tangible  world 
is  compacted,  with  all  their  qualities,  to  God 
their  Creator.  Nevertheless,  from  the  death- 
infected  members  and  earthly  construction  of 
the  body  they  believe  the  soul  is  so  affected  that 
there  are  thus  originated  in  it  the  diseases  of 
4Rom.  3.  20.  5Gen.  46.  27. 


380  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


desiies,  and  fears,  and  joy.  and  sorrow,  under 
which  four  perturbations,  as  Cicero  calls  them, 
or  passions,  as  most  prefer  to  name  them  with 
the  Greeks,  is  included  the  whole  viciousness  of 
human  life.  But  if  this  be  so.  how  is  it  that 
JEneas  in  Virgil,  when  he  had  heard  from  his 
father  in  Hades  that  the  souls  should  return  to 
bodies,  expresses  surprise  at  this  declaration, 
and  exclaims : 

0  father!  and  can  thought  conceive 
That  happy  souls  this  realm  would  leave , 

And  seek  the  upper  sky, 

With  sluggish  clay  to  reunite? 

T his  direful  longing  for  the  light, 

Whence  comes  it,  say,  and  why?1 

This  direful  longing,  then,  does  it  still  exist  even 
in  that  boasted  purity  of  the  disembodied  spir¬ 
its,  and  does  it  still  proceed  from  the  death- 
infected  members  and  earthly  limbs?  Does  he 
not  assert  that,  when  they  begin  to  long  to  re¬ 
turn*  to  the  body,  they  have  already  been  deliv¬ 
ered  from  all  these  so-called  pestilences  of  the 
body?  From  which  we  gather  that,  were  this 
endlessly  alternating  purification  and  defilement 
of  departing  and  returning  souls  as  true  as  it  is 
most  certainly  false,  yet  it  could  not  be  averred 
that  all  culpable  and  vicious  motions  of  the  soul 
originate  in  the  earthly  body;  for,  on  their  own 
showing,  “this  direful  longing,”  to  use  the  words 
of  their  noble  exponent,  is  so  extraneous  to  the 
body,  that  it  moves  the  soul  that  is  purged  of  all 
bodily  taint,  and  is  existing  apart  from  any  body 
whatever,  and  moves  it,  moreover,  to  be  embod¬ 
ied  again.  So  that  even  they  themselves  ac¬ 
knowledge  that  the  soul  is  not  only  moved  to  de¬ 
sire,  fear,  joy,  sorrow,  by  the  flesh,  but  that  it 
can  also  be  agitated  with  these  emotions  at  its 
own  instance. 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  character  of  the  human  will 
which  makes  the  affections  of  the  soul  right 
or  wrong 

But  the  character  of  the  human  will  is  of  mo¬ 
ment;  because,  if  it  is  wrong,  these  motions  of 
the  soul  will  be  wrong,  but  if  it  is  right,  they  will 
be  not  merely  blameless,  but  even  praiseworthy. 
For  the  will  is  in  them  all;  yea,  none  of  them  is 
anything  else  than  will.  For  what  are  desire  and 
joy  but  a  volition  of  consent  to  the  things  we 
wish?  And  what  are  fear  and  sadness  but  a  voli¬ 
tion  of  aversion  from  the  things  which  we  do 
not  wish?  But  when  consent  takes  the  form  of 
seeking  to  possess  the  things  we  wish,  this  is 
called  desire;  and  when  consent  takes  the  form 
of  enjoying  the  things  we  wish,  this  is  called  joy. 

1AEneid,  bk.  vi.  719-21. 


In  like  manner,  when  we  turn  with  aversion 
from  that  which  we  do  not  wish  to  happen,  this 
volition  is  termed  fear;  and  when  we  turn  away 
from  that  which  has  happened  against  our  will, 
this  act  of  will  is  called  sorrow.  And  generally  in 
respect  of  all  that  we  seek  or  shun,  as  a  man’s 
will  is  attracted  or  repelled,  so  it  is  changed  and 
turned  into  these  different  affections.  Wherefore 
the  man  who  lives  according  to  God,  and  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  man,  ought  to  be  a  lover  of  good,  and 
therefore  a  hater  of  evil.  And  since  no  one  is 
evil  by  nature,  but  whoever  is  evil  is  evil  by  vice, 
he  who  lives  according  to  God  ought  to  cherish 
towards  evil  men  a  perfect  hatred,  so  that  he 
shall  neither  hate  the  man  because  of  his  vice, 
nor  love  the  vice  because  of  the  man,  but  hate 
the  vice  and  love  the  man.  For  the  vice  being 
cursed,  all  that  ought  to  be  loved,  and  nothing 
that  ought  to  be  hated,  will  remain. 

Chap.  7.  That  the  words  love  and  regard  (amor 
and  dilectio)  are  in  Scripture  used  indiffer¬ 
ently  of  good  and  evil  affection 
He  who  resolves  to  love  God,  and  to  love  his 
neighbour  as  himself,  not  according  to  man  but 
according  to  God.  is  on  account  of  this  love  said 
to  be  of  a  good  will ;  and  this  is  in  Scripture  more 
commonly  called  charity,  but  it  is  also,  even  in 
the  same  books,  called  love.  For  the  apostle  says 
that  the  man  to  be  elected  as  a  ruler  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  must  be  a  lover  of  good.2  And  when  the  Lord 
Himself  had  asked  Peter,  “Hast  thou  a  regard 
for  me  ( diligis )  more  than  these?”  Peter  re¬ 
plied,  “Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  (amo) 
Thee.”  And  again  a  second  time  the  Lord  asked 
not  whether  Peter  loved  ( amaret )  Him,  but 
whether  he  had  a  regard  ( diligeret )  for  Him, 
and  he  again  answered,  “Lord,  Thou  knowest 
that  I  love  (amo)  Thee.”  But  on  the  third  inter¬ 
rogation  the  Lord  Himself  no  longer  says,  “Hast 
thou  a  regard  ( diligis )  for  me,”  but  “Lovest 
thou  (amas)  me?”  And  then  the  evangelist  adds, 
“Peter  was  grieved  because  He  said  unto  him 
the  third  time,  Lovest  thou  (amas)  me?”  though 
the  Lord  had  not  said  three  times  but  only  once, 
“Lovest  thou  (amas)  me?”  and  twice  “ Diligis 
me?”  from  which  we  gather  that,  even  when  the 
Lord  said  (< diligis”  He  used  an  equivalent  for 
uamas”  Peter,  too,  throughout  used  one  word 
for  the  one  thing,  and  the  third  time  also  replied, 
“Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things,  Thou  knowest 
that  I  love  (amo)  Thee.”3 

I  have  judged  it  right  to  mention  this,  be¬ 
cause  some  are  of  opinion  that  charity  or  regard 

2Tit.  1.  8,  according  to  Greek  and  Vulgate. 

3John,  21.  15-17. 


THE  CITY  OF 

( dilectio )  is  one  thing,  love  (amor)  another. 
They  say  that  dilectio  is  used  of  a  good  affec¬ 
tion,  amor  of  an  evil  love.  But  it  is  very  certain 
that  even  secular  literature  knows  no  such  dis¬ 
tinction.  However,  it  is  for  the  philosophers  to 
determine  whether  and  how  they  differ,  though 
their  own  writings  sufficiently  testify  that  they 
make  great  account  of  love  (amor)  placed  on 
good  objects  and  even  on  God  Himself.  But  we 
wished  to  show  that  the  Scriptures  of  our  reli¬ 
gion,  whose  authority  we  prefer  to  all  writings 
whatsoever,  make  no  distinction  between  amor, 
dilectio,  and  caritas;  and  we  have  already  shown 
that  amor  is  used  in  a  good  connection.  And  if 
any  one  fancy  that  amor  is  no  doubt  used  both 
of  good  and  bad  loves,  but  that  dilectio  is  re¬ 
served  for  the  good  only,  let  him  remember 
what  the  psalm  says,  “He  that  loveth  (diligit) 
iniquity  hateth  his  own  soul”  j1  and  the  words  of 
the  Apostle  John,  “If  any  man  love  (diligere) 
the  world,  the  love  (dilectio)  of  the  Father  is 
not  in  him.”2  Here  you  have  in  one  passage  dilec¬ 
tio  used  both  in  a  good  and  a  bad  sense.  And  if 
any  one  demands  an  instance  of  amor  being 
used  in  a  bad  sense  (for  we  have  already  shown 
its  use  in  a  good  sense),  let  him  read  the  words, 
“For  men  shall  be  lovers  (amantes)  of  their  own 
selves,  lovers  (amatores)  of  money.”3 

The  right  will  is,  therefore,  well-directed  love, 
and  the  wrong  will  is  ill-directed  love.  Love, 
then,  yearning  to  have  what  is  loved,  is  desire ; 
and  having  and  enjoying  it,  is  joy;  fleeing  what 
is  opposed  to  it,  it  is  fear;  and  feeling  what  is 
opposed  to  it,  when  it  has  befallen  it,  it  is  sad¬ 
ness.  Now  these  motions  are  evil  if  the  love  is 
evil;  good  if  the  love  is  good.  What  we  assert  let 
us  prove  from  Scripture.  The  apostle  “desires  to 
depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ.”4  And,  “My  soul 
desired  to  long  for  Thy  judgments”;5  or  if  it 
is  more  appropriate  to  say,  “My  soul  longed  to 
desire  Thy  judgments.”  And,  “The  desire  of 
wisdom  bringeth  to  a  kingdom  ”6  Yet  there  has 
always  obtained  the  usage  of  understanding  de¬ 
sire  and  concupiscence  in  a  bad  sense  if  the  ob¬ 
ject  be  not  defined.  But  joy  is  used  in  a  good 
sense:  “Be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye 
righteous.”7  And,  “Thou  hast  put  gladness  in 
my  heart.”8  And,  “Thou  wilt  fill  me  with  joy 
with  Thy  countenance.”9  Fear  is  used  in  a  good 
sense  by  the  apostle  when  he  says,  “Work  out 
your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.”10  And, 
“Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear.”11  And,  “I  fear, 

Ts.  ii.  5.  2I  John,  2.  15.  3II  Tim.  3.  2. 

4Phil.  1.  23.  5Ps.  1 19.  20.  6Wisd.  6.  20. 

7Ps.  32.  11.  8Ps.  4.  7.  9Ps.  16.  11. 

10Phil.  2.  12.  nRom.  11.  20. 


GOD  XIV.  6-8  381 

lest  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve 
through  his  subtlety,  so  your  minds  should  be 
corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in 
Christ.”12  But  with  respect  to  sadness,  which 
Cicero  prefers  to  call  sickness  (cegritudo),  and 
Virgil  pain  (dolor)  (as  he  says,  “Dolent  gau- 
dentque ”13),  but  which  I  prefer  to  call  sorrow, 
because  sickness  and  pain  are  more  commonly 
used  to  express  bodily  suffering — with  respect  to 
this  emotion,  I  say,  the  question  whether  it  can 
be  used  in  a  good  sense  is  more  difficult. 

Chap.  8.  Of  the  three  perturbations,  which  the 
Stoics  admitted  in  the  soul  of  the  wise  man  to 
the  exclusion  of  grief  or  sadness,  which  the 
manly  mind  ought  not  to  experience 
Those  emotions  which  the  Greeks  call  evira- 
de'iai,  and  which  Cicero  calls  constantice ,  the 
Stoics  would  restrict  to  three;  and,  instead 
of  three  “perturbations”  in  the  soul  of  the  wise 
man,  they  substituted  severally,  in  place  of  de¬ 
sire,  will;  in  place  of  joy,  contentment;  and  for 
fear,  caution;  and  as  to  sickness  or  pain,  which 
we,  to  avoid  ambiguity,  preferred  to  call  sorrow, 
they  denied  that  it  could  exist  in  the  mind  of  a 
wise  man.  Will,  they  say,  seeks  the  good,  for  this 
the  wise  man  does.  Contentment  has  its  object 
in  good  that  is  possessed,  and  this  the  wise  man 
continually  possesses.  Caution  avoids  evil,  and 
this  the  wise  man  ought  to  avoid.  But  sorrow 
arises  from  evil  that  has  already  happened;  and 
as  they  suppose  that  no  evil  can  happen  to  the 
wise  man,  there  can  be  no  representative  of  sor¬ 
row  in  his  mind.  According  to  them,  therefore, 
none  but  the  wise  man  wills,  is  contented,  uses 
caution;  and  that  the  fool  can  do  no  more  than 
desire,  rejoice,  fear,  be  sad.  The  former  three 
affections  Cicero  calls  constantice,  the  last  four 
perturbationes.  Many,  however,  call  these  last 
passiones;  and,  as  I  have  said,  the  Greeks  call 
the  former  eviradelai,  and  the  latter  ttclOtj. 
And  when  I  made  a  careful  examination  of 
Scripture  to  find  whether  this  terminology  was 
sanctioned  by  it,  I  came  upon  this  saying  of  the 
prophet :  “There  is  no  contentment  to  the  wick¬ 
ed,  saith  the  Lord”;14  as  if  the  wicked  might 
more  properly  rejoice  than  be  contented  regard¬ 
ing  evils,  for  contentment  is  the  property  of  the 
good  and  godly.  I  found  also  that  verse  in  the 
Gospel:  “Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should 
do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them”;15  which 
seems  to  imply  that  evil  or  shameful  things  may 
be  the  object  of  desire,  but  not  of  will.  Indeed, 
some  interpreters  have  added  “good  things,”  to 

12II  Cor.  11.  3.  l3y£neid,  bk.  vi.  733. 

14Isa.  57.  21.  15Matt.  7.  12. 


382  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


make  the  expression  more  in  conformity  with 
customary  usage,  and  have  given  this  meaning, 
“Whatsoever  good  deeds  that  ye  would  that 
men  should  do  unto  you.”  For  they  thought  that 
this  would  prevent  any  one  from  wishing  other 
men  to  provide  him  with  unseemly,  not  to  say 
shameful  gratifications — luxurious  banquets, 
for  example — on  the  supposition  that  if  he  re¬ 
turned  the  like  to  them  he  would  be  fulfilling 
this  precept.  In  the  Greek  Gospel,  however, 
from  which  the  Latin  is  translated,  “good”  does 
not  occur,  but  only,  “All  things  whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even 
so  unto  them,”  and,  as  I  believe,  because  “good” 
is  already  included  in  the  word  “would”;  for 
He  does  not  say  “desire.” 

Yet  though  we  may  sometimes  avail  our¬ 
selves  of  these  precise  proprieties  of  language, 
we  are  not  to  be  always  bridled  by  them;  and 
when  we  read  those  writers  against  whose  au¬ 
thority  it  is  unlawful  to  reclaim,  we  must  ac¬ 
cept  the  meanings  above  mentioned  in  passages 
where  a  right  sense  can  be  educed  by  no  other 
interpretation,  as  in  those  instances  we  adduced 
partly  from  the  prophet,  partly  from  the  Gos¬ 
pel.  For  who  does  not  know  that  the  wicked  ex¬ 
ult  with  joy?  Yet  “there  is  no  contentment  for 
the  wicked,  saith  the  Lord.”  And  how  so,  unless 
because  contentment,  when  the  word  is  used  in 
its  proper  and  distinctive  significance,  means 
something  different  from  joy?  In  like  manner, 
who  would  deny  that  it  were  wrong  to  enjoin 
upon  men  that  whatever  they  desire  others  to  do 
to  them  they  should  themselves  do  to  others, 
lest  they  should  mutually  please  one  another  by 
shameful  and  illicit  pleasure?  And  yet  the  pre¬ 
cept,  “Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do 
unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them,”  is  very  whole¬ 
some  and  just.  And  how  is  this,  unless  because 
the  will  is  in  this  place  used  strictly,  and  signifies 
that  will  which  cannot  have  evil  for  its  object? 
But  ordinary  phraseology  would  not  have  al¬ 
lowed  the  saying,  “Be  unwilling  to  make  any 
manner  of  lie,”1  had  there  not  been  also  an  evil 
will,  whose  wickedness  separates  it  from  that 
which  the  angels  celebrated,  “Peace  on  earth,  of 
good  will  to  men.”2  For  “good”  is  superfluous  if 
there  is  no  other  kind  of  will  but  good  will.  And 
why  should  the  apostle  have  mentioned  it  among 
the  praises  of  charity  as  a  great  thing,  that  “it 
rejoices  not  in  iniquity,”  unless  because  wicked¬ 
ness  does  so  rejoice?  For  even  with  secular  writ¬ 
ers  these  words  are  used  indifferently.  For  Ci¬ 
cero,  that  most  fertile  of  orators,  says,  “I  desire, 
conscript  fathers,  to  be  merciful.”  And  who 
^cclus.  7.  13.  2Luke,  2.  14. 


would  be  so  pedantic  as  to  say  that  he  should 
have  said  “I  will”  rather  than  “I  desire,”  be¬ 
cause  the  word  is  used  in  a  good  connection? 
Again,  in  Terence,  the  profligate  youth,  burning 
with  wild  lust,  says,  “I  will  nothing  else  than 
Philumena.”  That  this  “will”  was  lust  is  suffi¬ 
ciently  indicated  by  the  answer  of  his  old  serv¬ 
ant  which  is  there  introduced:  “How  much  bet¬ 
ter  were  it  to  try  and  banish  that  love  from  your 
heart,  than  to  speak  so  as  uselessly  to  inflame 
your  passion  still  more!”  And  that  content¬ 
ment  was  used  by  secular  writers  in  a  bad  s^nse, 
that  verse  of  Virgil  testifies,  in  which  he  most 
succinctly  comprehends  these  four  perturba¬ 
tions — 

Hence  they  fear  and  desire ,  grieve  and  are  content .3 
The  same  author  had  also  used  the  expression, 
“the  evil  contentments  of  the  mind.”4  So  that 
good  and  bad  men  alike  will,  are  cautious  and 
contented;  or,  to  say  the  same  thing  in  other 
words,  good  and  bad  men  alike  desire,  fear,  re¬ 
joice,  but  the  former  in  a  good,  the  latter  in  a 
bad  fashion,  according  as  the  will  is  right  or 
wrong.  Sorrow  itself,  too,  which  the  Stoics 
would  not  allow  to  be  represented  in  the  mind 
of  the  wise  man,  is  used  in  a  good  sense,  and 
especially  in  our  writings.  For  the  apostle  praises 
the  Corinthians  because  they  had  a  godly  sor¬ 
row.  But  possibly  some  one  may  say  that  the 
apostle  congratulated  them  because  they  were 
penitently  sorry,  and  that  such  sorrow  can  exist 
only  in  those  who  have  sinned.  For  these  are  his 
words:  “For  I  perceive  that  the  same  epistle 
hath  made  you  sorry,  though  it  were  but  for  a 
season.  Now  I  rejoice,  not  that  ye  were  made 
sorry,  but  that  ye  sorrowed  to  repentance;  for 
ye  were  made  sorry  after  a  godly  manner,  that 
ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in  nothing.  For 
godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salvation 
not  to  be  repented  of,  but  the  sorrow  of  the 
world  worketh  death.  For,  behold,  this  selfsame 
thing  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a  godly  sort,  what 
carefulness  it  wrought  in  you!”5  Consequently 
the  Stoics  may  defend  themselves  by  replying, 
that  sorrow  is  indeed  useful  for  repentance  of 
sin,  but  that  this  can  have  no  place  in  the  mind 
of  the  wise  man,  inasmuch  as  no  sin  attaches  to 
him  of  which  he  could  sorrowfully  repent,  nor 
any  other  evil  the  endurance  or  experience  of 
which  could  make  him  sorrowful.  For  they  say 
that  Alcibiades  (if  my  memory  does  not  deceive 
me),  who  believed  himself  happy,  shed  tears 
when  Socrates  argued  with  him,  and  demon- 

3+'£neid,  bk.  vi.  733.  4JZneid,  bk.  v.  278. 

6II  Cor.  7.  8-1 1. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIV.  o  383 


strated  that  he  was  miserable  because  he  was 
foolish.  In  his  case,  therefore,  folly  was  the 
cause  of  this  useful  and  desirable  sorrow,  where¬ 
with  a  man  mourns  that  he  is  what  he  ought 
not  to  be.  But  the  Stoics  maintain  not  that  the 
fool,  but  that  the  wise  man,  cannot  be  sorrow¬ 
ful. 

Chap.  9.  Of  the  perturbations  of  the  soul  which 
appear  as  right  affections  in  the  life  of  the 
righteous 

But  so  far  as  regards  this  question  of  mental 
perturbations,  we  have  answered  these  philoso¬ 
phers  in  the  ninth  book1  of  this  work,  showing 
that  it  is  rather  a  verbal  than  a  real  dispute,  and 
that  they  seek  contention  rather  than  truth. 
Among  ourselves,  according  to  the  sacred  Scrip¬ 
tures  and  sound  doctrine,  the  citizens  of  the  holy 
city  of  God,  who  live  according  to  God  in  the 
pilgrimage  of  this  life,  both  fear  and  desire,  and 
grieve  and  rejoice.  And  because  their  love  is 
rightly  placed,  all  these  affections  of  theirs  are 
right.  They  fear  eternal  punishment,  they  desire 
eternal  life;  they  grieve  because  they  them¬ 
selves  groan  within  themselves,  waiting  for  the 
adoption,  the  redemption  of  their  body;2  they 
rejoice  in  hope,  because  there  “shall  be  brought 
to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swal¬ 
lowed  up  in  victory.”3  In  .like  manner  they  fear 
to  sin,  they  desire  to  persevere;  they  grieve  in 
sin,  they  rejoice  in  good  works.  They  fear  to  sin, 
because  they  hear  that  “because  iniquity  shall 
abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold.”4  They 
desire  to  persevere,  because  they  hear  that  it  is 
written,  “He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be 
saved.”5  They  grieve  for  sin,  hearing  that  “If 
we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  our¬ 
selves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.”6  They  rejoice 
in  good  works,  because  they  hear  that  “the  Lord 
loveth  a  cheerful  giver.”7  In  like  manner,  ac¬ 
cording  as  they  are  strong  or  weak,  they  fear  or 
desire  to  be  tempted,  grieve  or  rejoice  in  temp¬ 
tation.  They  fear  to  be  tempted,  because  they 
hear  the  injunction,  “If  a  man  be  overtaken  in 
a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an 
one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness;  considering  thy¬ 
self,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted.”8  They  desire  to 
be  tempted,  because  they  hear  one  of  the  heroes 
of  the  city  of  God  saying,  “Examine  me,  0 
Lord,  and  tempt  me:  try  my  reins  and  my 
heart.”9  They  grieve  in  temptations,  because 
they  see  Peter  weeping ; 10  they  rejoice  in  tempta- 

^haps.  4,  5.  2Rom.  8.  23.  3  ICor.  15.  54. 

4Matt.  24.  12.  6Matt.  10.  22.  6I  John,  1.  8. 

7II  Cor.  9.  7.  8Gal.  6.  1.  9Ps.  26.  2. 

10Matt.  26.  75. 


tions.  because  they  hear  James  saying,  “My 
brethren,  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers 
temptations.”11 

And  not  only  on  their  own  account  do  they 
experience  these  emotions,  but  also  on  account 
of  those  whose  deliverance  they  desire  and 
whose  perdition  they  fear,  and  whose  loss  or 
salvation  affects  them  with  grief  or  with  joy. 
For  if  we  who  have  come  into  the  Church  from 
among  the  Gentiles  may  suitably  instance  that 
noble  and  mighty  hero  who  glories  in  his  infirmi¬ 
ties,  the  teacher  ( doctor )  of  the  nations  in  faith 
and  truth,  who  also  laboured  more  than  all  his 
fellow-apostles,  and  instructed  the  tribes  of 
God’s  people  by  his  epistles,  which  edified  not 
only  those  of  his  own  time,  but  all  those  who 
were  to  be  gathered  in — that  hero,  I  say,  and 
athlete  of  Christ,  instructed  by  Him,  anointed 
of  His  Spirit,  crucified  with  Him,  glorious  in 
Him,  lawfully  maintaining  a  great  conflict  on  the 
theatre  of  this  world,  and  being  made  a  spectacle 
to  angels  and  men,12  and  pressing  onwards  for 
the  prize  of  his  high  calling13 — very  joyfully  do 
we  with  the  eyes  of  faith  behold  him  rejoicing 
with  them  that  rejoice,  and  weeping  with  them 
that  weep ; 14  though  hampered  by  fightings  with¬ 
out  and  fears  within;15  desiring  to  depart  and 
to  be  with  Christ;16  longing  to  see  the  Romans, 
that  he  might  have  some  fruit  among  them  as 
among  other  Gentiles;17  being  jealous  over  the 
Corinthians,  and  fearing  in  that  jealousy  lest 
their  minds  should  be  corrupted  from  the  chas¬ 
tity  that  is  in  Christ;18  having  great  heaviness 
and  continual  sorrow  of  heart  for  the  Israel¬ 
ites,19  because  they,  being  ignorant  of  God’s 
righteousness,  and  going  about  to  establish  their 
own  righteousness,  have  not  submitted  them¬ 
selves  unto  the  righteousness  of  God;20  and  ex¬ 
pressing  not  only  his  sorrow,  but  bitter  lamenta¬ 
tion  over  some  who  had  formally  sinned  and  had 
not  repented  of  their  uncleanness  and  fornica¬ 
tions.21 

If  these  emotions  and  affections,  arising  as 
they  do  from  the  love  of  what  is  good  and  from 
a  holy  charity,  are  to  be  called  vices,  then  let  us 
allow  these  emotions  which  are  truly  vices  to 
pass  under  the  name  of  virtues.  But  since  these 
affections,  when  they  are  exercised  in  a  becom¬ 
ing  way,  follow  the  guidance  of  right  reason, 
who  will  dare  to  say  that  they  are  diseases  or 
vicious  passions?  Wherefore  even  the  Lord 
Himself,  when  He  condescended  to  lead  a  hu- 

nJas.  1.  2.  12I  Cor.  4.  9.  13Phil.  3.  14. 

14Rom.  12.  15.  16II  Cor.  7.  5.  16Phil.  1.  23. 

17Rom.  1.  n-13.  18II  Cor.  n.  1-3.  19Rom.  9.  2. 

20Rom.  10.  3.  21II  Cor.  12.  21. 


384  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


man  life  in  the  form  of  a  slave,  had  no  sin  what¬ 
ever,  and  yet  exercised  these  emotions  where 
He  judged  they  should  be  exercised.  For  as  there 
was  in  Him  a  true  human  body  and  a  true  hu¬ 
man  soul,  so  was  there  also  a  true  human  emo¬ 
tion.  When,  therefore,  we  read  in  the  Gospel 
that  the  hardheartedness  of  the  Jews  moved 
Him  to  sorrowful  indignation,1  that  He  said. 
“I  am  glad  for  your  sakes,  to  the  intent  ye  may 
believe,”2  that  when  about  to  raise  Lazarus  He 
even  shed  tears.3  that  He  earnestly  desired  to 
eat  the  passover  with  His  disciples,4  that  as  His 
passion  drew  near  His  soul  was  sorrowful,5 
these  emotions  are  certainly  not  falsely  ascribed 
to  Him.  But  as  He  became  man  when  it  pleased 
Him,  so,  in  the  grace  of  His  definite  purpose, 
when  it  pleased  Him  He  experienced  those  emo¬ 
tions  in  His  human  soul. 

But  we  must  further  make  the  admission,  that 
even  when  these  affections  are  well  regulated, 
and  according  to  God’s  will,  they  are  peculiar  to 
this  life,  not  to  that  future  life  we  look  for,  and 
that  often  we  yield  to  them  against  our  will. 
And  thus  sometimes  we  weep  in  spite  of  our¬ 
selves,  being  carried  beyond  ourselves,  not  in¬ 
deed  by  culpable  desire,  but  by  praiseworthy 
charity.  In  us,  therefore,  these  affections  arise 
from  human  infirmity;  but  it  was  not  so  with 
the  Lord  Jesus,  for  even  His  infirmity  was  the 
consequence  of  His  power.  But  so  long  as  we 
wear  the  infirmity  of  this  life,  we  are  rather 
worse  men  than  better  if  we  have  none  of  these 
emotions  at  all.  For  the  apostle  vituperated  and 
abominated  some  who,  as  he  said,  were  “without 
natural  affection.”6  The  sacred  Psalmist  also 
found  fault  with  those  of  whom  he  said,  “I 
looked  for  some  to  lament  with  me,  and  there 
was  none.”7  For  to  be  quite  free  from  pain  while 
we  are  in  this  place  of  misery  is  only  purchased, 
as  one  of  this  world’s  literati  perceived  and  re¬ 
marked,  at  the  price  of  blunted  sensibilities  both 
of  mind  and  body.  And  therefore  that  which 
the  Greeks  call  curadeLa ,  and  what  the  Latins 
would  call,  if  their  language  would  allow  them, 
“ impassibilitas  ”  if  it  be  taken  to  mean  an  im¬ 
passibility  of  spirit  and  not  of  body,  or,  in  other 
words,  a  freedom  from  those  emotions  which 
are  contrary  to  reason  and  disturb  the  mind, 
then  it  is  obviously  a  good  and  most  desirable 
quality,  but  it  is  not  one  which  is  attainable  in 
this  life.  For  the  words  of  the  apostle  are  the 
confession,  not  of  the  common  herd,  but  of  the 
eminently  pious,  just,  and  holy  men:  “If  we  say 

1Mark,  3.  5.  2John,  11.  15.  3John,  11.  35. 

4Luke,  22.  15.  6Matt.  26.  38.  6Rom.  1.  31. 

7Ps.  69.  20. 


we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the 
truth  is  not  in  us.”8  When  there  shall  be  no  sin 
in  a  man,  then  there  shall  be  this  airaOtia, 
At  present  it  is  enough  if  we  live  without  crime ; 
and  he  who  thinks  he  lives  without  sin  puts 
aside  not  sin,  but  pardon.  And  if  that  is  to  be 
called  apathy,  where  the  mind  is  the  subject  of 
no  emotion,  then  who  would  not  consider  this 
insensibility  to  be  worse  than  all  vices?  It  may, 
indeed,  reasonably  be  maintained  that  the  per¬ 
fect  blessedness  we  hope  for  shall  be  free  from 
all  sting  of  fear  or  sadness;  but  who  that  is  not 
quite  lost  to  truth  would  say  that  neither  love 
nor  joy  shall  be  experienced  there?  But  if  by 
apathy  a  condition  be  meant  in  which  no  fear 
terrifies  nor  any  pain  annoys,  we  must  in  this 
life  renounce  such  a  state  if  we  would  live  ac¬ 
cording  to  God’s  will,  but  may  hope  to  enjoy  it 
in  that  blessedness  which  is  promised  as  our 
eternal  condition. 

For  that  fear  of  which  the  Apostle  John  says, 
“There  is  no  fear  in  love;  but  perfect  love  cast- 
eth  out  fear,  because  fear  hath  torment.  He  that 
feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love”;9  that  fear 
is  not  of  the  same  kind  as  the  Apostle  Paul  felt 
lest  the  Corinthians  should  be  seduced  by  the 
subtlety  of  the  serpent;  for  love  is  susceptible 
of  this  fear,  yea,  love  alone  is  capable  of  it.  But 
the  fear  which  is  not  in  love  is  of  that  kind  of 
which  Paul  himself  says,  “For  ye  have  not  re¬ 
ceived  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear.”10  But 
as  for  that  “clean  fear  which  endureth  for 
ever,”11  if  it  is  to  exist  in  the  world  to  come  (and 
how  else  can  it  be  said  to  endure  for  ever?),  it  is 
not  a  fear  deterring  us  from  evil  which  may  hap¬ 
pen.  but  preserving  us  in  the  good  which  cannot 
be  lost.  For  where  the  love  of  acquired  good  is 
unchangeable,  there  certainly  the  fear  that 
avoids  evil  is,  if  I  may  say  so,  free  from  anxiety. 
For  under  the  name  of  “clean  fear”  David  sig¬ 
nifies  that  will  by  which  we  shall  necessarily 
shrink  from  sin,  and  guard  against  it,  not  with 
the  anxiety  of  weakness,  which  fears  that  we 
may  strongly  sin,  but  with  the  tranquillity  of 
perfect  love.  Or  if  no  kind  of  fear  at  all  shall 
exist  in  that  most  imperturbable  security  of  per¬ 
petual  and  blissful  delights,  then  the  expression. 
“The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  for 
ever,”  must  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  that 
other,  “The  patience  of  the  poor  shall  not  perish 
for  ever.”12  For  patience,  which  is  necessary  only 
where  ills  are  to  be  borne,  shall  not  be  eternal, 
but  that  which  patience  leads  us  to  will  be  eter¬ 
nal.  So  perhaps  this  “clean  fear”  is  said  to  en- 

8I  John,  1.  8.  9I  John,  4.  18.  10Rom.  8.  15. 

11Ps.  19.  9.  12Ps.  9.  18. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIV.  io-ii 


dure  for  ever,  because  that  to  which  fear  leads 
shall  endure. 

And  since  this  is  so — since  we  must  live  a 
good  life  in  order  to  attain  to  a  blessed  life — a 
good  life  has  all  these  affections  right,  a  bad  life 
has  them  wrong.  But  in  the  blessed  life  eternal 
there  will  be  love  and  joy,  not  only  right,  but 
also  assured;  but  fear  and  grief  there  will  be 
none.  Whence  it  already  appears  in  some  sort 
what  manner  of  persons  the  citizens  of  the  city 
of  God  must  be  in  this  their  pilgrimage,  who  live 
after  the  spirit,  not  after  the  flesh — that  is  to 
say,  according  to  God,  not  according  to  man — 
and  what  manner  of  persons  they  shall  be  also 
in  that  immortality  whither  they  are  journeying. 
And  the  city  or  society  of  the  wicked,  who  live 
not  according  to  God,  but  according  to  man,  and 
who  accept  the  doctrines  of  men  or  devils  in  the 
worship  of  a  false  and  contempt  of  the  true  di¬ 
vinity,  is  shaken  with  those  wicked  emotions  as 
by  diseases  and  disturbances.  And  if  there  be 
some  of  its  citizens  who  seem  to  restrain  and,  as 
it  were,  temper  those  passions,  they  are  so  elated 
with  ungodly  pride,  that  their  disease  is  as  much 
greater  as  their  pain  is  less.  And  if  some,  with  a 
vanity  monstrous  in  proportion  to  its  rarity, 
have  become  enamoured  of  themselves  because 
they  can  be  stimulated  and  excited  by  no  emo¬ 
tion,  moved  or  bent  by  no  affection,  such  per¬ 
sons  rather  lose  all  humanity  than  obtain  true 
tranquillity.  For  a  thing  is  not  necessarily  right 
because  it  is  inflexible,  nor  healthy  because  it  is 
insensible. 

Chap.  io.  Whether  it  is  to  be  believed  that  our 
first  parents  in  Paradise ,  before  they  sinned , 
were  free  from  all  perturbation 
But  it  is  a  fair  question,  whether  our  first  par¬ 
ent  or  first  parents  (for  there  was  a  marriage  of 
two),  before  they  sinned,  experienced  in  their 
animal  body  such  emotions  as  we  shall  not  ex¬ 
perience  in  the  spiritual  body  when  sin  has  been 
purged  and  finally  abolished.  For  if  they  did, 
then  how  were  they  blessed  in  that  boasted 
place  6f  bliss,  Paradise?  For  who  that  is  affected 
by  fear  or  grief  can  be  called  absolutely  blessed? 
And  what  could  those  persons  fear  or  suffer  in 
such  affluence  of  blessings,  where  neither  death 
nor  ill-health  was  feared,  and  where  nothing  was 
wanting  which  a  good  will  could  desire,  and 
nothing  present  which  could  interrupt  man’s 
mental  or  bodily  enjoyment?  Their  love  to  God 
was  unclouded,  and  their  mutual  affection  was 
that  of  faithful  and  sincere  marriage;  and  from 
this  love  flowed  a  wonderful  delight,  because 
they  always  enjoyed  what  was  loved.  Their 


385 

avoidance  of  sin  was  tranquil;  and,  so  long  as  it 
was  maintained,  no  other  ill  at  all  could  invade 
them  and  bring  sorrow.  Or  did  they  perhaps  de¬ 
sire  to  touch  and  eat  the  forbidden  fruit,  yet 
feared  to  die;  and  thus  both  fear  and  desire  al¬ 
ready,  even  in  that  blissful  place,  preyed  upon 
those  first  of  mankind?  Away  with  the  thought 
that  such  could  be  the  case  where  there  was  no 
sin!  And,  indeed,  this  is  already  sin,  to  desire 
those  things  which  the  law  of  God  forbids  and 
to  abstain  from  them  through  fear  of  punish¬ 
ment,  not  through  love  of  righteousness.  Away, 
I  say,  with  the  thought,  that  before  there  was 
any  sin,  there  should  already  have  been  commit¬ 
ted  regarding  that  fruit  the  very  sin  which  our 
Lord  warns  us  against  regarding  a  woman: 
“Whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after 
her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already 
in  his  heart.”1  As  happy,  then,  as  were  these  our 
first  parents,  who  were  agitated  by  no  mental 
perturbations,  and  annoyed  by  no  bodily  dis¬ 
comforts,  so  happy  should  the  whole  human 
race  have  been,  had  they  not  introduced  that 
evil  which  they  have  transmitted  to  their  pos¬ 
terity,  and  had  none  of  their  descendants  com¬ 
mitted  iniquity  worthy  of  damnation;  but  this 
original  blessedness  continuing  until,  in  virtue 
of  that  benediction  which  said,  “Increase  and 
multiply,”2  the  number  of  the  predestined  saints 
should  have  been  completed,  there  would  then 
have  been  bestowed  that  higher  felicity  which  is 
enjoyed  by  the  most  blessed  angels — a  blessed¬ 
ness  in  which  there  should  have  been  a  secure 
assurance  that  no  one  would  sin,  and  no  one  die; 
and  so  should  the  saints  have  lived,  after  no 
taste  of  labour,  pain,  or  death,  as  now  they  shall 
live  in  the  resurrection,  after  they  have  endured 
all  these  things. 

Chap.  ii.  Of  the  fall  of  the  first  man ,  in  whom 
nature  was  created  good,  and  can  be  restored 
only  by  its  Author 

But  because  God  foresaw  all  things,  and  was 
therefore  not  ignorant  that  man  also  would  fall, 
we  ought  to  consider  this  holy  city  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  what  God  foresaw  and  ordained,  and 
not  according  to  our  own  ideas,  which  do  not 
embrace  God’s  ordination.  For  man,  by  his  sin. 
could  not  disturb  the  divine  counsel,  nor  compel 
God  to  change  what  He  had  decreed;  for  God’s 
foreknowledge  had  anticipated  both — that  is  to 
say,  both  how  evil  the  man  whom  He  had  cre¬ 
ated  good  should  become,  and  what  good  He 
Himself  should  even  thus  derive  from  him.  For 
though  God  is  said  to  change  His  determinations 
xMatt.  5.  28.  2Gen.  1.  28. 


386  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


(so  that  in  a  tropical  sense  the  Holy  Scripture 
says  even  that  God  repented1),  this  is  said  with 
reference  to  man’s  expectation,  or  the  order  of 
natural  causes,  and  not  with  reference  to  that 
which  the  Almighty  had  foreknown  that  He 
would  do.  Accordingly  God,  as  it  is  written, 
made  man  upright,2  and  consequently  with  a 
good  will.  For  if  he  had  not  had  a  good  will,  he 
could  not  have  been  upright.  The  good  will, 
then,  is  the  work  of  God;  for  God  created  him 
with  it.  But  the  first  evil  will,  which  preceded  all 
man’s  evil  acts,  was  rather  a  kind  of  falling  away 
from  the  work  of  God  to  its  own  works  than  any 
positive  work.  And  therefore  the  acts  resulting 
were  evil,  not  having  God,  but  the  will  itself  for 
their  end;  so  that  the  will  or  the  man  himself, 
so  far  as  his  will  is  bad,  was  as  it  were  the  evil 
tree  bringing  forth  evil  fruit.  Moreover,  the  bad 
will,  though  it  be  not  in  harmony  with,  but  op¬ 
posed  to  nature,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  vice  or 
blemish,  yet  it  is  true  of  it  as  of  all  vice,  that  it 
cannot  exist  except  in  a  nature,  and  only  in  a 
nature  created  out  of  nothing,  and  not  in  that 
which  the  Creator  has  begotten  of  Himself;- as 
He  begot  the  Word,  by  Whom  all  things  were 
made.  For  though  God  formed  man  of  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  yet  the  earth  itself,  and  every 
earthly  material,  is  absolutely  created  out  of 
nothing;  and  man’s  soul,  too,  God  created  out  of 
nothing,  and  joined  to  the  body,  when  He  made 
man.  But  evils  are  so  thoroughly  overcome  by 
good  that,  though  they  are  permitted  to  exist 
for  the  sake  of  demonstrating  how  the  most 
righteous  foresight  of  God  can  make  a  good  use 
even  of  them,  yet  good  can  exist  without  evil, 
as  in  the  true  and  supreme  God  Himself,  and  as 
in  every  invisible  and  visible  celestial  creature 
that  exists  above  this  murky  atmosphere;  but 
evil  cannot  exist  without  good,  because  the  na¬ 
tures  in  which  evil  exists,  in  so  far  as  they  are 
natures,  are  good.  And  evil  is  removed,  not  by 
removing  any  nature,  or  part  of  a  nature,  which 
had  been  introduced  by  the  evil,  but  by  healing 
and  correcting  that  which  had  been  vitiated  and 
depraved.  The  will,  therefore,  is  then  truly  free, 
when  it  is  not  the  slave  of  vices  and  sins.  Such 
was  it  given  us  by  God ;  and  this  being  lost  by  its 
own  fault,  can  only  be  restored  by  Him  Who  was 
able  at  first  to  give  it.  And  therefore  the  truth 
says,  “If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall 
be  free  indeed”;3  which  is  equivalent  to  saying, 
“If  the  Son  shall  save  you,  ye  shall  be  saved  in¬ 
deed.”  For  He  is  our  Liberator,  inasmuch  as  He 
is  our  Saviour. 

JGen.  6.  6;  and  I  Sam.  15.  11. 

2Eccles.  7.  29.  3I  John,  8.  36. 


Man  then  lived  with  God  for  his  rule  in  a 
paradise  at  once  physical  and  spiritual.  For  nei¬ 
ther  was  it  a  paradise  only  physical  for  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  body,  and  not  also  spiritual  for 
the  advantage  of  the  mind;  nor  was  it  only  spir¬ 
itual  to  afford  enjoyment  to  man  by  his  internal 
sensations,  and  not  also  physical  to  afford  him 
enjoyment  through  his  external  senses.  But  ob¬ 
viously  it  was  both  for  both  ends.  But  after  that 
proud  and  therefore  envious  angel  (of  whose 
fall  I  have  said  as  much  as  I  was  able  in  the 
eleventh  and  twelfth  books  of  this  work,  as  well 
as  that  of  his  fellows,  who,  from  being  God’s 
angels,  became  his  angels),  preferring  to  rule 
with  a  kind  of  pomp  of  empire  rather  than  to  be 
another’s  subject,  fell  from  the  spiritual  Para¬ 
dise,  and  essaying  to  insinuate  his  persuasive 
guile  into  the  mind  of  man,  whose  unfallen  con¬ 
dition  provoked  him  to  envy  now  that  himself 
was  fallen,  he  chose  the  serpent  as  his  mouth¬ 
piece  in  that  bodily  Paradise  in  which  it  and  all 
the  other  earthly  animals  were  living  with  those 
two  human  beings,  the  man  and  his  wife,  sub¬ 
ject  to  them,  and  harmless;  and  he  chose  the 
serpent  because,  being  slippery,  and  moving  in 
tortuous  windings,  it  was  suitable  for  his  pur¬ 
pose.  And  this  animal  being  subdued  to  his  wick¬ 
ed  ends  by  the  presence  and  superior  force  of  his 
angelic  nature,  he  abused  as  his  instrument,  and 
first  tried  his  deceit  upon  the  woman,  making 
his  assault  upon  the  weaker  part  of  that  human 
alliance,  that  he  might  gradually  gain  the  whole, 
and  not  supposing  that  the  man  would  readily 
give  ear  to  him,  or  be  deceived,  but  that  he 
might  yield  to  the  error  of  the  woman.  For  as 
Aaron  was  not  induced  to  agree  with  the  people 
when  they  blindly  wished  him  to  make  an  idol, 
and  yet  yielded  to  constraint;  and  as  it  is  not 
credible  that  Solomon  was  so  blind  as  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  idols  should  be  worshipped,  but  was 
drawn  over  to  such  sacrilege  by  the  blandish¬ 
ments  of  women;  so  we  cannot  believe  that 
Adam  was  deceived,  and  supposed  the  devil’s 
word  to  be  truth,  and  therefore  transgressed 
God’s  law,  but  that  he  by  the  drawings  of  kin¬ 
dred  yielded  to  the  woman,  the  husband  to  the 
wife,  the  one  human  being  to  the  only  other  hu¬ 
man  being.  For  not  without  significance  did  the 
apostle  say,  “And  Adam  was  not  deceived,  but 
the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  transgres¬ 
sion”;4  but  he  speaks  thus,  because  the  woman 
accepted  as  true  what  the  serpent  told  her,  but 
the  man  could  not  bear  to  be  severed  from  his 
only  companion,  even  though  this  involved  a 
partnership  in  sin.  He  was  not  on  this  account 
4I  Tim.  2.  14. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIV.  12-13  387 


less  culpable,  but  sinned  with  his  eyes  open.  And 
so  the  apostle  does  not  say,  “He  did  not  sin,” 
but  “He  was  not  deceived.”  For  he  shows  that 
he  sinned  when  he  says,  “By  one  man  sin  en¬ 
tered  into  the  world,”1  and  immediately  after 
more  distinctly,  “In  the  likeness  of  Adam’s 
transgression.”  But  he  meant  that  those  are  de¬ 
ceived  who  do  not  judge  that  which  they  do  to 
be  sin ;  but  he  knew.  Otherwise  how  were  it  true 
“Adam  was  not  deceived”?  But  having  as  yet  no 
experience  of  the  divine  severity,  he  was  possi¬ 
bly  deceived  in  so  far  as  he  thought  his  sin  ven¬ 
ial.  And  consequently  he  was  not  deceived  as 
the  woman  was  deceived,  but  he  was  deceived  as 
to  the  judgment  which  would  be  passed  on  his 
apology:  “The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be 
with  me,  she  gave  me,  and  I  did  eat.”2  What 
need  of  saying  more?  Although  they  were  not 
both  deceived  by  credulity,  yet  both  were  en¬ 
tangled  in  the  snares  of  the  devil,  and  taken  by 
sin. 

Chap.  12  .Of  the  nature  of  man's  first  sin 

If  any  one  finds  a  difficulty  in  understanding 
why  other  sins  do  not  alter  human  nature  as  it 
was  altered  by  the  transgression  of  those  first 
human  beings,  so  that  on  account  of  it  this  na¬ 
ture  is  subject  to  the  great  corruption  we  feel 
and  see,  and  to  death,  and  is  distracted  and 
tossed  with  so  many  furious  and  contending 
emotions,  and  is  certainly  far  different  from 
what  it  was  before  sin.  even  though  it  were  then 
lodged  in  an  animal  body — if,  I  say,  any  one  is 
moved  by  this,  he  ought  not  to  think  that  that 
sin  was  a  small  and  light  one  because  it  was  com¬ 
mitted  about  food,  and  that  not  bad  nor  noxious, 
except  because  it  was  forbidden;  for  in  that 
spot  of  singular  felicity  God  could  not  have  cre¬ 
ated  and  planted  any  evil  thing.  But  by  the  pre¬ 
cept  He  gave,  God  commanded  obedience,  which 
is,  in  a  sort,  the  mother  and  guardian  of  all  the 
virtues  in  the  reasonable  creature,  which  was  so 
created  that  submission  is  advantageous  to  it, 
while  the  fulfillment  of  its  own  will  in  prefer¬ 
ence  td  the  Creator’s  is  destruction.  And  as  this 
commandment  enjoining  abstinence  from  one 
kind  of  food  in  the  midst  of  great  abundance  of 
other  kinds  was  so  easy  to  keep — so  light  a  bur¬ 
den  to  the  memory — and,  above  all,  found  no  re¬ 
sistance  to  its  observance  in  lust,  which  only 
afterwards  sprung  up  as  the  penal  consequence 
of  sin,  the  iniquity  of  violating  it  was  all  the 
greater  in  proportion  to  the  ease  with  which  it 
might  have  been  kept. 

^om.  5.  12. 

2Gen.  3.  12. 


Chap.  13.  That  in  Adam's  sin  an  evil  will  pre¬ 
ceded  the  evil  act 

Our  first  parents  fell  into  open  disobedience 
because  already  they  were  secretly  corrupted; 
for  the  evil  act  had  never  been  done  had  not  an 
evil  will  preceded  it.  And  what  is  the  origin  of 
our  evil  will  but  pride?  For  “pride  is  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  sin.”3  And  what  is  pride  but  the  craving 
for  undue  exaltation?  And  this  is  undue  exalta¬ 
tion,  when  the  soul  abandons  Him  to  whom  it 
ought  to  cleave  as  its  end,  and  becomes  a  kind 
of  end  to  itself.  This  happens  when  it  becomes 
its  own  satisfaction.  And  it  does  so  when  it  falls 
away  from  that  unchangeable  good  which  ought 
to  satisfy  it  more  than  itself.  This  falling  away 
is  spontaneous;  for  if  the  will  had  remained 
steadfast  in  the  love  of  that  higher  and  change¬ 
less  good  by  which  it  was  illumined  to  intelli¬ 
gence  and  kindled  into  love,  it  would  not  have 
turned  away  to  find  satisfaction  in  itself  and  so 
become  frigid  and  benighted;  the  woman  would 
not  have  believed  the  serpent  spoke  the  truth, 
nor  would  the  man  have  preferred  the  request 
of  his  wife  to  the  command  of  God,  nor  have 
supposed  that  it  was  a  venial  transgression  to 
cleave  to  the  partner  of  his  life  even  in  a  part¬ 
nership  of  sin.  The  wicked  deed,  then— that  is  to 
say,  the  transgression  of  eating  the  forbidden 
fruit — was  committed  by  persons  who  were 
already  wicked.  That  “evil  fruit”4  could  be 
brought  forth  only  by  “a  corrupt  tree.”  But  that 
the  tree  was  evil  was  not  the  result  of  nature; 
for  certainly  it  could  become  so  only  by  the  vice 
of  the  will,  and  vice  is  contrary  to  nature.  Now, 
nature  could  not  have  been  depraved  by  vice 
had  it  not  been  made  out  of  nothing.  Conse¬ 
quently,  that  it  is  a  nature,  this  is  because  it  is 
made  by  God;  but  that  it  falls  away  from  Him, 
this  is  because  it  is  made  out  of  nothing.  But 
man  did  not  so  fall  away  as  to  become  absolute¬ 
ly  nothing;  but  being  turned  towards  himself, 
his  being  became  more  contracted  than  it  was 
when  he  clave  to  Him  Who  supremely  is.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  to  exist  in  himself,  that  is,  to  be  his 
own  satisfaction  after  abandoning  God,  is  not 
quite  to  become  a  nonentity,  but  to  approxi¬ 
mate  to  that.  And  therefore  the  holy  Scriptures 
designate  the  proud  by  another  name,  “self- 
pleasers.”  For  it  is  good  to  have  the  heart  lifted 
up,  yet  not  to  one’s  self,  for  this  is  proud,  but  to 
the  Lord,  for  this  is  obedient,  and  can  be  the 
act  only  of  the  humble.  There  is,  therefore, 
something  in  humility  which,  strangely  enough, 
exalts  the  heart,  and  something  in  pride  which 

3Ecclus.  10.  13.  4Matt.  7.  18. 


388  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


debases  it.  This  seems,  indeed,  to  be  contra¬ 
dictory,  that  loftiness  should  debase  and  lowli¬ 
ness  exalt.  But  pious  humility  enables  us  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  what  is  above  us:  and  nothing  is  more 
exalted  above  us  than  God;  and  therefore  hu¬ 
mility,  by  making  us  subject  to  God,  exalts  us. 
But  pride,  being  a  defect  of  nature,  by  the  very 
act  of  refusing  subjection  and  revolting  from 
Him  who  is  supreme,  falls  to  a  low  condition; 
and  then  comes  to  pass  what  is  written :  “Thou 
castedst  them  down  when  they  lifted  up  them¬ 
selves.”1  For  he  does  not  say,  “when  they  had 
been  lifted  up,”  as  if  first  they  were  exalted,  and 
then  afterwards  cast  down;  but  “when  they  lift¬ 
ed  up  themselves”  even  then  they  were  cast 
down — that  is  to  say,  the  very  lifting  up  was  al¬ 
ready  a  fall.  And  therefore  it  is  that  humility 
is  specially  recommended  to  the  city  of  God  as 
it  sojourns  in  this  world,  and  is  specially  exhib¬ 
ited  in  the  city  of  God,  and  in  the  person  of 
Christ  its  King;  while  the  contrary  vice  of  pride, 
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  sacred  writ¬ 
ings,  specially  rules  his  adversary  the  devil.  And 
certainly  this  is  the  great  difference  which  dis¬ 
tinguishes  the  two  cities  of  which  we  speak,  the 
one  being  the  society  of  the  godly  men,  the  other 
of  the  ungodly,  each  associated  with  the  angels 
that  adhere  to  their  party,  and  the  one  guided 
and  fashioned  by  love  of  self,  the  other  by  love 
of  God. 

The  devil,  then,  would  not  have  ensnared  man 
in  the  open  and  manifest  sin  of  doing  what  God 
had  forbidden,  had  man  not  already  begun  to 
live  for  himself.  It  was  this  that  made  him  listen 
with  pleasure  to  the  words,  “Ye  shall  be  as 
gods,”2  which  they  would  much  more  readily 
have  accomplished  by  obediently  adhering  to 
their  supreme  and  true  end  than  by  proudly  liv¬ 
ing  to  themselves.  For  created  gods  are  gods  not 
by  virtue  of  what  is  in  themselves,  but  by  a 
participation  of  the  true  God.  By  craving  to  be 
more,  man  becomes  less;  and  by  aspiring  to  be 
self-sufficing,  he  fell  away  from  Him  Who  truly 
suffices  him.  Accordingly,  this  wicked  desire 
which  prompts  man  to  please  himself  as  if  he 
were  himself  light,  and  which  thus  turns  him 
away  from  that  light  by  which,  had  he  followed 
it,  he  would  himself  have  become  light;  this 
wicked  desire,  I  say,  already  secretly  existed  in 
him,  and  the  open  sin  was  but  its  consequence. 
For  that  is  true  which  is  written,  “Pride  goeth 
before  destruction,  and  before  honour  is  humil¬ 
ity”;3  that  is  to  say,  secret  ruin  precedes  open 
ruin,  while  the  former  is  not  counted  ruin.  For 
who  counts  exaltation  ruin,  though  no  sooner  is 
Ts.  73.  18.  2Gen.  3.  5.  3Prov.  18.  12. 


the  Highest  forsaken  than  a  fall  is  begun?  But 
who  does  not  recognize  it  as  ruin,  when  there 
occurs  an  evident  and  indubitable  transgression 
of  the  commandment?  And  consequently,  God’s 
prohibition  had  reference  to  such  an  act  as, 
when  committed,  could  not  be  defended  on  any 
pretence  of  doing  what  was  righteous.  And  I 
make  bold  to  say  that  it  is  useful  for  the  proud 
to  fall  into  an  open  and  indisputable  transgres¬ 
sion,  and  so  displease  themselves,  as  already,  by 
pleasing  themselves,  they  had  fallen.  For  Peter 
was  in  a  healthier  condition  when  he  wept  and 
was  dissatisfied  with  himself,  than  when  he  bold¬ 
ly  presumed  and  satisfied  himself.  And  this  is 
averred  by  the  sacred  Psalmist  when  he  says, 
“Fill  their  faces  with  shame,  that  they  may  seek 
Thy  name.  0  Lord”;4  that  is,  that  they  who 
have  pleased  themselves  in  seeking  their  own 
glory  may  be  pleased  and  satisfied  with  Thee  in 
seeking  Thy  glory. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  pride  in  the  sin ,  which  was 
worse  than  the  sin  itself 
But  it  is  a  worse  and  more  damnable  pride 
which  casts  about  for  the  shelter  of  an  excuse 
even  in  manifest  sins,  as  these  our  first  parents 
did,  of  whom  the  woman  said,  “The  serpent  be¬ 
guiled  me,  and  I  did  eat”;  and  the  man  said, 
“The  woman  whom  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  me, 
she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat.”5  Here 
there  is  no  word  of  begging  pardon,  no  word  of 
entreaty  for  healing.  For  though  they  do  not, 
like  Cain,  deny  that  they  have  perpetrated  the 
deed,  yet  their  pride  seeks  to  refer  its  wicked¬ 
ness  to  another — the  woman’s  pride  to  the  ser¬ 
pent,  the  man’s  to  the  woman.  But  where  there 
is  a  plain  transgression  of  a  divine  command¬ 
ment,  this  is  rather  to  accuse  than  to  excuse  one¬ 
self.  For  the  fact  that  the  woman  sinned  on  the 
serpent’s  persuasion,  and  the  man  at  the  wom¬ 
an’s  offer,  did  not  make  the  transgression  less, 
as  if  there  were  any  one  whom  we  ought  rather 
to  believe  or  yield  to  than  God. 

Chap.  15.  Of  the  justice  of  the  punishment  with 
which  our  first  parents  were  visited  for  their 
disobedience 

Therefore,  because  the  sin  was  a  despising  of 
the  authority  of  God — who  had  created  man; 
who  had  made  him  in  His  own  image;  who  had 
set  him  above  the  other  animals;  who  had 
placed  him  in  Paradise;  who  had  enriched  him 
with  abundance  of  every  kind  and  of  safety; 
who  had  laid  upon  him  neither  many,  nor  great, 
nor  difficult  commandments,  but,  in  order  to 
4Ps.  83.  16.  5Gen.  3.  12,  13. 


THE  CITY  OF 

make  a  wholesome  obedience  easy  to  him.  had 
given  him  a  single  very  brief  and  very  light  pre¬ 
cept  by  which  He  reminded  that  creature  whose 
service  was  to  be  free  that  He  was  Lord — it  was 
just  that  condemnation  followed,  and  condem¬ 
nation  such  that  man,  who  by  keeping  the  com¬ 
mandments  should  have  been  spiritual  even  in 
his  flesh,  became  fleshly  even  in  his  spirit;  and 
as  in  his  pride  he  had  sought  to  be  his  own  satis¬ 
faction,  God  in  His  justice  abandoned  him  to 
himself,  not  to  live  in  the  absolute  independence 
he  affected,  but  instead  of  the  liberty  he  desired, 
to  live  dissatisfied  with  himself  in  a  hard  and 
miserable  bondage  to  him  to  whom  by  sinning 
he  had  yielded  himself,  doomed  in  spite  of  him¬ 
self  to  die  in  body  as  he  had  willingly  become 
dead  in  spirit,  condemned  even  to  eternal  death 
(had  not  the  grace  of  God  delivered  him)  be¬ 
cause  he  had  forsaken  eternal  life.  Whoever 
thinks  such  punishment  either  excessive  or  un¬ 
just  shows  his  inability  to  measure  the  great  in¬ 
iquity  of  sinning  where  sin  might  so  easily  have 
been  avoided.  For  as  Abraham’s  obedience  is 
with  justice  pronounced  to  be  great,  because  the 
thing  commanded,  to  kill  his  son,  was  very  diffi¬ 
cult,  so  in  Paradise  the  disobedience  was  the 
greater,  because  the  difficulty  of  that  which  was 
commanded  was  imperceptible.  And  as  the  obe¬ 
dience  of  the  second  Man  was  the  more  laudable 
because  He  became  obedient  even  “unto  death,”1 
so  the  disobedience  of  the  first  man  was  the 
more  detestable  because  he  became  disobedient 
even  unto  death.  For  where  the  penalty  annexed 
to  disobedience  is  great,  and  the  thing  com¬ 
manded  by  the  Creator  is  easy,  who  can  suffi¬ 
ciently  estimate  how  great  a  wickedness  it  is,  in 
a  matter  so  easy,  not  to  obey  the  authority  of  so 
great  a  power,  even  when  that  power  deters  with 
so  terrible  a  penalty? 

In  short,  to  say  all  in  a  word,  what  but  dis¬ 
obedience  was  the  punishment  of  disobedience 
in  that  sin?  For  what  else  is  man’s  misery  but 
his  own  disobedience  to  himself,  so  that  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  his  not  being  willing  to  do  what  he 
could  do,  he  now  wills  to  do  what  he  cannot? 
For  though  he  could  not  do  all  things  in  Para¬ 
dise  before  he  sinned,  yet  he  wished  to  do  only 
what  he  could  do,  and  therefore  he  could  do  all 
things  he  wished.  But  now,  as  we  recognize  in 
his  offspring,  and  as  divine  Scripture  testifies, 
“Man  is  like  to  vanity.”2  For  who  can  count  how 
many  things  he  wishes  which  he  cannot  do,  so 
long  as  he  is  disobedient  to  himself,  that  is,  so 
long  as  his  mind  and  his  flesh  do  not  obey  his 
will?  For  in  spite  of  himself  his  mind  is  both  fre- 
1Phil.  2.  8.  2Ps.  144.  4. 


GOD  XIV.  14-15  389 

quently  disturbed,  and  his  flesh  suffers,  and 
grows  old,  and  dies;  and  in  spite  of  ourselves  we 
suffer  whatever  else  we  suffer,  and  which  we 
would  not  suffer  if  our  nature  absolutely  and  in 
all  its  parts  obeyed  our  will.  But  is  it  not  the  in¬ 
firmities  of  the  flesh  which  hamper  it  in  its  serv¬ 
ice?  Yet  what  does  it  matter  how  its  service  is 
hampered,  so  long  as  the  fact  remains,  that  by 
the  just  retribution  of  the  sovereign  God  Whom 
we  refused  to  be  subject  to  and  serve,  our  flesh, 
which  was  subjected  to  us,  now  torments  us  by 
insubordination,  although  our  disobedience 
brought  trouble  on  ourselves,  not  upon  God? 
For  He  is  not  in  need  of  our  service  as  we  of  our 
body’s;  and  therefere  what  we  did  was  no  pun¬ 
ishment  to  Him,  but  what  we  receive  is  so  to  us. 
And  the  pains  which  are  called  bodily  are  pains 
of  the  soul  in  and  from  the  body.  For  what  pain 
or  desire  can  the  flesh  feel  by  itself  and  without 
the  soul?  But  when  the  flesh  is  said  to  desire  or 
to  suffer,  it  is  meant,  as  we  have  explained,  that 
the  man  does  so,  or  some  part  of  the  soul  which 
is  affected  by  the  sensation  of  the  flesh,  whether 
a  harsh  sensation  causing  pain,  or  gentle,  caus¬ 
ing  pleasure.  But  pain  in  the  flesh  is  only  a  dis¬ 
comfort  of  the  soul  arising  from  the  flesh,  and  a 
kind  of  shrinking  from  its  suffering,  as  the  pair 
of  the  soul  which  is  called  sadness  is  a  shrinking 
from  those  things  which  have  happened  to  us  in 
spite  of  ourselves.  But  sadness  is  frequently  pre¬ 
ceded  by  fear,  which  is  itself  in  the  soul,  not  in 
the  flesh ;  while  bodily  pain  is  not  preceded  by 
any  kind  of  fear  of  the  flesh,  which  can  be  felt 
in  the  flesh  before  the  pain.  But  pleasure  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  a  certain  appetite  which  is  felt  in  the 
flesh  like  a  craving,  as  hunger  and  thirst  and 
that  generative  appetite  which  is  most  common¬ 
ly  identified  with  the  name  lust ,  though  this  is 
the  generic  word  for  all  desires.  For  anger  itself 
was  defined  by  the  ancients  as  nothing  else  than 
the  lust  of  revenge;3  although  sometimes  a  man 
is  angry  even  at  inanimate  objects  which  can¬ 
not  feel  his  vengeance,  as  when  one  breaks  a 
pen,  or  crushes  a  quill  that  writes  badly.  Yet 
even  this,  though  less  reasonable,  is  in  its  way  a 
lust  of  revenge,  and  is,  so  to  speak,  a  mysterious 
kind  of  shadow  of  retribution,  that  they  who  do 
evil  should  suffer  evil.  There  is  therefore  a  lust 
for  revenge,  which  is  called  anger;  there  is  a  lust 
of  money,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  avarice ; 
there  is  a  lust  of  conquering,  no  matter  by  what 
means,  which  is  called  opinionativeness ;  there 
is  a  lust  of  applause,  which  is  named  boasting. 
There  are  many  and  various  lusts,  of  which 
some  have  names  of  their  own,  while  others 
3So  Aristotle. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


390 

have  not.  For  who  could  readily  give  a  name  to 
the  lust  of  ruling,  which  yet  has  a  powerful  in¬ 
fluence  in  the  soul  of  tyrants,  as  civil  wars  bear 
witness? 

Chap.  16.  Of  the  evil  of  lust — a  word  which , 
though  applicable  to  many  vices,  is  specially 
appropriated  to  sexual  uncleanness 
Although,  therefore,  lust  may  have  many  ob¬ 
jects,  yet  when  no  object  is  specified,  the  word 
lust  usually  suggests  to  the  mind  the  lustful  ex¬ 
citement  of  the  organs  of  generation.  And  this 
lust  not  only  takes  possession  of  the  whole  body 
and  outward  members,  but  also  makes  itself  felt 
within  and  moves  the  whole  man  with  a  passion 
in  which  mental  emotion  is  mingled  with  bodily 
appetite,  so  that  the  pleasure  which  results  is  the 
greatest  of  all  bodily  pleasures.  So  possessing 
indeed  is  this  pleasure  that,  at  the  moment  of 
time  in  which  it  is  consummated,  all  mental  ac¬ 
tivity  is  suspended.  What  friend  of  wisdom  and 
holy  joys,  who,  being  married,  but  knowing,  as 
the  apostle  says,  “how  to  possess  his  vessel  in 
santification  and  honour,  not  in  the  disease  of 
desire,  as  the  Gentiles  who  know  not  God,”1 
would  not  prefer,  if  this  were  possible,  to  beget 
children  without  this  lust,  so  that  in  this  func¬ 
tion  of  begetting  offspring  the  members  created 
for  this  purpose  should  not  be  stimulated  by  the 
heat  of  lust,  but  should  be  actuated  by  his  voli¬ 
tion.  in  the  same  way  as  his  other  members 
serve  him  for  their  respective  ends?  But  even 
those  who  delight  in  this  pleasure  are  not  moved 
to  it  at  their  own  will,  whether  they  confine 
themselves  to  lawful  or  transgress  to  unlawful 
pleasures;  but  sometimes  this  lust  importunes 
them  in  spite  of  themselves,  and  sometimes  fails 
them  when  they  desire  to  feel  it,  so  that  though 
lust  rages  in  the  mind,  it  stirs  not  in  the  body. 
Thus,  strangely  enough,  this  emotion  not  only 
fails  to  obey  the  legitimate  desire  to  beget  off¬ 
spring,  but  also  refuses  to  serve  lascivious  lust; 
and  though  it  often  opposes  its  whole  combined 
energy  to  the  soul  that  resists  it,  sometimes  also 
it  is  divided  against  itself,  and  while  it  moves 
the  soul,  leaves  the  body  unmoved. 

Chap.  17.  Of  the  nakedness  of  our  first  parents , 
which  they  saw  after  their  base  and  shame  fid 
sin 

Justly  is  shame  very  specially  connected  with 
this  lust;  justly,  too,  these  members  themselves, 
being  moved  and  restrained  not  at  our  will,  but 
by  a  certain  independent  autocracy,  so  to  speak, 
are  called  “shameful.”  Their  condition  was  dif- 
lI  Thess.  4.  4. 


ferent  before  sin.  For  as  it  is  written,  “They 
were  naked  and  were  not  ashamed”;2  not  that 
their  nakedness  was  unknown  to  them,  but  be¬ 
cause  nakedness  was  not  yet  shameful,  because 
not  yet  did  lust  move  those  members  without 
the  will’s  consent;  not  yet  did  the  flesh  by  its 
disobedience  testify  against  the  disobedience  of 
man.  For  they  were  not  created  blind,  as  the  un¬ 
enlightened  vulgar  fancy;3  for  Adam  saw  the 
animals  to  whom  he  gave  names,  and  of  Eve  we 
read,  “The  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good 
for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes.”4 
Their  eyes,  therefore,  were  open,  but  were  not 
open  to  this,  that  is  to  say,  were  not  observant 
so  as  to  recognize  what  was  conferred  upon 
them  by  the  garment  of  grace,  for  they  had  no 
consciousness  of  their  members  warring  against 
their  will.  But  when  they  were  stripped  of  this 
grace,  that  their  disobedience  might  be  punished 
by  fit  retribution,  there  began  in  the  movement 
of  their  bodily  members  a  shameless  novelty 
which  made  nakedness  indecent:  it  at  once 
made  them  observant  and  made  them  ashamed. 
And  therefore,  after  they  violated  God’s  com¬ 
mand  by  open  transgression,  it  is  written :  “And 
the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and  they 
knew  that  they  were  naked;  and  they  sewed  fig 
leaves  together,  and  made  themselves  aprons.”5 
“The  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,”  not  to 
see,  for  already  they  saw,  but  to  discern  between 
the  good  they  had  lost  and  the  evil  into  which 
they  had  fallen.  And  therefore  also  the  tree  it¬ 
self  which  they  were  forbidden  to  touch  was 
called  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil  from  this  circumstance,  that  if  they  ate  of 
it  it  would  impart  to  them  this  knowledge.  For 
the  discomfort  of  sickness  reveals  the  pleasure 
of  health.  “They  knew,”  therefore,  “that  they 
were  naked” — naked  of  that  grace  which  pre¬ 
vented  them  from  being  ashamed  of  bodily  nak¬ 
edness  while  the  law  of  sin  offered  no  resistance 
to  their  mind.  And  thus  they  obtained  a  knowl¬ 
edge  which  they  would  have  lived  in  blissful  ig¬ 
norance  of,  had  they,  in  trustful  obedience  to 
God.  declined  to  commit  that  offence  which  in¬ 
volved  them  in  the  experience  of  the  hurtful  ef¬ 
fects  of  unfaithfulness  and  disobedience.  And 
therefore,  being  ashamed  of  the  disobedience  of 
their  own  flesh,  which  witnessed  to  their  disobe¬ 
dience  while  it  punished  it,  “they  sewed  fig 
leaves  together,  and  made  themselves  aprons,” 
that  is,  cinctures  for  their  privy  parts;  for  some 

2Gen.  2.  25. 

3An  error  which  arose  from  the  words,  “The  eyes  of 
them  both  were  opened,”  Gen.  3.  7. 

4Gen.  3.  6.  5Gen.  3.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIV.  16-19  391 


interpreters  have  rendered  the  word  by  succinc- 
toria.  Campestria  is,  indeed,  a  Latin  word,  but  it 
is  used  of  the  drawers  or  aprons  used  for  a  simi¬ 
lar  purpose  by  the  young  men  who  stripped  for 
exercise  in  the  campus;  hence  those  who  were  so 
girt  were  commonly  called  campestrati.  Shame 
modestly  covered  that  which  lust  disobediently 
moved  in  opposition  to  the  will,  which  was  thus 
punished  for  its  own  disobedience.  Consequent¬ 
ly  all  nations,  being  propagated  from  that  one 
stock,  have  so  strong  an  instinct  to  cover  the 
shameful  parts  that  some  barbarians  do  not  un¬ 
cover  them  even  in  the  bath,  but  wash  with  their 
drawers  on.  In  the  dark  solitudes  of  India  also, 
though  some  philosophers  go  naked,  and  are 
therefore  called  gymnosophists,  yet  they  make 
an  exception  in  the  case  of  these  members,  and 
cover  them. 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  shame  which  attends  all  sexual 

intercourse 

Lust  requires  for  its  consummation  darkness 
and  secrecy;  and  this  not  only  when  unlawful 
intercourse  is  desired,  but  even  such  fornication 
as  the  earthly  city  has  legalized.  Where  there  is 
no  fear  of  punishment,  these  permitted  pleas¬ 
ures  still  shrink  from  the  public  eye.  Even  where 
provision  is  made  for  this  lust,  secrecy  also  is 
provided;  and  while  lust  found  it  easy  to  re¬ 
move  the  prohibitions  of  law,  shamelessness 
found  it  impossible  to  lay  aside  the  veil  of  re¬ 
tirement.  For  even  shameless  men  call  this 
shameful;  and  though  they  love  the  pleasure, 
dare  not  display  it.  What!  does  not  even  con¬ 
jugal  intercourse,  sanctioned  as  it  is  by  law  for 
the  propagation  of  children,  legitimate  and  hon¬ 
ourable  though  it  be,  does  it  not  seek  retirement 
from  every  eye?  Before  the  bridegroom  fondles 
his  bride,  does  he  not  exclude  the  attendants, 
and  even  the  paranymphs,  and  such  friends  as 
the  closest  ties  have  admitted  to  the  bridal 
chamber?  The  greatest  master  of  Roman  elo¬ 
quence  says  that  all  right  actions  wish  to  be  set 
in  the  light,  i.e.,  desire  to  be  known.  This  right 
action,  however,  has  such  a  desire  to  be  known 
that  yet  it  blushes  to  be  seen.  Who  does  not 
know  what  passes  between  husband  and  wife 
that  children  may  be  born?  Is  it  not  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  that  wives  are  married  with  such  cere¬ 
mony?  And  yet,  when  this  well-understood  act 
is  gone  about  for  the  procreation  of  children, 
not  even  the  children  themselves,  who  may  al¬ 
ready  have  been  born  to  them,  are  suffered  to  be 
witnesses.  This  right  action  seeks  the  light,  in 
so  far  as  it  seeks  to  be  known,  but  yet  dreads 
being  seen.  And  why  so,  if  not  because  that 


which  is  by  nature  fitting  and  decent  is  so  done 
as  to  be  accompanied  with  a  shame-begetting 
penalty  of  sin? 

Chap.  19.  That  it  is  now  necessary ,  as  it  was 
not  before  man  sinned ,  to  bridle  anger  and 
lust  by  the  restraining  influence  of  wisdom 
Hence  it  is  that  even  the  philosophers  who 
have  approximated  to  the  truth  have  avowed 
that  anger  and  lust  are  vicious  mental  emotions, 
because,  even  when  exercised  towards  objects 
which  wisdom  does  not  prohibit,  they  are  moved 
in  an  ungoverned  and  inordinate  manner,  and 
consequently  need  the  regulation  of  mind  and 
reason.  And  they  assert  that  this  third  part  of 
the  mind  is  posted  as  it  were  in  a  kind  of  citadel, 
to  give  rule  to  these  other  parts,  so  that,  while  it 
rules  and  they  serve,  man’s  righteousness  is  pre¬ 
served  without  a  breach.1  These  parts,  then, 
which  they  acknowledge  to  be  vicious  even  in  a 
wise  and  temperate  man,  so  that  the  mind,  by 
its  composing  and  restraining  influence,  must 
bridle  and  recall  them  from  those  objects  to¬ 
wards  which  they  are  unlawfully  moved,  and 
give  them  access  to  those  which  the  law  of  wis¬ 
dom  sanctions — that  anger,  e.g.,  may  be  allowed 
for  the  enforcement  of  a  just  authority,  and  lust 
for  the  duty  of  propagating  offspring — these 
parts,  I  say,  were  not  vicious  in  Paradise  before 
sin,  for  they  were  never  moved  in  opposition  to 
a  holy  will  towards  any  object  from  which  it 
was  necessary  that  they  should  be  withheld  by 
the  restraining  bridle  of  reason.  For  though  now 
they  are  moved  in  this  way  and  are  regulated  by 
a  bridling  and  restraining  power,  which  those 
who  live  temperately,  justly,  and  godly,  exercise, 
sometimes  with  ease,  and  sometimes  with  great¬ 
er  difficulty,  this  is  not  the  sound  health  of  na¬ 
ture,  but  the  weakness  which  results  from  sin. 
And  how  is  it  that  shame  does  not  hide  the  acts 
and  words  dictated  by  anger  or  other  emotions, 
as  it  covers  the  motions  of  lust,  unless  because 
the  members  of  the  body  which  we  employ  for 
accomplishing  them  are  moved,  not  by  the  emo¬ 
tions  themselves,  but  by  the  authority  of  the 
consenting  will?  For  he  who  in  his  anger  rails  at 
or  even  strikes  some  one,  could  not  do  so  were 
not  his  tongue  and  hand  moved  by  the  authority 
of  the  will,  as  also  they  are  moved  when  there  is 
no  anger.  But  the  organs  of  generation  are  so 
subjected  to  the  rule  of  lust,  that  they  have  no 
motion  but  what  it  communicates.  It  is  this  we 
are  ashamed  of ;  it  is  this  which  blushingly  hides 
from  the  eyes  of  onlookers.  And  rather  will  a 
man  endure  a  crowd  of  witnesses  when  he  is  un- 
xSee  Plato,  Republic ,  bk.  iv. 


392  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


justly  venting  his  anger  on  some  one,  than  the 
eye  of  one  man  when  he  innocently  copulates 
with  his  wife. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  foolish  beastliness  of  the 

Cynics 

It  is  this  which  those  Canine  or  Cynic1  philos¬ 
ophers  have  overlooked,  when  they  have,  in  vio¬ 
lation  of  the  modest  instincts  of  men,  boastfully 
proclaimed  their  unclean  and  shameless  opin¬ 
ion,  worthy  indeed  of  dogs,  viz.,  that  as  the  mat¬ 
rimonial  act  is  legitimate,  no  one  should  be 
ashamed  to  perform  it  openly,  in  the  street  or  in 
any  public  place.  Instinctive  shame  has  over¬ 
borne  this  wild  fancy.  For  though  it  is  related 
that  Diogenes  once  dared  to  put  his  opinion  in 
practice,  under  the  impression  that  his  sect 
would  be  all  the  more  famous  if  his  egregious 
shamelessness  were  deeply  graven  in  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  mankind,  yet  this  example  was  not  after¬ 
wards  followed.  Shame  had  more  influence  with 
them,  to  make  them  blush  before  men,  than  er¬ 
ror  to  make  them  affect  a  resemblance  to  dogs. 
And  possibly,  even  in  the  case  of  Diogenes,  and 
those  who  did  imitate  him,  there  was  but  an  ap¬ 
pearance  and  pretence  of  copulation,  and  not 
the  reality.  Even  at  this  day  there  are  still  Cynic 
philosophers  to  be  seen;  for  these  are  Cynics 
who  are  not  content  with  being  clad  in  the  pal¬ 
lium ,  but  also  carry  a  club ;  yet  no  one  of  them 
dares  to  do  this  that  we  speak  of.  If  they  did, 
they  would  be  spat  upon,  not  to  say  stoned,  by 
the  mob.  Human  nature,  then,  is  without  doubt 
ashamed  of  this  lust;  and  justly  so,  for  the  in¬ 
subordination  of  these  members,  and  their  de¬ 
fiance  of  the  will,  are  the  clear  testimony  of  the 
punishment  of  man’s  first  sin.  And  it  was  fitting 
that  this  should  appear  specially  in  those  parts 
by  which  is  generated  that  nature  which  has 
been  altered  for  the  worse  by  that  first  and 
great  sin — that  sin  from  whose  evil  connection 
no  one  can  escape,  unless  God’s  grace  expiate  in 
him  individually  that  which  was  perpetrated  to 
the  destruction  of  all  in  common,  when  all  were 
in  one  man,  and  which  was  avenged  by  God’s 
justice. 

Chap.  21.  That  man’s  transgression  did  not  an¬ 
nul  the  blessing  of  fecundity  pronounced  up- 

071  man  before  he  sinned ,  but  infected  it  with 

the  disease  of  lust 

Far  be  it,  then,  from  us  to  suppose  that  our 
first  parents  in  Paradise  felt  that  lust  which 
caused  them  afterwards  to  blush  and  hide  their 

lrThe  one  word  being  the  Latin  form,  the  other  the 
Greek,  of  the  same  adjective. 


nakedness,  or  that  by  its  means  they  should 
have  fulfilled  the  benediction  of  God,  “Increase 
and  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth”;2  for  it 
was  after  sin  that  lust  began.  It  was  after  sin 
that  our  nature,  having  lost  the  power  it  had 
over  the  whole  body,  but  not  having  lost  all 
shame,  perceived,  noticed,  blushed  at,  and  cov¬ 
ered  it.  But  that  blessing  upon  marriage,  which 
encouraged  them  to  increase  and  multiply  and 
replenish  the  earth,  though  it  continued  even  af¬ 
ter  they  had  sinned,  was  yet  given  before  they 
sinned,  in  order  that  the  procreation  of  children 
might  be  recognized  as  part  of  the  glory  of  mar¬ 
riage,  and  not  of  the  punishment  of  sin.  But 
now,  men  being  ignorant  of  the  blessedness  of 
Paradise,  suppose  that  children  could  not  have 
been  begotten  there  in  any  other  way  than  they 
know  them  to  be  begotten  now,  i.e.,  by  lust,  at 
which  even  honourable  marriage  blushes;  some 
not  simply  rejecting,  but  sceptically  deriding 
the  divine  Scriptures,  in  which  we  read  that  our 
first  parents,  after  they  sinned,  were  ashamed  of 
their  nakedness,  and  covered  it;  while  others, 
though  they  accept  and  honour  Scripture,  yet 
conceive  that  this  expression,  “Increase  and 
multiply,”  refers  not  to  carnal  fecundity,  be¬ 
cause  a  similar  expression  is  used  of  the  soul  in 
the  words,  “Thou  wilt  multiply  me  with  strength 
in  my  soul”;3  and  so,  too,  in  the  words  which 
follow  in  Genesis,  “And  replenish  the  earth,  and 
subdue  it,”  they  understand  by  the  earth  the 
body  which  the  soul  fills  with  its  presence,  and 
which  it  rules  over  when  it  is  multiplied  in 
strength.  And  they  hold  that  children  could  no 
more  then  than  now  be  begotten  without  lust, 
which,  after  sin,  was  kindled,  observed,  blushed 
for,  and  covered;  and  even  that  children  would 
not  have  been  born  in  Paradise,  but  only 
outside  of  it,  as  in  fact  it  turned  out.  For  it 
was  after  they  were  expelled  from  it  that  they 
came  together  to  beget  children,  and  begot 
them. 

Chap.  22.  Of  the  conjugal  union  as  it  was  ori¬ 
ginally  instituted  and  blessed  by  God 
But  we,  for  our  part,  have  no  manner  of 
doubt  that  to  increase  and  multiply  and  replen¬ 
ish  the  earth  in  virtue  of  the  blessing  of  God,  is 
a  gift  of  marriage  as  God  instituted  it  from  the 
beginning  before  man  sinned,  when  He  created 
them  male  and  female — in  other  words,  two 
sexes  manifestly  distinct.  And  it  was  this  work 
of  God  on  which  His  blessing  was  pronounced. 
For  no  sooner  had  Scripture  said,  “Male  and 
female  created  He  them,”4  than  it  immediately 
2Gen.  1.  28.  3Ps.  138.  3.  4Gen.  1.  27,  28. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIV.  20-23 


continues,  “And  God  blessed  them,  and  God 
said  unto  them,  Increase,  and  multiply,  and  re¬ 
plenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it,”  etc.  And 
though  all  these  things  may  not  unsuitably  be 
interpreted  in  a  spiritual  sense,  yet  “male  and 
female”  cannot  be  understood  of  two  things  in 
one  man,  as  if  there  were  in  him  one  thing  which 
rules,  another  which  is  ruled;  but  it  is  quite  clear 
that  they  were  created  male  and  female,  with 
bodies  of  different  sexes,  for  the  very  purpose  of 
begetting  offspring,  and  so  increasing,  multiply¬ 
ing,  and  replenishing  the  earth;  and  it  is  great 
folly  to  oppose  so  plain  a  fact.  It  was  not  of  the 
spirit  which  commands  and  the  body  which 
obeys,  nor  of  the  rational  soul  which  rules  and 
the  irrational  desire  which  is  ruled,  nor  of  the 
contemplative  virtue  which  is  supreme  and  the 
active  which  is  subject,  nor  of  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  mind  and  the  sense  of  the  body,  but 
plainly  of  the  matrimonial  union  by  which  the 
sexes  are  mutually  bound  together,  that  our 
Lord,  when  asked  whether  it  were  lawful  for  any 
cause  to  put  away  one’s  wife  (for  on  account  of 
the  hardness  of  the  hearts  of  the  Israelites 
Moses  permitted  a  bill  of  divorcement  to  be 
given),  answered  and  said,  “Have  ye  not  read 
that  He  which  made  them  at  the  beginning  made 
them  male  and  female,  and  said,  For  this  cause 
shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  shall 
cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  twain  shall  be  one 
flesh?  Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 
one  flesh.  What,  therefore,  God  hath  joined  to¬ 
gether,  let  not  man  put  asunder.”1  It  is  certain, 
then,  that  from  the  first  men  were  created,  as 
we  see  and  know  them  to  be  now,  of  two  sexes, 
male  and  female,  and  that  they  are  called  one, 
either  on  account  of  the  matrimonial  union,  or 
on  account  of  the  origin  of  the  woman,  who  was 
created  from  the  side  of  the  man.  And  it  is  by 
this  original  example,  which  God  Himself  insti¬ 
tuted,  that  the  apostle  admonishes  all  husbands 
to  love  their  own  wives  in  particular.2 

Chap.  23.  Whether  generation  should  have  tak¬ 
en  place  even  in  Paradise  had  man  not 
sinned,  or  whether  there  should  have  been 
any  contention  there  between  chastity  and 
lust 

But  he  who  says  that  there  should  have  been 
neither  copulation  nor  generation  but  for  sin, 
virtually  says  that  man’s  sin  was  necessary  to 
complete  the  number  of  the  saints.  For  if  these 
two  by  not  sinning  should  have  continued  to  live 
alone,  because,  as  is  supposed,  they  could  not 
have  begotten  children  had  they  not  sinned,  then 
JMatt.  19.  4,  s.  2Eph.  5.  25. 


certainly  sin  was  necessary  in  order  that  there 
might  be  not  only  two  but  many  righteous  men. 
And  if  this  cannot  be  maintained  without  ab¬ 
surdity,  we  must  rather  believe  that  the  number 
of  the  saints  fit  to  complete  this  most  blessed 
city  would  have  been  as  great  though  no  one  had 
sinned,  as  it  is  now  that  the  grace  of  God  gath¬ 
ers  its  citizens  out  of  the  multitude  of  sinners, 
so  long  as  the  children  of  this  world  generate 
and  are  generated.3 

And  therefore  that  marriage,  worthy  of  the 
happiness  of  Paradise,  should  have  had  desir¬ 
able  fruit  without  the  shame  of  lust,  had  there 
been  no  sin.  But  how  that  could  be,  there  is  now 
no  example  to  teach  us.  Nevertheless,  it  ought 
not  to  seem  incredible  that  one  member  might 
serve  the  will  without  lust  then,  since  so  many 
serve  it  now.  Do  we  now  move  our  feet  and 
hands  when  we  will  to  do  the  things  we  would  by 
means  of  these  members?  do  we  meet  with  no 
resistance  in  them,  but  perceive  that  they  are 
ready  servants  of  the  will,  both  in  our  own  case 
and  in  that  of  others,  and  especially  of  artisans 
employed  in  mechanical  operations,  by  which 
the  weakness  and  clumsiness  of  nature  become, 
through  industrious  exercise,  wonderfully  dex¬ 
terous?  and  shall  we  not  b’elieve  that,  like  as  all 
those  members  obediently  serve  the  will,  so  also 
should  the  members  have  discharged  the  func¬ 
tion  of  generation,  though  lust,  the  award  of 
disobedience,  had  been  awanting?  Did  not  Ci¬ 
cero  in  discussing  the  difference  of  governments 
in  his  De  Republica,  adopt  a  simile  from  human 
nature,  and  say  that  we  command  our  bodily 
members  as  children,  they  are  so  obedient;  but 
that  the  vicious  parts  of  the  soul  must  be  treated 
as  slaves,  and  be  coerced  with  a  more  stringent 
authority?  And  no  doubt,  in  the  order  of  nature, 
the  soul  is  more  excellent  than  the  body;  and 
yet  the  soul  commands  the  body  more  easily 
than  itself.  Nevertheless  this  lust,  of  which  we 
at  present  speak,  is  the  more  shameful  on  this 
account,  because  the  soul  is  therein  neither  mas¬ 
ter  of  itself,  so  as  not  to  lust  at  all,  nor  of  the 
body,  so  as  to  keep  the  members  under  the  con¬ 
trol  of  the  will;  for  if  they  were  thus  ruled, 
there  should  be  no  shame.  But  now  the  soul  is 
ashamed  that  the  body,  which  by  nature  is  in¬ 
ferior  and  subject  to  it,  should  resist  its  author¬ 
ity.  For  in  the  resistance  experienced  by  the 
soul  in  the  other  emotions  there  is  less  shame, 
because  the  resistance  is  from  itself,  and  thus, 
when  it  is  conquered  by  itself,  itself  is  the  con¬ 
queror,  although  the  conquest  is  inordinate  and 
vicious,  because  accomplished  by  those  parts  of 

3Luke,  20.  34. 


394  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  soul  which  ought  to  be  subject  to  reason, 
yet,  being  accomplished  by  its  own  parts  and  en¬ 
ergies,  the  conquest  is,  as  I  say,  its  own.  For 
when  the  soul  conquers  itself  to  a  due  subordi¬ 
nation,  so  that  its  unreasonable  motions  are  con¬ 
trolled  by  reason,  while  it  again  is  subject  to 
God,  this  is  a  conquest  virtuous  and  praise¬ 
worthy.  Yet  there  is  less  shame  when  the  soul  is 
resisted  by  its  own  vicious  parts  than  when  its 
will  and  order  are  resisted  by  the  body,  which 
is  distinct  from  and  inferior  to  it,  and  depend¬ 
ent  on  it  for  life  itself. 

But  so  long  as  the  will  retains  under  its  au¬ 
thority  the  other  members,  without  which  the 
members  excited  by  lust  to  resist  the  will  cannot 
accomplish  what  they  seek,  chastity  is  pre¬ 
served.  and  the  delight  of  sin  foregone.  And  cer¬ 
tainly,  had  not  culpable  disobedience  been  vis¬ 
ited  with  penal  disobedience,  the  marriage  of 
Paradise  should  have  been  ignorant  of  this 
struggle  and  rebellion,  this  quarrel  between  will 
and  lust,  that  the  will  may  be  satisfied  and  lust 
restrained,  but  those  members,  like  all  the  rest, 
should  have  obeyed  the  will.  The  field  of  gen¬ 
eration1  should  have  been  sown  by  the  organ 
created  for  this  purpose,  as  the  earth  is  sown  by 
the  hand.  And  whereas  now.  as  we  essay  to  in¬ 
vestigate  this  subject  more  exactly,  modesty 
hinders  us  and  compels  us  to  ask  pardon  of 
chaste  ears,  there  would  have  been  no  cause  to 
do  so,  but  we  could  have  discoursed  freely,  and 
without  fear  of  seeming  obscene,  upon  all  those 
points  which  occur  to  one  who  meditates  on  the 
subject.  There  would  not  have  been  even  words 
which  could  be  called  obscene,  but  all  that 
might  be  said  of  these  members  would  have 
been  as  pure  as  what  is  said  of  the  other  parts  of 
the  body.  Whoever,  then,  comes  to  the  perusal 
of  these  pages  with  unchaste  mind,  let  him 
blame  his  disposition,  not  his  nature;  let  him 
brand  the  actings  of  his  own  impurity,  not  the 
words  which  necessity  forces  us  to  use,  and  for 
which  every  pure  and  pious  reader  or  hearer  will 
very  readily  pardon  me,  while  I  expose  the  folly 
of  that  scepticism  which  argues  solely  on  the 
ground  of  its  own  experience,  and  has  no  faith 
in  anything  beyond.  He  who  is  not  scandalized 
at  the  apostle’s  censure  of  the  horrible  wicked¬ 
ness  of  the  women  who  “changed  the  natural 
use  into  that  which  is  against  nature,”2  will  read 
all  this  without  being  shocked,  especially  as  we 
are  not,  like  Paul,  citing  and  censuring  a  damna¬ 
ble  uncleanness,  but  are  explaining,  so  far  as  we 
can,  human  generation,  while  with  Paul  we 
avoid  all  obscenity  of  language. 
lSee  Virgil,  Georgies ,  bk.  iii.  136.  2Rom.  1.  26. 


Chap.  24.  That  ij  men  had  remained  innocent 
and  obedient  in  Paradise,  the  generative  or¬ 
gans  should  have  been  in  subjection  to  the 
will  as  the  other  members  are 
The  man,  then,  would  have  sown  the  seed, 
and  the  woman  received  it,  as  need  required,  the 
generative  organs  being  moved  by  the  will,  not 
excited  by  lust.  For  we  move  at  will  not  only 
those  members  which  are  furnished  with  joints 
of  solid  bone,  as  the  hands,  feet,  and  fingers,  but 
we  move  also  at  will  those  which  are  composed 
of  slack  and  soft  nerves:  we  can  put  them  in 
motion,  or  stretch  them  out,  or  bend  and  twist 
them,  or  contract  and  stiffen  them,  as  we  do 
with  the  muscles  of  the  mouth  and  face.  The 
lungs,  which  are  the  very  tenderest  of  the  vis¬ 
cera  except  the  brain,  and  are  therefore  care¬ 
fully  sheltered  in  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  yet  for 
all  purposes  of  inhaling  and  exhaling  the  breath, 
and  of  uttering  and  modulating  the  voice,  are 
obedient  to  the  will  when  we  breathe,  exhale, 
speak,  shout,  or  sing,  just  as  the  bellows  obey 
the  smith  or  the  organist.  I  will  not  press  the 
fact  that  some  animals  have  a  natural  power  to 
move  a  single  spot  of  the  skin  with  which  their 
whole  body  is  covered,  if  they  have  felt  on  it 
anything  they  wish  to  drive  off — a  power  so 
great,  that  by  this  shivering  tremor  of  the  skin 
they  can  not  only  shake  off  flies  that  have  settled 
on  them,  but  even  spears  that  have  fixed  in 
their  flesh.  Man,  it  is  true,  has  not  this  power; 
but  is  this  any  reason  for  supposing  that  God 
could  not  give  it  to  such  creatures  as  He  wished 
to  possess  it?  And  therefore  man  himself  also 
might  very  well  have  enjoyed  absolute  power 
over  his  members  had  he  not  forfeited  it  by  his 
disobedience;  for  it  was  not  difficult  for  God  to 
form  him  so  that  what  is  now  moved  in  his  body 
only  by  lust  should  have  been  moved  only  at 
will. 

We  know,  too,  that  some  men  are  differently 
constituted  from  others,  and  have  some  rare  and 
remarkable  faculty  of  doing  with  their  body 
what  other  men  can  by  no  effort  do,  and,  indeed, 
scarcely  believe  when  they  hear  of  others  doing. 
There  are  persons  who  can  move  their  ears,  ei¬ 
ther  one  at  a  time,  or  both  together.  There  are 
some  who,  without  moving  the  head,  can  bring 
the  hair  down  upon  the  forehead,  and  move  the 
whole  scalp  backwards  and  forwards  at  pleas¬ 
ure.  Some,  by  lightly  pressing  their  stomach, 
bring  up  an  incredible  quantity  and  variety  of 
things  they  have  swallowed,  and  produce  what¬ 
ever  they  please,  quite  whole,  as  if  out  of  a  bag. 
Some  so  accurately  mimic  the  voices  of  birds 
and  beasts  and  other  men,  that,  unless  they  are 


THE  CITY  OF 

seen,  the  difference  cannot  be  told.  Some  have 
such  command  of  their  bowels,  that  they  can 
break  wind  continuously  at  pleasure,  so  as  to 
produce  the  effect  of  singing.  I  myself  have 
known  a  man  who  was  accustomed  to  sweat 
whenever  he  wished.  It  is  well  known  that  some 
weep  when  they  please,  and  shed  a  flood  of  tears. 
But  far  more  incredible  is  that  which  some  of 
our  brethren  saw  quite  recently.  There  was  a 
presbyter  called  Restitutus,  in  the  parish  of  the 
Calamensian1  Church,  who,  as  often  as  he 
pleased  (and  he  was  asked  to  do  this  by  those 
who  desired  to  witness  so  remarkable  a  phe¬ 
nomenon),  on  some  one  imitating  the  wailings 
of  mourners,  became  so  insensible,  and  lay  in  a 
state  so  like  death,  that  not  only  had  he  no  feel¬ 
ing  when  they  pinched  and  pricked  him,  but 
even  when  fire  wras  applied  to  him.  and  he  was 
burned  by  it,  he  had  no  sense  of  pain  except  af¬ 
terwards  from  the  wound.  And  that  his  body  re¬ 
mained  motionless,  not  by  reason  of  his  self- 
command,  but  because  he  was  insensible,  was 
proved  by  the  fact  that  he  breathed  no  more 
than  a  dead  man ;  and  yet  he  said  that,  when  any 
one  spoke  with  more  than  ordinary  distinctness, 
he  heard  the  voice,  but  as  if  it  were  a  long  way 
off.  Seeing,  then,  that  even  in  this  mortal  and 
miserable  life  the  body  serves  some  men  by 
many  remarkable  movements  and  moods  be¬ 
yond  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  what  rea¬ 
son  is  there  for  doubting  that,  before  man  was 
involved  by  his  sin  in  this  weak  and  corruptible 
condition,  his  members  might  have  served  his 
will  for  the  propagation  of  offspring  without 
lust?  Man  has  been  given  over  to  himself  be¬ 
cause  he  abandoned  God,  wrhile  he  sought  to  be 
self-satisfying;  and  disobeying  God,  he  could 
not  obey  even  himself.  Hence  it  is  that  he  is  in¬ 
volved  in  the  obvious  misery  of  being  unable  to 
live  as  he  wishes.  For  if  he  lived  as  he  wished, 
he  would  think  himself  blessed;  but  he  could  not 
be  so  if  he  lived  wickedly. 

Chap  25.  Of  true  blessedness ,  which  this  pres¬ 
ent  life  cannot  enjoy 

However,  if  we  look  at  this  a  little  more 
closely,  we  see  that  no  one  lives  as  he  wishes  but 
the  blessed,  and  that  no  one  is  blessed  but  the 
righteous.  But  even  the  righteous  himself  does 
not  live  as  he  wishes,  until  he  has  arrived  where 
he  cannot  die,  be  deceived,  or  injured,  and  until 
he  is  assured  that  this  shall  be  his  eternal  con¬ 
dition.  For  this  nature  demands;  and  nature  is 
not  fully  and  perfectly  blessed  till  it  attains 

lThe  position  of  Calama  is  described  by  Augustine  as 
between  Constantine  and  Hippo,  but  nearer  Hippo. 


GOD  XIV.  24-26  395 

what  it  seeks.  But  what  man  is  at  present  able  to 
live  as  he  wishes,  wrhen  it  is  not  in  his  power  so 
much  as  to  live?  He  wishes  to  live,  he  is  com¬ 
pelled  to  die.  How,  then,  does  he  live  as  he 
wishes  who  does  not  live  as  long  as  he  wishes? 
or  if  he  wishes  to  die,  how  can  he  live  as  he 
wishes,  since  he  does  not  wish  even  to  live?  Or 
if  he  wishes  to  die,  not  because  he  dislikes  life, 
but  that  after  death  he  may  live  better,  still  he 
is  not  yet  living  as  he  wishes,  but  only  has  the 
prospect  of  so  living  when,  through  death,  he 
reaches  that  which  he  wishes.  But  admit  that  he 
lives  as  he  wishes,  because  he  has  done  violence 
to  himself,  and  forced  himself  not  to  wish  what 
he  cannot  obtain,  and  to  wish  only  what  he  can 
(as  Terence  has  it,  “Since  you  cannot  do  wrhat 
you  will,  will  what  you  can”),  is  he  therefore 
blessed  because  he  is  patiently  wretched?  For  a 
blessed  life  is  possessed  only  by  the  man  who 
loves  it.  If  it  is  loved  and  possessed,  it  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  more  ardently  loved  than  all  besides ; 
for  whatever  else  is  loved  must  be  loved  for  the 
sake  of  the  blessed  life.  And  if  it  is  loved  as  it 
deserves  to  be — and  the  man  is  not  blessed  who 
does  not  love  the  blessed  life  as  it  deserves — 
then  he  who  so  loves  it  cannot  but  wish  it  to  be 
eternal.  Therefore  it  shall  then  only  be  blessed 
when  it  is  eternal. 

Chap.  26.  That  we  are  to  believe  that  in  Para¬ 
dise  our  first  parents  begat  offspring  without 
blushing 

In  Paradise,  then,  man  lived  as  he  desired  so 
long  as  he  desired  what  God  had  commanded. 
He  lived  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  and  was  good 
by  God’s  goodness ;  he  lived  without  any  want, 
and  had  it  in  his  power  so  to  live  eternally.  He 
had  food  that  he  might  not  hunger,  drink  that  he 
might  not  thirst,  the  tree  of  life  that  old  age 
might  not  waste  him.  There  was  in  his  body  no 
corruption,  nor  seed  of  corruption,  which  could 
produce  in  him  any  unpleasant  sensation.  He 
feared  no  inward  disease,  no  outward  accident. 
Soundest  health  blessed  his  body,  absolute  tran¬ 
quillity  his  soul.  As  in  Paradise  there  was  no  ex¬ 
cessive  heat  or  cold,  so  its  inhabitants  were  ex¬ 
empt  from  the  vicissitudes  of  fear  and  desire. 
No  sadness  of  any  kind  was  there,  nor  any  fool¬ 
ish  joy;  true  gladness  ceaselessly  flowed  from 
the  presence  of  God,  who  was  loved  “out  of  a 
pure  heart,  and  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  un¬ 
feigned.”  2  The  honest  love  of  husband  and  wife 
made  a  sure  harmony  between  them.  Body  and 
spirit  worked  harmoniously  together,  and  the 
commandment  was  kept  without  labour.  No  lan- 
2I  Tim.  1.  5. 


396  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


guor  made  their  leisure  wearisome;  no  sleepi¬ 
ness  interrupted  their  desire  to  labour.  Men  and 
women  dwelling  happily  in  this  well-ordered 
world,  did  not  beget  their  offspring  in  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  passionate  desire,  for  the  sexual  appetite, 
like  all  others,  stirred  but  at  the  bidding  of  the 
will.  And  husband  and  wife  embraced  in  the 
marital  act.  not  goaded  on  by  the  heat  and 
prickings  of  voluptuous  desires,  but  rather  in 
peace  of  soul  and  with  integrity  of  body.  Nor 
does  it  follow  that  what  experience  cannot  prove 
must  be  rejected,  for  at  that  time  those  privy 
parts  were  not  moved  by  the  turbulence  of  lust, 
but  acted  in  accordance  with  nature  as  the  need 
arose.  Hence,  as  now  we  know,  a  virgin  is  not 
physically  changed  by  the  menstrual  flow,  so  in 
those  days  the  wife  could  receive  into  the  womb 
her  husband’s  seed  without  rupture  of  the  hy¬ 
men;  for  indeed,  the  semen  could  flow  in 
through  the  same  ducts  that  bear  out  the  men¬ 
strual  discharge.  And  as  the  womb  opens  up  to 
give  birth,  not  when  a  woman  cries  in  pain,  but 
when  in  the  course  of  nature  her  time  has  come, 
so  the  sexes  should  be  joined  together  to  beget 
and  bring  forth  not  out  of  lust,  but  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  right  desires  of  the  will.  We  speak 
of  things  which  are  now  shameful,  and  although 
we  try,  as  well  as  we  are  able,  to  conceive  them 
as  they  were  before  they  became  shameful,  yet 
necessity  compels  us  rather  to  limit  our  discus¬ 
sion  to  the  bounds  set  by  modesty  than  to  ex¬ 
tend  it  as  our  moderate  faculty  of  discourse 
might  suggest.  For  since  that  which  I  have  been 
speaking  of  was  not  experienced  even  by  those 
who  might  have  experienced  it — I  mean  our  first 
parents  (for  sin  and  its  merited  banishment 
from  Paradise  anticipated  this  passionless  gen¬ 
eration  on  their  part) — when  sexual  intercourse 
is  spoken  of  now,  it  suggests  to  men’s  thoughts 
not  such  a  placid  obedience  to  the  will  as  is  con¬ 
ceivable  in  our  first  parents,  but  such  violent 
acting  of  lust  as  they  themselves  have  experi¬ 
enced.  And  therefore  modesty  shuts  my  mouth, 
although  my  mind  conceives  the  matter  clearly. 
But  Almighty  God,  the  supreme  and  supremely 
good  Creator  of  all  natures,  who  aids  and  re¬ 
wards  good  wills,  while  He  abandons  and  con¬ 
demns  the  bad,  and  rules  both,  was  not  destitute 
of  a  plan  by  which  He  might  people  His  city 
with  the  fixed  number  of  citizens  which  His  wis¬ 
dom  had  foreordained  even  out  of  the  con¬ 
demned  human  race,  discriminating  them  not 
now  by  merits,  since  the  whole  mass  was  con¬ 
demned  as  if  in  a  vitiated  root,  but  by  grace, 
and  showing,  not  only  in  the  case  of  the  re¬ 
deemed,  but  also  in  those  who  were  not  deliv¬ 


ered,  how  much  grace  He  has  bestowed  upon 
them.  For  every  one  acknowledges  that  he  has 
been  rescued  from  evil,  not  by  deserved,  but  by 
gratuitous  goodness,  when  he  is  singled  out  from 
the  company  of  those  with  whom  he  might  just¬ 
ly  have  borne  a  common  punishment,  and  is  al¬ 
lowed  to  go  scathless.  Why,  then,  should  God 
not  have  created  those  whom  He  foresaw  would 
sin,  since  He  was  able  to  show  in  and  by  them 
both  what  their  guilt  merited,  and  what  His 
grace  bestowed,  and  since,  under  His  creating 
and  disposing  hand,  even  the  perverse  disorder 
of  the  wicked  could  not  pervert  the  right  order 
of  things? 

Chap.  27  .Of  the  angels  and  men  who  sinned , 
and  that  their  wickedness  did  not  disturb  the 
order  of  God’s  providence 
The  sins  of  men  and  angels  do  nothing  to  im¬ 
pede  the  “great  works  of  the  Lord  which  accom¬ 
plish  His  will.”1  For  He  Who  by  His  providence 
and  omnipotence  distributes  to  every  one  his 
own  portion,  is  able  to  make  good  use  not  only 
of  the  good,  but  also  of  the  wicked.  And  thus 
making  a  good  use  of  the  wicked  angel,  who,  in 
punishment  of  his  first  wicked  volition,  was 
doomed  to  an  obduracy  that  prevents  him  now 
from  willing  any  good,  why  should  not  God  have 
permitted  him  to  tempt  the  first  man,  who  had 
been  created  upright,  that  is  to  say,  with  a  good 
will?  For  he  had  been  so  constituted  that  if  he 
looked  to  God  for  help,  man’s  goodness  should 
defeat  the  angel’s  wickedness;  but  if  by  proud 
self-pleasing  he  abandoned  God.  his  Creator  and 
Sustainer,  he  should  be  conquered.  If  his  will 
remained  upright,  through  leaning  on  God’s 
help,  he  should  be  rewarded;  if  it  became  wick¬ 
ed,  by  forsaking  God,  he  should  be  punished. 
But  even  this  trusting  in  God’s  help  could  not  it¬ 
self  be  accomplished  without  God's  help,  al¬ 
though  man  had  it  in  his  own  power  to  relin¬ 
quish  the  benefits  of  divine  grace  by  pleasing 
himself.  For  as  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  live  in 
this  world  without  sustaining  ourselves  by  food, 
while  it  is  in  our  power  to  refuse  this  nourish¬ 
ment  and  cease  to  live,  as  those  do  who  kill 
themselves,  so  it  was  not  in  man’s  power,  even 
in  Paradise,  to  live  as  he  ought  without  God’s 
help;  but  it  was  in  his  power  to  live  wickedly, 
though  thus  he  should  cut  short  his  happiness, 
and  incur  very  just  punishment.  Since,  then, 
God  was  not  ignorant  that  man  would  fall,  why 
should  He  not  have  suffered  him  to  be  tempted 
by  an  angel  who  hated  and  envied  him?  It  was 
not,  indeed,  that  He  was  unaware  that  he  should 

JPs.  III.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD 

be  conquered,  but  because  He  foresaw  that  by 
the  man’s  seed,  aided  by  divine  grace,  this  same 
devil  himself  should  be  conquered,  to  the  great¬ 
er  glory  of  the  saints.  All  was  brought  about  in 
such  a  manner,  that  neither  did  any  future 
event  escape  God’s  foreknowledge,  nor  did  His 
foreknowledge  compel  any  one  to  sin,  and  so  as 
to  demonstrate  in  the  experience  of  the  intelli¬ 
gent  creation,  human  and  angelic,  how  great  a 
difference  there  is  between  the  private  presump¬ 
tion  of  the  creature  and  the  Creator’s  protec¬ 
tion.  For  who  will  dare  to  believe  or  say  that  it 
was  not  in  God’s  power  to  prevent  both  angels 
and  men  from  sinning?  But  God  preferred  to 
leave  this  in  their  power,  and  thus  to  show  both 
what  evil  could  be  wrought  by  their  pride,  and 
what  good  by  His  grace. 

Chap.  28.  Of  the  nature  of  the  two  cities,  the 
earthly  and  the  heavenly 
Accordingly,  two  cities  have  been  formed  by 
two  loves :  the  earthly  by  the  love  of  self,  even 
to  the  contempt  of  God:  the  heavenly  by  the 
love  of  God,  even  to  the  contempt  of  self.  The 
former,  in  a  word,  glories  in  itself,  the  latter  in 
the  Lord.  For  the  one  seeks  glory  from  men;  but 
the  greatest  glory  of  the  other  is  God,  the  wit¬ 
ness  of  conscience.  The  one  lifts  up  its  head  in 
its  own  glory ;  the  other  says  to  its  God,  “Thou 
art  my  glory,  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head.”1 
'Ps.  3.  3- 


XIV.  27-28,  XV.  1  397 

In  the  one,  the  princes  and  the  nations  it  sub¬ 
dues  are  ruled  by  the  love  of  ruling ;  in  the  other, 
the  princes  and  the  subjects  serve  one  another 
in  love,  the  latter  obeying,  while  the  former  take 
thought  for  all.  The  one  delights  in  its  own 
strength,  represented  in  the  persons  of  its  rul¬ 
ers;  the  other  says  to  its  God,  “I  will  love  Thee. 
0  Lord,  my  strength.”2  And  therefore  the  wise 
men  of  the  one  city,  living  according  to  man, 
have  sought  for  profit  to  their  own  bodies  or 
souls,  or  both,  and  those  who  have  known  God 
“glorified  Him  not  as  God.  neither  were  thank¬ 
ful,  but  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and 
their  foolish  heart  was  darkened;  professing 
themselves  to  be  wise” — that  is,  glorying  in 
their  own  wisdom,  and  being  possessed  by  pride 
— “they  became  fools,  and  changed  the  glory  of 
the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like 
to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four- 
footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things.”  For  they 
were  either  leaders  or  followers  of  the  people  in 
adoring  images,  “and  worshipped  and  served  the 
creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed 
for  ever.”3  But  in  the  other  city  there  is  no  hu¬ 
man  wisdom,  but  only  godliness,  which  offers 
due  worship  to  the  true  God,  and  looks  for  its 
reward  in  the  society  of  the  saints,  of  holy  an¬ 
gels  as  well  as  holy  men,  “that  God  may  be  all 
in  all.”  4 

2Ps.  18.  1.  3Rom.  1.  21-25. 

4I  Cor.  15.  28. 


BOOK  XV 

ARGUMENT.  Having  treated  in  the  four  preceding  books  of  the  origin  of 

THE  TWO  CITIES,  THE  EARTHLY  AND  THE  HEAVENLY,  AUGUSTINE  EXPLAINS  THEIR 
GROWTH  AND  PROGRESS  IN  THE  FOUR  BOOKS  WHICH  FOLLOW ;  AND,  IN  ORDER  TO  DO 
SO.  HE  EXPLAINS  THE  CHIEF  PASSAGES  OF  THE  SACRED  HISTORY  WHICH  BEAR  UPON 
THIS  SUBJECT.  In  THIS  FIFTEENTH  BOOK  HE  OPENS  THIS  PART  OF  HIS  WORK  BY  EX¬ 
PLAINING  THE  EVENTS  RECORDED  IN  GENESIS  FROM  THE  TIME  OF  CAIN  AND  ABEL  TO 
THE  DELUGE. 


Chap.  a.  Of  the  two  lines  of  the  human  race 
which  from  first  to  last  divide  it 

Of  the  bliss  of  Paradise,  of  Paradise  itself,  and 
of  the  life  of  our  first  parents  there,  and  of  their 
sin  and  punishment,  many  have  thought  much, 
spoken  much,  written  much.  We  ourselves,  too, 
have  spoken  of  these  things  in  the  foregoing 
books,  and  have  written  either  what  we  read  in 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  what  we  could  reason¬ 
ably  deduce  from  them.  And  were  we  to  enter 
into  a  more  detailed  investigation  of  these  mat¬ 
ters,  an  endless  number  of  endless  questions 


would  arise,  which  would  involve  us  in  a  larger 
work  than  the  present  occasion  admits.  We  can¬ 
not  be  expected  to  find  room  for  replying  to  ev¬ 
ery  question  that  may  be  started  by  unoccupied 
and  captious  men,  who  are  ever  more  ready  to 
ask  questions  than  capable  of  understanding  the 
answer.  Yet  I  trust  we  have  already  done  jus¬ 
tice  to  these  great  and  difficult  questions  regard¬ 
ing  the  beginning  of  the  world,  or  of  the  soul,  or 
of  the  human  race  itself.  This  race  we  have  dis¬ 
tributed  into  two  parts,  the  one  consisting  of 
those  who  live  according  to  man,  the  other  of 
those  who  live  according  to  God.  And  these  we 


398  ST.  AUGUSTINE 

also  mystically  call  the  two  cities,  or  the  two  Cain  that  he  built  a  city,3  but  Abel,  being  a  so- 


communities  of  men,  of  which  the  one  is  predes¬ 
tined  to  reign  eternally  with  God,  and  the  other 
to  suffer  eternal  punishment  with  the  devil. 
This,  however,  is  their  end,  and  of  it  we  are  to 
speak  afterwards.  At  present,  as  we  have  said 
enough  about  their  origin,  whether  among  the 
angels,  whose  numbers  we  know  not,  or  in  the 
two  first  human  beings,  it  seems  suitable  to  at¬ 
tempt  an  account  of  their  career,  from  the  time 
when  our  two  first  parents  began  to  propagate 
the  race  until  all  human  generation  shall  cease. 
For  this  whole  time  or  world-age,  in  which  the 
dying  give  place  and  those  who  are  born  succeed, 
is  the  career  of  these  two  cities  concerning 
which  we  treat. 

Of  these  two  first  parents  of  the  human  race, 
then,  Cain  was  the  first-born,  and  he  belonged 
to  the  city  of  men ;  after  him  was  born  Abel,  who 
belonged  to  the  city  of  God.  For  as  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual  the  truth  of  the  apostle’s  statement  is  dis¬ 
cerned,  “that  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but 
that  which  is  natural  and  afterward  that  which 
is  spiritual,”1  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  each 
man.  being  derived  from  a  condemned  stock,  is 
first  of  all  born  of  Adam  evil  and  carnal,  and  be¬ 
comes  good  and  spiritual  only  afterwards,  when 
he  is  grafted  into  Christ  by  regeneration:  so 
was  it  in  the  human  race  as  a  whole.  When  these 
two  cities  began  to  run  their  course  by  a  series 
of  deaths  and  births,  the  citizen  of  this  world 
was  the  first-born,  and  after  him  the  stranger  in 
this  world,  the  citizen  of  the  city  of  God,  pre¬ 
destinated  by  grace,  elected  by  grace,  by  grace  a 
stranger  below,  and  by  grace  a  citizen  above.  By 
grace — for  so  far  as  regards  himself  he  is  sprung 
from  the  same  mass,  all  of  which  is  condemned 
in  its  origin:  but  God.  like  a  potter  (for  this 
comparison  is  introduced  by  the  apostle  ju¬ 
diciously,  and  not  without  thought),  of  the  same 
lump  made  one  vessel  to  honour,  another  to  dis¬ 
honour.2  But  first  the  vessel  to  dishonour  was 
made,  and  after  it  another  to  honour.  For  in 
each  individual,  as  I  have  already  said,  there  is 
first  of  all  that  which  is  reprobate,  that  from 
which  we  must  begin,  but  in  which  we  need  not 
necessarily  remain;  afterwards  is  that  which  is 
well-approved,  to  which  we  may  by  advancing 
attain,  and  in  which,  when  we  have  reached  it, 
we  may  abide.  Not,  indeed,  that  every  wicked 
man  shall  be  good,  but  that  no  one  will  be  good 
who  was  not  first  of  all  wicked;  but  the  sooner 
any  one  becomes  a  good  man,  the  more  speedily 
does  he  receive  this  title,  and  abolish  the  old 
name  in  the  new.  Accordingly,  it  is  recorded  of 

JI  Cor.  15.  46.  2Rom.  9.  21. 


journer,  built  none.  For  the  city  of  the  saints  is 
above,  although  here  below  it  begets  citizens,  in 
whom  it  sojourns  till  the  time  of  its  reign  ar¬ 
rives,  when  it  shall  gather  together  all  in  the  day 
of  the  resurrection;  and  then  shall  the  promised 
kingdom  be  given  to  them,  in  which  they  shall 
reign  with  their  Prince,  the  King  of  the  ages, 
time  without  end. 

Chap.  2.  Of  the  children  of  the  flesh  and  the 
children  of  the  promise 
There  was  indeed  on  earth,  so  long  as  it  was 
needed,  a  symbol  and  foreshadowing  image  of 
this  city,  which  served  the  purpose  of  remind¬ 
ing  men  that  such  a  city  was  to  be,  rather  than 
of  making  it  present ;  and  this  image  was  itself 
called  the  Holy  City,  as  a  symbol  of  the  future 
city,  though  not  itself  the  reality.  Of  this  city 
which  served  as  an  image,  and  of  that  free  city 
it  typified,  Paul  writes  to  the  Galatians  in  these 
terms:  “Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the 
law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law?  For  it  is  written, 
that  Abraham  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bond 
maid,  the  other  by  a  free  woman.  But  he  who  was 
of  the  bond  woman  was  born  after  the  flesh,  but 
he  of  the  free  woman  was  by  promise.  Which 
things  are  an  allegory:  for  these  are  the  two 
covenants ;  the  one  from  the  Mount  Sinai,  which 
gendereth  to  bondage,  which  is  Agar.  For  this 
Agar  is  Mount  Sinai  in  Arabia,  and  answereth  to 
Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with 
her  children.  But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is 
free,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all.  For  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  Rejoice,  thou  barren  that  bearest  not; 
break  forth  and  cry.  thou  that  travailest  not  for 
the  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than  she 
which  hath  an  husband.  Now  we,  brethren,  as 
Isaac  was,  are  the  children  of  promise.  But  as 
then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted 
him  that  was  born  after  the  Spirit,  even  so  it  is 
now.  Nevertheless,  what  saith  the  Scripture? 
Cast  out  the  bond  woman  and  her  son:  for  the 
son  of  the  bond  woman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the 
son  of  the  free  woman.  And  we,  brethren,  are 
not  children  of  the  bond  women,  but  of  the  free, 
in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us 
free.”4  This  interpretation  of  the  passage,  hand¬ 
ed  down  to  us  with  apostolic  authority,  shows 
how  we  ought  to  understand  the  Scriptures  of 
the  two  covenants — the  old  and  the  new.  One 
portion  of  the  earthly  city  became  an  image  of 
the  heavenly  city,  not  having  a  significance  of 
its  own,  but  signifying  another  city,  and  there¬ 
fore  serving,  or  “being  in  bondage.”  For  it  was 
3Gen.  4.  17.  4Gal.  4.  21-31. 


THE  CITY  OF 

founded  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  to  prefigure 
another  city;  and  this  shadow  of  a  city  was  also 
itself  foreshadowed  by  another  preceding  figure. 
For  Sarah’s  handmaid  Agar  and  her  son  were  an 
image  of  this  image.  And  as  the  shadows  wTere 
to  pass  away  when  the  full  light  came,  Sarah, 
the  free  woman  who  prefigured  the  free  city 
(which  again  was  also  prefigured  in  another  way 
by  that  shadow  of  a  city  Jerusalem),  therefore 
said,  “Cast  out  the  bond  woman  and  her  son; 
for  the  son  of  the  bond  woman  shall  not  be  heir 
with  my  son  Isaac,”  or,  as  the  apostle  says, 
“with  the  son  of  the  free  woman.”  In  the  earthly 
city,  then,  we  find  two  things — its  own  obvious 
presence,  and  its  symbolic  presentation  of  the 
heavenly  city.  Now  citizens  are  begotten  to  the 
earthly  city  by  nature  vitiated  by  sin,  but  to  the 
heavenly  city  by  grace  freeing  nature  from  sin; 
whence  the  former  are  called  “vessels  of  wrath,” 
the  latter  “vessels  of  mercy.” 1  And  this  was  typ¬ 
ified  in  the  two  sons  of  Abraham — Ishmael,  the 
son  of  Agar  the  handmaid,  being  born  according 
to  the  flesh,  while  Isaac  was  born  of  the  free 
woman  Sarah,  according  to  the  promise.  Both, 
indeed,  were  of  Abraham’s  seed;  but  the  one 
was  begotten  by  natural  law,  the  other  was  given 
by  gracious  promise.  In  the  one  birth,  human 
action  is  revealed ;  in  the  other,  a  divine  kind¬ 
ness  comes  to  light. 

Chap.  3.  That  Sarah’s  barrenness  was  made  pro¬ 
ductive  by  God’s  grace 

Sarah,  in  fact,  was  barren;  and,  despairing  of 
offspring,  and  being  resolved  that  she  would 
have  at  least  through  her  handmaid  that  bless¬ 
ing  she  saw  she  could  not  in  her  own  person  pro¬ 
cure,  she  gave  her  handmaid  to  her  husband,  to 
whom  she  herself  had  been  unable  to  bear  chil¬ 
dren.  From  him  she  required  this  conjugal  duty, 
exercising  her  own  right  in  another’s  womb. 
And  thus  Ishmael  was  born  according  to  the 
common  law  of  human  generation,  by  sexual  in¬ 
tercourse.  Therefore  it  is  said  that  he  was  born 
“according  to  the  flesh” — not  because  such 
births  are  not  the  gifts  of  God,  nor  His  handi¬ 
work,  whose  creative  wisdom  “reaches,”  as  it  is 
written,  “from  one  end  to  another  mightily,  and 
sweetly  doth  she  order  all  things,”2  but  because, 
in  a  case  in  which  the  gift  of  God,  which  was 
not  due  to  men  and  was  the  gratuitous  largess  of 
grace,  was  to  be  conspicuous,  it  was  requisite 
that  a  son  be  given  in  a  way  which  no  effort  of 
nature  could  compass.  Nature  denies  children 
to  persons  of  the  age  which  Abraham  and  Sarah 
had  now  reached;  besides  that,  in  Sarah’s  case, 
lRom.  9.  22,  23.  2Wisd.  8.  1. 


GOD  XV.  2-4  399 

she  was  barren  even  in  her  prime.  This  nature, 
so  constituted  that  offspring  could  not  be  looked 
for,  symbolized  the  nature  of  the  human  race 
vitiated  by  sin  and  by  just  consequence  con¬ 
demned,  which  deserves  no  future  felicity.  Fitly, 
therefore,  does  Isaac,  the  child  of  promise,  typi¬ 
fy  the  children  of  grace,  the  citizens  of  the  free 
city,  who  dwell  together,  in  everlasting  peace,  in 
which  self-love  and  self-will  have  no  place,  but 
a  ministering  love  that  rejoices  in  the  common 
joy  of  all,  of  many  hearts  makes  one,  that  is  to 
say,  secures  a  perfect  concord. 

Chap.  4.  Of  the  conflict  and  peace  of  the  earth¬ 
ly  city 

But  the  earthly  city,  which  shall  not  be  ever¬ 
lasting  (for  it  will  no  longer  be  a  city  when  it 
has  been  committed  to  the  extreme  penalty), has 
its  good  in  this  world  and  rejoices  in  it  with  such 
joy  as  such  things  can  afford.  But  as  this  is  not 
a  good  which  can  discharge  its  devotees  of  all 
distresses,  this  city  is  often  divided  against  itself 
by  litigations,  wars,  quarrels,  and  such  victories 
as  are  either  life-destroying  or  short-lived.  For 
each  part  of  it  that  arms  against  another  part  of 
it  seeks  to  triumph  over  the  nations  through  it¬ 
self  in  bondage  to  vice.  If,  when  it  has  con¬ 
quered,  it  is  inflated  with  pride,  its  victory  is 
life-destroying;  but  if  it  turns  its  thoughts  upon 
the  common  casualties  of  our  mortal  condition, 
and  is  rather  anxious  concerning  the  disasters 
that  may  befall  it  than  elated  with  the  successes 
already  achieved,  this  victory,  though  of  a 
higher  kind,  is  still  only  short-lived;  for  it  can¬ 
not  abidingly  rule  over  those  whom  it  has  vic¬ 
toriously  subjugated.  But  the  things  which  this 
city  desires  cannot  justly  be  said  to  be  evil,  for 
it  is  itself,  in  its  own  kind,  better  than  all  other 
human  good.  For  it  desires  earthly  peace  for  the 
sake  of  enjoying  earthly  goods,  and  it  makes 
war  in  order  to  attain  to  this  peace;  since,  if  it 
has  conquered,  and  there  remains  no  one  to  re¬ 
sist  it,  it  enjoys  a  peace  which  it  had  not  while 
there  were  opposing  parties  who  contested  for 
the  enjoyment  of  those  things  which  were  too 
small  to  satisfy  both.  This  peace  is  purchased  by 
toilsome  wars;  it  is  obtained  by  what  they  style 
a  glorious  victory.  Now,  when  victory  remains 
with  the  party  which  had  the  juster  cause,  who 
hesitates  to  congratulate  the  victor,  and  style  it 
a  desirable  peace?  These  things,  then,  are  good 
things,  and  without  doubt  the  gifts  of  God.  But 
if  they  neglect  the  better  things  of  the  heavenly 
city,  which  are  secured  by  eternal  victory  and 
peace  never-ending,  and  so  inordinately  covet 
these  present  good  things  that  they  believe  them 


4oo  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  be  the  only  desirable  things,  or  love  them  bet¬ 
ter  than  those  things  which  are  believed  to  be 
better — if  this  be  so,  then  it  is  necessary  that 
misery  follow  and  ever  increase. 

Chap.  5.  Of  the  fratricidal  act  of  the  founder  of 
the  earthly  city,  and  the  corresponding  crime 
of  the  founder  of  Rome 
Thus  the  founder  of  the  earthly  city  w7as  a 
fratricide.  Overcome  with  envy,  he  slew  his  owrn 
brother,  a  citizen  of  the  eternal  city,  and  a  so¬ 
journer  on  earth.  So  that  w7e  cannot  be  surprised 
that  this  first  specimen,  or.  as  the  Greeks  say, 
archetype  of  crime,  should,  long  afterwards, 
find  a  corresponding  crime  at  the  foundation  of 
that  city  which  was  destined  to  reign  over  so 
many  nations,  and  be  the  head  of  this  earthly 
city  of  which  we  speak.  For  of  that  city  also,  as 
one  of  their  poets  has  mentioned,  “the  first  walls 
were  stained  with  a  brother’s  blood.”  or,  as  Ro¬ 
man  history  records,  Remus  was  slain  by  his 
brother  Romulus.  And  thus  there  is  no  difference 
between  the  foundation  of  this  city  and  ofjhe 
earthly  city,  unless  it  be  that  Romulus  and  Re¬ 
mus  were  both  citizens  of  the  earthly  city.  Both 
desired  to  have  the  glory  of  founding  the  Roman 
republic,  but  both  could  not  have  as  much  glory 
as  if  one  only  claimed  it;  for  he  who  wished  to 
have  the  glory  of  ruling  would  certainly  rule  less 
if  his  power  were  shared  by  a  living  consort.  In 
order,  therefore,  that  the  whole  glory  might  be 
enjoyed  by  one,  his  consort  was  removed;  and 
by  this  crime  the  empire  was  made  larger  in¬ 
deed.  but  inferior,  while  otherwise  it  would  have 
been  less,  but  better.  Now  these  brothers,  Cain 
and  Abel,  were  not  both  animated  by  the  same 
earthly  desires,  nor  did  the  murderer  envy  the 
other  because  he  feared  that,  by  both  ruling,  his 
own  dominion  would  be  curtailed — for  Abel  was 
not  solicitous  to  rule  in  that  city  which  his 
brother  built — he  was  moved  by  that  diabolical, 
envious  hatred  with  which  the  evil  regard  the 
good,  for  no  other  reason  than  because  they  are 
good  while  themselves  are  evil.  For  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  goodness  is  by  no  means  diminished  by 
being  shared  with  a  partner  either  permanent  or 
temporarily  assumed;  on  the  contrary,  the  pos¬ 
session  of  goodness  is  increased  in  proportion  to 
the  concord  and  charity  of  each  of  those  who 
share  it.  In  short,  he  who  is  unwilling  to  share 
this  possession  cannot  have  it;  and  he  who  is 
most  willing  to  admit  others  to  a  share  of  it  will 
have  the  greatest  abundance  to  himself.  The 
quarrel,  then,  between  Romulus  and  Remus 
shows  how  the  earthly  city  is  divided  against  it¬ 
self  ;  that  which  fell  out  between  Cain  and  Abel 


illustrated  the  hatred  that  subsists  between  the 
two  cities,  that  of  God  and  that  of  men.  The 
wdcked  w7ar  with  the  wicked;  the  good  also  w7ar 
with  the  wicked.  But  wdth  the  good,  good  men, 
or  at  least  perfectly  good  men,  cannot  war; 
though,  while  only  going  on  towards  perfection, 
they  war  to  this  extent,  that  every  good  man  re¬ 
sists  others  in  those  points  in  which  he  resists 
himself.  And  in  each  individual  “the  flesh  lust- 
eth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the 
flesh.”1  This  spiritual  lusting,  therefore,  can  be 
at  war  with  the  carnal  lust  of  another  man;  or 
carnal  lust  may  be  at  war  with  the  spiritual  de¬ 
sires  of  another,  in  some  such  way  as  good  and 
wicked  men  are  at  war;  or,  still  more  certainly, 
the  carnal  lusts  of  two  men,  good  but  not  yet 
perfect,  contend  together,  just  as  the  wicked 
contend  with  the  wicked,  until  the  health  of 
those  who  are  under  the  treatment  of  grace  at¬ 
tains  final  victory. 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  weaknesses  which  even  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  the  city  of  God  suffer  during  this 
earthly  pilgrimage  in  punishment  of  sin,  and 
of  which  they  are  healed  by  Godys  care 
This  sickliness — that  is  to  say,  that  disobedi¬ 
ence  of  which  we  spoke  in  the  fourteenth  book 
— is  the  punishment  of  the  first  disobedience.  It 
is  therefore  not  nature,  but  vice;  and  therefore 
it  is  said  to  the  good  who  are  growing  in  grace, 
and  living  in  this  pilgrimage  by  faith,  “Bear  ye 
one  another’s  burdens,  and  so  fulfill  the  law7  of 
Christ.”2  In  like  manner  it  is  said  elsewhere, 
“Warn  them  that  are  unruly,  comfort  the  feeble¬ 
minded,  support  the  wreak,  be  patient  toward  all 
men.  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto  any 
man.”3  And  in  another  place,  “If  a  man  be  over¬ 
taken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore 
such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness;  consider¬ 
ing  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted.”4  And 
elsewhere,  “Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your 
wrath.”5  And  in  the  Gospel,  “If  thy  brother 
shall  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his 
fault  between  thee  and  him  alone.”6  So  too  of 
sins  which  may  create  scandal  the  apostle  says, 
“Them  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that  others 
also  may  fear.”7  For  this  purpose,  and  that  we 
may  keep  that  peace  without  wThich  no  man  can 
see  the  Lord,8  many  precepts  are  given  which 
carefully  inculcate  mutual  forgiveness;  among 
which  we  may  number  that  terrible  word  in 
which  the  servant  is  ordered  to  pay  his  formerly 
remitted  debt  of  ten  thousand  talents,  because 

1Gal.  5.  17.  2Gal.  6.  2.  3I  Thess.  5.  14,  15. 

4Gal.  6.  1.  5Eph.  4.  26.  6Matt.  18.  15. 

7I  Tim.  5.  20.  8Heb.  12.  14. 


THE  CITY  OF 

he  did  not  remit  to  his  fellow-servant  his  debt 
of  two  hundred  pence.  To  which  parable  the 
Lord  Jesus  added  the  words,  “So  likewise  shall 
my  heavenly  Father  do  also  unto  you,  if  ye  from 
your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his  brother.” 1 
It  is  thus  the  citizens  of  the  city  of  God  are 
healed  while  still  they  sojourn  in  this  earth  and 
sigh  for  the  peace  of  their  heavenly  country. 
The  Holy  Spirit,  too,  works  within,  that  the 
medicine  externally  applied  may  have  some 
good  result.  Otherwise,  even  though  God  Him¬ 
self  make  use  of  the  creatures  that  are  subject 
to  Him,  and  in  some  human  form  address  our 
human  senses,  whether  we  receive  those  impres¬ 
sions  in  sleep  or  in  some  external  appearance, 
still,  if  He  does  not  by  His  own  inward  grace 
sway  and  act  upon  the  mind,  no  preaching  of  the 
truth  is  of  any  avail.  But  this  God  does,  distin¬ 
guishing  between  the  vessels  of  wrath  and  the 
vessels  of  mercy,  by  His  own  very  secret  but 
very  just  providence.  When  He  Himself  aids 
the  soul  in  His  own  hidden  and  wonderful  ways, 
and  the  sin  which  dwells  in  our  members,  and  is, 
as  the  apostle  teaches,  rather  the  punishment  of 
sin,  does  not  reign  in  our  mortal  body  to  obey 
the  lusts  of  it,  and  when  we  no  longer  yield  our 
members  as  instruments  of  unrighteousness,2 
then  the  soul  is  converted  from  its  own  evil  and 
selfish  desires,  and,  God  possessing  it,  it  pos¬ 
sesses  itself  in  peace  even  in  this  life,  and  after¬ 
wards,  with  perfected  health  and  endowed  with 
immortality,  will  reign  without  sin  in  peace 
everlasting. 

Chap.  7.  Of  the  cause  of  Cain’s  crime  and  his 
obstinacy ,  which  not  even  the  word  of  God 
could  subdue 

But  though  God  made  use  of  this  very  mode 
of  address  which  we  have  been  endeavouring  to 
explain,  and  spoke  to  Cain  in  that  form  by  which 
He  was  wont  to  accommodate  Himself  to  our 
first  parents  and  converse  with  them  as  a  com¬ 
panion,  what  good  influence  had  it  on  Cain?  Did 
he  not  fulfill  his  wicked  intention  of  killing  his 
brother  even  after  he  was  warned  by  God’s 
voice?  For  when  God  had  made  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  their  sacrifices,  neglecting  Cain’s,  regard¬ 
ing  Abel’s,  which  was  doubtless  intimated  by 
some  visible  sign  to  that  effect;  and  when  God 
had  done  so  because  the  works  of  the  one  were 
evil  but  those  of  his  brother  good,  Cain  was  very 
wroth,  and  his  countenance  fell.  For  thus  it  is 
written:  “And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Why 
are  thou  wroth,  and  why  is  thy  countenance 
'Matt.  18.  35.  2Rom.  6.  12,  13. 


GOD  XV.  5-7  401 

fallen?  If  thou  offerest  rightly,  but  dost  not 
rightly  distinguish,  hast  thou  not  sinned?  Fret 
not  thyself,  for  unto  thee  shall  be  his  turning, 
and  thou  shalt  rule  over  him.”3  In  this  admoni¬ 
tion  administered  by  God  to  Cain,  that  clause 
indeed,  “If  thou  offerest  rightly,  but  dost  not 
rightly  distinguish,  hast  thou  not  sinned?”  is 
obscure,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  apparent  for  what 
reason  or  purpose  it  was  spoken,  and  many 
meanings  have  been  put  upon  it,  as  each  one 
who  discusses  it  attempts  to  interpret  it  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  rule  of  faith.  The  truth  is,  that  a  sacri¬ 
fice  is  “rightly  offered”  when  it  is  offered  to  the 
true  God  to  Whom  alone  we  must  sacrifice.  And 
it  is  “not  rightly  distinguished”  when  we  do 
not  rightly  distinguish  the  places  or  seasons  or 
materials  of  the  offering,  or  the  person  offering, 
or  the  person  to  whom  it  is  presented,  or  those 
to  whom  it  is  distributed  for  food  after  the  obla¬ 
tion.  Distinguishing4  is  here  used  for  discrim¬ 
inating — whether  when  an  offering  is  made  in  a 
place  where  it  ought  not  or  of  a  material  which 
ought  to  be  offered  not  there  but  elsewhere;  or 
when  an  offering  is  made  at  a  wrong  time,  or  of 
a  material  suitable  not  then  but  at  some  other 
time;  or  when  that  is  offered  which  in  no  place 
nor  any  time  ought  to  be  offered;  or  when  a  man 
keeps  to  himself  choicer  specimens  of  the  same 
kind  than  he  offers  to  God;  or  when  he  or  any 
other  who  may  not  lawfully  partake  profanely 
eats  of  the  oblation.  In  which  of  these  particu¬ 
lars  Cain  displeased  God,  it  is  difficult  to  deter¬ 
mine.  But  the  Apostle  John,  speaking  of  these 
brothers,  says,  “Not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that 
wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother.  And  where¬ 
fore  slew  he  him?  Because  his  own  works  were 
evil,  and  his  brother’s  righteous.”5  He  thus  gives 
us  to  understand  that  God  did  not  respect  his 
offering  because  it  was  not  rightly  “distin¬ 
guished”  in  this,  that  he  gave  to  God  something 
of  his  own  but  kept  himself  to  himself.  For  this 
all  do  who  follow  not  God’s  will  but  their  own, 
who  live  not  with  an  upright  but  a  crooked 
heart,  and  yet  offer  to  God  such  gifts  as  they 
suppose  will  procure  from  Him  that  He  aid  them 
not  by  healing  but  by  gratifying  their  evil  pas¬ 
sions.  And  this  is  the  characteristic  of  the  earth¬ 
ly  city,  that  it  worships  God  or  gods  who  may 
aid  it  in  reigning  victoriously  and  peacefully  on 
earth  not  through  love  of  doing  good,  but 
through  lust  of  rule.  The  good  use  the  world  that 
they  may  enjoy  God;  the  wicked,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  that  they  may  enjoy  the  world  would  fain 
use  God — those  of  them,  at  least,  who  have  at- 

3Gen.  4.  6,  7.  4Literally,  “division.” 

6I  John,  3.  12. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tained  to  the  belief  that  He  is  and  takes  an  in¬ 
terest  in  human  affairs.  For  they  who  have  not 
yet  attained  even  to  this  belief  are  still  at  a  much 
lower  level.  Cain,  then,  when  he  saw  that  God 
had  respect  to  his  brother’s  sacrifice,  but  not  to 
his  own,  should  have  humbly  chosen  his  good 
brother  as  his  example,  and  not  proudly  counted 
him  his  rival.  But  he  was  wroth,  and  his  counte¬ 
nance  fell.  This  angry  regret  for  another  per¬ 
son’s  goodness,  even  his  brother’s,  was  charged 
upon  him  by  God  as  a  great  sin.  And  He  accused 
him  of  it  in  the  interrogation,  “Why  are  thou 
wroth,  and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen?”  For 
God  saw  that  he  envied  his  brother,  and  of  this 
He  accused  him.  For  to  men,  from  whom  the 
heart  of  their  fellow  is  hid.  it  might  be  doubtful 
and  quite  uncertain  whether  that  sadness  be¬ 
wailed  his  own  wickedness  by  which,  as  he  had 
learned,  he  had  displeased  God,  or  his  brother’s 
goodness,  which  had  pleased  God.  and  won  His 
favourable  regard  to  his  sacrifice.  But  God,  in 
giving  the  reason  why  He  refused  to  accept 
Cain’s  offering  and  why  Cain  should  rather  have 
been  displeased  at  himself  than  at  his  brother, 
shows  him  that  though  he  was  unjust  in  “not 
rightly  distinguishing,”  that  is,  not  rightly  liv¬ 
ing  and  being  unworthy  to  have  his  offering  re¬ 
ceived,  he  was  more  unjust  by  far  in  hating  his 
just  brother  without  a  cause. 

Yet  He  does  not  dismiss  him  without  counsel, 
holy,  just,  and  good.  “Fret  not  thyself,”  He  says, 
“for  unto  thee  shall  be  his  turning,  and  thou 
shalt  rule  over  him.”  Over  his  brother,  does  He 
mean?  Most  certainly  not.  Over  what,  then,  but 
sin?  For  He  had  said.  “Thou  hast  sinned,”  and 
then  He  added,  “Fret  not  thyself,  for  to  thee 
shall  be  its  turning,  and  thou  shalt  rule  over  it.” 
And  the  “turning”  of  sin  to  the  man  can  be  un¬ 
derstood  of  his  conviction  that  the  guilt  of  sin 
can  be  laid  at  no  other  man’s  door  but  his  own. 
For  this  is  the  health-giving  medicine  of  peni¬ 
tence  and  the  fit  plea  for  pardon;  so  that,  when 
it  is  said,  “To  thee  its  turning,”  we  must  not  sup¬ 
ply  “shall  be,”  but  we  must  read,  “To  thee  let 
its  turning  be,”  understanding  it  as  a  command, 
not  as  a  prediction.  For  then  shall  a  man  rule 
over  his  sin  when  he  does  not  prefer  it  to  him¬ 
self  and  defend  it.  but  subjects  it  by  repentance; 
otherwise  he  that  becomes  protector  of  it  shall 
surely  become  its  prisoner.  But  if  we  understand 
this  sin  to  be  that  carnal  concupiscence  of  which 
the  apostle  says,  “The  flesh  lusteth  against  the 
spirit,”1  among  the  fruits  of  which  lust  he  names 
envy,  by  which  assuredly  Cain  was  stung  and 
excited  to  destroy  his  brother,  then  we  may 

1Gal.  s.  17. 


properly  supply  the  words  “shall  be.”  and  read, 
“To  thee  shall  be  its  turning,  and  thou  shalt  rule 
over  it.”  For  when  the  carnal  part  which  the 
apostle  calls  sin,  in  that  place  where  he  says,  “It 
is  not  I  who  do  it.  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.”2 
that  part  which  the  philosophers  also  call  vi¬ 
cious,  and  which  ought  not  to  lead  the  mind,  but 
which  the  mind  ought  to  rule  and  restrain  by 
reason  from  illicit  motions;  when,  then,  this 
part  has  been  moved  to  perpetrate  any  wicked¬ 
ness,  if  it  be  curbed  and  if  it  obey  the  word  of 
the  apostle,  “Yield  not  your  members  instru¬ 
ments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,”3  it  is  turned 
towards  the  mind  and  subdued  and  conquered 
by  it,  so  that  reason  rules  over  it  as  a  subject. 
It  was  this  which  God  enjoined  on  him  who  was 
kindled  with  the  fire  of  envy  against  his  brother, 
so  that  he  sought  to  put  out  of  the  way  him 
whom  he  should  have  set  as  an  example.  “Fret 
not  thyself,”  or  compose  thyself.  He  says:  with¬ 
hold  thy  hand  from  crime;  let  not  sin  reign  in 
your  mortal  body  to  fulfill  it  in  the  lusts  thereof, 
nor  yield  your  members  instruments  of  unright¬ 
eousness  unto  sin.  “For  to  thee  shall  be  its  turn¬ 
ing,”  so  long  as  you  do  not  encourage  it  by  giv¬ 
ing  it  the  rein,  but  bridle  it  by  quenching  its  fire. 
“And  thou  shalt  rule  over  it”;  for  when  it  is  not 
allowed  any  external  actings,  it  yields  itself  to 
the  rule  of  the  governing  mind  and  righteous 
will,  and  ceases  from  even  internal  motions. 
There  is  something  similar  said  in  the  same  di¬ 
vine  book  of  the  woman,  when  God  questioned 
and  judged  them  after  their  sin,  and  pronounced 
sentence  on  them  all — the  devil  in  the  form  of 
the  serpent,  the  woman  and  her  husband  in  their 
own  persons.  For  when  He  had  said  to  her,  “I 
will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy  con¬ 
ception;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  chil¬ 
dren,”  then  He  added,  “and  thy  turning  shall  be 
to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.”4 
What  is  said  to  Cain  about  his  sin,  or  about  the 
vicious  concupiscence  of  his  flesh,  is  here  said  of 
the  woman  who  had  sinned;  and  we  are  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  the  husband  is  to  rule  his  wife  as 
the  soul  rules  the  flesh.  And  therefore,  says  the 
apostle,  “He  that  loveth  his  wife,  loveth  him¬ 
self;  for  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh."5 
This  flesh,  then,  is  to  be  healed,  because  it  be¬ 
longs  to  ourselves:  is  not  to  be  abandoned  to 
destruction  as  if  it  were  alien  to  our  nature.  But 
Cain  received  that  counsel  of  God  in  the  spirit 
of  one  who  did  not  wish  to  amend.  In  fact,  the 
vice  of  envy  grew  stronger  in  him;  and,  having 

2Rom.  7.  17.  3Rom.  6.  13. 

4Gen.  3.  16. 

5Eph.  5.  28,  29. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XV.  8  403 


entrapped  his  brother,  he  slew  him.  Such  was 
the  founder  of  the  earthly  city.  He  was  also  a 
figure  of  the  Jews  who  slew  Christ  the  Shepherd 
of  the  flock  of  men,  prefigured  by  Abel  the  shep¬ 
herd  of  sheep:  but  as  this  is  an  allegorical  and 
prophetical  matter,  I  forbear  to  explain  it  now; 
besides,  I  remember  that  I  have  made  some  re¬ 
marks  upon  it  in  writing  against  Faustus  the 
Manichaean. 

Chap.  8.  What  Cain’s  reason  was  for  building 
a  city  so  early  in  the  history  of  the  human 
race 

At  present  it  is  the  history  which  I  aim  at  de¬ 
fending,  that  Scripture  may  not  be  reckoned  in¬ 
credible  when  it  relates  that  one  man  built  a 
city  at  a  time  in  which  there  seem  to  have  been 
but  four  men  upon  earth,  or  rather  indeed  but 
three,  after  one  brother  slew  the  other — to  wit, 
the  first  man  the  father  of  all,  and  Cain  himself, 
and  his  son  Enoch,  by  whose  name  the  city  was 
itself  called.  But  they  who  are  moved  by  this 
consideration  forget  to  take  into  account  that 
the  writer  of  the  sacred  history  does  not  neces¬ 
sarily  mention  all  the  men  who  might  be  alive 
at  that  time,  but  those  only  whom  the  scope  of 
his  work  required  him  to  name.  The  design  of 
that  writer  (who  in  this  matter  was  the  instru¬ 
ment  of  the  Holy  Ghost)  was  to  descend  to 
Abraham  through  the  successions  of  ascertained 
generations  propagated  from  one  man,  and  then 
to  pass  from  Abraham’s  seed  to  the  people  of 
God,  in  whom,  separated  as  they  were  from 
other  nations,  was  prefigured  and  predicted  all 
that  relates  to  the  city  whose  reign  is  eternal, 
and  to  its  king  and  founder  Christ,  which  things 
were  foreseen  in  the  Spirit  as  destined  to  come; 
yet  neither  is  this  object  so  effected  as  that 
nothing  is  said  of  the  other  society  of  men 
which  we  call  the  earthly  city,  but  mention  is 
made  of  it  so  far  as  seemed  needful  to  enhance 
the  glory  of  the  heavenly  city  by  contrast  to  its 
opposite.  Accordingly,  when  the  divine  Scrip¬ 
ture,  in  mentioning  the  number  of  years  which 
those  mkn  lived,  concludes  its  account  of  each 
man  of  whom  it  speaks,  with  the  words,  “And 
he  begat  sons  and  daughters,  and  all  his  days 
were  so  and  so,  and  he  died,”  are  we  to  under¬ 
stand  that,  because  it  does  not  name  those  sons 
and  daughters,  therefore,  during  that  long  term 
of  years  over  which  one  lifetime  extended  in 
those  early  days,  there  might  not  have  been  born 
very  many  men,  by  whose  united  numbers  not 
one  but  several  cities  might  have  been  built? 
But  it  suited  the  purpose  of  God,  by  whose  in¬ 
spiration  these  histories  were  composed,  to  ar¬ 


range  and  distinguish  from  the  first  these  two 
societies  in  their  several  generations — that  on 
the  one  side  the  generations  of  men.  that  is  to 
say,  of  those  who  live  according  to  man,  and  on 
the  other  side  the  generations  of  the  sons  of 
God,  that  is  to  say,  of  men  living  according  to 
God,  might  be  traced  down  together  and  yet 
apart  from  one  another  as  far  as  the  deluge,  at 
which  point  their  dissociation  and  association 
are  exhibited:  their  dissociation,  inasmuch  as 
the  generations  of  both  lines  are  recorded  in 
separate  tables,  the  one  line  descending  from 
the  fratricide  Cain,  the  other  from  Seth,  who 
had  been  born  to  Adam  instead  of  him  whom 
his  brother  slew;  their  association,  inasmuch  as 
the  good  so  deteriorated  that  the  whole  race  be¬ 
came  of  such  a  character  that  it  was  swept  away 
by  the  deluge,  with  the  exception  of  one  just 
man,  whose  name  was  Noah,  and  his  wife  and 
three  sons  and  three  daughters-in-law,  which 
eight  persons  were  alone  deemed  worthy  to  es¬ 
cape  from  that  desolating  visitation  which  de¬ 
stroyed  all  men. 

Therefore,  although  it  is  written,  “And  Cain 
knew  his  wife,  and  she  conceived  and  bare 
Enoch,  and  he  builded  a  city  and  called  the 
name  of  the  city  after  the  name  of  his  son 
Enoch,”1  it  does  not  follow  that  we  are  to  be¬ 
lieve  this  to  have  been  his  first-born;  for  we 
cannot  suppose  that  this  is  proved  by  the  ex¬ 
pression  “he  knew  his  wife,”  as  if  then  for  the 
first  time  he  had  had  intercourse  with  her.  For 
in  the  case  of  Adam,  the  father  of  all,  this  ex¬ 
pression  is  used  not  only  when  Cain,  who  seems 
to  have  been  his  first-born,  was  conceived,  but 
also  afterwards  the  same  Scripture  says,  “Adam 
knew  Eve  his  wife,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare 
a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth.”2  Whence  it  is 
obvious  that  Scripture  employs  this  expression 
neither  always  when  a  birth  is  recorded  nor  then 
only  when  the  birth  of  a  first-born  is  mentioned. 
Neither  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  Enoch 
was  Cain’s  first-born  because  he  named  his  city 
after  him.  For  it  is  quite  possible  that  though  he 
had  other  sons,  yet  for  some  reason  the  father 
loved  him  more  than  the  rest.  Judah  was  not  the 
first-born,  though  he  gives  his  name  to  Judaea 
and  the  Jews.  But  even  though  Enoch  was  the 
first-born  of  the  city’s  founder,  that  is  no  rea¬ 
son  for  supposing  that  the  father  named  the  city 
after  him  as  soon  as  he  was  born;  for  at  that 
time  he,  being  but  a  solitary  man,  could  not  have 
founded  a  civic  community,  which  is  nothing 
else  than  a  multitude  of  men  bound  together  by 

1Gen.  4.  17. 

2Gen.  4.  25. 


404  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


some  associating  tie.  But  when  his  family  in¬ 
creased  to  such  numbers  that  he  had  quite  a 
population,  then  it  became  possible  to  him  both 
to  build  a  city,  and  give  it,  when  founded,  the 
name  of  his  son.  For  so  long  was  the  life  of  those 
antediluvians,  that  he  who  lived  the  shortest 
time  of  those  whose  years  are  mentioned  in 
Scripture  attained  to  the  age  of  753  years.1  And 
though  no  one  attained  the  age  of  a  thousand 
years,  several  exceeded  the  age  of  nine  hundred. 
Who  then  can  doubt  that  during  the  lifetime  of 
one  man  the  human  race  might  be  so  multiplied 
that  there  would  be  a  population  to  build  and 
occupy  not  one  but  several  cities?  And  this 
might  very  readily  be  conjectured  from  the  fact 
that  from  one  man,  Abraham,  in  not  much  more 
than  four  hundred  years,  the  numbers  of  the  He¬ 
brew  race  so  increased  that  in  the  exodus  of  that 
people  from  Egypt  there  are  recorded  to  have 
been  six  hundred  thousand  men  capable  of  bear¬ 
ing  arms,2  and  this  over  and  above  the  Idumae- 
ans,  who,  though  not  numbered  with  Israel’s  de¬ 
scendants,  were  yet  sprung  from  his  brother, 
also  a  grandson  of  Abraham;  and  overhand 
above  the  other  nations  which  were  of  the  same 
stock  of  Abraham,  though  not  through  Sarah — 
that  is,  his  descendants  by  Hagar  and  Keturah, 
the  Ishmaelites,  Midianites,  etc. 

Chap.  9.  Of  the  long  life  and  greater  stature  of 

the  antediluvians 

Wherefore  no  one  who  considerately  weighs 
facts  will  doubt  that  Cain  might  have  built  a 
city,  and  that  a  large  one,  when  it  is  observed 
how  prolonged  were  the  lives  of  men,  unless 
perhaps  some  sceptic  take  exception  to  this  very 
length  of  years  which  our  authors  ascribe  to  the 
antediluvians  and  deny  that  this  is  credible. 
And  so,  too,  they  do  not  believe  that  the  size  of 
men’s  bodies  was  larger  then  than  now,  though 
the  most  esteemed  of  their  own  poets,  Virgil, 
asserts  the  same,  when  he  speaks  of  that  huge 
stone  which  had  been  fixed  as  a  landmark,  and 
which  a  strong  man  of  those  ancient  times 
snatched  up  as  he  fought,  and  ran,  and  hurled, 
and  cast  it : 

Scarce  twelve  strong  men  of  later  mould 

That  weight  could  on  their  necks  uphold ,3 

thus  declaring  his  opinion  that  the  earth  then 
produced  mightier  men.  And  if  in  the  more  re¬ 
cent  times,  how  much  more  in  the  ages  be¬ 
fore  the  world-renowned  deluge?  But  the  large 

^amech,  according  to  the  Septuagint. 

2Ex.  12.  37. 

3JZneid,  bk.  xn.  899, 900.  Compare  the  Iliad,  bk.  v.  302. 


size  of  the  primitive  human  body  is  often  proved 
to  the  incredulous  by  the  exposure  of  sepul¬ 
chres,  either  through  the  wear  of  time  or  the 
violence  of  torrents  or  some  accident,  and  in 
which  bones  of  incredible  size  have  been  found 
or  have  rolled  out,  I  myself,  along  with  some 
others,  saw  on  the  shore  at  Utica  a  man’s  molar 
tooth  of  such  a  size,  that  if  it  were  cut  down  into 
teeth  such  as  we  have,  a  hundred,  I  fancy,  could 
have  been  made  out  of  it.  But  that,  I  believe, 
belonged  to  some  giant.  For  though  the  bodies 
of  ordinary  men  were  then  larger  than  ours,  the 
giants  surpassed  all  in  stature.  And  neither  in 
our  own  age  nor  any  other  have  there  been  al¬ 
together  wanting  instances  of  gigantic  stature, 
though  they  may  be  few.  The  younger  Pliny,  a 
most  learned  man,  maintains  that  the  older  the 
world  becomes,  the  smaller  will  be  the  bodies  of 
men.  And  he  mentions  that  Homer  in  his  poems 
often  lamented  the  same  decline;  and  this  he 
does  not  laugh  at  as  a  poetical  figment,  but  in 
his  character  of  a  recorder  of  natural  wonders 
accepts  it  as  historically  true.  But,  as  I  said,  the 
bones  which  are  from  time  to  time  discovered 
prove  the  size  of  the  bodies  of  the  ancients,4 
and  will  do  so  to  future  ages,  for  they  are  slow 
to  decay.  But  the  length  of  an  antediluvian’s  life 
cannot  now  be  proved  by  any  such  monumental 
evidence.  But  we  are  not  on  this  account  to 
withhold  our  faith  from  the  sacred  history, 
whose  statements  of  past  fact  we  are  the  more 
inexcusable  in  discrediting,  as  we  see  the  accu¬ 
racy  of  its  prediction  of  what  was  future.  And 
even  that  same  Pliny  tells  us  that  there  is  still  a 
nation  in  which  men  live  200  years.  If,  then,  in 
places  unknown  to  us,  men  are  believed  to  have 
a  length  of  days  which  is  quite  beyond  our  own 
experience,  why  should  we  not  believe  the  same 
of  times  distant  from  our  own?  Or  are  we  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  in  other  places  there  is  what  is  not 
here,  while  we  do  not  believe  that  in  other  times 
there  has  been  anything  but  what  is  now? 

Chap.  10.  Of  the  different  computation  of  the 
ages  of  the  antediluvians,  given  by  the  He¬ 
brew  manuscripts  and  by  our  own 
Wherefore,  although  there  is  a  discrepancy 
for  which  I  cannot  account  between  our  manu¬ 
scripts  and  the  Hebrew,5  in  the  very  number  of 

4See  the  account  given  by  Herodotus  (bk.  i.  67)  of  the 
discovery  of  the  bones  of  Orestes,  which,  as  the  story  goes, 
gave  a  stature  of  seven  cubits. 

60ur  own  mss.,  of  which  Augustine  here  speaks,  were  the 
Latin  versions  of  the  Septuagint  used  by  the  Church  be¬ 
fore  Jerome’s  was  received;  the  “Hebrew  mss.”  were  the 
versions  made  from  the  Hebrew  text.  Compare  On  Chris¬ 
tian  Doctrine ,  Bk.  n.  ch.  15,  ff. 


THE  CITY  OF 

years  assigned  to  the  antediluvians,  yet  the  dis¬ 
crepancy  is  not  so  great  that  they  do  not  agree 
about  their  longevity.  For  the  very  first  man. 
Adam,  before  he  begot  his  son  Seth,  is  in  our 
manuscripts  found  to  have  lived  230  years,  but 
in  the  Hebrew  mss.  130.  But  after  he  begot  Seth, 
our  copies  read  that  he  lived  700  years,  while 
the  Hebrew  give  800.  And  thus,  when  the  two 
periods  are  taken  together,  the  sum  agrees.  And 
so  throughout  the  succeeding  generations,  the 
period  before  the  father  begets  a  son  is  always 
made  shorter  by  100  years  in  the  Hebrew,  but 
the  period  after  his  son  is  begotten  is  longer  by 
100  years  in  the  Hebrew  than  in  our  copies.  And 
thus,  taking  the  two  periods  together,  the  result 
is  the  same  in  both.  And  in  the  sixth  generation 
there  is  no  discrepancy  at  all.  In  the  seventh, 
however,  of  which  Enoch  is  the  representative, 
who  is  recorded  to  have  been  translated  without 
death  because  he  pleased  God.  there  is  the  same 
discrepancy  as  in  the  first  five  generations,  100 
years  more  being  ascribed  to  him  by  our  mss. 
before  he  begat  a  son.  But  still  the  result  agrees; 
for  according  to  both  documents  he  lived  before 
he  was  translated  365  years.  In  the  eighth  gen¬ 
eration  the  discrepancy  is  less  than  in  the  others, 
and  of  a  different  kind.  For  Methuselah,  whom 
Enoch  begat,  lived,  before  he  begat  his  succes¬ 
sor,  not  100  years  less,  but  ioo  years  more,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Hebrew  reading;  and  in  our  mss. 
again  these  years  are  added  to  the  period  after 
he  begat  his  son;  so  that  in  this  case  also  the 
sum  total  is  the  same.  And  it  is  only  in  the  ninth 
generation,  that  is,  in  the  age  of  Lamech,  Me¬ 
thuselah’s  son  and  Noah’s  father,  that  there  is  a 
discrepancy  in  the  sum  total;  and  even  in  this 
case  it  is  slight.  For  the  Hebrew  mss.  represent 
him  as  living  twenty-four  years  more  than  ours 
assign  to  him.  For  before  he  begat  his  son,  who 
was  called  Noah,  six  years  fewer  are  given  to 
him  by  the  Hebrew  mss.  than  by  ours;  but  after 
he  begat  this  son,  they  give  him  thirty  years 
more  than  ours;  so  that,  deducting  the  former 
six,  ther^  remains,  as  we  said,  a  surplus  of 
twenty-four. 

Chap,  ii  .Of  Methuselah’s  age ,  which  seems  to 
extend  fourteen  years  beyond  the  deluge 
From  this  discrepancy  between  the  Hebrew 
books  and  our  own  arises  the  well-known  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  age  of  Methuselah;  for  it  is  com¬ 
puted  that  he  lived  for  fourteen  years  after  the 
deluge,  though  Scripture  relates  that  of  all  who 
were  then  upon  the  earth  only  the  eight  souls  in 
the  ark  escaped  destruction  by  the  flood,  and  of 
these  Methuselah  was  not  one.  For,  according 


GOD  XV.  9-1 1  405 

to  our  books,  Methuselah,  before  he  begat  the 
son  whom  he  called  Lamech,  lived  167  years; 
then  Lamech  himself,  before  his  son  Noah  was 
born,  lived  188  years,  which  together  make  355 
years.  Add  to  these  the  age  of  Noah  at  the  date 
of  the  deluge,  600  years,  and  this  gives  a  total  of 
955  from  the  birth  of  Methuselah  to  the  year  of 
the  flood.  Now  all  the  years  of  the  life  of  Me¬ 
thuselah  are  computed  to  be  969;  for  when  he 
had  lived  167  years,  and  had  begotten  his  son 
Lamech,  he  then  lived  after  this  802  years, 
which  makes  a  total,  as  we  said,  of  969  years. 
From  this,  if  we  deduct  955  years  from  the  birth 
of  Methuselah  to  the  flood,  there  remains  four¬ 
teen  years,  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  lived 
after  the  flood.  And  therefore  some  suppose 
that,  though  he  was  not  on  earth  (in  which  it  is 
agreed  that  every  living  thing  which  could  not 
naturally  live  in  water  perished) ,  he  was  for  a 
time  with  his  father,  who  had  been  translated, 
and  that  he  lived  there  till  the  flood  had  passed 
away.  This  hypothesis  they  adopt,  that  they 
may  not  cast  a  slight  on  the  trustworthiness  of 
versions  which  the  Church  has  received  into  a 
position  of  high  authority,  and  because  they  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  Jewish  mss.  rather  than  our  own 
are  in  error.  For  they  do  not  admit  that  this  is  a 
mistake  of  the  translators,  but  maintain  that 
there  is  a  falsified  statement  in  the  original, 
from  which,  through  the  Greek,  the  Scripture 
has  been  translated  into  our  own  tongue.  They 
say  that  it  is  not  credible  that  the  seventy  trans¬ 
lators,  who  simultaneously  and  unanimously 
produced  one  rendering,  could  have  erred,  or,  in 
a  case  in  which  no  interest  of  theirs  was  in¬ 
volved,  could  have  falsified  their  translation; 
but  that  the  Jews,  envying  us  our  translation  of 
their  Law  and  Prophets,  have  made  alterations 
in  their  texts  so  as  to  undermine  the  authority  of 
ours.  This  opinion  or  suspicion  let  each  man 
adopt  according  to  his  own  judgment.  Certain  it 
is  that  Methuselah  did  not  survive  the  flood,  but 
died  in  the  very  year  it  occurred,  if  the  numbers 
given  in  the  Hebrew  mss.  are  true.  My  own 
opinion  regarding  the  seventy  translators  I  will, 
with  God’s  help,  state  more  carefully  in  its  own 
place,  when  I  have  come  down  (following  the 
order  which  this  work  requires)  to  that  period  in 
which  their  translation  was  executed.1  For  the 
present  question,  it  is  enough  that,  according  to 
our  versions,  the  men  of  that  age  had  lives  so 
long  as  to  make  it  quite  possible  that,  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  first-born  of  the  two  sole  parents 
then  on  earth,  the  human  race  multiplied  suffi¬ 
ciently  to  form  a  community 
^ee  below,  bk.  xviii.  chaps  42-44 


406 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  12  .Of  the  opinion  of  those  who  do  not 
believe  that  in  these  primitive  times  men  lived 
so  long  as  is  stated 

For  they  are  by  no  means  to  be  listened  to 
who  suppose  that  in  those  times  years  were  dif¬ 
ferently  reckoned,  and  were  so  short  that  one  of 
our  years  may  be  supposed  to  be  equal  to  ten  of 
theirs.  So  that  they  say,  when  we  read  or  hear 
that  some  man  lived  900  years,  we  should  un¬ 
derstand  ninety,  ten  of  those  years  making  but 
one  of  ours,  and  ten  of  ours  equalling  100  of 
theirs.  Consequently,  as  they  suppose,  Adam 
was  twenty-three  years  of  age  when  he  begat 
Seth,  and  Seth  himself  was  twenty  years  and  six 
months  old  when  his  son  Enos  was  born,  though 
the  Scripture  calls  these  months  205  years.  For, 
on  the  hypothesis  of  those  whose  opinion  we  are 
explaining,  it  was  customary  to  divide  one  such 
year  as  we  have  into  ten  parts,  and  to  call  each 
part  a  year.  And  each  of  these  parts  was  com¬ 
posed  of  six  days  squared;  because  God  finished 
His  works  in  six  days,  that  He  might  rest  the 
seventh.  Of  this  I  disputed  according  to  my*abil- 
ity  in  the  eleventh  book.1  Now  six  squared,  or 
six  times  six,  gives  thirty-six  days ;  and  this  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  ten  amounts  to  360  days,  or  twelve 
lunar  months.  As  for  the  five  remaining  days 
which  are  needed  to  complete  the  solar  year, 
and  for  the  fourth  part  of  a  day,  which  requires 
that  into  every  fourth  or  leap-year  a  day  be  add¬ 
ed,  the  ancients  added  such  days  as  the  Romans 
used  to  call  “intercalary,”  in  order  to  complete 
the  number  of  the  years.  So  that  Enos,  Seth’s 
son,  was  nineteen  years  old  when  his  son  Cainan 
was  born,  though  Scripture  calls  these  years  190. 
And  so  through  all  the  generations  in  which  the 
ages  of  the  antediluvians  are  given,  we  find  in 
our  versions  that  almost  no  one  begat  a  son  at 
the  age  of  100  or  under,  or  even  at  the  age  of  1 20 
or  thereabouts;  but  the  youngest  fathers  are  re¬ 
corded  to  have  been  160  years  old  and  upwards. 
And  the  reason  of  this,  they  say,  is  that  no  one 
can  beget  children  when  he  is  ten  years  old,  the 
age  spoken  of  by  those  men  as  100,  but  that  six¬ 
teen  is  the  age  of  puberty,  and  competent  now 
to  propagate  offspring;  and  this  is  the  age  called 
by  them  160.  And  that  it  may  not  be  thought 
incredible  that  in  these  days  the  year  was  differ¬ 
ently  computed  from  our  own,  they  adduce  what 
is  recorded  by  several  writers  of  history,  that 
the  Egyptians  had  a  year  of  four  months,  the 
Acarnanians  of  six,  and  the  Lavinians  of  thir¬ 
teen  months.  The  younger  Pliny,  after  mention¬ 
ing  that  some  writers  reported  that  one  man  had 
lChap.  8. 


lived  152  years,  another  ten  more,  others  200, 
others  300,  that  some  had  even  reached  500  and 
600,  and  a  few  800  years  of  age,  gave  it  as  his 
opinion  that  all  this  must  be  ascribed  to  mis¬ 
taken  computation.  For  some,  he  says,  make 
summer  and  winter  each  a  year;  others  make 
each  season  a  year,  like  the  Arcadians,  whose 
years,  he  says,  were  of  three  months.  He  added, 
too,  that  the  Egyptians,  of  whose  little  years  of 
four  months  we  have  spoken  already,  sometimes 
terminated  their  year  at  the  wane  of  each  moon  ; 
so  that  with  them  there  are  produced  lifetimes 
of  1000  years. 

By  these  plausible  arguments  certain  persons, 
with  no  desire  to  weaken  the  credit  of  this  sa¬ 
cred  history,  but  rather  to  facilitate  belief  in  it 
by  removing  the  difficulty  of  such  incredible 
longevity,  have  been  themselves  persuaded,  and 
think  they  act  wisely  in  persuading  others,  that 
in  these  days  the  year  was  so  brief  that  ten  of 
their  years  equal  but  one  of  ours,  while  ten  of 
ours  equal  100  of  theirs.  But  there  is  the  plain¬ 
est  evidence  to  show  that  this  is  quite  false.  Be¬ 
fore  producing  this  evidence,  however,  it  seems 
right  to  mention  a  conjecture  which  is  yet  more 
plausible.  From  the  Hebrew  manuscripts  we 
could  at  once  refute  this  confident  statement; 
for  in  them  Adam  is  found  to  have  lived  not  230 
but  130  years  before  he  begat  his  third  son.  If, 
then,  this  mean  thirteen  years  by  our  ordinary 
computation,  then  he  must  have  begotten  his 
first  son  when  he  was  only  twelve  or  there¬ 
abouts.  Who  can  at  this  age  beget  children  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  ordinary  and  familiar  course  of 
nature?  But  not  to  mention  him,  since  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  he  may  have  been  able  to  beget  his  like  as 
soon  as  he  was  created — for  it  is  not  credible 
that  he  was  created  so  little  as  our  infants  are — 
not  to  mention  him,  his  son  was  not  205  years 
old  when  he  begat  Enos,  as  our  versions  have  it, 
but  105,  and  consequently,  according  to  this 
idea,  was  not  eleven  years  old.  But  what  shall  I 
say  of  his  son  Cainan,  who,  though  by  our  ver¬ 
sion  170  years  old,  was  by  the  Hebrew  text  sev¬ 
enty  when  he  beget  Mahalaleel?  If  seventy 
years  in  those  times  meant  only  seven  of  our 
years,  what  man  of  seven  years  old  begets  chil¬ 
dren? 

Chap.  13.  Whether,  in  computing  years ,  we 

ought  to  follow  the  Hebrew  or  the  Septuagint 

But  if  I  say  this,  I  shall  presently  be  an¬ 
swered.  “It  is  one  of  the  Jews’  lies.”  This,  how¬ 
ever,  we  have  disposed  of  above,  showing  that 
it  cannot  be  that  men  of  so  just  a  reputation  as 
the  seventy  translators  should  have  falsified 


THE  CITY  OF 

their  version.  However,  if  I  ask  them  which  of 
the  two  is  more  credible,  that  the  Jewish  nation, 
scattered  far  and  wide,  could  have  unanimously 
conspired  to  forge  this  lie,  and  so,  through  envy¬ 
ing  others  the  authority  of  their  Scriptures,  have 
deprived  themselves  of  their  verity;  or  that  sev¬ 
enty  men,  who  were  also  themselves  Jews,  shut 
up  in  one  place  (for  Ptolemy  king  of  Egypt  had 
got  them  together  for  this  work),  should  have 
envied  foreign  nations  that  same  truth,  and  by 
common  consent  inserted  these  errors :  who  does 
not  see  which  can  be  more  naturally  and  readily 
believed?  But  far  be  it  from  any  prudent  man 
to  believe  either  that  the  Jews,  however  mali¬ 
cious  and  wrong-headed,  could  have  tampered 
with  so  many  and  so  widely-dispersed  manu¬ 
scripts;  or  that  those  renowned  seventy  indi¬ 
viduals  had  any  common  purpose  to  grudge  the 
truth  to  the  nations.  One  must  therefore  more 
plausibly  maintain,  that  when  first  their  labours 
began  to  be  transcribed  from  the  copy  in  Ptole¬ 
my’s  library,  some  such  misstatement  might  find 
its  way  into  the  first  copy  made,  and  from  it 
might  be  disseminated  far  and  wide;  and  that 
this  might  arise  from  no  fraud,  but  from  a  mere 
copyist’s  error.  This  is  a  sufficiently  plausible 
account  of  the  difficulty  regarding  Methuselah’s 
life,  and  of  that  other  case  in  which  there  is  a 
difference  in  the  total  of  twenty-four  years.  But 
in  those  cases  in  which  there  is  a  methodical  re¬ 
semblance  in  the  falsification,  so  that  uniformly 
the  one  version  allots  to  the  period  before  a  son 
and  successor  is  born  ioo  years  more  than  the 
other,  and  to  the  period  subsequent  ioo  years 
less,  and  vice  versa ,  so  that  the  totals  may  agree 
— and  this  holds  true  of  the  first,  second,  third, 
fourth,  fifth,  and  seventh  generations — in  these 
cases  error  seems  to  have,  if  we  may  say  so,  a 
certain  kind  of  constancy,  and  savours  not  of 
accident,  but  of  design. 

Accordingly,  that  diversity  of  numbers  which 
distinguishes  the  Hebrew  from  the  Greek  and 
Latin  copies  of  Scripture,  and  which  consists  of 
a  uniform  addition  and  deduction  of  ioo  years 
in  each  lifetime  for  several  consecutive  genera¬ 
tions,  is  to  be  attributed  neither  to  the  malice  of 
the  Jews  nor  to  men  so  diligent  and  prudent  as 
the  seventy  translators,  but  to  the  error  of  the 
copyist  who  was  first  allowed  to  transcribe  the 
manuscript  from  the  library  of  the  above  men¬ 
tioned  king.  For  even  now,  in  cases  where  num¬ 
bers  contribute  nothing  to  the  easier  compre¬ 
hension  or  more  satisfactory  knowledge  of  any¬ 
thing,  they  are  both  carelessly  transcribed,  and 
still  more  carelessly  emended.  For  who  will 
trouble  himself  to  learn  how  many  thousand 


GOD  XV.  12-13  407 

men  the  several  tribes  of  Israel  contained?  He 
sees  no  resulting  benefit  of  such  knowledge.  Or 
how  many  men  are  there  who  are  aware  of  the 
vast  advantage  that  lies  hid  in  this  knowledge? 
But  in  this  case,  in  which  during  so  many  con¬ 
secutive  generations  100  years  are  added  in  one 
manuscript  where  they  are  not  reckoned  in  the 
other,  and  then,  after  the  birth  of  the  son  and 
successor,  the  years  which  were  wanting  are 
added,  it  is  obvious  that  the  copyist  who  con¬ 
trived  this  arrangement  designed  to  insinuate 
that  the  antediluvians  lived  an  excessive  num¬ 
ber  of  years  only  because  each  year  was  exces¬ 
sively  brief,  and  that  he  tried  to  draw  the  atten¬ 
tion  to  this  fact  by  his  statement  of  their  age  of 
puberty  at  which  they  became  able  to  beget 
children.  For,  lest  the  incredulous  might  stum¬ 
ble  at  the  difficulty  of  so  long  a  lifetime,  he  in¬ 
sinuated  that  100  of  their  years  equalled  but  ten 
of  ours;  and  this  insinuation  he  conveyed  by 
adding  100  years  whenever  he  found  the  age  be¬ 
low  160  years  or  thereabouts,  deducting  these 
years  again  from  the  period  after  the  son’s  birth, 
that  the  total  might  harmonize.  By  this  means 
he  intended  to  ascribe  the  generation  of  off¬ 
spring  to  a  fit  age,  without  diminishing  the  total 
sum  of  years  ascribed  to  the  lifetime  of  the  in¬ 
dividuals.  And  the  very  fact  that  in  the  sixth 
generation  he  departed  from  this  uniform  prac¬ 
tice,  inclines  us  all  the  rather  to  believe  that 
when  the  circumstance  we  have  referred  to  re¬ 
quired  his  alterations,  he  made  them;  seeing 
that  when  this  circumstance  did  not  exist,  he 
made  no  alteration.  For  in  the  same  generation 
he  found  in  the  Hebrew  mss.  that  Jared  lived  be¬ 
fore  he  begat  Enoch  162  years,  which,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  short  year  computation,  is  sixteen 
years  and  somewhat  less  than  two  months,  an 
age  capable  of  procreation;  and  therefore  it  was 
not  necessary  to  add  100  short  years,  and  so 
make  the  age  twenty-six  years  of  the  usual 
length;  and  of  course  it  was  not  necessary  to 
deduct,  after  the  son’s  birth,  years  which  he  had 
not  added  before  it.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass 
that  in  this  instance  there  is  no  variation  be¬ 
tween  the  two  manuscripts. 

This  is  corroborated  still  further  by  the  fact 
that  in  the  eighth  generation,  while  the  Hebrew 
books  assign  1821  years  to  Methuselah  before 
Lamech’s  birth,  ours  assign  to  him  twenty  less, 
though  usually  100  years  are  added  to  this  pe¬ 
riod;  then,  after  Lamech’s  birth,  the  twenty 
years  are  restored,  so  as  to  equalize  the  total  in 

^ne  hundred  and  eighty-seven  is  the  number  given  in 
the  Hebrew,  and  one  hundred  and  sixty -seven  in  the 
Septuagint. 


4o8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  two  books.  For  if  his  design  was  that  these 
170  years  be  understood  as  seventeen,  so  as  to 
suit  the  age  of  puberty,  as  there  w^as  no  need  for 
him  adding  anything,  so  there  was  none  for  his 
subtracting  anything;  for  in  this  case  he  found 
an  age  fit  for  the  generation  of  children,  for  the 
sake  of  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  adding 
those  100  years  in  cases  where  he  did  not  find 
the  age  already  sufficient.  This  difference  of 
twenty  years  we  might,  indeed,  have  supposed 
had  happened  accidentally,  had  he  not  taken 
care  to  restore  them  afterwards  as  he  had  de¬ 
ducted  them  from  the  period  before,  so  that 
there  might  be  no  deficiency  in  the  total.  Or  are 
we  perhaps  to  suppose  that  there  was  the  still 
more  astute  design  of  concealing  the  deliberate 
and  uniform  addition  of  100  years  to  the  first 
period  and  their  deduction  from  the  subsequent 
period;  did  he  design  to  conceal  this  by  doing 
something  similar,  that  is  to  say,  adding  and  de¬ 
ducting,  not  indeed  a  century,  but  some  years, 
even  in  a  case  in  which  there  was  no  need  for 
his  doing  so?  But  whatever  may  be  thought  of 
this,  whether  it  be  believed  that  he  did  so  ornot, 
whether,  in  fine,  it  be  so  or  not,  I  would  have  no 
manner  of  doubt  that  when  any  diversity  is 
found  in  the  books,  since  both  cannot  be  true  to 
fact,  we  do  well  to  believe  in  preference  that 
language  out  of  which  the  translation  was  made 
into  another  by  translators.  For  there  are  three 
Greek  mss.,  one  Latin,  and  one  Syriac,  which 
agree  with  one  another,  and  in  all  of  these  Me¬ 
thuselah  is  said  to  have  died  six  years  before  the 
deluge. 

Chap.  14.  That  the  years  in  those  ancient  times 
were  of  the  same  length  as  our  own 
Let  us  now  see  how  it  can  be  plainly  made  out 
that  in  the  enormously  protracted  lives  of  those 
men  the  years  were  not  so  short  that  ten  of  their 
years  were  equal  to  only  one  of  ours,  but  were 
of  as  great  length  as  our  own,  which  are  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  course  of  the  sun.  It  is  proved  by 
this,  that  Scripture  states  that  the  flood  oc¬ 
curred  in  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah’s  life. 
But  why  in  the  same  place  is  it  also  written, 
“The  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon  the  earth  in 
the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah’s  life,  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  month,  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the 
month,”1  if  that  very  brief  year  (of  which  it 
took  ten  to  make  one  of  ours)  consisted  of 
thirty-six  days?  For  so  scant  a  year,  if  the  an¬ 
cient  usage  dignified  it  with  the  name  of  year, 
either  has  not  months,  or  this  month  must  be 
three  days,  so  that  it  may  have  twelve  of  them. 
1Gen.  7.  10,  11,  (in  our  version  the  seventeenth  day). 


How  then  was  it  here  said,  “In  the  six  hundredth 
year,  the  second  month,  the  twenty-seventh  day 
of  the  month,”  unless  the  months  then  were  of 
the  same  length  as  the  months  now?  For  how 
else  could  it  be  said  that  the  flood  began  on  the 
twenty-seventh  day  of  the  second  month?  Then 
afterwards,  at  the  end  of  the  flood,  it  is  thus 
written:  “And  the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh 
month,  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  month, 
on  the  mountains  of  Ararat.  And  the  waters  de¬ 
creased  continually  until  the  eleventh  month: 
on  the  first  day  of  the  month  w^ere  the  tops  of 
the  mountains  seen.”2  But  if  the  months  were 
such  as  we  have,  then  so  were  the  years.  And 
certainly  months  of  three  days  each  could  not 
have  a  twenty-seventh  day.  Or  if  every  measure 
of  time  was  diminished  in  proportion,  and  a 
thirtieth  part  of  three  days  was  then  called  a 
day.  then  that  great  deluge,  which  is  recorded  to 
have  lasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  was 
really  over  in  less  than  four  of  our  days.  Who 
can  away  with  such  foolishness  and  absurdity? 
Far  be  this  error  from  us — an  error  which  seeks 
to  build  up  our  faith  in  the  divine  Scriptures  on 
false  conjecture  only  to  demolish  our  faith  at 
another  point.  It  is  plain  that  the  day  then  was 
what  it  now  is,  a  space  of  four-and-twenty 
hours,  determined  by  the  lapse  of  day  and 
night ;  the  month  then  equal  to  the  month  now, 
which  is  defined  by  the  rise  and  completion  of 
one  moon ;  the  year  then  equal  to  the  year  now, 
which  is  completed  by  twelve  lunar  months, 
with  the  addition  of  five  days  and  a  fourth  to 
adjust  it  with  the  course  of  the  sun.  It  was  a 
year  of  this  length  which  was  reckoned  the  six 
hundredth  of  Noah’s  life,  and  in  the  second 
month,  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  month, 
the  flood  began — a  flood  which,  as  is  recorded, 
was  caused  by  heavy  rains  continuing  for  forty 
days,  which  days  had  not  only  two  hours  and  a 
little  more,  but  four-and-twenty  hours  complet¬ 
ing  a  night  and  a  day.  And  consequently  those 
antediluvians  lived  more  than  900  years,  which 
were  years  as  long  as  those  which  afterwards 
Abraham  lived  175  of,  and  after  him  his  son 
Isaac  180,  and  his  son  Jacob  nearly  150,  and 
some  time  after,  Moses  120,  and  men  now  sev¬ 
enty  or  eighty,  or  not  much  longer,  of  which 
years  it  is  said,  “their  strength  is  labour  and 
sorrow.”3 

But  that  discrepancy  of  numbers  which  is 
found  to  exist  between  our  own  and  the  Hebrew 
text  does  not  touch  the  longevity  of  the  an¬ 
cients;  and  if  there  is  any  diversity  so  great  that 
both  versions  cannot  be  true,  we  must  take  our 
2Gen.  8.  4,  5.  3Ps.  90.  10. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ideas  of  the  real  facts  from  that  text  out  of 
which  our  own  version  has  been  translated. 
However,  though  any  one  who  pleases  has  it  in 
his  power  to  correct  this  version,  yet  it  is  not 
unimportant  to  observe  that  no  one  has  pre¬ 
sumed  to  emend  the  Septuagint  from  the  He¬ 
brew  text  in  the  many  places  where  they  seem 
to  disagree.  For  this  difference  has  not  been 
reckoned  a  falsification;  and  for  my  own  part 
I  am  persuaded  it  ought  not  to  be  reckoned  so. 
But  where  the  difference  is  not  a  mere  copyist’s 
error,  and  where  the  sense  is  agreeable  to  truth 
and  illustrative  of  truth,  we  must  believe  that 
the  divine  Spirit  prompted  them  to  give  a  vary¬ 
ing  version,  not  in  their  function  of  translators, 
but  in  the  liberty  of  prophesying.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  find  that  the  apostles  justly  sanction  the 
Septuagint,  by  quoting  it  as  well  as  the  Hebrew 
when  they  adduce  proofs  from  the  Scriptures. 
But  as  I  have  promised  to  treat  this  subject 
more  carefully,  if  God  help  me,  in  a  more  fitting 
place,  I  will  now  go  on  with  the  matter  in  hand. 
For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  the  lives  of  men 
being  so  long,  the  first-born  of  the  first  man 
could  have  built  a  city — a  city,  however,  which 
was  earthly,  and  not  that  which  is  called  the  city 
of  God,  to  describe  which  we  have  taken  in  hand 
this  great  work. 

Chap.  15.  Whether  it  is  credible  that  the  men  of 
the  primitive  age  abstained  from  sexual  in¬ 
tercourse  until  that  date  at  which  it  is  record¬ 
ed  that  they  begat  children 
Some  one,  then,  will  say,  “Is  it  to  be  believed 
that  a  man  who  intended  to  beget  children,  and 
had  no  intention  of  continence,  abstained  from 
sexual  intercourse  a  hundred  years  and  more,  or 
even,  according  to  the  Hebrew  version,  only  a 
little  less,  say  eighty,  seventy,  or  sixty  years;  or, 
if  he  did  not  abstain,  was  unable  to  beget  off¬ 
spring?”  This  question  admits  of  two  solutions. 
For  either  puberty  was  so  much  later  as  the 
whole  life  was  longer,  or,  which  seems  to  me 
more  likely,  it  is  not  the  first-born  sons  that  are 
here  mentioned,  but  those  whose  names  were  re¬ 
quired  to  fill  up  the  series  until  Noah  was 
reached,  from  whom  again  we  see  that  the  suc¬ 
cession  is  continued  to  Abraham,  and  after  him 
down  to  that  point  of  time  until  which  it  was 
needful  to  mark  by  pedigree  the  course  of  the 
most  glorious  city,  which  sojourns  as  a  stranger 
in  this  world,  and  seeks  the  heavenly  country. 
That  which  is  undeniable  is  that  Cain  was  the 
first  who  was  born  of  man  and  woman.  For  had 
he  not  been  the  first  who  was  added  by  birth  to 
the  two  unborn  persons,  Adam  could  not  have 


GOD  XV.  14-15  409 

said  what  he  is  recorded  to  have  said,  “I  have 
gotten  a  man  by  the  Lord.” 1  He  was  followed  by 
Abel,  whom  the  elder  brother  slew,  and  who  was 
the  first  to  show,  by  a  kind  of  foreshadowing  of 
the  sojourning  city  of  God,  what  iniquitous  per¬ 
secutions  that  city  would  suffer  at  the  hands  of 
wicked  and,  at  it  were,  earth-born  men,  who 
love  their  earthly  origin,  and  delight  in  the 
earthly  happiness  of  the  earthly  city.  But  how 
old  Adam  was  when  he  begat  these  sons  does  not 
appear.  After  this  the  generations  diverge,  the 
one  branch  deriving  from  Cain,  the  other  from 
him  whom  Adam  begot  in  the  room  of  Abel  slain 
by  his  brother,  and  whom  he  called  Seth,  say¬ 
ing,  as  it  is  written,  “For  God  hath  raised  me 
up  another  seed  for  Abel  whom  Cain  slew.”2 
These  two  series  of  generations  accordingly,  the 
one  of  Cain,  the  other  of  Seth,  represent  the  two 
cities  in  their  distinctive  ranks,  the  one  the 
heavenly  city,  which  sojourns  on  earth,  the 
other  the  earthly,  which  gapes  after  earthly 
joys,  and  grovels  in  them  as  if  they  were  the 
only  joys.  But  though  eight  generations,  includ¬ 
ing  Adam,  are  registered  before  the  flood,  no 
man  of  Cain’s  line  has  his  age  recorded  at  which 
the  son  who  succeeded  him  was  begotten.  For 
the  Spirit  of  God  refused  to  mark  the  times  be¬ 
fore  the  flood  in  the  generations  of  the  earthly 
city,  but  preferred  to  do  so  in  the  heavenly  line, 
as  if  it  were  more  worthy  of  being  remembered. 
Further,  when  Seth  was  born,  the  age  of  his 
father  is  mentioned;  but  already  he  had  begot¬ 
ten  other  sons  and  who  will  presume  to  say  that 
Cain  and  Abel  were  the  only  ones  previously  be¬ 
gotten?  For  it  does  not  follow  that  they  alone 
had  been  begotten  of  Adam,  because  they  alone 
were  named  in  order  to  continue  the  series  of 
generations  which  it  was  desirable  to  mention. 
For  though  the  names  of  all  the  rest  are  buried 
in  silence,  yet  it  is  said  that  Adam  begot  sons 
and  daughters;  and  who  that  cares  to  be  free 
from  the  charge  of  temerity  will  dare  to  say  how 
many  his  offspring  numbered?  It  was  possible 
enough  that  Adam  was  divinely  prompted  to 
say,  after  Seth  was  born,  “For  God  hath  raised 
up  to  me  another  seed  for  Abel,”  because  that 
son  was  to  be  capable  of  representing  Abel’s 
holiness,  not  because  he  was  born  first  after  him 
in  point  of  time.  Then  because  it  is  written, 
“And  Seth  lived  205  years,”  or,  according  to  the 
Hebrew  reading,  “105  years,  and  begat  Enos,”3 
who  but  a  rash  man  could  affirm  that  this  was 
his  first-born?  Will  any  man  do  so  to  excite  our 
wonder,  and  cause  us  to  inquire  how  for  so  many 
years  he  remained  free  from  sexual  intercourse, 
1Gen.  4.  1.  2Gen.  4.  25.  3Gen.  5.  6. 


4io  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


though  without  any  purpose  of  continuing  so. 
or  how,  if  he  did  not  abstain,  he  yet  had  no  chil¬ 
dren?  Will  any  man  do  so  when  it  is  written  of 
him,  “And  he  begat  sons  and  daughters,  and  all 
the  days  of  Seth  were  912  years,  and  he  died”?1 
And  similarly  regarding  those  whose  years  are 
afterwards  mentioned,  it  is  not  disguised  that 
they  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

Consequently  it  does  not  at  all  appear  wheth¬ 
er  he  who  is  named  as  the  son  was  himself  the 
first  begotten.  Nay.  since  it  is  incredible  that 
those  fathers  were  either  so  long  in  attaining 
puberty,  or  could  not  get  wives,  or  could  not 
impregnate  them,  it  is  also  incredible  that  those 
sons  were  their  first-born.  But  as  the  writer  of 
the  sacred  history  designed  to  descend  by  well- 
marked  intervals  through  a  series  of  generations 
to  the  birth  and  life  of  Noah,  in  whose  time  the 
flood  occurred,  he  mentioned  not  those  sons  who 
were  first  begotten,  but  those  by  whom  the  suc¬ 
cession  was  handed  down. 

Let  me  make  this  clearer  by  here  inserting  an 
example,  in  regard  to  which  no  one  can  have  any 
doubt  that  what  I  am  asserting  is  true.  The 
evangelist  Matthew,  where  he  designs  to  Com¬ 
mit  to  our  memories  the  generation  of  the  Lord’s 
flesh  by  a  series  of  parents,  beginning  from 
Abraham  and  intending  to  reach  David,  says. 
“Abraham  begat  Isaac”;2  why  did  he  not  say 
Ishmael,  whom  he  first  begat?  Then  “Isaac  be¬ 
gat  Jacob”;  why  did  he  not  say  Esau,  who  was 
the  first-born?  Simply  because  these  sons  would 
not  have  helped  him  to  reach  David.  Then  fol¬ 
lows,  “And  Jacob  begat  Judah  and  his  breth¬ 
ren”:  was  Judah  the  first  begotten?  “Judah,”  he 
says,  “begat  Pharez  and  Zara” ;  yet  neither  were 
these  twins  the  first-born  of  Judah,  but  before 
them  he  had  begotten  three  other  sons.  And  so 
in  the  order  of  the  generations  he  retained  those 
by  whom  he  might  reach  David,  so  as  to  proceed 
onwards  to  the  end  he  had  in  view.  And  from 
this  we  may  understand  that  the  antediluvians 
who  are  mentioned  were  not  the  first-born,  but 
those  through  whom  the  order  of  the  succeed¬ 
ing  generations  might  be  carried  on  to  the  patri¬ 
arch  Noah.  We  need  not,  therefore,  weary  our¬ 
selves  with  discussing  the  needless  and  obscure 
question  as  to  their  lateness  of  reaching  puberty. 

Chap.  16  .Of  marriage  between  blood-relations , 
in  regard  to  which  the  present  law  could  not 
bind  the  men  of  the  earliest  ages 
As,  therefore,  the  human  race,  subsequently 
to  the  first  marriage  of  the  man  who  was  made 
of  dust,  and  his  wife  who  was  made  out  of  his 
‘Gen.  5.  8.  2Matt.  1. 


side,  required  the  union  of  males  and  females 
in  order  that  it  might  multiply,  and  as  there 
were  no  human  beings  except  those  who  had 
been  born  of  these  two.  men  took  their  sisters 
for  wives — an  act  which  was  as  certainly  dic¬ 
tated  by  necessity  in  these  ancient  days  as  after¬ 
wards  it  was  condemned  by  the  prohibitions  of 
religion.  For  it  is  very  reasonable  and  just  that 
men,  among  whom  concord  is  honourable  and 
useful,  should  be  bound  together  by  various  re¬ 
lationships  ;  and  that  one  man  should  not  him¬ 
self  sustain  many  relationships,  but  that  the 
various  relationships  should  be  distributed 
among  several,  and  should  thus  serve  to  bind  to¬ 
gether  the  greatest  number  in  the  same  social  in¬ 
terests.  “Father”  and  “father-in-law”  are  the 
names  of  two  relationships.  When,  therefore,  a 
man  has  one  person  for  his  father,  another  for 
his  father-in-law.  friendship  extends  itself  to  a 
larger  number.  But  Adam  in  his  single  person 
was  obliged  to  hold  both  relations  to  his  sons 
and  daughters,  for  brothers  and  sisters  were 
united  in  marriage.  So  too  Eve  his  wife  was 
both  mother  and  mother-in-law  to  her  children 
of  both  sexes;  while,  had  there  been  two  women, 
one  the  mother,  the  other  the  mother-in-law,  the 
family  affection  would  have  had  a  wider  field. 
Then  the  sister  herself  by  becoming  a  wife  sus¬ 
tained  in  her  single  person  two  relationships, 
which,  had  they  been  distributed  among  indi¬ 
viduals,  one  being  sister,  and  another  being  wife, 
the  family  tie  would  have  embraced  a  greater 
number  of  persons.  But  there  was  then  no  ma¬ 
terial  for  effecting  this,  since  there  were  no  hu¬ 
man  beings  but  the  brothers  and  sisters  born  of 
those  two  first  parents.  Therefore,  when  an 
abundant  population  made  it  possible,  men 
ought  to  choose  for  wives  women  who  were  not 
already  their  sisters;  for  not  only  would  there 
then  be  no  necessity  for  marrying  sisters,  but, 
were  it  done,  it  would  be  most  abominable.  For 
if  the  grandchildren  of  the  first  pair,  being  now 
able  to  choose  their  cousins  for  wives,  married 
their  sisters,  then  it  would  no  longer  be  only  two 
but  three  relationships  that  were  held  by  one 
man,  while  each  of  these  relationships  ought  to 
have  been  held  by  a  separate  individual,  so  as  to 
bind  together  by  family  affection  a  larger  num¬ 
ber.  For  one  man  would  in  that  case  be  both 
father,  and  father-in-law,  and  uncle  to  his  own 
children  (brother  and  sister  now  man  and  wife) ; 
and  his  wife  would  be  mother,  aunt,  and  mother- 
in-law  to  them;  and  they  themselves  would  be 
not  only  brother  and  sister,  and  man  and  wife, 
but  cousins  also,  being  the  children  of  brother 
and  sister.  Now,  all  these  relationships,  which 


THE  CITY  OF 

combined  three  men  into  one,  would  have  em¬ 
braced  nine  persons  had  each  relationship  been 
held  by  one  individual,  so  that  a  man  had  one 
person  for  his  sister,  another  his  wife,  another 
his  cousin,  another  his  father,  another  his  uncle, 
another  his  father-in-law,  another  his  mother, 
another  his  aunt,  another  his  mother-in-law; 
and  thus  the  social  bond  would  not  have  been 
tightened  to  bind  a  few,  but  loosened  to  embrace 
a  larger  number  of  relations. 

And  we  see  that,  since  the  human  race  has 
increased  and  multiplied,  this  is  so  strictly  ob¬ 
served  even  among  the  profane  worshippers  of 
many  and  false  gods,  that  though  their  laws 
perversely  allow  a  brother  to  marry  his  sister,1 
yet  custom,  with  a  finer  morality,  prefers  to 
forego  this  licence;  and  though  it  was  quite  al¬ 
lowable  in  the  earliest  ages  of  the  human  race  to 
marry  one’s  sister,  it  is  now  abhorred  as  a  thing 
which  no  circumstances  could  justify.  For  cus¬ 
tom  has  very  great  power  either  to  attract  or  to 
shock  human  feeling.  And  in  this  matter,  while 
it  restrains  concupiscence  within  due  bounds, 
the  man  who  neglects  and  disobeys  it  is  justly 
branded  as  abominable.  For  if  it  is  iniquitous  to 
plough  beyond  our  own  boundaries  through  the 
greed  of  gain,  is  it  not  much  more  iniquitous  to 
transgress  the  recognized  boundaries  of  morals 
through  sexual  lust?  And  with  regard  to  mar¬ 
riage  in  the  next  degree  of' consanguinity,  mar¬ 
riage  between  cousins,  we  have  observed  that  in 
our  own  time  the  customary  morality  has  pre¬ 
vented  this  from  being  frequent,  though  the  law 
allows  it.  It  was  not  prohibited  by  divine  law, 
nor  as  yet  had  human  law  prohibited  it;  never¬ 
theless,  though  legitimate,  people  shrank  from 
it.  because  it  lay  so  close  to  what  was  illegiti¬ 
mate,  and  in  marrying  a  cousin  seemed  almost 
to  marry  a  sister — for  cousins  are  so  closely  re¬ 
lated  that  they  are  called  brothers  and  sisters2 
and  are  almost  really  so.  But  the  ancient  fathers, 
fearing  that  near  relationship  might  gradually 
in  the  course  of  generations  diverge,  and  become 
distant  relationship,  or  cease  to  be  relationship 
at  all,  religiously  endeavoured  to  limit  it  by  the 
bond  of  marriage  before  it  became  distant,  and 
thus,  as  it  were,  to  call  it  back  when  it  was  es¬ 
caping  them.  And  on  this  account,  even  when 
the  world  was  full  of  people,  though  they  did 
not  choose  wives  from  among  their  sisters  or 
half-sisters,  yet  they  preferred  them  to  be  of  the 
same  stock  as  themselves.  But  who  doubts  that 

lThis  was  allowed  by  the  Egyptians  and  Athenians, 
never  by  the  Romans. 

2In  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin,  though  not  uniformly, 
nor  in  Latin  commonly. 


GOD  XV.  16-17  411 

the  modern  prohibition  of  the  marriage  even  of 
cousins  is  the  more  seemly  regulation — not 
merely  on  account  of  the  reason  we  have  been 
urging,  the  multiplying  of  relationships,  so  that 
one  person  might  not  absorb  two,  which  might 
be  distributed  to  two  persons,  and  so  increase 
the  number  of  people  bound  together  as  a  fam¬ 
ily,  but  also  because  there  is  in  human  nature  I 
know  not  what  natural  and  praiseworthy  shame¬ 
facedness  which  restrains  us  from  desiring  that 
connexion  which,  though  for  propagation,  is  yet 
lustful,  and  which  even  conjugal  modesty  blushes 
over,  with  any  one  to  whom  consanguinity  bids 
us  render  respect? 

The  sexual  intercourse  of  man  and  woman, 
then,  is  in  the  case  of  mortals  a  kind  of  seed¬ 
bed  of  the  city;  but  while  the  earthly  city  needs 
for  its  population  only  generation,  the  heavenly 
needs  also  regeneration  to  rid  it  of  the  taint  of 
generation.  Whether  before  the  deluge  there  was 
any  bodily  or  visible  sign  of  regeneration  such 
as  was  afterwards  enjoined  upon  Abraham  when 
he  was  circumcised,  or  what  kind  of  sign  it  was, 
the  sacred  history  does  not  inform  us.  But  it 
does  inform  us  that  even  these  earliest  of  man¬ 
kind  sacrificed  to  God,  as  appeared  also  in  the 
case  of  the  two  first  brothers;  Noah,  too,  is  said 
to  have  offered  sacrifices  to  God  when  he  had 
come  forth  from  the  ark  after  the  deluge.  And 
concerning  this  subject  we  have  already  said  in 
the  foregoing  books  that  the  devils  arrogate  to 
themselves  divinity,  and  require  sacrifice  that 
they  may  be  esteemed  gods,  and  delight  in  these 
honours  on  no  other  account  than  this,  because 
they  know  that  true  sacrifice  is  due  to  the  true 
God. 

Chap.  17  .Of  the  two  fathers  and  leaders  who 

sprang  from  one  progenitor 

Since,  then,  Adam  was  the  father  of  both 
lines — the  father,  that  is  to  say.  both  of  the  line 
which  belonged  to  the  earthly,  and  of  that  which 
belonged  to  the  heavenly  city — when  Abel  was 
slain,  and  by  his  death  exhibited  a  marvellous 
mystery,  there  were  henceforth  two  lines  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  two  fathers,  Cain  and  Seth,  and  in 
those  sons  of  theirs,  whom  it  behoved  to  regis¬ 
ter,  the  tokens  of  these  two  cities  began  to  ap¬ 
pear  more  distinctly.  For  Cain  begat  Enoch,  in 
whose  name  he  built  a  city,  an  earthly  one, 
which  was  not  from  home  in  this  world,  but  rest¬ 
ed  satisfied  with  its  temporal  peace  and  happi¬ 
ness.  Cain,  too,  means  “possession”;  wherefore 
at  his  birth  either  his  father  or  mother  said,  “I 
have  gotten  a  man  through  God.”  Then  Enoch 
means  “dedication” ;  for  the  earthly  city  is  dedi- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


cated  in  this  world  in  which  it  is  built,  for  in  this 
world  it  finds  the  end  towards  which  it  aims  and 
aspires.  Further,  Seth  signifies  “resurrection.” 
and  Enos  his  son  signifies  “man,”  not  as  Adam, 
which  also  signifies  man,  but  is  used  in  Hebrew 
indifferently  for  man  and  woman,  as  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “Male  and  female  created  He  them,  and 
blessed  them,  and  called  their  name  Adam,”1 
leaving  no  room  to  doubt  that  though  the  wom¬ 
an  was  distinctively  called  Eve,  yet  the  name 
Adam,  meaning  man.  was  common  to  both.  But 
Enos  means  man  in  so  restricted  a  sense  that 
Hebrew  linguists  tell  us  it  cannot  be  applied  to 
woman:  it  is  the  equivalent  of  the  “child  of  the 
resurrection,”  when  they  neither  marry  nor  are 
given  in  marriage.2  For  there  shall  be  no  genera¬ 
tion  in  that  place  to  which  regeneration  shall 
have  brought  us.  Wherefore  I  think  it  not  imma¬ 
terial  to  observe  that  in  those  generations  which 
are  propagated  from  him  who  is  called  Seth,  al¬ 
though  daughters  as  well  as  sons  are  said  to  have 
been  begotten,  no  woman  is  expressly  registered 
by  name ;  but  in  those  which  sprang  from  Cain 
at  the  very  termination  to  which  the  line  xuns. 
the  last  person  named  as  begotten  is  a  woman. 
For  we  read,  “Methusael  begat  Lamech.  And 
Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives:  the  name  of 
the  one  was  Adah,  and  the  name  of  the  other 
Zillah.  And  Adah  bare  Jabal:  he  was  the  father 
of  the  shepherds  that  dwell  in  tents.  And  his 
brother’s  name  was  Jubal:  he  was  the  father  of 
all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ.  And  Zil¬ 
lah,  she  also  bare  Tubal-cain,  an  instructor  of 
every  artificer  in  brass  and  iron :  and  the  sister 
of  Tubal-cain  was  Naamah.”3  Here  terminate 
all  the  generations  of  Cain,  being  eight  in  num¬ 
ber,  including  Adam — to  wit,  seven  from  Adam 
to  Lamech,  who  married  two  wives,  and  whose 
children,  among  whom  a  woman  also  is  named, 
form  the  eighth  generation.  Whereby  it  is  ele¬ 
gantly  signified  that  the  earthly  city  shall  to  its 
termination  have  carnal  generations  proceeding 
from  the  intercourse  of  males  and  females.  And 
therefore  the  wives  themselves  of  the  man  who 
is  the  last  named  father  of  Cain’s  line,  are  regis¬ 
tered  in  their  own  names — a  practice  nowhere 
followed  before  the  deluge  save  in  Eve’s  case. 
Now  as  Cain,  signifying  possession,  the  founder 
of  the  earthly  city,  and  his  son  Enoch,  meaning 
dedication,  in  whose  name  it  was  founded,  indi¬ 
cate  that  this  city  is  earthly  both  in  its  begin¬ 
ning  and  in  its  end — a  city  in  which  nothing 
more  is  hoped  for  than  can  be  seen  in  this  world 
— so  Seth,  meaning  resurrection,  and  being  the 
father  of  generations  registered  apart  from  the 
1Gen.  5.  2.  2Luke,  20.  35,  36.  3Gen.  4.  18-22. 


others,  we  must  consider  what  this  sacred  his¬ 
tory  says  of  his  son. 

Chap.  18.  The  significance  of  Abel,  Seth,  and 
Enos  to  Christ  and  his  body  the  Church 
“And  to  Seth,”  it  is  said,  “there  was  born  a 
son.  and  he  called  his  name  Enos:  he  hoped  to 
call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  God.”4  Here  we 
have  a  loud  testimony  to  the  truth.  Man,  then, 
the  son  of  the  resurrection,  lives  in  hope:  he 
lives  in  hope  as  long  as  the  city  of  God,  which  is 
begotten  by  faith  in  the  resurrection,  sojourns 
in  this  world.  For  in  these  two  men.  Abel,  signi¬ 
fying  “grief,”  and  his  brother  Seth,  signifying 
“resurrection,”  the  death  of  Christ  and  His  life 
from  the  dead  are  prefigured.  And  by  faith  in 
these  is  begotten  in  this  world  the  city  of  God. 
that  is  to  say,  the  man  who  has  hoped  to  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  “For  by  hope,”  says  the 
apostle,  “we  are  saved :  but  hope  that  is  seen  is 
not  hope:  for  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he 
yet  hope  for?  But  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not, 
then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it.”5  Who  can 
avoid  referring  this  to  a  profound  mystery?  For 
did  not  Abel  hope  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  God  when  his  sacrifice  is  mentioned  in 
Scripture  as  having  been  accepted  by  God?  Did 
not  Seth  himself  hope  to  call  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord  God,  of  whom  it  was  said,  “For  God  hath 
appointed  me  another  seed  instead  of  Abel”? 
Why  then  is  this  which  is  found  to  be  common 
to  all  the  godly  specially  attributed  to  Enos,  un¬ 
less  because  it  was  fit  that  in  him,  who  is  men¬ 
tioned  as  the  first-born  of  the  father  of  those 
generations  which  were  separated  to  the  better 
part  of  the  heavenly  city,  there  should  be  a  type 
of  the  man,  or  society  of  men,  who  live  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  man  in  contentment  with  earthly 
felicity,  but  according  to  God  in  hope  of  ever¬ 
lasting  felicity?  And  it  was  not  said,  “He  hoped 
in  the  Lord  God,”  nor  “He  called  on  the  name 
of  the  Lord  God,”  but  “He  hoped  to  call  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord  God.”  And  what  does  this 
“hoped  to  call”  mean,  unless  it  is  a  prophecy 
that  a  people  should  arise  who,  according  to  the 
election  of  grace,  would  call  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord  God?  It  is  this  which  has  been  said  by  an¬ 
other  prophet,  and  which  the  apostle  interprets 
of  the  people  who  belong  to  the  grace  of  God : 
“And  it  shall  be  that  whosoever  shall  call  upon 
the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved.”6  For  these 
two  expressions,  “And  he  called  his  name  Enos, 
which  means  man,”  and  “He  hoped  to  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord  God,”  are  sufficient  proof 
that  man  ought  not  to  rest  his  hopes  in  himself ; 
4Gen.  4.  26.  5Rora.  8.  24,  25.  6Rom.  10.  13. 


THE  CITY  OF 

as  it  is  elsewhere  written,  “Cursed  is  the  man 
that  trusteth  in  man.”1  Consequently  no  one 
ought  to  trust  in  himself  that  he  shall  become  a 
citizen  of  that  other  city  which  is  not  dedicated 
in  the  name  of  Cain’s  son  in  this  present  time, 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  fleeting  course  of  this  mor¬ 
tal  world,  but  in  the  immortality  of  perpetual 
blessedness. 

Chap.  19.  The  significance  of  Enoch’s  transla¬ 
tion 

For  that  line  also  of  which  Seth  is  the  father 
has  the  name  “Dedication”  in  the  seventh  gen¬ 
eration  from  Adam,  counting  Adam.  For  the 
seventh  from  him  is  Enoch,  that  is,  Dedication. 
But  this  is  that  man  who  was  translated  because 
he  pleased  God,  and  who  held  in  the  order  of  the 
generations  a  remarkable  place,  being  the  sev¬ 
enth  from  Adam,  a  number  signalized  by  the 
consecration  of  the  Sabbath.  But,  counting  from 
the  diverging  point  of  the  two  lines,  or  from 
Seth,  he  was  the  sixth.  Now  it  was  on  the  sixth 
day  God  made  man,  and  consummated  His 
works.  But  the  translation  of  Enoch  prefigured 
our  deferred  dedication;  for  though  it  is  indeed 
already  accomplished  in  Christ  our  Head,  Who 
so  rose  again  that  He  shall  die  no  more,  and  Who 
was  Himself  also  translated,  yet  there  remains 
another  dedication  of  the  whole  house,  of  which 
Christ  Himself  is  the  foundation,  and  this  dedi¬ 
cation  is  deferred  till  the  end,  when  all  shall  rise 
again  to  die  no  more.  And  whether  it  is  the  house 
of  God,  or  the  temple  of  God,  or  the  city  of  God, 
that  is  said  to  be  dedicated,  it  is  all  the  same, 
and  equally  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the 
Latin  language.  For  Virgil  himself  calls  the  city 
of  widest  empire  “the  house  of  Assaracus,”2 
meaning  the  Romans,  who  were  descended 
through  the  Trojans  from  Assaracus.  He  also 
calls  them  the  house  of  ^Eneas,  because  Rome 
was  built  by  those  Trojans  who  had  come  to 
Italy  under  ^Eneas.3  For  that  poet  imitated  the 
sacred  writings,  in  which  the  Hebrew  nation, 
though  so  numerous,  is  called  the  house  of  Ja¬ 
cob.  1 

Chap.  20.  How  it  is  that  Cain’s  line  terminates 
in  the  eighth  generation ,  while  Noah ,  though 
descended  from  the  same  father ,  Adam,  is 
found  to  be  the  tenth  from  him 
Some  one  will  say,  “If  the  writer  of  this  his¬ 
tory  intended,  in  enumerating  the  generations 
from  Adam  through  his  son  Seth,  to  descend 
through  them  to  Noah,  in  whose  time  the  deluge 
occurred,  and  from  him  again  to  trace  the  con¬ 
fer.  17.  5.  2&neid,  bk.  i.  288.  Hbid.,  bk.  hi.  97. 


GOD  XV.  18-20  413 

nected  generations  down  to  Abraham,  with  whom 
Matthew  begins  the  pedigree  of  Christ  the  eter¬ 
nal  King  of  the  city  of  God,  what  did  he  intend 
by  enumerating  the  generations  from  Cain,  and 
to  what  terminus  did  he  mean  to  trace  them?” 
We  reply,  “To  the  deluge,  by  which  the  whole 
stock  of  the  earthly  city  was  destroyed,  but  re¬ 
paired  by  the  sons  of  Noah.”  For  the  earthly 
city  and  community  of  men  who  live  after  the 
flesh  will  never  fail  until  the  end  of  this  world, 
of  which  our  Lord  says,  “The  children  of  this 
world  generate,  and  are  generated.”4  But  the 
city  of  God,  which  sojourns  in  this  world,  is  con¬ 
ducted  by  regeneration  to  the  world  to  come,  of 
which  the  children  neither  generate  nor  are  gen¬ 
erated.  In  this  world  generation  is  common  to 
both  cities;  though  even  now  the  city  of  God 
has  many  thousand  citizens  who  abstain  from 
the  act  of  generation;  yet  the  other  city  also  has 
some  citizens  who  imitate  these,  though  er¬ 
roneously.  For  to  that  city  belong  also  those 
who  have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  introduced 
divers  heresies;  for  they  live  according  to  man, 
not  according  to  God.  And  the  Indian  gymnoso- 
phists,  who  are  said  to  philosophize  in  the  soli¬ 
tudes  of  India  in  a  state  of  nudity,  are  its  citi¬ 
zens;  and  they  abstain  from  marriage.  For  con¬ 
tinence  is  not  a  good  thing,  except  when  it  is 
practised  in  the  faith  of  the  highest  good,  that  is, 
God.  Yet  no  one  is  found  to  have  practised  it  be¬ 
fore  the  deluge ;  for  indeed  even  Enoch  himself, 
the  seventh  from  Adam,  who  is  said  to  have 
been  translated  without  dying,  begat  sons  and 
daughters  before  he  was  translated,  and  among 
these  was  Methuselah,  by  whom  the  succession 
of  the  recorded  generations  is  maintained. 

Why,  then,  is  so  small  a  number  of  Cain’s  gen¬ 
erations  registered,  if  it  was  proper  to  trace 
them  to  the  deluge,  and  if  there  was  no  such  de¬ 
lay  of  the  date  of  puberty  as  to  preclude  the 
hope  of  offspring  for  a  hundred  or  more  years? 
For  if  the  author  of  this  book  had  not  in  view 
some  one  to  whom  he  might  rigidly  trace  the 
series  of  generations,  as  he  designed  in  those 
which  sprang  from  Seth’s  seed  to  descend  to 
Noah,  and  thence  to  start  again  by  a  rigid  order, 
what  need  was  there  of  omitting  the  first-born 
sons  for  the  sake  of  descending  to  Lamech,  in 
whose  sons  that  line  terminates — that  is  to  say, 
in  the  eighth  generation  from  Adam,  or  the  sev¬ 
enth  from  Cain — as  if  from  this  point  he  had 
wished  to  pass  on  to  another  series,  by  which  he 
might  reach  either  the  Israelitish  people,  among 
whom  the  earthly  Jerusalem  presented  a  pro¬ 
phetic  figure  of  the  heavenly  city,  or  to  Jesus 

4Luke,  20.  34. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Christ,  “according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all, 
God  blessed  for  ever,”1  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of 
the  heavenly  city?  What,  I  say.  was  the  need  of 
this,  seeing  that  the  whole  of  Cain’s  posterity 
were  destroyed  in  the  deluge?  From  this  it  is 
manifest  that  they  are  the  first-born  sons  who 
are  registered  in  this  genealogy.  Why,  then,  are 
there  so  few  of  them?  Their  numbers  in  the  pe¬ 
riod  before  the  deluge  must  have  been  greater, 
if  the  date  of  puberty  bore  no  proportion  to 
their  longevity,  and  they  had  children  before 
they  were  a  hundred  years  old.  For  supposing 
they  were  on  an  average  thirty  years  old  when 
they  began  to  beget  children,  then,  as  there  are 
eight  generations,  including  Adam  and  Lamech’s 
children,  8  times  30  gives  240  years;  did  they 
then  produce  no  more  children  in  all  the  rest  of 
the  time  before  the  deluge?  With  what  inten¬ 
tion.  then,  did  he  who  wrote  this  record  make 
no  mention  of  subsequent  generations?  For 
from  Adam  to  the  deluge  there  are  reckoned, 
according  to  our  copies  of  Scripture,  2262  years, 
and  according  to  the  Hebrew  text,  1656  years. 
Supposing,  then,  the  smaller  number  to  be  the 
true  one,  and  subtracting  from  1656  years  240, 
is  it  credible  that  during  the  remaining  1400  and 
odd  years  until  the  deluge  the  posterity  of  Cain 
begat  no  children? 

But  let  any  one  who  is  moved  by  this  call  to 
mind  that  when  I  discussed  the  question,  how 
it  is  credible  that  those  primitive  men  could  ab¬ 
stain  for  so  many  years  from  begetting  children, 
two  modes  of  solution  were  found — either  a 
puberty  late  in  proportion  to  their  longevity,  or 
that  the  sons  registered  in  the  genealogies  were 
not  the  first-born,  but  those  through  whom  the 
author  of  the  book  intended  to  reach  the  point 
aimed  at,  as  he  intended  to  reach  Noah  by  the 
generations  of  Seth.  So  that,  if  in  the  genera¬ 
tions  of  Cain  there  occurs  no  one  whom  the 
writer  could  make  it  his  object  to  reach  by 
omitting  the  first-born  and  inserting  those  who 
would  serve  such  a  purpose,  then  we  must  have 
recourse  to  the  supposition  of  late  puberty,  and 
say  that  only  at  some  age  beyond  a  hundred 
years  they  became  capable  of  begetting  chil¬ 
dren,  so  that  the  order  of  the  generations  ran 
through  the  first-born,  and  filled  up  even  the 
whole  period  before  the  deluge,  long  though  it 
was.  It  is,  however,  possible  that,  for  some  more 
secret  reason  which  escapes  me,  this  city,  which 
we  say  is  earthly,  is  exhibited  in  all  its  genera¬ 
tions  down  to  Lamech  and  his  sons,  and  that 
then  the  writer  withholds  from  recording  the 
rest  which  may  have  existed  before  the  deluge. 

'Rom.  9.  5. 


And  without  supposing  so  late  a  puberty  in  these 
men,  there  might  be  another  reason  for  tracing 
the  generations  by  sons  who  were  not  first-born, 
viz.,  that  the  same  city  which  Cain  built,  and 
named  after  his  son  Enoch,  may  have  had  a 
widely  extended  dominion  and  many  kings,  not 
reigning  simultaneously,  but  successively,  the 
reigning  king  begetting  always  his  successor. 
Cain  himself  would  be  the  first  of  these  kings; 
his  son  Enoch,  in  whose  name  the  city  in  which 
he  reigned  was  built,  would  be  the  second;  the 
third  Irad,  whom  Enoch  begat;  the  fourth  Me- 
hujael,  whom  Irad  begat;  the  fifth  Methusael. 
whom  Mehujael  begat ;  the  sixth  Lamech,  whom 
Methusael  begat,  and  who  is  the  seventh  from 
Adam  through  Cain.  But  it  was  not  necessary 
that  the  first-born  should  succeed  their  fathers 
in  the  kingdom,  but  those  would  succeed  who 
were  recommended  by  the  possession  of  some 
virtue  useful  to  the  earthly  city,  or  who  were 
chosen  by  lot,  or  the  son  who  was  best  liked  by 
his  father  would  succeed  by  a  kind  of  hereditary 
right  to  the  throne.  And  the  deluge  may  have 
happened  during  the  lifetime  and  reign  of  La¬ 
mech,  and  may  have  destroyed  him  along  with 
all  other  men,  save  those  who  were  in  the  ark. 
For  we  cannot  be  surprised  that,  during  so  long 
a  period  from  Adam  to  the  deluge,  and  with  the 
ages  of  individuals  varying  as  they  did,  there 
should  not  be  an  equal  number  of  generations  in 
both  lines,  but  seven  in  Cain’s,  and  ten  in  Seth’s ; 
for  as  I  have  already  said.  Lamech  is  the  sev¬ 
enth  from  Adam,  Noah  the  tenth;  and  in  La¬ 
mech’s  case  not  one  son  only  is  registered,  as  in 
the  former  instances,  but  more,  because  it  was 
uncertain  which  of  them  would  have  succeeded 
when  he  died,  if  there  had  intervened  any  time 
to  reign  between  his  death  and  the  deluge. 

But  in  whatever  manner  the  generations  of 
Cain’s  line  are  traced  downwards,  whether  it  be 
by  firstborn  sons  or  by  the  heirs  to  the  throne, 
it  seems  to  me  that  I  must  by  no  means  omit 
to  notice  that,  when  Lamech  had  been  set  down 
as  the  seventh  from  Adam,  there  were  named, 
in  addition,  as  many  of  his  children  as  made  up 
this  number  to  eleven,  which  is  the  number  sig¬ 
nifying  sin;  for  three  sons  and  one  daughter  are 
added.  The  wives  of  Lamech  have  another  sig¬ 
nification,  different  from  that  which  I  am  now 
pressing.  For  at  present  I  am  speaking  of  the 
children,  and  not  of  those  by  whom  the  children 
were  begotten.  Since,  then,  the  law  is  symbol¬ 
ized  by  the  number  ten — whence  that  memo¬ 
rable  Decalogue — there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
number  eleven,  which  goes  beyond  ten,  sym¬ 
bolizes  the  transgression  of  the  law,  and  conse- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XV.  21  415 


quently  sin.  For  this  reason,  eleven  veils  of 
goat’s  skin  were  ordered  to  be  hung  in  the  taber¬ 
nacle  of  the  testimony,  which  served  in  the  wan¬ 
derings  of  God’s  people  as  an  ambulatory  tem¬ 
ple.  And  in  that  haircloth  there  was  a  reminder 
of  sins,  because  the  goats  were  to  be  set  on  the 
left  hand  of  the  Judge;  and  therefore,  when  we 
confess  our  sins,  we  prostrate  ourselves  in  hair¬ 
cloth,  as  if  we  wTere  saying  what  is  written  in  the 
psalm,  “My  sin  is  ever  before  me.”1  The  prog¬ 
eny  of  Adam,  then,  by  Cain  the  murderer,  is 
completed  in  the  number  eleven,  which  symbol¬ 
izes  sin ;  and  this  number  itself  is  made  up  by  a 
wroman,  as  it  was  by  the  same  sex  that  beginning 
was  made  of  sin  by  which  we  all  die.  And  it  was 
committed  that  the  pleasure  of  the  flesh,  which 
resists  the  spirit,  might  follow;  and  so  Naamah, 
the  daughter  of  Lamech,  means  “pleasure.”  But 
from  Adam  to  Noah,  in  the  line  of  Seth,  there 
are  ten  generations.  And  to  Noah  three  sons  are 
added,  of  whom,  while  one  fell  into  sin,  two 
were  blessed  by  their  father;  so  that,  if  you  de¬ 
duct  the  reprobate  and  add  the  gracious  sons  to 
the  number,  you  get  twelve — a  number  signal¬ 
ized  in  the  case  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  the 
apostles,  and  made  up  of  the  parts  of  the  num¬ 
ber  seven  multiplied  into  one  another — for  three 
times  four,  or  four  times  three,  give  twelve. 
These  things  being  so.  I  see  that  I  must  con¬ 
sider  and  mention  how  these  two  lines,  which  by 
their  separate  genealogies  depict  the  two  cities, 
one  of  earth-born,  the  other  of  regenerated  per¬ 
sons,  became  afterwards  so  mixed  and  confused, 
that  the  whole  human  race,  with  the  exception 
of  eight  persons,  deserved  to  perish  in  the  deluge. 

Chap.  21.  Why  it  is  that ,  as  soon  as  Cain’s  son 
Enoch  has  been  named,  the  genealogy  is  forth¬ 
with  continued  as  far  as  the  deluge ,  while 
after  the  mention  of  Enos,  Seth’s  son ,  the 
narrative  returns  again  to  the  creation  of  man 
AVe  must  first  see  why,  in  the  enumeration  of 
Cain’s  posterity,  after  Enoch,  in  whose  name  the 
city  was  built,  has  been  first  of  all  mentioned, 
the  rest  *are  at  once  enumerated  down  to  that 
terminus  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and  at  which 
that  race  and  the  whole  line  was  destroyed  in  the 
deluge;  while,  after  Enos  the  son  of  Seth,  has 
been  mentioned,  the  rest  are  not  at  once  named 
down  to  the  deluge,  but  a  clause  is  inserted  to 
the  following  effect:  “This  is  the  book  of  the 
generations  of  Adam.  In  the  day  that  God  cre¬ 
ated  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  He  him; 
male  and  female  created  He  them;  and  blessed 
them,  and  called  their  name  Adam,  in  the  day 
JPs.  si.  3. 


when  they  were  created.”2  This  seems  to  me  to 
be  inserted  for  this  purpose,  that  here  again  the 
reckoning  of  the  times  may  start  from  Adam 
himself — a  purpose  which  the  writer  had  not  in 
view  in  speaking  of  the  earthly  city,  as  if  God 
mentioned  it,  but  did  not  take  account  of  its 
duration.  But  why  does  he  return  to  this  recapit¬ 
ulation  after  mentioning  the  son  of  Seth,  the 
man  who  hoped  to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 
God,  unless  because  it  was  fit  thus  to  present 
these  two  cities,  the  one  beginning  with  a  mur¬ 
derer  and  ending  in  a  murderer  (for  Lamech, 
too,  acknowledges  to  his  two  wives  that  he  had 
committed  murder),  the  other  built  up  by  him 
who  hoped  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
God?  For  the  highest  and  complete  terrestrial 
duty  of  the  city  of  God,  which  is  a  stranger  in 
this  w’orld,  is  that  which  was  exemplified  in  the 
individual  who  was  begotten  by  him  who  typi¬ 
fied  the  resurrection  of  the  murdered  Abel.  That 
one  man  is  the  unity  of  the  whole  heavenly  city, 
not  yet  indeed  complete,  but  to  be  completed, 
as  this  prophetic  figure  foreshows.  The  son  of 
Cain,  therefore,  that  is,  the  son  of  possession 
(and  of  wrhat  but  an  earthly  possession?),  may 
have  a  name  in  the  earthly  city  which  was  built 
in  his  name.  It  is  of  such  the  Psalmist  says, 
“They  call  their  lands  after  their  own  names.”3 
Wherefore  they  incur  what  is  written  in  another 
psalm :  “Thou,  0  Lord,  in  Thy  city  wilt  despise 
their  image.”4  But  as  for  the  son  of  Seth,  the 
son  of  the  resurrection,  let  him  hope  to  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord  God.  For  he  prefigures 
that  society  of  men  which  says,  “But  I  am  like  a 
green  olive-tree  in  the  house  of  God:  I  have 
trusted  in  the  mercy  of  God.”5  But  let  him  not 
seek  the  empty  honours  of  a  famous  name  upon 
earth,  for  “Blessed  is  the  man  that  maketh  the 
name  of  the  Lord  his  trust,  and  respecteth  not 
vanities  nor  lying  follies.”6  After  having  pre¬ 
sented  the  two  cities,  the  one  founded  in  the 
material  good  of  this  world,  the  other  in  hope  in 
God,  but  both  starting  from  a  common  gate 
opened  in  Adam  into  this  mortal  state,  and  both 
running  on  and  running  out  to  their  proper  and 
merited  ends,  Scripture  begins  to  reckon  the 
times,  and  in  this  reckoning  includes  other  gen¬ 
erations,  making  a  recapitulation  from  Adam, 
out  of  whose  condemned  seed,  as  out  of  one 
mass  handed  over  to  merited  damnation,  God 
made  some  vessels  of  wrath  to  dishonour  and 
others  vessels  of  mercy  to  honour;  in  punish¬ 
ment  rendering  to  the  former  what  is  due,  in 
grace  giving  to  the  latter  wiiat  is  not  due:  in  or- 

2Gen.  5.  1.  3Ps.  49.  11.  4Ps.  73.  20. 

6Ps.  52.  8.  6Ps.  40.  4. 


4i6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


der  that  by  the  very  comparison  of  itself  with 
the  vessels  of  wrath,  the  heavenly  city,  which 
sojourns  on  earth,  may  learn  not  to  put  confi¬ 
dence  in  the  liberty  of  its  own  will,  but  may  hope 
to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  God.  For  will, 
being  a  nature  which  was  made  good  by  the  good 
God,  but  mutable  by  the  immutable,  because  it 
was  made  out  of  nothing,  can  both  decline  from 
good  to  do  evil,  which  takes  place  when  it  freely 
chooses,  and  can  also  escape  the  evil  and  do 
good,  which  takes  place  only  by  divine  assist¬ 
ance. 

Chap.  2  2.  Of  the  fall  of  the  sons  of  God  who 
were  captivated  by  the  daughters  of  men , 
whereby  all,  with  the  exception  of  eight  per¬ 
sons,  deservedly  perished  in  the  deluge 
When  the  human  race,  in  the  exercise  of  this 
freedom  of  will,  increased  and  advanced,  there 
arose  a  mixture  and  confusion  of  the  two  cities 
by  their  participation  in  a  common  iniquity. 
And  this  calamity,  as  well  as  the  first,  was  occa¬ 
sioned  by  woman,  though  not  in  the  same  way; 
for  these  women  were  not  themselves  betrayed, 
neither  did  they  persuade  the  men  to  sin,  but 
having  belonged  to  the  earthly  city  and  society 
of  the  earthly,  they  had  been  of  corrupt  man¬ 
ners  from  the  first,  and  were  loved  for  their 
bodily  beauty  by  the  sons  of  God,  or  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  the  other  city  which  sojourns  in  this 
world.  Beauty  is  indeed  a  good  gift  of  God;  but 
that  the  good  may  not  think  it  a  great  good,  God 
dispenses  it  even  to  the  wicked.  And  thus,  when 
the  good  that  is  great  and  proper  to  the  good  was 
abandoned  by  the  sons  of  God,  they  fell  to  a 
paltry  good  which  is  not  peculiar  to  the  good, 
but  common  to  the  good  and  the  evil ;  and  when 
they  were  captivated  by  the  daughters  of  men, 
they  adopted  the  manners  of  the  earthly  to  win 
them  as  their  brides,  and  forsook  the  godly  ways 
they  had  followed  in  their  own  holy  society. 
And  thus  beauty,  which  is  indeed  God’s  handi¬ 
work,  but  only  a  temporal,  carnal,  and  lower 
kind  of  good,  is  not  fitly  loved  in  preference  to 
God,  the  eternal,  spiritual,  and  unchangeable 
good.  When  the  miser  prefers  his  gold  to  justice, 
it  is  through  no  fault  of  the  gold,  but  of  the 
man;  and  so  with  every  created  thing.  For 
though  it  be  good,  it  may  be  loved  with  an  evil 
as  well  as  with  a  good  love :  it  is  loved  rightly 
when  it  is  loved  ordinately;  evilly,  when  inor¬ 
dinately,  It  is  this  which  some  one  has  briefly 
said  in  these  verses  in  praise  of  the  Creator:1 
“These  are  Thine,  they  are  good,  because  Thou 

1Or,  according  to  another  reading:  “Which  I  briefly 
said  in  these  verses  in  praise  of  a  taper.” 


art  good  Who  didst  create  them.  There  is  in  them 
nothing  of  ours,  unless  the  sin  we  commit  when 
we  forget  the  order  of  things,  and  instead  of 
Thee  love  that  which  Thou  hast  made.” 

But  if  the  Creator  is  truly  loved,  that  is,  if  He 
Himself  is  loved  and  not  another  thing  in  His 
stead,  He  cannot  be  evilly  loved;  for  love  itself 
is  to  be  ordinately  loved,  because  we  do  well  to 
love  that  which,  when  we  love  it,  makes  us  live 
well  and  virtuously.  So  that  it  seems  to  me  that 
it  is  a  brief  but  true  definition  of  virtue  to  say, 
it  is  the  order  of  love;  and  on  this  account,  in 
the  Canticles,  the  bride  of  Christ,  the  city  of 
God,  sings,  “Order  love  within  me.”2  It  was  the 
order  of  this  love,  then,  this  charity  or  attach¬ 
ment,  which  the  sons  of  God  disturbed  when 
they  forsook  God,  and  were  enamoured  of  the 
daughters  of  men.3  And  by  these  two  names 
(sons  of  God  and  daughters  of  men)  the  two 
cities  are  sufficiently  distinguished.  For  though 
the  former  were  by  nature  children  of  men,  they 
had  come  into  possession  of  another  name  by 
grace.  For  in  the  same  Scripture  in  which  the 
sons  of  God  are  said  to  have  loved  the  daugh¬ 
ters  of  men,  they  are  also  called  angels  of  God; 
whence  many  suppose  that  they  were  not  men 
but  angels. 

Chap.  23.  Whether  we  are  to  believe  that  angels, 
who  are  of  a  spiritual  substance,  fell  in  love 
with  the  beauty  of  women,  and  sought  them 
in  marriage,  and  that  from  this  connection 
giants  were  born 

In  the  third  book  of  this  work  (chap.  5)  we 
made  a  passing  reference  to  this  question,  but 
did  not  decide  whether  angels,  inasmuch  as  they 
are  spirits,  could  have  bodily  intercourse  with 
women.  For  it  is  written,  “Who  maketh  His  an¬ 
gels  spirits,”4  that  is,  “He  makes  those  who  are 
by  nature  spirits  His  angels  by  appointing  them 
to  the  duty  of  bearing  His  messages.”  For  the 
Greek  word  ayyeXos,  which  in  Latin  appears 
as  “angelus,”  means  a  messenger.  But  whether 
the  Psalmist  speaks  of  their  bodies  when  he 
adds,  “and  His  ministers  a  flaming  fire,”  or 
means  that  God’s  ministers  ought  to  blaze  with 
love  as  with  a  spiritual  fire,  is  doubtful.  How¬ 
ever,  the  same  trustworthy  Scripture  testifies 
that  angels  have  appeared  to  men  in  such  bodies 
as  could  not  only  be  seen,  but  also  touched. 
There  is,  too,  a  very  general  rumour,  which  many 
have  verified  by  their  own  experience,  or  which 
trustworthy  persons  who  have  heard  the  experi- 

2Song  of  Sol.  2.  4. 

3See  On  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk.  i.  ch.  27. 

4Ps.  104.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ence  of  others  corroborate,  that  sylvans  and 
fauns,  who  are  commonly  called  “incubi”  had 
often  made  wicked  assaults  upon  women,  and 
satisfied  their  lust  upon  them ;  and  that  certain 
devils,  called  Duses  by  the  Gauls,  are  constantly 
attempting  and  effecting  this  impurity  is  so  gen¬ 
erally  affirmed,  that  it  were  impudent  to  deny 
it.  From  these  assertions,  indeed,  I  dare  not  de¬ 
termine  whether  there  be  some  spirits  embodied 
in  an  aerial  substance  (for  this  element,  even 
when  agitated  by  a  fan,  is  sensibly  felt  by  the 
body),  and  who  are  capable  of  lust  and  of  min¬ 
gling  sensibly  with  women ;  but  certainly  I  could 
by  no  means  believe  that  God’s  holy  angels 
could  at  that  time  have  so  fallen,  nor  can  I  think 
that  it  is  of  them  the  Apostle  Peter  said,  “For 
if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but 
cast  them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into 
chains  of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judg¬ 
ment.”1  I  think  he  rather  speaks  of  those  who 
first  apostatized  from  God,  along  with  their 
chief  the  devil,  who  enviously  deceived  the  first 
man  under  the  form  of  a  serpent.  But  the  same 
holy  Scripture  affords  the  most  ample  testimony 
that  even  godly  men  have  been  called  angels; 
for  of  John  it  is  written:  “Behold,  I  send  my 
messenger  (angel)  before  Thy  face,  who  shall 
prepare  Thy  way.”2  And  the  prophet  Malachi, 
by  a  peculiar  grace  specially  communicated  to 
him,  was  called  an  angel.3 

But  some  are  moved  by  the  fact  that  we  have 
read  that  the  fruit  of  the  connexion  between 
those  who  are  called  angels  of  God  and  the  wom¬ 
en  they  loved  were  not  men  like  our  own  breed, 
but  giants ;  just  as  if  there  were  not  born  even  in 
our  own  time  (as  I  have  mentioned  above)  men 
of  much  greater  size  than  the  ordinary  stature. 
Was  there  not  at  Rome  a  few  years  ago,  when 
the  destruction  of  the  city  now  accomplished  by 
the  Goths  was  drawing  near,  a  woman,  with  her 
father  and  mother,  who  by  her  gigantic  size 
over-topped  all  others?  Surprising  crowds  from 
all  quarters  came  to  see  her,  and  that  which 
struck  them  most  was  the  circumstance  that  nei¬ 
ther  of  her  parents  were  quite  up  to  the  tallest 
ordinary  stature.  Giants  therefore  might  well  be 
born,  even  before  the  sons  of  God,  who  are  also 
called  angels  of  God,  formed  a  connexion  with 
the  daughters  of  men,  or  of  those  living  accord¬ 
ing  to  men,  that  is  to  say,  before  the  sons  of 
Seth  formed  a  connexion  with  the  daughters  of 
Cain.  For  thus  speaks  even  the  canonical  Scrip¬ 
ture  itself  in  the  book  in  which  we  read  of  this; 
its  words  are:  “And  it  came  to  pass,  when  men 
began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
lII  Pet.  2.  4.  2Mark,  1.  2.  3Mal.  2.  7. 


GOD  XV.  22-23  417 

daughters  were  born  unto  them,  that  the  sons 
of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men  that  they  were 
fair  [good] ;  and  they  took  them  wives  of  all 
which  they  chose.  And  the  Lord  God  said,  My 
Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  for  that 
he  also  is  flesh :  yet  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred 
and  twenty  years.  There  were  giants  in  the  earth 
in  those  days;  and  also  after  that,  when  the  sons 
of  God  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  men,  and 
they  bare  children  to  them,  the  same  became  the 
giants,  men  of  renown.”4  These  words  of  the  di¬ 
vine  book  sufficiently  indicate  that  already  there 
were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days,  in  which 
the  sons  of  God  took  wives  of  the  children  of 
men,  when  they  loved  them  because  they  were 
good,  that  is,  fair.  For  it  is  the  custom  of  this 
Scripture  to  call  those  who  are  beautiful  in  ap¬ 
pearance  “good.”  But  after  this  connexion  had 
been  formed,  then  too  were  giants  born.  For  the 
words  are:  “There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in 
those  days,  and  also  after  thaty  when  the  sons  of 
God  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  men.”  There¬ 
fore  there  were  giants  both  before,  “in  those 
days,”  and  “also  after  that.”  And  the  words, 
“They  bare  children  to  them,”  show  plainly 
enough  that  before  the  sons  of  God  fell  in  this 
fashion  they  begat  children  to  God,  not  to  them¬ 
selves — that  is  to  say,  not  moved  by  the  lust  of 
sexual  intercourse,  but  discharging  the  duty  of 
propagation,  intending  to  produce  not  a  family 
to  gratify  their  own  pride,  but  citizens  to  people 
the  city  of  God;  and  to  these  they  as  God’s  an¬ 
gels  would  bear  the  message,  that  they  should 
place  their  hope  in  God,  like  him  who  was  born 
of  Seth,  the  son  of  resurrection,  and  who  hoped 
to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  God,  in  which 
hope  they  and  their  offspring  would  be  co-heirs 
of  eternal  blessings,  and  brethren  in  the  family 
of  which  God  is  the  Father. 

But  that  those  angels  were  not  angels  in  the 
sense  of  not  being  men,  as  some  suppose,  Scrip¬ 
ture  itself  decides,  which  unambiguously  de¬ 
clares  that  they  were  men.  For  when  it  had  first 
been  stated  that  “the  angels  of  God  saw  the 
daughters  of  men  that  they  were  fair,  and  they 
took  them  wives  of  all  which  they  chose,”  it  was 
immediately  added,  “And  the  Lord  God  said, 
My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  these 
men,  for  that  they  also  are  flesh.”  For  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  they  had  been  made  angels  of  God 
and  sons  of  God;  but  declining  towards  lower 
things,  they  are  called  “men.”  a  name  of  nature, 
not  of  grace;  and  they  are  called  “flesh,”  as  de¬ 
serters  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  their  desertion  de¬ 
serted.  The  Septuagint  indeed  calls  them  both 
4Gen.  6.  1.  4. 


418  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


angels  of  God  and  sons  of  God,  though  all  the 
copies  do  not  show  this,  some  having  only  the 
name  “sons  of  God.”  And  Aquila,  whom  the 
Jews  prefer  to  the  other  interpreters,  has  trans¬ 
lated  neither  “angels  of  God”  nor  “sons  of  God,” 
but  “sons  of  gods.”  But  both  are  correct.  For 
they  were  both  sons  of  God,  and  thus  brothers 
of  their  own  fathers,  who  were  children  of  the 
same  God;  and  they  were  sons  of  gods,  because 
begotten  by  gods,  together  with  whom  they 
themselves  also  were  gods,  according  to  that  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  psalm :  “I  have  said,  Ye  are  gods, 
and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  Most  High.”1 
For  the  Septuagint  translators  are  justly  be¬ 
lieved  to  have  received  the  Spirit  of  prophecy; 
so  that,  if  they  made  any  alterations  under  His 
authority,  and  did  not  adhere  to  a  strict  transla¬ 
tion,  we  could  not  doubt  that  this  was  divinely 
dictated.  However,  the  Hebrew  word  may  be 
said  to  be  ambiguous,  and  to  be  susceptible  of 
either  translation,  “sons  of  God,”  or  “sons  of 
gods.” 

Let  us  omit,  then,  the  fables  of  those  scrip¬ 
tures  which  are  called  apocryphal,  becaus^their 
obscure  origin  was  unknown  to  the  fathers  from 
whom  the  authority  of  the  true  Scriptures  has 
been  transmitted  to  us  by  a  most  certain  and 
well-ascertained  succession.  For  though  there  is 
some  truth  in  these  apocryphal  writings,  yet 
they  contain  so  many  false  statements  that  they 
have  no  canonical  authority.  We  cannot  deny 
that  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  left  some 
divine  writings,  for  this  is  asserted  by  the  Apos¬ 
tle  Jude  in  his  canonical  epistle.  But  it  is  not 
without  reason  that  these  writings  have  no  place 
in  that  canon  of  Scripture  which  was  preserved 
in  the  temple  of  the  Hebrew  people  by  the  dili¬ 
gence  of  successive  priests;  for  their  antiquity 
brought  them  under  suspicion,  and  it  was  impos¬ 
sible  to  ascertain  whether  these  were  his  genu¬ 
ine  writings,  and  they  were  not  brought  for¬ 
ward  as  genuine  by  the  persons  who  were  found 
to  have  carefully  preserved  the  canonical  books 
by  a  successive  transmission.  So  that  the  writ¬ 
ings  which  are  produced  under  his  name,  and 
which  contain  these  fables  about  the  giants,  say¬ 
ing  that  their  fathers  were  not  men,  are  properly 
judged  by  prudent  men  to  be  not  genuine ;  just 
as  many  writings  are  produced  by  heretics  un¬ 
der  the  names  both  of  other  prophets,  and,  more 
recently,  under  the  names  of  the  apostles,  all  of 
which,  after  careful  examination,  have  been  set 
apart  from  canonical  authority  under  the  title 
of  Apocrypha.  There  is  therefore  no  doubt  that, 
according  to  the  Hebrew  and  Christian  canon- 

^s.  82.  6. 


ical  Scriptures,  there  were  many  giants  before 
the  deluge,  and  that  these  were  citizens  of  the 
earthly  society  of  men,  and  that  the  sons  of 
God,  who  were  according  to  the  flesh  the  sons 
of  Seth,  sunk  into  this  community  when  they 
forsook  righteousness.  Nor  need  we  wonder  that 
giants  should  be  born  even  from  these.  For  all 
of  their  children  were  not  giants ;  but  there  were 
more  then  than  in  the  remaining  periods  since 
the  deluge.  And  it  pleased  the  Creator  to  pro¬ 
duce  them,  that  it  might  thus  be  demonstrated 
that  neither  beauty,  nor  yet  size  and  strength, 
are  of  much  moment  to  the  wise  man,  whose 
blessedness  lies  in  spiritual  and  immortal  bless¬ 
ings,  in  far  better  and  more  enduring  gifts,  in  the 
good  things  that  are  the  peculiar  property  of  the 
good  and  are  not  shared  by  good  and  bad  alike. 
It  is  this  which  another  prophet  confirms  when 
he  says,  “These  were  the  giants,  famous  from 
the  beginning,  that  were  of  so  great  stature,  and 
so  expert  in  war.  Those  did  not  the  Lord  choose, 
neither  gave  He  the  way  of  knowledge  unto 
them ;  but  they  were  destroyed  because  they  had 
no  wisdom,  and  perished  through  their  own  fool¬ 
ishness.”2 

Chap.  24.  How  we  are  to  understand  this  which 
the  Lord  said  to  those  who  were  to  perish  in 
the  flood:  “ their  days  shall  be  120  years” 

But  that  which  God  said,  “Their  days  shall  be 
an  hundred  and  twenty  years,”  is  not  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  as  a  prediction  that  henceforth  men 
should  not  live  longer  than  120  years — for  even 
after  the  deluge  we  find  that  they  lived  more 
than  500  years — but  we  are  to  understand  that 
God  said  this  when  Noah  had  nearly  completed 
his  fifth  century,  that  is,  had  lived  480  years, 
which  Scripture,  as  it  frequently  uses  the  name 
of  the  whole  of  the  largest  part,  calls  500  years. 
Now  the  deluge  came  in  the  600th  year  of  No¬ 
ah’s  life,  the  second  month;  and  thus  120  years 
were  predicted  as  being  the  remaining  span  of 
those  who  were  doomed,  which  years  being 
spent,  they  should  be  destroyed  by  the  deluge. 
And  it  is  not  unreasonably  believed  that  the  del¬ 
uge  came  as  it  did,  because  already  there  were 
not  found  upon  earth  any  who  were  not  worthy 
of  sharing  a  death  so  manifestly  judicial — not 
that  a  good  man,  who  must  die  some  time,  would 
be  a  jot  the  worse  of  such  a  death  after  it  was 
past.  Nevertheless  there  died  in  the  deluge  none 
of  those  mentioned  in  the  sacred  Scripture  as 
descended  from  Seth.  But  here  is  the  divine  ac¬ 
count  of  the  cause  of  the  deluge:  “The  Lord 
God  saw7  that  the  wickedness  of  man  w7as  great 
2Baruch,  3.  26-28. 


THE  CITY  OF 

in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually. 
And  it  repented  the  Lord  that  He  had  made 
man  on  the  earth,  and  it  grieved  Him  at  His 
heart.  And  the  Lord  said,  I  will  destroy  man. 
whom  I  have  created,  from  the  face  of  the 
earth;  both  man  and  beast,  and  the  creeping 
thing,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air:  for  I  am  angry 
that  I  have  made  them.”1 

Chap.  25.  Of  the  anger  of  God ,  which  does  not 
inflame  His  mind ,  nor  disturb  His  unchange¬ 
able  tranquillity 

The  anger  of  God  is  not  a  disturbing  emotion 
of  His  mind,  but  a  judgment  by  which  punish¬ 
ment  is  inflicted  upon  sin.  His  thought  and  re¬ 
consideration  also  are  the  unchangeable  reason 
which  changes  things;  for  He  does  not,  like  man, 
repent  of  anything  He  has  done,  because  in  all 
matters  His  decision  is  as  inflexible  as  His  pre¬ 
science  is  certain.  But  if  Scripture  were  not  to 
use  such  expressions  as  the  above,  it  would  not 
familiarly  insinuate  itself  into  the  minds  of  all 
classes  of  men,  whom  it  seeks  access  to  for  their 
good,  that  it  may  alarm  the  proud,  arouse  the 
careless,  exercise  the  inquisitive,  and  satisfy  the 
intelligent;  and  this  it  could  not  do,  did  it  not 
first  stoop,  and  in  a  manner  descend,  to  them 
where  they  lie.  But  its  denouncing  death  on  all 
the  animals  of  earth  and  air  is  a  declaration  of 
the  vastness  of  the  disaster  that  was  approach¬ 
ing  :  not  that  it  threatens  destruction  to  the  irra¬ 
tional  animals  as  if  they  too  had  incurred  it  by 
sin. 

Chap.  26.  That  the  ark  which  Noah  was  ordered 
to  make  figures  in  every  respect  Christ  and 
the  Church 

Moreover,  inasmuch  as  God  commanded  No¬ 
ah,  a  just  man,  and,  as  the  truthful  Scripture 
says,  a  man  perfect  in  his  generation — not  in¬ 
deed  with  the  perfection  of  the  citizens  of  the 
city  of  God  in  that  immortal  condition  in  which 
they  equal  the  angels,  but  in  so  far  as  they  can 
be  perfect  in  their  sojourn  in  this  world — inas¬ 
much  as  God  commanded  him,  I  say,  to  make  an 
ark,  in  which  he  might  be  rescued  from  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  flood,  along  with  his  family,  i.e., 
his  wife,  sons,  and  daughters-in-law,  and  along 
with  the  animals  who,  in  obedience  to  God’s 
command,  came  to  him  into  the  ark :  this  is  cer¬ 
tainly  a  figure  of  the  city  of  God  sojourning  in 
this  world;  that  is  to  say,  of  the  Church,  which 
is  rescued  by  the  wood  on  which  hung  the  Medi¬ 
ator  of  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.2 
^en.  6.  5-7. 


GOD  XV.  24-26  419 

For  even  its  very  dimensions,  in  length,  breadth, 
and  height,  represent  the  human  body  in  which 
He  came,  as  it  had  been  foretold.  For  the  length 
of  the  human  body,  from  the  crown  of  the  head 
to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  is  six  times  its  breadth 
from  side  to  side,  and  ten  times  its  depth  or 
thickness,  measuring  from  back  to  front:  that 
is  to  say,  if  you  measure  a  man  as  he  lies  on  his 
back  or  on  his  face,  he  is  six  times  as  long  from 
head  to  foot  as  he  is  broad  from  side  to  side,  and 
ten  times  as  long  as  he  is  high  from  the  ground. 
And  therefore  the  ark  was  made  300  cubits  in 
length,  50  in  breadth,  and  30  in  height.  And  its 
having  a  door  made  in  the  side  of  it  certainly 
signified  the  wound  which  was  made  when  the 
side  of  the  Crucified  was  pierced  with  the  spear; 
for  by  this  those  who  come  to  Him  enter;  for 
thence  flowed  the  sacraments  by  which  those 
who  believe  are  initiated.  And  the  fact  that  it 
was  ordered  to  be  made  of  squared  timbers, 
signifies  the  immoveable  steadiness  of  the  life 
of  the  saints;  for  however  you  turn  a  cube,  it 
still  stands.  And  the  other  peculiarities  of  the 
ark’s  construction  are  signs  of  features  of  the 
church. 

But  we  have  not  now  time  to  pursue  this  sub¬ 
ject;  and,  indeed,  we  have  already  dwelt  upon 
it  in  the  work  we  wrote  against  Faustus  the 
Manichean,  who  denies  that  there  is  anything 
prophesied  of  Christ  in  the  Hebrew  books.  It 
may  be  that  one  man’s  exposition  excels  an¬ 
other’s,  and  that  ours  is  not  the  best ;  but  all  that 
is  said  must  be  referred  to  this  city  of  God  we 
speak  of,  which  sojourns  in  this  wicked  world 
as  in  a  deluge,  at  least  if  the  expositor  would  not 
widely  miss  the  meaning  of  the  author.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  interpretation  I  have  given  in  the 
work  against  Faustus,  of  the  words,  “with  lower, 
second,  and  third  stories  shalt  thou  make  it,”  is 
that,  because  the  church  is  gathered  out  of  all 
nations,  it  is  said  to  have  two  stories,  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  two  kinds  of  men — the  circumcision,  to 
wit,  and  the  uncircumcision,  or,  as  the  apostle 
otherwise  calls  them,  Jews  and  Gentiles;  and  to 
have  three  stories,  because  all  the  nations  were 
replenished  from  the  three  sons  of  Noah.  Now 
any  one  may  object  to  this  interpretation,  and 
may  give  another  which  harmonizes  with  the 
rule  of  faith.  For  as  the  ark  was  to  have  rooms 
not  only  on  the  lower,  but  also  on  the  upper 
stories,  which  were  called  “third  stories,”  that 
there  might  be  a  habitable  space  on  the  third 
floor  from  the  basement,  some  one  may  inter¬ 
pret  these  to  mean  the  three  graces  commended 
by  the  apostle — faith,  hope,  and  charity.  Or 

2I  Tim.  2.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


even  more  suitably  they  may  be  supposed  to 
represent  those  three  harvests  in  the  gospel, 
thirty-fold,  sixty-fold,  an  hundred-fold — chaste 
marriage  dwelling  in  the  ground  floor,  chaste 
widowhood  in  the  upper,  and  chaste  virginity  in 
the  top  story.  Or  any  better  interpretation  may 
be  given,  so  long  as  the  reference  to  this  city  is 
maintained.  And  the  same  statement  I  would 
make  of  all  the  remaining  particulars  in  this 
passage  which  require  exposition,  viz.,  that  al¬ 
though  different  explanations  are  given,  yet  they 
must  all  agree  with  the  one  harmonious  Catholic 
faith. 

Chap.  27.  Of  the  ark  and  the  deluge,  and  that 
we  cannot  agree  with  those  who  receive  the 
bare  history,  but  reject  the  allegorical  inter¬ 
pretation,  nor  with  those  who  maintain  the 
figurative  and  not  the  historical  meaning 
Yet  no  one  ought  to  suppose  either  that  these 
things  were  written  for  no  purpose,  or  that  we 
should  study  only  the  historical  truth,  apart 
from  any  allegorical  meanings;  or,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  that  they  are  only  allegories,  and  that 
there  were  no  such  facts  at  all,  or  that,  whether 
it  be  so  or  no,  there  is  here  no  prophecy  of  the 
Church.  For  what  right-minded  man  will  con¬ 
tend  that  books  so  religiously  preserved  during 
thousands  of  years,  and  transmitted  by  so  order¬ 
ly  a  succession,  were  written  without  an  object, 
or  that  only  the  bare  historical  facts  are  to  be 
considered  when  we  read  them?  For,  not  to  men¬ 
tion  other  instances,  if  the  number  of  the  ani¬ 
mals  entailed  the  construction  of  an  ark  of 
great  size,  where  was  the  necessity  of  sending 
into  it  two  unclean  and  seven  clean  animals  of 
each  species,  when  both  could  have  been  pre¬ 
served  in  equal  numbers?  Or  could  not  God, 
Who  ordered  them  to  be  preserved  in  order  to 
replenish  the  race,  restore  them  in  the  same  way 
He  had  created  them? 

But  they  who  contend  that  these  things  never 
happened,  but  are  only  figures  setting  forth 
other  things,  in  the  first  place  suppose  that  there 
could  not  be  a  flood  so  great  that  the  water 
should  rise  fifteen  cubits  above  the  highest 
mountains,  because  it  is  said  that  clouds  can¬ 
not  rise  above  the  top  of  Mount  Olympus,  be¬ 
cause  it  reaches  the  sky  where  there  is  none  of 
that  thicker  atmosphere  in  which  winds,  clouds, 
and  rains  have  their  origin.  They  do  not  reflect 
that  the  densest  element  of  all,  earth,  can  exist 
there;  or  perhaps  they  deny  that  the  top  of  the 
mountain  is  earth.  Why,  then,  do  these  measur¬ 
ers  and  weighers  of  the  elements  contend  that 
earth  can  be  raised  to  those  aerial  altitudes,  and 


that  water  cannot,  while  they  admit  that  water 
is  lighter,  and  liker  to  ascend  than  earth?  What 
reason  do  they  adduce  why  earth,  the  heavier 
and  lower  element,  has  for  so  many  ages  scaled 
to  the  tranquil  ether,  while  water,  the  lighter, 
and  more  likely  to  ascend,  is  not  suffered  to  do 
the  same  even  for  a  brief  space  of  time? 

They  say,  too,  that  the  area  of  that  ark  could 
not  contain  so  many  kinds  of  animals  of  both 
sexes,  two  of  the  unclean  and  seven  of  the  clean. 
But  they  seem  to  me  to  reckon  only  one  area 
of  300  cubits  long  and  50  broad,  and  not  to  re¬ 
member  that  there  was  another  similar  in  the 
story  above,  and  yet  another  as  large  in  the 
story  above  that  again ;  and  that  there  was  con¬ 
sequently  an  area  of  900  cubits  by  150.  And  if 
we  accept  what  Origen  has  with  some  appropri¬ 
ateness  suggested,  that  Moses  the  man  of  God, 
being,  as  it  is  written,  “learned  in  all  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  Egyptians,”1  who  delighted  in  geom- 
try,  may  have  meant  geometrical  cubits,  of 
which  they  say  that  one  is  equal  to  six  of  our 
cubits,  then  who  does  not  see  what  a  capacity 
these  dimensions  give  to  the  ark?  For  as  to  their 
objection  that  an  ark  of  such  size  could  not  be 
built,  it  is  a  very  silly  calumny;  for  they  are 
aware  that  huge  cities  have  been  built,  and  they 
should  remember  that  the  ark  was  an  hundred 
years  in  building.  Or,  perhaps,  though  stone  can 
adhere  to  stone  when  cemented  with  nothing  but 
lime,  so  that  a  wall  of  several  miles  may  be  con¬ 
structed,  yet  plank  cannot  be  riveted  to  plank 
by  mortices,  bolts,  nails,  and  pitch-glue,  so  as 
to  construct  an  ark  which  was  not  made  with 
curved  ribs  but  straight  timbers,  which  was  not 
to  be  launched  by  its  builders,  but  to  be  lifted 
by  the  natural  pressure  of  the  water  when  it 
reached  it,  and  which  was  to  be  preserved  from 
shipwreck  as  it  floated  about  rather  by  divine 
oversight  than  by  human  skill. 

As  to  another  customary  inquiry  of  the  scru¬ 
pulous  about  the  very  minute  creatures,  not 
only  such  as  mice  and  lizards,  but  also  locusts, 
beetles,  flies,  fleas,  and  so  forth,  whether  there 
were  not  in  the  ark  a  larger  number  of  them 
than  was  determined  by  God  in  His  command, 
those  persons  who  are  moved  by  this  difficulty 
are  to  be  reminded  that  the  words  “every  creep¬ 
ing  thing  of  the  earth”  only  indicate  that  it  was 
not  needful  to  preserve  in  the  ark  the  animals 
that  can  live  in  the  water,  whether  the  fishes 
that  live  submerged  in  it,  or  the  sea-birds  that 
swim  on  its  surface.  Then,  when  it  is  said  “male 
and  female,”  no  doubt  reference  is  made  to  the 
repairing  of  the  races,  and  consequently  there 

^cts,  7.  22. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XV.  27 


was  no  need  for  those  creatures  being  in  the  ark 
which  are  born  without  the  union  of  the  sexes 
from  inanimate  things,  or  from  their  corrup¬ 
tion;  or  if  they  were  in  the  ark,  they  might  be 
there  as  they  commonly  are  in  houses,  not  in 
any  determinate  numbers ;  or  if  it  was  necessary 
that  there  should  be  a  definite  number  of  all 
those  animals  that  cannot  naturally  live  in  the 
water,  that  so  the  most  sacred  mystery  which 
was  being  enacted  might  be  bodied  forth  and 
perfectly  figured  in  actual  realities,  still  this  was 
not  the  care  of  Noah  or  his  sons,  but  of  God. 
For  Noah  did  not  catch  the  animals  and  put 
them  into  the  ark,  but  gave  them  entrance  as 
they  came  seeking  it.  For  this  is  the  force  of  the 
words,  “They  shall  come  unto  thee”1 — not,  that 
is  to  say,  by  man’s  effort,  but  by  God’s  will.  But 
certainly  we  are  not  required  to  believe  that 
those  which  have  no  sex  also  came;  for  it  is  ex¬ 
pressly  and  definitely  said,  “They  shall  be  male 
and  female.”1  For  there  are  some  animals  which 
are  born  out  of  corruption,  but  yet  afterwards 
they  themselves  copulate  and  produce  offspring, 
as  flies;  but  others,  which  have  no  sex,  like  bees. 
Then,  as  to  those  animals  which  have  sex,  but 
without  ability  to  propagate  their  kind,  like 
mules  and  she-mules,  it  is  probable  that  they 
were  not  in  the  ark,  but  that  it  was  counted  suf¬ 
ficient  to  preserve  their  parents,  to  wit,  the 
horse  and  the  ass ;  and  this  applies  to  all  hybrids. 
Yet,  if  it  was  necessary  for  the  completeness  of 
the  mystery,  they  were  there;  for  even  this 
species  has  “male  and  female.” 

Another  question  is  commonly  raised  regard¬ 
ing  the  food  of  the  carnivorous  animals — wheth¬ 
er,  without  transgressing  the  command  which 
fixed  the  number  to  be  preserved,  there  were 
necessarily  others  included  in  the  ark  for  their 
sustenance;  or,  as  is  more  probable,  there  might 
be  some  food  which  was  not  flesh,  and  which  yet 

1Gen.  6.  19,  20. 


suited  all.  For  we  know  how  many  animals 
whose  food  is  flesh  eat  also  vegetable  products 
and  fruits,  especially  figs  and  chestnuts.  What 
wonder  is  it,  therefore,  if  that  wise  and  just  man 
was  instructed  by  God  what  would  suit  each,  so 
that  without  flesh  he  prepared  and  stored  provi¬ 
sion  fit  for  every  species?  And  what  is  there 
which  hunger  would  not  make  animals  eat?  Or 
what  could  not  be  made  sweet  and  wholesome 
by  God,  Who,  with  a  divine  facility,  might  have 
enabled  them  to  do  without  food  at  all,  had  it 
not  been  requisite  to  the  completeness  of  so 
great  a  mystery  that  they  should  be  fed?  But 
none  but  a  contentious  man  can  suppose  that 
there  was  no  prefiguring  of  the  Church  in  so 
manifold  and  circumstantial  a  detail.  For  the 
nations  have  already  so  filled  the  Church,  and 
are  comprehended  in  the  framework  of  its  unity, 
the  clean  and  unclean  together,  until  the  ap¬ 
pointed  end,  that  this  one  very  manifest  fulfill¬ 
ment  leaves  no  doubt  how  we  should  interpret 
even  those  others  which  are  somewhat  more  ob¬ 
scure,  and  which  cannot  so  readily  be  discerned. 
And  since  this  is  so,  if  not  even  the  most  auda¬ 
cious  will  presume  to  assert  that  these  things 
were  written  without  a  purpose,  or  that  though 
the  events  really  happened  they  mean  nothing, 
or  that  they  did  not  really  happen,  but  are  only 
allegory,  or  that  at  all  events  they  are  far  from 
having  any  figurative  reference  to  the  Church; 
if  it  has  been  made  out  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  must  rather  believe  that  there  was  a  wise 
purpose  in  their  being  committed  to  memory 
and  to  writing,  and  that  they  did  happen,  and 
have  a  significance,  and  that  this  significance  has 
a  prophetic  reference  to  the  Church,  then  this 
book,  having  served  this  purpose,  may  now  be 
closed,  that  we  may  go  on  to  trace  in  the  history 
subsequent  to  the  deluge  the  courses  of  the  two 
cities — the  earthly,  that  lives  according  to  men, 
and  the  heavenly  that  lives  according  to  God. 


422 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


BOOK  XVI 

ARGUMENT.  In  the  former  part  of  this  book,  from  the  first  to  the 

TWELFTH  CHAPTER,  THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  TWO  CITIES,  THE  EARTHLY  AND 
THE  HEAVENLY,  FROM  NOAH  TO  ABRAHAM,  IS  EXHIBITED  FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.* 
IN  THE  LATTER  PART,  THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  ALONE,  FROM  ABRAHAM 
TO  THE  KINGS  OF  ISRAEL,  IS  THE  SUBJECT. 


Chap.  i.  Whether,  after  the  deluge,  from  Noah 
to  Abraham,  any  families  can  be  found  who 
lived  according  to  God 

It  is  difficult  to  discover  from  Scripture, 
whether,  after  the  deluge,  traces  of  the  holy  city 
are  continuous,  or  are  so  interrupted  by  inter¬ 
vening  seasons  of  godlessness  that  not  a  single 
worshipper  of  the  one  true  God  was  found 
among  men;  because  from  Noah,  who,  with  his 
wife,  three  sons,  and  as  many  daughters-in-law, 
achieved  deliverance  in  the  ark  from  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  deluge,  down  to  Abraham,  we 
do  not  find  in  the  canonical  books  that  the  piety 
of  any  one  is  celebrated  by  express  divine  testi¬ 
mony,  unless  it  be  in  the  case  of  Noah,wwho 
commends  with  a  prophetic  benediction  his  two 
sons  Shem  and  Japheth,  while  he  beheld  and 
foresaw  what  was  long  afterwards  to  happen.  It 
was  also  by  this  prophetic  spirit  that,  when  his 
middle  son — that  is,  the  son  who  was  younger 
than  the  first  and  older  than  the  last  born — had 
sinned  against  him,  he  cursed  him  not  in  his  own 
person,  but  in  his  son’s  (his  own  grandson’s), 
in  the  words,  “Cursed  be  the  lad  Canaan ;  a  serv¬ 
ant  shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren.”1  Now  Canaan 
was  born  of  Ham,  who,  so  far  from  covering  his 
sleeping  father’s  nakedness,  had  divulged  it.  For 
the  same  reason  also  he  subjoins  the  blessing  on 
his  two  other  sons,  the  oldest  and  youngest,  say¬ 
ing,  “Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Shem;  and 
Canaan  shall  be  his  servant.  God  shall  gladden 
Japheth,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  houses  of 
Shem.”2  And  so,  too,  the  planting  of  the  vine  by 
Noah,  and  his  intoxication  by  its  fruit,  and  his 
nakedness  while  he  slept,  and  the  other  things 
done  at  that  time,  and  recorded,  are  all  of  them 
pregnant  with  prophetic  meanings  and  veiled  in 
mysteries. 

Chap.  2.  What  was  prophetically  prefigured  in 
the  sons  of  Noah 

The  things  which  then  were  hidden  are  now 
sufficiently  revealed  by  the  actual  events  which 
have  followed.  For  who  can  carefully  and  intel¬ 
ligently  consider  these  things  without  recogniz- 
1Gen.  9.  25.  2Gen.  9.  26,  27. 


ing  them  accomplished  in  Christ?  Shem,  of 
whom  Christ  was  born  in  the  flesh,  means 
“named.”  And  what  is  of  greater  name  than 
Christ,  the  fragrance  of  Whose  name  is  now 
everywhere  perceived,  so  that  even  prophecy 
sings  of  it  beforehand,  comparing  it  in  the  Song 
of  Songs3  to  ointment  poured  forth?  Is  it  not 
also  in  the  houses  of  Christ,  that  is,  in  the 
churches,  that  the  “enlargement”  of  the  nations 
dwells?  For  Japheth  means  “enlargement.”  And 
Ham  (i.e.,  hot),  who  was  the  middle  son  of 
Noah,  and,  as  it  were,  separated  himself  from 
both,  and  remained  between  them,  neither  be¬ 
longing  to  the  first-fruits  of  Israel  nor  to  the 
fullness  of  the  Gentiles,  what  does  he  signify  but 
the  tribe  of  heretics,  hot  with  the  spirit,  not  of 
patience,  but  of  impatience,  with  which  the 
breasts  of  heretics  are  wont  to  blaze,  and  with 
which  they  disturb  the  peace  of  the  saints?  But 
even  the  heretics  yield  an  advantage  to  those 
that  make  proficiency,  according  to  the  apostle’s 
saying,  “There  must  also  be  heresies,  that  they 
which  are  approved  may  be  made  manifest 
among  you.”4  Whence,  too,  it  is  elsewhere  said, 
“The  son  that  receives  instruction  will  be  wise, 
and  he  uses  the  foolish  as  his  servant.”5  For 
while  the  hot  restlessness  of  heretics  stirs  ques¬ 
tions  about  many  articles  of  the  Catholic  faith, 
the  necessity  of  defending  them  forces  us  both 
to  investigate  them  more  accurately,  to  under¬ 
stand  them  more  clearly,  and  to  proclaim  them 
more  earnestly;  and  the  question  mooted  by  an 
adversary  becomes  the  occasion  of  instruction. 
However,  not  only  those  who  are  openly  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  Church,  but  also  all  who  glory  in 
the  Christian  name,  and  at  the  same  time  lead 
abandoned  lives,  may  without  absurdity  seem 
to  be  figured  by  Noah’s  middle  son :  for  the  pas¬ 
sion  of  Christ,  which  was  signified  by  that  man’s 
nakedness,  is  at  once  proclaimed  by  their  pro¬ 
fession,  and  dishonoured  by  their  wicked  con¬ 
duct.  Of  such,  therefore,  it  has  been  said,  “By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.”6  And  there¬ 
fore  was  Ham  cursed  in  his  son,  he  being,  as  it 
were,  his  fruit.  So,  too,  this  son  of  his,  Canaan, 

3Song  of  Sol.  1.  3.  4I  Cor.  11.  19. 

5Prov.  10.  5  in  Septuagint.  6Matt.  7.  20. 


THE  CITY  OF 

is  fitly  interpreted  “their  movement,”  which  is 
nothing  else  than  their  work.  But  Shem  and 
Japheth,  that  is  to  say,  the  circumcision  and  un¬ 
circumcision,  or,  as  the  apostle  otherwise  calls 
them,  the  Jews  and  Greeks,  but  called  and  justi¬ 
fied.  having  somehow  discovered  the  nakedness 
of  their  father  (which  signifies  the  Saviour’s 
passion),  took  a  garment  and  laid  it  upon  their 
backs,  and  entered  backwards  and  covered  their 
father’s  nakedness,  without  their  seeing  what 
their  reverence  hid.  For  we  both  honour  the  pas¬ 
sion  of  Christ  as  accomplished  for  us,  and  we 
hate  the  crime  of  the  Jews  who  crucified  Him. 
The  garment  signifies  the  sacrament,  their  backs 
the  memory  of  things  past:  for  the  Church  cele¬ 
brates  the  passion  of  Christ  as  already  accom¬ 
plished,  and  no  longer  to  be  looked  forward  to, 
now  that  Japheth  already  dwells  in  the  habita¬ 
tions  of  Shem,  and  their  wicked  brother  between 
them. 

But  the  wicked  brother  is,  in  the  person  of 
his  son  (i.e.,  his  work),  the  boy,  or  slave,  of  his 
good  brothers,  when  good  men  make  a  skilful 
use  of  bad  men,  either  for  the  exercise  of  their 
patience  or  for  their  advancement  in  wisdom. 
For  the  apostle  testifies  that  there  are  some  who 
preach  Christ  from  no  pure  motives;  “but,” 
says  he,  “whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth,  Christ 
is  preached;  and  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and 
will  rejoice.”1  For  it  is  Christ  Himself  Who 
planted  the  vine  of  which  the  prophet  says, 
“The  vine  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  house  of 
Israel”;2  and  He  drinks  of  its  wine,  whether  we 
thus  understand  that  cup  of  which  He  says. 
“Can  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of?”3 
and,  “Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass 
from  me,”4  by  which  He  obviously  means  His 
passion.  Or,  as  wine  is  the  fruit  of  the  vine, 
we  may  prefer  to  understand  that  from  this 
vine,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  race  of  Israel, 
He  has  assumed  flesh  and  blood  that  He  might 
suffer;  “and  he  was  drunken,”  that  is,  He  suf¬ 
fered;  “and  was  naked,”  that  is,  His  weak¬ 
ness  appeared  in  His  suffering,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “though  He  was  crucified  through  weak¬ 
ness.”5  Wherefore  the  same  apostle  says,  “The 
weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men;  and  the 
foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men.”6  And 
when  to  the  expression  “he  was  naked”  Scrip¬ 
ture  adds  “in  his  house,”  it  elegantly  intimates 
that  Jesus  was  to  suffer  the  cross  and  death  at 
the  hands  of  His  own  household,  His  own  kith 
and  kin,  the  Jews.  This  passion  of  Christ  is  only 
externally  and  verbally  professed  by  the  repro- 

1Phil.  i.  18.  2Isa.  5.  7.  3Matt.  20.  22. 

4Matt.  26.  39.  6II  Cor.  13.  4.  6I  Cor.  1.  25. 


GOD  XVI.  1-3  423 

bate,  for  what  they  profess  they  do  not  under¬ 
stand.  But  the  elect  hold  in  the  inner  man  this 
so  great  mystery,  and  honour  inwardly  in  the 
heart  this  weakness  and  foolishness  of  God. 
And  of  this  there  is  a  figure  in  Ham  going  out  to 
proclaim  his  father’s  nakedness;  while  Shem 
and  Japheth,  to  cover  or  honour  it,  went  in,  that 
is  to  say,  did  it  inwardly. 

These  secrets  of  divine  Scripture  we  investi¬ 
gate  as  well  as  we  can.  All  will  not  accept  our  in¬ 
terpretation  with  equal  confidence,  but  all  hold 
it  certain  that  these  things  were  neither  done  nor 
recorded  without  some  foreshadowing  of  future 
events,  and  that  they  are  to  be  referred  only  to 
Christ  and  His  Church,  which  is  the  city  of  God, 
proclaimed  from  the  very  beginning  of  human 
history  by  figures  which  we  now  see  everywhere 
accomplished.  From  the  blessing  of  the  two  sons 
of  Noah,  and  the  cursing  of  the  middle  son. 
down  to  Abraham,  or  for  more  than  a  thousand 
years,  there  is,  as  I  have  said,  no  mention  of  any 
righteous  persons  who  worshipped  God.  I  do  not 
therefore  conclude  that  there  were  none ;  but  it 
had  been  tedious  to  mention  every  one,  and 
would  have  displayed  historical  accuracy  rather 
than  prophetic  foresight.  The  object  of  the  wri¬ 
ter  of  these  sacred  books,  or  rather  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  him,  is  not  only  to  record  the  past, 
but  to  depict  the  future,  so  far  as  it  regards  the 
city  of  God;  for  whatever  is  said  of  those  who 
are  not  its  citizens,  is  given  either  for  her  in¬ 
struction,  or  as  a  foil  to  enhance  her  glory.  Yet 
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  all  that  is  recorded 
has  some  signification;  but  those  things  which 
have  no  signification  of  their  own  are  interwov¬ 
en  for  the  sake  of  the  things  which  are  signifi¬ 
cant.  It  is  only  the  ploughshare  that  cleaves  the 
soil;  but  to  effect  this,  other  parts  of  the  plough 
are  requisite.  It  is  only  the  strings  in  harps  and 
other  musical  instruments  which  produce  melo¬ 
dious  sounds;  but  that  they  may  do  so,  there  are 
other  parts  of  the  instrument  which  are  not  in¬ 
deed  struck  by  those  who  sing,  but  are  connect¬ 
ed  with  the  strings  which  are  struck,  and  pro¬ 
duce  musical  notes.  So  in  this  prophetic  history 
some  things  are  narrated  which  have  no  signifi¬ 
cance,  but  are,  as  it  were,  the  framework  to 
which  the  significant  things  are  attached. 

Chap.  3.  Of  the  generations  of  the  three  sons  of 

Noah 

We  must  therefore  introduce  into  this  work 
an  explanation  of  the  generations  of  the  three 
sons  of  Noah,  in  so  far  as  that  may  illustrate  the 
progress  in  time  of  the  two  cities.  Scripture  first 
mentions  that  of  the  youngest  son,  who  is  called 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Japheth :  he  had  eight  sons,1  and  by  two  of  these 
sons  seven  grandchildren,  three  by  one  son,  four 
by  the  other;  in  all,  fifteen  descendants.  Ham, 
Noah’s  middle  son,  had  four  sons,  and  by  one  of 
them  five  grandsons,  and  by  one  of  these  two 
great-grandsons;  in  all,  eleven.  After  enumerat¬ 
ing  these,  Scripture  returns  to  the  first  of  the 
sons,  and  says,  “Cush  begat  Nimrod;  he  began 
to  be  a  giant  on  the  earth.  He  was  a  giant  hunter 
against  the  Lord  God:  wherefore  they  say,  As 
Nimrod  the  giant  hunter  against  the  Lord.  And 
the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babylon, 
Erech,  Accad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar. 
Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Assur,  and  built 
Nineveh,  and  the  city  Rehoboth.  and  Calah,  and 
Resen  between  Nineveh  and  Calah:  this  was  a 
great  city.”  Now  this  Cush,  father  of  the  giant 
Nimrod,  is  the  first-named  among  the  sons  of 
Ham,  to  whom  five  sons  and  two  grandsons  are 
ascribed.  But  he  either  begat  this  giant  after  his 
grandsons  were  born,  or,  which  is  more  credible, 
Scripture  speaks  of  him  separately  on  account 
of  his  eminence;  for  mention  is  also  made  of  his 
kingdom,  which  began  with  that  magnificent 
city  Babylon,  and  the  other  places,  whether  cit¬ 
ies  or  districts,  mentioned  along  with  it.  But 
what  is  recorded  of  the  land  of  Shinar  which  be¬ 
longed  to  Nimrod’s  kingdom,  to  wit,  that  Assur 
went  forth  from  it  and  built  Nineveh  and  the 
other  cities  mentioned  with  it,  happened  long  af¬ 
ter;  but  he  takes  occasion  to  speak  of  it  here  on 
account  of  the  grandeur  of  the  Assyrian  king¬ 
dom,  which  was  wonderfully  extended  by  Ninus 
son  of  Belus,  and  founder  of  the  great  city  Nine¬ 
veh,  which  was  named  after  him,  Nineveh,  from 
Ninus.  But  Assur,  father  of  the  Assyrian,  was 
not  one  of  the  sons  of  Ham,  Noah’s  middle  son, 
but  is  found  among  the  sons  of  Shem,  his  eldest 
son.  Whence  it  appears  that  among  Shem’s  off¬ 
spring  there  arose  men  who  afterwards  took  pos¬ 
session  of  that  giant’s  kingdom  and,  advancing 
from  it,  founded  other  cities,  the  first  of  which 
was  called  Nineveh,  from  Ninus.  From  him 
Scripture  returns  to  Ham’s  other  son,  Mizraim; 
and  his  sons  are  enumerated,  not  as  seven  indi¬ 
viduals,  but  as  seven  nations.  And  from  the 
sixth,  as  if  from  the  sixth  son,  the  race  called  the 
Philistines  are  said  to  have  sprung;  so  that  there 
are  in  all  eight.  Then  it  returns  again  to  Canaan, 
in  whose  person  Ham  was  cursed ;  and  his  eleven 
sons  are  named.  Then  the  territories  they  occu- 

1  Augustine  here  follows  the  Greek  version,  which  intro¬ 
duces  the  name  Elisa  among  the  sons  of  Japheth,  though 
not  found  in  the  Hebrew.  It  is  not  found  in  the  Complu- 
tensian  Greek  translation,  nor  in  the  mss.  used  by  Jerome. 


pied,  and  some  of  the  cities,  are  named.  And 
thus,  if  we  count  sons  and  grandsons,  there  are 
thirty-one  of  Ham’s  descendants  registered. 

It  remains  to  mention  the  sons  of  Shem,  No¬ 
ah’s  eldest  son;  for  to  him  this  genealogical  nar¬ 
rative  gradually  ascends  from  the  youngest.  But 
in  the  commencement  of  the  record  of  Shem’s 
sons  there  is  an  obscurity  which  calls  for  expla¬ 
nation,  since  it  is  closely  connected  with  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  our  investigation.  For  we  read,  “Unto 
Shem  also,  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  He¬ 
ber,  the  brother  of  Japheth  the  elder,  were  chil¬ 
dren  born.”2  This  is  the  order  of  the  words: 
And  to  Shem  was  born  Heber,  even  to  himself, 
that  is,  to  Shem  himself  was  born  Heber,  and 
Shem  is  the  father  of  all  his  children.  We  are  in¬ 
tended  to  understand  that  Shem  is  the  patriarch 
of  all  his  posterity  who  were  to  be  mentioned, 
whether  sons,  grandsons,  great-grandsons,  or  de¬ 
scendants  at  any  remove.  For  Shem  did  not  be¬ 
get  Heber,  who  was  indeed  in  the  fifth  genera¬ 
tion  from  him.  For  Shem  begat,  among  other 
sons,  Arphaxad;  Arphaxad  begat  Cainan,  Cai- 
nan  begat  Salah,  Salah  begat  Heber.  And  it  was 
with  good  reason  that  he  was  named  first  among 
Shem’s  offspring,  taking  precedence  even  of  his 
sons,  though  only  a  grandchild  of  the  fifth  gen¬ 
eration;  for  from  him,  as  tradition  says,  the  He¬ 
brews  derived  their  name,  though  the  other  ety¬ 
mology  which  derives  the  name  from  Abraham 
(as  if  Abrahews )  may  possibly  be  correct.  But 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  former  is  the 
right  etymology,  and  that  they  were  called  after 
Heber.  Heberews,  and  then,  dropping  a  letter, 
Hebrews ;  and  so  was  their  language  called  He¬ 
brew,  which  was  spoken  by  none  but  the  people 
of  Israel  among  whom  was  the  city  of  God,  mys¬ 
teriously  prefigured  in  all  the  people  and  truly 
present  in  the  saints.  Six  of  Shem’s  sons  then 
are  first  named,  then  four  grandsons  born  to  one 
of  these  sons ;  then  it  mentions  another  son  of 
Shem.  who  begat  a  grandson;  and  his  son,  again, 
or  Shem’s  great-grandson,  was  Heber.  And  He¬ 
ber  begat  two  sons,  and  called  the  one  Peleg, 
which  means  “dividing”;  and  Scripture  subjoins 
the  reason  of  this  name,  saying,  “for  in  his  days 
was  the  earth  divided.”  What  this  means  will  af¬ 
terwards  appear.  Heber’s  other  son  begat  twelve 
sons;  consequently  all  Shem’s  descendants  are 
twenty-seven.  The  total  number  of  the  progeny 
of  the  three  sons  of  Noah  is  seventy-three,  fif¬ 
teen  by  Japheth,  thirty-one  by  Ham,  twenty-sev¬ 
en  by  Shem.  Then  Scripture  adds,  “These  are 
the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their  families,  after  their 
2Gen.  io.  21. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  4 


tongues,  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations.”  And 
so  of  the  whole  number:  “These  are  the  families 
of  the  sons  of  Noah  after  their  generations,  in 
their  nations ;  and  by  these  were  the  isles  of  the 
nations  dispersed  through  the  earth  after  the 
flood.”  From  which  we  gather  that  the  seventy- 
three  (or  rather,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  sev¬ 
enty-two)  were  not  individuals,  but  nations.  For 
in  a  former  passage,  when  the  sons  of  Japheth 
were  enumerated,  it  is  said  in  conclusion,  “By 
these  were  the  isles  of  the  nations  divided  in 
their  lands,  every  one  after  his  language,  in  their 
tribes,  and  in  their  nations.” 

But  nations  are  expressly  mentioned  among 
the  sons  of  Ham,  as  I  showed  above.  “Mizraim 
begat  those  who  are  called  Ludim”;  and  so  also 
of  the  other  seven  nations.  And  after  enumerat¬ 
ing  all  of  them,  it  concludes,  “These  are  the  sons 
of  Ham,  in  their  families,  according  to  their  lan¬ 
guages,  in  their  territories,  and  in  their  nations.” 
The  reason,  then,  why  the  children  of  several  of 
them  are  not  mentioned  is  that  they  belonged  by 
birth  to  other  nations,  and  did  not  themselves 
become  nations.  Why  else  is  it,  that  though  eight 
sons  are  reckoned  to  Japheth,  the  sons  of  only 
two  of  these  are  mentioned:  and  though  four  are 
reckoned  to  Ham.  only  three  are  spoken  of  as 
having  sons;  and  though  six  are  reckoned  to 
Shem,  the  descendants  of  only  two  of  these  are 
traced?  Did  the  rest  remain  childless?  We  can¬ 
not  suppose  so;  but  they  did  not  produce  na¬ 
tions  so  great  as  to  warrant  their  being  men¬ 
tioned,  but  were  absorbed  in  the  nations  to 
which  they  belonged  by  birth. 

Chap.  4  Of  the  diversity  of  languages,  and  of 
the  founding  of  Babylon 
But  though  these  nations  are  said  to  have 
been  dispersed  according  to  their  languages,  yet 
the  narrator  recurs  to  that  time  when  all  had  but 
one  language,  and  explains  how  it  came  to  pass 
that  a  diversity  of  languages  was  introduced. 
“The  whole  earth,”  he  says,  “was  of  one  lip,  and 
all  had  pne  speech.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they 
journeyed  from  the  east,  that  they  found  a  plain 
in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  dwelt  there.  And  they 
said  one  to  another.  Come,  and  let  us  make 
bricks,  and  burn  them  thoroughly.  And  they  had 
bricks  for  stone,  and  slime  for  mortar.  And  they 
said,  Come,  and  let  us  build  for  ourselves  a  city, 
and  a  tower  whose  top  shall  reach  the  sky ;  and 
let  us  make  us  a  name,  before  we  be  scattered 
abroad  on  the  face  of  all  the  earth.  And  the  Lord 
came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower,  which 
the  children  of  men  builded.  And  the  Lord  God 


said,  Behold,  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have 
all  one  language;  and  this  they  begin  to  do:  and 
now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them,  which 
they  have  imagined  to  do.  Come,  and  let  us  go 
down,  and  confound  there  their  language,  that 
they  may  not  understand  one  another’s  speech. 
And  God  scattered  them  thence  on  the  face  of 
all  the  earth:  and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city 
and  the  tower.  Therefore  the  name  of  it  is  called 
Confusion;  because  the  Lord  did  there  confound 
the  language  of  all  the  earth :  and  the  Lord  God 
scattered  them  thence  on  the  face  of  all  the 
earth.”  1  This  city,  which  was  called  Confusion, 
is  the  same  as  Babylon,  whose  wonderful  con¬ 
struction  Gentile  history  also  notices.  For  Baby¬ 
lon  means  Confusion.  Whence  we  conclude  that 
the  giant  Nimrod  was  its  founder,  as  had  been 
hinted  a  little  before,  where  Scripture,  in  speak¬ 
ing  of  him,  says  that  the  beginning  of  his  king¬ 
dom  was  Babylon,  that  is,  Babylon  had  a  su¬ 
premacy  over  the  other  cities  as  the  metropolis 
and  royal  residence;  although  it  did  not  rise  to 
the  grand  dimensions  designed  by  its  proud  and 
impious  founder.  The  plan  was  to  make  it  so 
high  that  it  should  reach  the  sky.  whether  this 
was  meant  of  one  tower  which  they  intended  to 
build  higher  than  the  others,  or  of  all  the  towers, 
which  might  be  signified  by  the  singular  number, 
as  we  speak  of  “the  soldier,”  meaning  the  army, 
and  of  the  frog  or  the  locust,  when  we  refer  to 
the  whole  multitude  of  frogs  and  locusts  in  the 
plagues  with  which  Moses  smote  the  Egyptians.2 
But  what  did  these  vain  and  presumptuous  men 
intend?  How  did  they  expect  to  raise  this  lofty 
mass  against  God,  when  they  had  built  it  above 
all  the  mountains  and  the  clouds  of  the  earth’s 
atmosphere?  What  injury  could  any  spiritual  or 
material  elevation  do  to  God?  The  safe  and  true 
way  to  heaven  is  made  by  humility,  which  lifts 
up  the  heart  to  the  Lord,  not  against  Him ;  as 
this  giant  is  said  to  have  been  a  “hunter  against 
the  Lord.”  This  has  been  misunderstood  by 
some  through  the  ambiguity  of  the  Greek  word, 
and  they  have  translated  it,  not  “against  the 
Lord/’  but  “before  the  Lord”;  for  kvavriov 
means  both  “before”  and  “against.”  In  the 
Psalm  this  word  is  rendered.  “Let  us  weep  be¬ 
fore  the  Lord  our  Maker.”3  The  same  word  oc¬ 
curs  in  the  book  of  Job,  where  it  is  written, 
“Thou  hast  broken  into  fury  against  the  Lord.”4 
And  so  this  giant  is  to  be  recognized  as  a  “hun¬ 
ter  against  the  Lord.”  And  what  is  meant  by  the 
term  “hunter”  but  deceiver,  oppressor,  and  de¬ 
stroyer  of  the  animals  of  the  earth?  He  and  his 
1Gen.  11. 1-9.  2Ex.  io.  3Ps.  95.  6.  4Job,  15. 13. 


426  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


people  therefore,  erected  this  tower  against  the 
Lord,  and  so  gave  expression  to  their  impious 
pride;  and  justly  was  their  wicked  intention 
punished  by  God,  even  though  it  was  unsuccess¬ 
ful.  But  what  was  the  nature  of  the  punishment? 
As  the  tongue  is  the  instrument  of  domination, 
in  it  pride  was  punished;  so  that  man,  who 
would  not  understand  God  when  He  issued  His 
commands,  should  be  misunderstood  when  he 
himself  gave  orders.  Thus  was  that  conspiracy 
disbanded,  for  each  man  retired  from  those  he 
could  not  understand,  and  associated  with  those 
whose  speech  was  intelligible;  and  the  nations 
were  divided  according  to  their  languages,  and 
scattered  over  the  earth  as  seemed  good  to  God. 
who  accomplished  this  in  ways  hidden  from  and 
incomprehensible  to  us. 

Chap.  5.  Of  God’s  coming  down  to  confound 
the  languages  of  the  builders  of  the  city 
We  read,  “The  Lord  came  down  to  see  the 
city  and  the  tower  which  the  sons  of  men  built” : 
it  was  not  the  sons  of  God,  but  that  society 
which  lived  in  a  merely  human  way,  and  which 
we  call  the  earthly  city.  God,  who  is  always 
wholly  everywhere,  does  not  move  locally;  but 
He  is  said  to  descend  when  He  does  anything  in 
the  earth  out  of  the  usual  course,  which,  as  it 
were,  makes  His  presence  felt.  And  in  the  same 
way,  He  does  not  by  “seeing”  learn  some  new 
thing,  for  He  cannot  ever  be  ignorant  of  any¬ 
thing;  but  He  is  said  to  see  and  recognize,  in 
time,  that  which  He  causes  others  to  see  and  rec¬ 
ognize.  And  therefore  that  city  was  not  previ¬ 
ously  being  seen  as  God  made  it  be  seen  when 
He  showed  howT  offensive  it  was  to  Him.  We 
might,  indeed,  interpret  God’s  descending  to  the 
city  of  the  descent  of  His  angels  in  whom  He 
dwells;  so  that  the  following  words,  “And  the 
Lord  God  said,  Behold,  they  are  all  one  race  and 
of  one  language,”  and  also  what  follows,  “Come, 
and  let  us  go  down  and  confound  their  speech,” 
are  a  recapitulation,  explaining  how  the  previ¬ 
ously  intimated  “descent  of  the  Lord”  was  ac¬ 
complished.  For  if  He  had  already  gone  down, 
why  does  He  say,  “Come,  and  let  us  go  down 
and  confound?” — wTords  wrhich  seem  to  be  ad¬ 
dressed  to  the  angels,  and  to  intimate  that  He 
who  was  in  the  angels  descended  in  their  de¬ 
scent.  And  the  words  most  appropriately  are. 
not,  “Go  ye  down  and  confound .”  but,  “Let  us 
confound  their  speech”;  showing  that  He  so 
works  by  His  servants,  that  they  are  themselves 
also  fellow-labourers  with  God,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “For  we  are  fellow-labourers  with  God.”1 

Cor.  3.  9. 


Chap.  6.  What  we  are  to  understand  by  God’s 

speaking  to  the  angels 

We  might  have  supposed  that  the  words  ut¬ 
tered  at  the  creation  of  man,  “Let  us,”  and  not 
“Let  me,”  “make  man,”  were  addressed  to  the 
angels,  had  He  not  added  “in  our  image”;  but 
as  we  cannot  believe  that  man  was  made  in  the 
image  of  angels,  or  that  the  image  of  God  is  the 
same  as  that  of  angels,  it  is  proper  to  refer  this 
expression  to  the  plurality  of  the  Trinity.  And 
yet  this  Trinity,  being  one  God.  even  after  say¬ 
ing  “Let  us  make,”  goes  on  to  say,  “And  God 
made  man  in  His  image,”2  and  not  “Gods 
made,”  or  “in  their  image.”  And  were  there 
any  difficulty  in  applying  to  the  angels  the 
words,  “Come,  and  let  us  go  down  and  con¬ 
found  their  speech,”  we  might  refer  the  plu¬ 
ral  to  the  Trinity,  as  if  the  Father  were  ad¬ 
dressing  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit;  but  it 
rather  belongs  to  the  angels  to  approach  God 
by  holy  movements,  that  is,  by  pious  thoughts, 
and  thereby  to  avail  themselves  of  the  un¬ 
changeable  truth  which  rules  in  the  court  of 
heaven  as  their  eternal  law.  For  they  are  not 
themselves  the  truth ;  but  partaking  in  the  crea¬ 
tive  truth,  they  are  moved  towards  it  as  the 
fountain  of  life,  that  what  they  have  not  in 
themselves  they  may  obtain  in  it.  And  this 
movement  of  theirs  is  steady,  for  they  never  go 
back  from  what  they  have  reached.  And  to  these 
angels  God  does  not  speak,  as  we  speak  to  one 
another,  or  to  God,  or  to  angels,  or  as  the  angels 
speak  to  us,  or  as  God  speaks  to  us  through 
them :  He  speaks  to  them  in  an  ineffable  manner 
of  His  own,  and  that  which  He  says  is  conveyed 
to  us  in  a  manner  suited  to  our  capacity.  For  the 
speaking  of  God  antecedent  and  superior  to  all 
His  works,  is  the  immutable  reason  of  His  work : 
it  has  no  noisy  and  passing  sound,  but  an  energy 
eternally  abiding  and  producing  results  in  time. 
Thus  He  speaks  to  the  holy  angels;  but  to  us, 
who  are  far  off.  He  speaks  otherwise.  When, 
however,  we  hear  with  the  inner  ear  some  part 
of  the  speech  of  God,  we  approximate  to  the  an¬ 
gels.  But  in  this  work  I  need  not  labour  to  give 
an  account  of  the  ways  in  which  God  speaks. 
For  either  the  unchangeable  Truth  speaks  di¬ 
rectly  to  the  mind  of  the  rational  creature  in 
some  indescribable  wray,  or  speaks  through  the 
changeable  creature,  either  presenting  spiritual 
images  to  our  spirit,  or  bodily  voices  to  our  bod¬ 
ily  sense. 

The  words,  “Nothing  will  be  restrained  from 
them  which  they  have  imagined  to  do,”3  are  as- 

2Gen.  1.  26.  3Gen.  11.  6. 


427 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  5-8 


suredly  not  meant  as  an  affirmation,  but  as  an 
interrogation,  such  as  is  used  by  persons  threat¬ 
ening,  as  e.g.,  when  Dido  exclaims, 

They  will  not  take  arms  and  pursue?1 

We  are  to  understand  the  words  as  if  it  had  been 
said,  “Shall  nothing  be  restrained  from  them 
which  they  have  imagined  to  do?”2  From  these 
three  men,  therefore,  the  three  sons  of  Noah  we 
mean,  73,  or  rather,  as  the  catalogue  will  show, 
72  nations  and  as  many  languages  were  dis¬ 
persed  over  the  earth,  and  as  they  increased 
filled  even  the  islands.  But  the  nations  multi¬ 
plied  much  more  than  the  languages.  For  even 
in  Africa  we  know  several  barbarous  nations 
which  have  but  one  language;  and  who  can 
doubt  that,  as  the  human  race  increased,  men 
contrived  to  pass  to  the  islands  in  ships? 

Chap.  7.  Whether  even  the  remotest  islands  re¬ 
ceived  their  fauna  from  the  animals  which 
were  preserved ,  through  the  deluge,  in  the  ark 
There  is  a  question  raised  about  all  those 
kinds  of  beasts  which  are  not  domesticated,  nor 
are  produced  like  frogs  from  the  earth,  but  are 
propagated  by  male  and  female  parents,  such  as 
wolves  and  animals  of  that  kind;  and  it  is  asked 
how  they  could  be  found  in  the  islands  after  the 
deluge,  in  which  all  the  afiimals  not  in  the  ark 
perished,  unless  the  breed  was  restored  from 
those  which  were  preserved  in  pairs  in  the  ark. 
It  might,  indeed,  be  said  that  they  crossed  to  the 
islands  by  swimming,  but  this  could  only  be 
true  of  those  very  near  the  mainland;  whereas 
there  are  some  so  distant  that  we  fancy  no  ani¬ 
mal  could  swim  to  them.  But  if  men  caught 
them  and  took  them  across  with  themselves,  and 
thus  propagated  these  breeds  in  their  new 
abodes,  this  would  not  imply  an  incredible  fond¬ 
ness  for  the  chase.  At  the  same  time,  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  by  the  intervention  of  angels  they 
might  be  transferred  by  God’s  order  or  permis¬ 
sion.  If,  however,  they  were  produced  out  of  the 
earth  a^s  at  their  first  creation,  when  God  said, 
“Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature,”3 
this  makes  it  more  evident  that  all  kinds  of  an¬ 
imals  were  preserved  in  the  ark,  not  so  much  for 
the  sake  of  renewing  the  stock,  as  of  prefiguring 
the  various  nations  which  were  to  be  saved  in 
the  Church;  this,  I  saw,  is  more  evident,  if  the 
earth  brought  forth  many  animals  in  islands  to 
which  they  could  not  cross  over. 

1Virgil,  Mneid,  bk.  iv.  592. 

2H ere  Augustine  remarks  on  the  addition  of  the  particle 

ne  to  the  word  non,  which  he  has  made  to  bring  out  the 

sense.  3Gen.  1.  24. 


Chap,  8.  Whether  certain  monstrous  races  of 

men  are  derived  from  the  stock  of  Adam  or 

NoaJTs  sons 

It  is  also  asked  whether  we  are  to  believe  that 
certain  monstrous  races  of  men,  spoken  of  in 
secular  history,  have  sprung  from  Noah’s  sons, 
or  rather,  I  should  say,  from  that  one  man  from 
whom  they  themselves  were  descended.  For  it  is 
reported  that  some  have  one  eye  in  the  middle 
of  the  forehead;  some,  feet  turned  backwards 
from  the  heel;  some,  a  double  sex,  the  right 
breast  like  a  man,  the  left  like  a  woman,  and 
that  they  alternately  beget  and  bring  forth :  oth¬ 
ers  are  said  to  have  no  mouth,  and  to  breathe 
only  through  the  nostrils ;  others  are  but  a  cubit 
high,  and  are  therefore  called  by  the  Greeks 
“Pigmies”:4  they  say  that  in  some  places  the 
women  conceive  in  their  fifth  year,  and  do  not 
live  beyond  their  eighth.  So,  too,  they  tell  of  a 
race  who  have  two  feet  but  only  one  leg,  and  are 
of  marvellous  swiftness,  though  they  do  not 
bend  the  knee:  they  are  called  Skiopodes,  be¬ 
cause  in  the  hot  weather  they  lie  down  on  their 
backs  and  shade  themselves  with  their  feet.  Oth¬ 
ers  are  said  to  have  no  head,  and  their  eyes  in 
their  shoulders;  and  other  human  or  quasi-hu¬ 
man  races  are  depicted  in  mosaic  in  the  harbour 
esplanade  of  Carthage,  on  the  faith  of  histories 
of  rarities.  What  shall  I  say  of  the  Cynocephali, 
whose  dog-like  head  and  barking  proclaim  them 
beasts  rather  than  men?  But  we  are  not  bound 
to  believe  all  we  hear  of  these  monstrosities. 
But  whoever  is  anywhere  born  a  man,  that  is,  a 
rational,  mortal  animal,  no  matter  what  unusual 
appearance  he  presents  in  colour,  movement, 
sound,  nor  how  peculiar  he  is  in  some  power, 
part,  or  quality  of  his  nature,  no  Christian  can 
doubt  that  he  springs  from  that  one  protoplast. 
We  can  distinguish  the  common  human  nature 
from  that  which  is  peculiar  and  therefore  won¬ 
derful. 

The  same  account  which  is  given  of  mon¬ 
strous  births  in  individual  cases  can  be  given  of 
monstrous  races.  For  God,  the  Creator  of  all, 
knows  where  and  when  each  thing  ought  to  be, 
or  to  have  been  created,  because  He  sees  the 
similarities  and  diversities  which  can  contribute 
to  the  beauty  of  the  whole.  But  he  who  cannot 
see  the  whole  is  offended  by  the  deformity  of  the 
part,  because  he  is  blind  to  that  which  balances 
it,  and  to  which  it  belongs.  We  know  that  men 
are  born  with  more  than  four  fingers  on  their 
hands  or  toes  on  their  feet :  this  is  a  smaller  mat¬ 
ter;  but  far  from  us  be  the  folly  of  supposing 
4From  Truy/jLrj,  a  cubit. 


428  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


that  the  Creator  mistook  the  number  of  a  man’s 
fingers,  though  we  cannot  account  for  the  dif¬ 
ference.  And  so  in  cases  where  the  divergence 
from  the  rule  is  greater.  He  Whose  works  no  man 
justly  finds  fault  with,  knows  what  He  has  done. 
At  Hippo-Diarrhytus  there  is  a  man  whose 
hands  are  crescent-shaped,  and  have  only  two 
fingers  each,  and  his  feet  similarly  formed.  If 
there  were  a  race  like  him,  it  would  be  added  to 
the  history  of  the  curious  and  wonderful.  Shall 
we  therefore  deny  that  this  man  is  descended 
from  that  one  man  who  was  first  created?  As 
for  the  Androgyni,  or  Hermaphrodites,  as  they 
are  called,  though  they  are  rare,  yet  from  time 
to  time  there  appear  persons  of  sex  so  doubtful, 
that  it  remains  uncertain  from  which  sex  they 
take  their  name ;  though  it  is  customary  to  give 
them  a  masculine  name,  as  the  more  worthy.  For 
no  one  ever  called  them  Hermaphroditesses. 
Some  years  ago,  quite  within  my  own  memory,  a 
man  was  born  in  the  East,  double  in  his  upper, 
but  single  in  his  lower  half — having  two  heads, 
two  chests,  four  hands,  but  one  body  and  two 
feet  like  an  ordinary  man;  and  he  lived  so  kmg 
that  many  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  him. 
But  who  could  enumerate  all  the  human  births 
that  have  differed  widely  from  their  ascertained 
parents?  As,  therefore,  no  one  will  deny  that 
these  are  all  descended  from  that  one  man,  so  all 
the  races  which  are  reported  to  have  diverged  in 
bodily  appearance  from  the  usual  course  which 
nature  generally  or  almost  universally  preserves, 
if  they  are  embraced  in  that  definition  of  man  as 
rational  and  mortal  animals,  unquestionably 
trace  their  pedigree  to  that  one  first  father  of  all. 
We  are  supposing  these  stories  about  various 
races  who  differ  from  one  another  and  from  us 
to  be  true;  but  possibly  they  are  not:  for  if  we 
were  not  aware  that  apes,  and  monkeys,  and 
sphinxes  are  not  men,  but  beasts,  those  histori¬ 
ans  would  possibly  describe  them  as  races  of 
men,  and  flaunt  with  impunity  their  false  and 
vainglorious  discoveries.  But  supposing  they 
are  men  of  whom  these  marvels  are  recorded, 
what  if  God  has  seen  fit  to  create  some  races  in 
this  way,  that  we  might  not  suppose  that  the 
monstrous  births  which  appear  among  ourselves 
are  the  failures  of  that  wisdom  whereby  He 
fashions  the  human  nature,  as  we  speak  of  the 
failure  of  a  less  perfect  workman?  Accordingly, 
it  ought  not  to  seem  absurd  to  us,  that  as  in  in¬ 
dividual  races  there  are  monstrous  births,  so  in 
the  whole  race  there  are  monstrous  races. 
Wherefore,  to  conclude  this  question  cautiously 
and  guardedly,  either  these  things  which  have 
been  told  of  some  races  have  no  existence  at  all; 


or  if  they  do  exist,  they  are  not  human  races;  or 
if  they  are  human,  they  are  descended  from 
Adam. 

Chap.  9.  Whether  we  are  to  believe  in  the  Anti¬ 
podes 

But  as  to  the  fable  that  there  are  Antipodes, 
that  is  to  say,  men  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
earth,  where  the  sun  rises  when  it  sets  to  us. 
men  who  walk  with  their  feet  opposite  ours,  that 
is  on  no  ground  credible.  And.  indeed,  it  is  not 
affirmed  that  this  has  been  learned  by  historical 
knowledge,  but  by  scientific  conjecture,  on  the 
ground  that  the  earth  is  suspended  within  the 
concavity  of  the  sky,  and  that  it  has  as  much 
room  on  the  one  side  of  it  as  on  the  other :  hence 
they  say  that  the  part  which  is  beneath  must 
also  be  inhabited.  But  they  do  not  remark  that, 
although  it  be  supposed  or  scientifically  demon¬ 
strated  that  the  world  is  of  a  round  and  spheri¬ 
cal  form,  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  the  other 
side  of  the  earth  is  bare  of  water;  nor  even, 
though  it  be  bare,  does  it  immediately  follow 
that  it  is  peopled.  For  Scripture,  which  proves 
the  truth  of  its  historical  statements  by  the  ac¬ 
complishment  of  its  prophecies,  gives  no  false 
information;  and  it  is  too  absurd  to  say  that 
some  men  might  have  taken  ship  and  traversed 
the  whole  wide  ocean,  and  crossed  from  this  side 
of  the  world  to  the  other,  and  that  thus  even  the 
inhabitants  of  that  distant  region  are  descended 
from  that  one  first  man.  Wherefore  let  us  seek 
if  we  can  find  the  city  of  God  that  sojourns  on 
earth  among  those  human  races  who  are  cata¬ 
logued  as  having  been  divided  into  seventy-two 
nations  and  as  many  languages.  For  it  continued 
down  to  the  deluge  and  the  ark,  and  is  proved  to 
have  existed  still  among  the  sons  of  Noah  by 
their  blessings,  and  chiefly  in  the  eldest  son 
Shem;  for  Japheth  received  this  blessing,  that 
he  should  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem. 

Chap.  10.  Of  the  genealogy  of  Shem ,  in  whose 

line  the  city  of  God  is  preserved  till  the  time 

of  Abraham 

It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  preserve  the  se¬ 
ries  of  generations  descending  from  Shem,  for 
the  sake  of  exhibiting  the  city  of  God  after  the 
flood;  as  before  the  flood  it  was  exhibited  in  the 
series  of  generations  descending  from  Seth.  And 
therefore  does  divine  Scripture,  after  exhibiting 
the  earthly  city  as  Babylon  or  “Confusion,”  re¬ 
vert  to  the  patriarch  Shem,  and  recapitulate  the 
generations  from  him  to  Abraham,  specifying 
besides,  the  year  in  which  each  father  begat  the 
son  that  belonged  to  this  line,  and  how  long  he 


THE  CITY  OF 

lived.  And  unquestionably  it  is  this  which  ful¬ 
fills  the  promise  I  made,  that  it  should  appear 
why  it  is  said  of  the  sons  of  Heber,  “The  name 
of  the  one  was  Peleg,  for  in  his  days  the  earth 
was  divided.”  1  For  what  can  we  understand  by 
the  division  of  the  earth,  if  not  the  diversity  of 
languages?  And,  therefore,  omitting  the  other 
sons  of  Shem,  who  are  not  concerned  in  this 
matter,  Scripture  gives  the  genealogy  of  those 
by  whom  the  line  runs  on  to  Abraham,  as  before 
the  flood  those  are  given  who  carried  on  the  line 
to  Noah  from  Seth.  Accordingly  this  series  of 
generations  begins  thus:  “These  are  the  genera¬ 
tions  of  Shem:  Shem  was  an  hundred  years  old. 
and  begat  Arphaxad  two  years  after  the  flood. 
And  Shem  lived  after  he  begat  Arphaxad  five 
hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.” 
In  like  manner  it  registers  the  rest,  naming  the 
year  of  his  life  in  which  each  begat  the  son  who 
belonged  to  that  line  which  extends  to  Abraham. 
It  specifies,  too,  how  many  years  he  lived  there¬ 
after,  begetting  sons  and  daughters,  that  we  may 
not  childishly  suppose  that  the  men  named  were 
the  only  men,  but  may  understand  how  the  pop¬ 
ulation  increased,  and  how  regions  and  king¬ 
doms  so  vast  could  be  populated  by  the  descend¬ 
ants  of  Shem;  especially  the  kingdom  of  As¬ 
syria,  from  which  Ninus  subdued  the  surround¬ 
ing  nations,  reigning  with  brilliant  prosperity, 
and  bequeathing  to  his  descendants  a  vast  but 
thoroughly  consolidated  empire,  which  held  to¬ 
gether  for  many  centuries. 

But,  to  avoid  needless  prolixity,  we  shall  men¬ 
tion  not  the  number  of  years  each  member  of 
this  series  lived,  but  only  the  year  of  his  life  in 
which  he  begat  his  heir,  that  we  may  thus  reck¬ 
on  the  number  of  years  from  the  flood  to  Abra¬ 
ham,  and  may  at  the  same  time  leave  room  to 
touch  briefly  and  cursorily  upon  some  other 
matters  necessary  to  our  argument.  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  year,  then,  after  the  flood,  Shem  when  he 
was  a  hundred  years  old  begat  Arphaxad;  Ar¬ 
phaxad  when  he  was  135  years  old  begat  Cai- 
nan;  Cainan  when  he  was  130  years  begat  Salah. 
Salah  himself,  too,  was  the  same  age  when  he 
begat  Heber.  Heber  lived  134  years,  and  begat 
Peleg,  in  whose  days  the  earth  was  divided. 
Peleg  himself  lived  130  years,  and  begat  Reu; 
and  Reu  lived  132  years,  and  begat  Serug;  Serug 
130,  and  begat  Nahor;  and  Nahor  79,  and  begat 
Terah;  and  Terah  70,  and  begat  Abram,  whose 
name  God  afterwards  changed  into  Abraham. 
There  are  thus  from  the  flood  to  Abraham  1072 
years,  according  to  the  Vulgate  or  Septuagint 
versions.  In  the  Hebrew  copies  far  fewer  years 

1Gen.  10.  25. 


GOD  XVI.  9-1 1  429 

are  given;  and  for  this  either  no  reason  or  a  not 
very  credible  one  is  given. 

When,  therefore,  we  look  for  the  city  of  God 
in  these  seventy-two  nations,  we  cannot  affirm 
that  while  they  had  but  one  lip,  that  is.  one  lan¬ 
guage,  the  human  race  had  departed  from  the 
worship  of  the  true  God,  and  that  genuine  godli¬ 
ness  had  survived  only  in  those  generations 
which  descend  from  Shem  through  Arphaxad 
and  reach  to  Abraham ;  but  from  the  time  when 
they  proudly  built  a  tower  to  heaven,  a  symbol 
of  godless  exaltation,  the  city  or  society  of  the 
wicked  becomes  apparent.  Whether  it  was  only 
disguised  before,  or  non-existent;  whether  both 
cities  remained  after  the  flood — the  godly  in  the 
two  sons  of  Noah  who  were  blessed  and  in  their 
posterity,  and  the  ungodly  in  the  cursed  son  and 
his  descendants,  from  whom  sprang  that  mighty 
hunter  against  the  Lord — is  not  easily  deter¬ 
mined.  For  possibly — and  certainly  this  is  more 
credible — there  were  despisers  of  God  among 
the  descendants  of  the  two  sons,  even  before 
Babylon  was  founded,  and  worshippers  of  God 
among  the  descendants  of  Ham.  Certainly  nei¬ 
ther  race  was  ever  obliterated  from  earth.  For  in 
both  the  Psalms  in  which  it  is  said,  “They  are 
all  gone  aside,  they  are  altogether  become  filthy ; 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one,”  we 
read  further,  “Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity 
no  knowledge?  who  eat  up  my  people  as  they  eat 
bread,  and  call  not  upon  the  Lord.”2  There  was 
then  a  people  of  God  even  at  that  time.  And 
therefore  the  words,  “There  is  none  that  doeth 
good,  no,  not  one,”  were  said  of  the  sons  of  men, 
not  of  the  sons  of  God.  For  it  had  been  previous¬ 
ly  said,  “God  looked  down  from  heaven  upon 
the  sons  of  men,  to  see  if  any  understood  and 
sought  after  God”;  and  then  follow  the  words 
which  demonstrate  that  all  the  sons  of  men,  that 
is,  all  who  belong  to  the  city  which  lives  accord¬ 
ing  to  man,  not  according  to  God,  are  reprobate. 

Chap.  ii.  That  the  original  language  in  use 
among  men  was  that  which  was  afterwards 
called  Hebrew ,  from  Heber ,  in  whose  family 
it  was  preserved  when  the  confusion  of 
tongues  occurred 

Wherefore,  as  the  fact  of  all  using  one  lan¬ 
guage  did  not  secure  the  absence  of  sin-infected 
men  from  the  race — for  even  before  the  deluge 
there  was  one  language,  and  yet  all  but  the  sin¬ 
gle  family  of  just  Noah  were  found  worthy  of 
destruction  by  the  flood — so  when  the  nations, 
by  a  prouder  godlessness,  earned  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  the  dispersion  and  the  confusion  of 
2Ps.  14.  3,  4;  Ps.  53-  3,  4- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tongues,  and  the  city  of  the  godless  was  called 
Confusion  or  Babylon,  there  was  still  the  house 
of  Heber  in  which  the  primitive  language  of  the 
race  survived.  And  therefore,  as  I  have  already 
mentioned,  when  an  enumeration  is  made  of  the 
sons  of  Shem,  who  each  founded  a  nation,  Heber 
is  first  mentioned,  although  he  was  of  the  fifth 
generation  from  Shem.  And  because,  when  the 
other  races  were  divided  by  their  own  peculiar 
languages,  his  family  preserved  that  language 
which  is  not  unreasonably  believed  to  have  been 
the  common  language  of  the  race,  it  was  on  this 
account  thenceforth  named  Hebrew.  For  it  then 
became  necessary  to  distinguish  this  language 
from  the  rest  by  a  proper  name;  though,  while 
there  was  only  one.  it  had  no  other  name  than 
the  language  of  man,  or  human  speech,  it  alone 
being  spoken  by  the  whole  human  race.  Some 
one  will  say:  “If  the  earth  was  divided  by  lan¬ 
guages  in  the  days  of  Peleg,  Heber’s  son,  that 
language,  which  was  formerly  common  to  all, 
should  rather  have  been  called  after  Peleg.”  But 
we  are  to  understand  that  Heber  himself  gave  to 
his  son  this  name  Peleg.  which  means  Division; 
because  he  was  born  when  the  earth  was  divided, 
that  is.  at  the  very  time  of  the  division,  and  that 
this  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  “In  his  days 
the  earth  was  divided.”1  For  unless  Heber  had 
been  still  alive  when  the  languages  were  multi¬ 
plied,  the  language  which  was  preserved  in  his 
house  would  not  have  been  called  after  him.  We 
are  induced  to  believe  that  this  was  the  primi¬ 
tive  and  common  language,  because  the  multi¬ 
plication  and  change  of  languages  was  intro¬ 
duced  as  a  punishment,  and  it  is  fit  to  ascribe  to 
the  people  of  God  an  immunity  from  this  pun¬ 
ishment.  Nor  is  it  without  significance  that  this 
is  the  language  which  Abraham  retained,  and 
that  he  could  not  transmit  it  to  all  his  descend¬ 
ants,  but  only  to  those  of  Jacob’s  line,  who  dis¬ 
tinctively  and  eminently  constituted  God’s  peo¬ 
ple,  and  received  His  covenants,  and  were 
Christ’s  progenitors  according  to  the  flesh.  In 
the  same  way,  Heber  himself  did  not  transmit 
that  language  to  all  his  posterity,  but  only  to 
the  line  from  which  Abraham  sprang.  And  thus, 
although  it  is  not  expressly  stated,  that  when  the 
wicked  were  building  Babylon  there  was  a  godly 
seed  remaining,  this  indistinctness  is  intended  to 
stimulate  research  rather  than  to  elude  it.  For 
when  we  see  that  originally  there  was  one  com¬ 
mon  language,  and  that  Heber  is  mentioned  be¬ 
fore  all  Shem’s  sons,  though  he  belonged  to  the 
fifth  generation  from  him,  and  that  the  language 
^en.  io.  25. 


which  the  patriarchs  and  prophets  used,  not 
only  in  their  conversation,  but  in  the  authorita¬ 
tive  language  of  Scripture,  is  called  Hebrew, 
when  we  are  asked  where  that  primitive  and 
common  language  was  preserved  after  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  tongues,  certainly,  as  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  those  among  whom  it  was  preserved 
were  exempt  from  the  punishment  it  embodied, 
what  other  suggestion  can  we  make,  than  that  it 
survived  in  the  family  of  him  whose  name  it 
took,  and  that  this  is  no  small  proof  of  the  right¬ 
eousness  of  this  family  that  the  punishment 
with  which  the  other  families  were  visited  did 
not  fall  upon  it? 

But  yet  another  question  is  mooted:  How  did 
Heber  and  his  son  Peleg  each  found  a  nation,  if 
they  had  but  one  language?  For  no  doubt  the 
Hebrew  nation  propagated  from  Heber  through 
Abraham,  and  becoming  through  him  a  great 
people,  is  one  nation.  How,  then,  are  all  the  sons 
of  the  three  branches  of  Noah’s  family  enumer¬ 
ated  as  founding  a  nation  each,  if  Heber  and 
Peleg  did  not  so?  It  is  very  probable  that  the  gi¬ 
ant  Nimrod  founded  also  his  nation,  and  that 
Scripture  has  named  him  separately  on  account 
of  the  extraordinary  dimensions  of  his  empire 
and  of  his  body,  so  that  the  number  of  seventy- 
two  nations  remains.  But  Peleg  was  mentioned, 
not  because  he  founded  a  nation  (for  his  race 
and  language  are  Hebrew),  but  on  account  of 
the  critical  time  at  which  he  was  born,  all  the 
earth  being  then  divided.  Nor  ought  we  to  be 
surprised  that  the  giant  Nimrod  lived  to  the 
time  in  which  Babylon  was  founded  and  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  tongues  occurred,  and  the  consequent 
division  of  the  earth.  For  though  Heber  was  in 
the  sixth  generation  from  Noah,  and  Nimrod  in 
the  fourth,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  could  not 
be  alive  at  the  same  time.  For  when  the  genera¬ 
tions  are  few,  they  live  longer  and  are  born  la¬ 
ter;  but  when  they  are  many,  they  live  a  shorter 
time,  and  come  into  the  world  earlier.  We  are  to 
understand  that,  when  the  earth  was  divided, 
the  descendants  of  Noah  who  are  registered  as 
founders  of  nations  were  not  only  already  born, 
but  were  of  an  age  to  have  immense  families, 
worthy  to  be  called  tribes  or  nations.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  must  by  no  means  suppose  that  they 
were  born  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  set 
down ;  otherwise,  how  could  the  twelve  sons  of 
Joktan,  another  son  of  Heber’s,  and  brother  of 
Peleg,  have  already  founded  nations,  if  Joktan 
was  born,  as  he  is  registered,  after  his  brother 
Peleg,  since  the  earth  was  divided  at  Peleg’s 
birth?  We  are  therefore  to  understand  that, 


THE  CITY  OF 

though  Peleg  is  named  first,  he  was  born  long 
after  Joktan,  whose  twelve  sons  had  already 
families  so  large  as  to  admit  of  their  being  di¬ 
vided  by  different  languages.  There  is  nothing 
extraordinary  in  the  last  born  being  first  named : 
of  the  sons  of  Noah,  the  descendants  of  Japheth 
are  first  named;  then  the  sons  of  Ham,  who  was 
the  second  son;  and  last  the  sons  of  Shem,  who 
was  the  first  and  oldest.  Of  these  nations  the 
names  have  partly  survived,  so  that  at  this  day 
we  can  see  from  whom  they  have  sprung,  as  the 
Assyrians  from  Assur,  the  Hebrews  from  Heber, 
but  partly  have  been  altered  in  the  lapse  of  time, 
so  that  the  most  learned  men,  by  profound  re¬ 
search  in  ancient  records,  have  scarcely  been 
able  to  discover  the  origin,  I  do  not  say  of  all, 
but  of  some  of  these  nations.  There  is,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  nothing  in  the  name  Egyptians  to  show 
that  they  are  descended  from  Misraim,  Ham’s 
son,  nor  in  the  name  Ethiopians  to  show  a  con¬ 
nection  with  Cush,  though  such  is  said  to  be  the 
origin  of  these  nations.  And  if  we  take  a  general 
survey  of  the  names,  we  shall  find  that  more 
have  been  changed  than  have  remained  the 
same. 

Chap.  12.  Of  the  era  in  Abraham’s  life  from 

which  a  new  period  in  the  holy  succession  be¬ 
gins 

Let  us  now  survey  the  progress  of  the  city  of 
God  from  the  era  of  the  patriarch  Abraham, 
from  whose  time  it  begins  to  be  more  conspicu¬ 
ous,  and  the  divine  promises  which  are  now  ful¬ 
filled  in  Christ  are  more  fully  revealed.  We 
learn,  then,  from  the  intimations  of  holy  Scrip¬ 
ture,  that  Abraham  was  born  in  the  country  of 
the  Chaldeans,  a  land  belonging  to  the  Assyrian 
empire.  Now,  even  at  that  time  impious  super¬ 
stitions  were  rife  with  the  Chaldeans,  as  with 
other  nations.  The  family  of  Terah,  to  which 
Abraham  belonged,  was  the  only  one  in  which 
the  worship  of  the  true  God  survived,  and  the 
only  one,  we  may  suppose,  in  which  the  Hebrew 
language  was  preserved;  although  Joshua  the 
son  of  Nun  tells  us  that  even  this  family  served 
other  gods  in  Mesopotamia.1  The  other  descend¬ 
ants  of  Heber  gradually  became  absorbed  in 
other  races  and  other  languages.  And  thus,  as 
the  single  family  of  Noah  was  preserved  through 
the  deluge  of  water  to  renew  the  human  race,  so, 
in  the  deluge  of  superstition  that  flooded  the 
whole  world,  there  remained  but  the  one  family 
of  Terah  in  which  the  seed  of  God’s  city  was 
preserved.  And  as,  when  Scripture  has  enumer- 

Uosh.  24.  2. 


GOD  XVI.  12-13  431 

ated  the  generations  prior  to  Noah,  with  their 
ages,  and  explained  the  cause  of  the  flood  before 
God  began  to  speak  to  Noah  about  the  building 
of  the  ark,  it  is  said,  “These  are  the  generations 
of  Noah”;  so  also  now,  after  enumerating  the 
generations  from  Shem.  Noah’s  son,  down  to 
Abraham,  it  then  signalizes  an  era  by  saying. 
“These  are  the  generations  of  Terah :  Terah  be¬ 
gat  Abram,  Nahor,  and  Haran;  and  Haran  be¬ 
gat  Lot.  And  Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah 
in  the  land  of  his  nativity,  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees. 
And  Abram  and  Nahor  took  them  wives:  the 
name  of  Abram’s  wife  was  Sarai;  and  the  name 
of  Nahor’s  wife  Milcah,  the  daughter  of  Haran, 
the  father  of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of  Iscah.”  2 
This  Iscah  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  Sarah, 
Abraham’s  wife. 

Chap.  13.  Why ,  in  the  account  of  Terah’ s  emi¬ 
gration ,  on  his  forsaking  the  Chaldeans  and 
passing  over  into  Mesopotamia ,  no  mention  is 
made  of  his  son  Nahor 
Next  it  is  related  how  Terah  with  his  family 
left  the  region  of  the  Chaldeans  and  came  into 
Mesopotamia,  and  dwelt  in  Haran.  But  nothing 
is  said  about  one  of  his  sons  called  Nahor,  as  if 
he  had  not  taken  him  along  with  him.  For  the 
narrative  runs  thus:  “And  Terah  took  Abram 
his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Haran,  his  son’s  son, 
and  Sarah  his  daughter-in-law,  his  son  Abram’s 
wife,  and  led  them  forth  out  of  the  region  of  the 
Chaldeans  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan;  and  he 
came  into  Haran,  and  dwelt  there.”3  Nahor  and 
Milcah  his  wife  are  nowhere  named  here.  But 
afterwards,  when  Abraham  sent  his  servant  to 
take  a  wife  for  his  son  Isaac,  we  find  it  thus 
written:  “And  the  servant  took  ten  camels  of 
the  camels  of  his  lord,  and  of  all  the  goods  of 
his  lord,  with  him;  and  arose,  and  went  into 
Mesopotamia,  into  the  city  of  Nahor.”4  This 
and  other  testimonies  of  this  sacred  history 
show  that  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother,  had  also 
left  the  region  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  fixed  his 
abode  in  Mesopotamia,  where  Abraham  dwelt 
with  his  father.  Why,  then,  did  the  Scripture  not 
mention  him,  when  Terah  with  his  family  went 
forth  out  of  the  Chaldean  nation  and  dwelt  in 
Haran,  since  it  mentions  that  he  took  with  him 
not  only  Abraham  his  son,  but  also  Sarah  his 
daughter-in-law,  and  Lot  his  grandson?  The 
only  reason  we  can  think  of  is  that  perhaps 
he  had  lapsed  from  the  piety  of  his  father 
and  brother,  and  adhered  to  the  superstition  of 
the  Chaldeans,  and  had  afterwards  emigrated 
2Gen.  11.  27-29.  3Gen.  11.  31.  4Gen.  24.  10. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


thence,  either  through  penitence,  or  because  he 
was  persecuted  as  a  suspected  person.  For  in  the 
book  called  Judith,  when  Holofernes,  the  enemy 
of  the  Israelites,  inquired  what  kind  of  nation 
that  might  be,  and  whether  war  should  be  made 
against  them,  Achior,  the  leader  of  the  Ammo¬ 
nites,  answered  him  thus:  “Let  our  lord  now 
hear  a  word  from  the  mouth  of  thy  servant,  and 
I  will  declare  unto  thee  the  truth  concerning  the 
people  which  dwelleth  near  thee  in  this  hill 
country,  and  there  shall  no  lie  come  out  of  the 
mouth  of  thy  servant.  For  this  people  is  de¬ 
scended  from  the  Chaldeans,  and  they  dwelt 
heretofore  in  Mesopotamia,  because  they  would 
not  follow  the  gods  of  their  fathers,  which  were 
glorious  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  but  went 
out  of  the  way  of  their  ancestors,  and  adored  the 
God  of  heaven,  whom  they  knew;  and  they  cast 
them  out  from  the  face  of  their  gods,  and  they 
fled  into  Mesopotamia,  and  dwelt  there  many 
days.  And  their  God  said  to  them  that  they 
should  depart  from  their  habitation,  and  go  into 
the  land  of  Canaan;  and  they  dwelt,”1  etc.,  as 
Achior  the  Ammonite  narrates.  Whence  k  is 
manifest  that  the  house  of  Terah  had  suffered 
persecution  from  the  Chaldeans  for  the  true  pi¬ 
ety  with  which  they  worshipped  the  one  and 
true  God. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  years  of  Terah,  who  completed 

his  lifetime  in  Haran 

On  Terah’s  death  in  Mesopotamia,  where  he 
is  said  to  have  lived  205  years,  the  promises  of 
God  made  to  Abraham  now  begin  to  be  pointed 
out;  for  thus  it  is  written:  “And  the  days  of 
Terah  in  Haran  were  two  hundred  and  five 
years,  and  he  died  in  Haran.”2  This  is  not  to  be 
taken  as  if  he  had  spent  all  his  days  there,  but 
that  he  there  completed  the  days  of  his  life, 
which  were  two  hundred  and  five  years:  other¬ 
wise  it  would  not  be  known  how  many  years  Te¬ 
rah  lived,  since  it  is  not  said  in  what  year  of  his 
life  he  came  into  Haran;  and  it  is  absurd  to  sup¬ 
pose  that,  in  this  series  of  generations,  where  it 
is  carefully  recorded  how  many  years  each  one 
lived,  his  age  was  the  only  one  not  put  on  record. 
For  although  some  whom  the  same  Scripture 
mentions  have  not  their  age  recorded,  they  are 
not  in  this  series,  in  which  the  reckoning  of  time 
is  continuously  indicated  by  the  death  of  the 
parents  and  the  succession  of  the  children.  For 
this  series,  which  is  given  in  order  from  Adam  to 
Noah,  and  from  him  down  to  Abraham,  contains 
no  one  without  the  number  of  the  years  of  his 
life. 

Judith,  5.  5-9.  2Gen.  11.  32. 


Chap.  15  .Of  the  time  of  the  migration  of  Abra¬ 
ham,  when,  according  to  the  commandment 
of  God,  he  went  out  from  Haran 

When,  after  the  record  of  the  death  of  Terah. 
the  father  of  Abraham  we  next  read,  “And  the 
Lord  said  to  Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy  coun¬ 
try,  and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father’s 
house,”3  etc,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,  because 
this  follows  in  the  order  of  the  narrative,  that  it 
also  followed  in  the  chronological  order  of 
events.  For  if  it  were  so,  there  would  be  an  in¬ 
soluble  difficulty.  For  after  these  words  of  God 
which  were  spoken  to  Abraham,  the  Scripture 
says:  “And  Abram  departed,  as  the  Lord  had 
spoken  unto  him;  and  Lot  went  with  him.  Now 
Abraham  was  seventy-five  years  old  when  he  de¬ 
parted  out  of  Haran.”4  How  can  this  be  true  if 
he  departed  from  Haran  after  his  father’s 
death?  For  when  Terah  was  seventy  years  old, 
as  is  intimated  above,  he  begat  Abraham;  and 
if  to  this  number  we  add  the  seventy-five  years 
which  Abraham  reckoned  when  he  went  out  of 
Haran,  we  get  145  years.  Therefore  that  was  the 
number  of  the  years  of  Terah,  when  Abraham 
departed  out  of  that  city  of  Mesopotamia;  for 
he  had  reached  the  seventy-fifth  year  of  his  life, 
and  thus  his  father,  who  begat  him  in  the  seven¬ 
tieth  year  of  his  life,  had  reached,  as  was  said, 
his  145th.  Therefore  he  did  not  depart  thence 
after  his  father’s  death,  that  is,  after  the  205 
years  his  father  lived;  but  the  year  of  his  de¬ 
parture  from  that  place,  seeing  it  was  his  seven¬ 
ty-fifth,  is  inferred  beyond  a  doubt  to  have  been 
the  145th  of  his  father,  who  begat  him  in  his 
seventieth  year.  And  thus  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  the  Scripture,  according  to  its  custom,  has 
gone  back  to  the  time  which  had  already  been 
passed  by  the  narrative;  just  as  above,  when  it 
had  mentioned  the  grandsons  of  Noah,  it  said 
that  they  were  in  their  nations  and  tongues ;  and 
yet  afterwards,  as  if  this  also  had  followed  in 
order  of  time,  it  says,  “And  the  whole  earth  was 
of  one  lip,  and  one  speech  for  all.”5  How,  then, 
could  they  be  said  to  be  in  their  own  nations  and 
according  to  their  own  tongues,  if  there  was  one 
for  all;  except  because  the  narrative  goes  back 
to  gather  up  what  it  had  passed  over?  Here,  too, 
in  the  same  way,  after  saying,  “And  the  days  of 
Terah  in  Haran  were  205  years,  and  Terah  died 
in  Haran,”  the  Scripture,  going  back  to  what 
had  been  passed  over  in  order  to  complete  what 
had  been  begun  about  Terah,  says.  “And  the 
Lord  said  to  Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy  coun¬ 
try,”6  etc.  After  which  words  of  God  it  is  added, 
3Gen.  12. 1.  4Gen.  12. 4.  6Gen.  11.1.  flGen.  12. 1. 


THE  CITY  OF 

“And  Abram  departed,  as  the  Lord  spake  unto 
him;  and  Lot  went  with  him.  But  Abram  was 
seventy-five  years  old  when  he  departed  out  of 
Haran.”  Therefore  it  was  done  when  his  father 
was  in  the  145th  year  of  his  age;  for  it  was  then 
the  seventy-fifth  of  his  own.  But  this  question 
is  also  solved  in  another  way,  that  the  seventy- 
five  years  of  Abraham  when  he  departed  out  of 
Haran  are  reckoned  from  the  year  in  which  he 
was  delivered  from  the  fire  of  the  Chaldeans, 
not  from  that  of  his  birth,  as  if  he  was  rather  to 
be  held  as  having  been  born  then. 

Now  the  blessed  Stephen,  in  narrating  these 
things  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  says:  “The 
God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  father  Abra¬ 
ham,  when  he  was  in  Mesopotamia,  before  he 
dwelt  in  Charran,  and  said  unto  him,  Get  thee 
out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kindred,  and 
from  thy  father’s  house,  and  come  into  the  land 
which  I  will  show  thee.”1  According  to  these 
words  of  Stephen,  God  spoke  to  Abraham,  not 
after  the  death  of  his  father,  who  certainly  died 
in  Haran,  where  his  son  also  dwelt  with  him,  but 
before  he  dwelt  in  that  city,  although  he  was  al¬ 
ready  in  Mesopotamia.  Therefore  he  had  al¬ 
ready  departed  from  the  Chaldeans.  So  that 
when  Stephen  adds,  “Then  Abraham  went  out 
of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  dwelt  in  Char¬ 
ran,”2  this  does  not  point,  out  what  took  place 
after  God  spoke  to  him  (for  it  was  not  after 
these  words  of  God  that  he  went  out  of  the  land 
of  the  Chaldeans,  since  he  says  that  God  spoke 
to  him  in  Mesopotamia),  but  the  word  “then” 
which  he  uses  refers  to  that  whole  period  from 
his  going  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  and 
dwelling  in  Haran.  Likewise  in  what  follows, 
“And  thenceforth,  when  his  father  was  dead,  he 
settled  him  in  this  land,  wherein  ye  now  dwell, 
and  your  fathers,”  he  does  not  say,  “after  his 
father  was  dead  he  went  out  from  Haran”;  but 
thenceforth  he  settled  him  here,  after  his  father 
was  dead.  It  is  to  be  understood,  therefore,  that 
God  had  spoken  to  Abraham  when  he  was  in 
Mesopotamia,  before  he  dwelt  in  Haran;  but 
that  he*  came  to  Haran  with  his  father,  keeping 
in  mind  the  precept  of  God.  and  that  he  went 
out  thence  in  his  own  seventy-fifth  year,  which 
was  his  father’s  145th.  But  he  says  that  his  set¬ 
tlement  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  not  his  going 
forth  from  Haran,  took  place  after  his  father’s 
death;  because  his  father  was  already  dead 
when  he  purchased  the  land,  and  personally  en¬ 
tered  on  possession  of  it.  But  when,  on  his  hav¬ 
ing  already  settled  in  Mesopotamia,  that  is,  al¬ 
ready  gone  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans, 
lActs,  7.  2,  3.  2Acts,  7.  4. 


GOD  XVI.  14-16  433 

God  says,  “Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and 
from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father’s 
house,”3  this  means,  not  that  he  should  cast  out 
his  body  from  thence,  for  he  had  already  done 
that,  but  that  he  should  tear  away  his  soul.  For 
he  had  not  gone  out  from  thence  in  mind,  if  he 
was  held  by  the  hope  and  desire  of  returning — a 
hope  and  desire  which  was  to  be  cut  off  by  God’s 
command  and  help,  and  by  his  own  obedience. 
It  would  indeed  be  no  incredible  supposition 
that  afterwards,  when  Nahor  followed  his  father, 
Abraham  then  fulfilled  the  precept  of  the  Lord, 
that  he  should  depart  out  of  Haran  with  Sarah 
his  wife  and  Lot  his  brother’s  son. 

Chap.  16  .Of  the  order  and  nature  of  the  prom¬ 
ises  of  God  which  were  made  to  Abraham 
God’s  promises  made  to  Abraham  are  now  to 
be  considered;  for  in  these  the  oracles  of  our 
God,4  that  is,  of  the  true  God,  began  to  appear 
more  openly  concerning  the  godly  people,  whom 
prophetic  authority  foretold.  The  first  of  these 
reads  thus:  “And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abram, 
Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kin¬ 
dred,  and  from  thy  father’s  house,  and  go  into  a 
land  that  I  will  show  thee :  and  I  will  make  of 
thee  a  great  nation,  and  I  will  bless  thee,  and 
magnify  thy  name;  and  thou  shalt  be  blessed: 
and  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse 
them  that  curse  thee :  and  in  thee  shall  all  tribes 
of  the  earth  be  blessed.”5  Now  it  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served  that  two  things  are  promised  to  Abra¬ 
ham,  the  one,  that  his  seed  should  possess  the 
land  of  Canaan,  which  is  intimated  when  it  is 
said,  “Go  into  a  land  that  I  will  show  thee,  and 
I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation” ;  but  the  oth¬ 
er  far  more  excellent,  not  about  the  carnal  but 
the  spiritual  seed,  through  which  he  is  the  fa¬ 
ther,  not  of  the  one  Israelite  nation,  but  of  all 
nations  who  follow  the  footprints  of  his  faith, 
which  was  first  promised  in  these  words,  “And 
in  thee  shall  all  tribes  of  the  earth  be  blessed.” 
Eusebius  thought  this  promise  was  made  in 
Abraham’s  seventy-fifth  year,  as  if  soon  after  it 
was  made  Abraham  had  departed  out  of  Haran ; 
because  the  Scripture  cannot  be  contradicted, 
in  which  we  read,  “Abram  was  seventy  and  five 
years  old  when  he  departed  out  of  Haran.”  But 
if  this  promise  was  made  in  that  year,  then  of 
course  Abraham  was  staying  in  Haran  with  his 
father;  for  he  could  not  depart  thence  unless  he 
had  first  dwelt  there.  Does  this,  then,  contradict 
what  Stephen  says,  “The  God  of  glory  appeared 

3Gen.  12.  1. 

4Variant  reading:  “of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.” 

BGen.  12.  1-3. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  our  father  Abraham,  when  he  was  in  Meso¬ 
potamia,  before  he  dwelt  in  Charran”?1  But  it 
is  to  be  understood  that  the  whole  took  place  in 
the  same  year — both  the  promise  of  God  before 
Abraham  dwelt  in  Haran,  and  his  dwelling  in 
Haran,  and  his  departure  thence — not  only  be¬ 
cause  Eusebius  in  the  Chronicles  reckons  from 
the  year  of  this  promise,  and  shows  that  after 
430  years  the  exodus  from  Egypt  took  place, 
when  the  law  was  given,  but  because  the  Apostle 
Paul  also  mentions  it. 

Chap.  17.  Of  the  three  most  famous  kingdoms 
of  the  nations ,  of  which  one ,  that  is  the  Assyr¬ 
ian ,  was  already  very  eminent  when  Abraham 
was  born 

During  the  same  period  there  were  three  fa¬ 
mous  kingdoms  of  the  nations,  in  which  the  city 
of  the  earth-born,  that  is,  the  society  of  men 
living  according  to  man  under  the  domination  of 
the  fallen  angels,  chiefly  flourished,  namely,  the 
three  kingdoms  of  Sicyon,  Egypt,  and  Assyria. 
Of  these,  Assyria  was  much  the  most  powerful 
and  sublime;  for  that  king  Ninus,  son  of  Belus, 
had  subdued  the  people  of  all  Asia  except  India. 
By  Asia  I  now  mean  not  that  part  which  is  one 
province  of  this  greater  Asia,  but  what  is  called 
Universal  Asia,  which  some  set  down  as  the  half, 
but  most  as  the  third  part  of  the  whole  world — 
the  three  being  Asia,  Europe,  and  Africa,  there¬ 
by  making  an  unequal  division.  For  the  part 
called  Asia  stretches  from  the  south  through  the 
east  even  to  the  north;  Europe  from  the  north 
even  to  the  west ;  and  Africa  from  the  west  even 
to  the  south.  Thus  we  see  that  two,  Europe  and 
Africa,  contain  one  half  of  the  world,  and  Asia 
alone  the  other  half.  And  these  two  parts  are 
made  by  the  circumstance,  that  there  enters  be¬ 
tween  them  from  the  ocean  all  the  Mediterrane¬ 
an  water,  which  makes  this  great  sea  of  ours.  So 
that,  if  you  divide  the  world  into  two  parts,  the 
east  and  the  west,  Asia  will  be  in  the  one,  and 
Europe  and  Africa  in  the  other.  So  that  of  the 
three  kingdoms  then  famous,  one,  namely  Si¬ 
cyon,  was  not  under  the  Assyrians,  because  it  was 
in  Europe;  but  as  for  Egypt,  how  could  it  fail 
to  be  subject  to  the  empire  which  ruled  all  Asia 
with  the  single  exception  of  India?  In  Assyria, 
therefore,  the  dominion  of  the  impious  city  had 
the  pre-eminence.  Its  head  was  Babylon — an 
earth-born  city,  most  fitly  named,  for  it  means 
confusion.  There  Ninus  reigned  after  the  death 
of  his  father  Belus,  who  first  had  reigned  there 
sixty-five  years.  His  son  Ninus,  who.  on  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  death,  succeeded  to  the  kingdom,  reigned 
hA.cts,  7.  2. 


fifty-two  years,  and  had  been  king  forty-three 
years  when  Abraham  was  born,  which  was  about 
the  1200th  year  before  Rome  was  founded,  as  it 
were  another  Babylon  in  the  west. 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  repeated  address  of  God  to 
Abraham,  in  which  he  promised  the  land  of 
Canaan  to  him  and  to  his  seed 

Abraham,  then,  having  departed  out  of  Haran 
in  the  seventy-fifth  year  of  his  own  age,  and  in 
the  hundred  and  forty-fifth  of  his  father’s,  went 
with  Lot,  his  brother’s  son,  and  Sarah  his  wife, 
into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  came  even  to  Si- 
chem,  where  again  he  received  the  divine  oracle, 
of  which  it  is  thus  written:  “And  the  Lord  ap¬ 
peared  unto  Abram,  and  said  unto  him,  Unto  thy 
seed  will  I  give  this  land.”2  Nothing  is  promised 
here  about  that  seed  in  which  he  is  made  the 
father  of  all  nations,  but  only  about  that  by 
which  he  is  the  father  of  the  one  Israelite  na¬ 
tion  ;  for  by  this  seed  that  land  was  possessed. 

Chap.  19.  Of  the  divine  preservation  of  Sarahys 
chastity  in  Egypt,  when  Abraham  had  called 
her  not  his  wife  but  his  sister 
Having  built  an  altar  there,  and  called  upon 
God,  Abraham  proceeded  thence  and  dwelt  in 
the  desert,  and  was  compelled  by  pressure  of 
famine  to  go  on  into  Egypt.  There  he  called  his 
wife  his  sister,  and  told  no  lie.  For  she  was  this 
also,  because  she  was  near  of  blood;  just  as  Lot, 
on  account  of  the  same  nearness,  being  his 
brother’s  son,  is  called  his  brother.  Now  he  did 
not  deny  that  she  was  his  wife,  but  held  his 
peace  about  it,  committing  to  God  the  defence 
of  his  wife’s  chastity,  and  providing  as  a  man 
against  human  wiles;  because  if  he  had  not  pro¬ 
vided  against  the  danger  as  much  as  he  could,  he 
would  have  been  tempting  God  rather  than 
trusting  in  Him.  We  have  said  enough  about  this 
matter  against  the  calumnies  of  Faustus  the 
Manichaean.  At  last  what  Abraham  had  expect¬ 
ed  the  Lord  to  do  took  place.  For  Pharaoh,  king 
of  Egypt,  who  had  taken  her  to  him  as  his  wife, 
restored  her  to  her  husband  on  being  severely 
plagued.  And  far  be  it  from  us  to  believe  that 
she  was  defiled  by  lying  with  another;  because  it 
is  much  more  credible  that,  by  these  great  afflic¬ 
tions,  Pharaoh  was  not  permitted  to  do  this. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  parting  of  Lot  and  Abraham, 
which  they  agreed  to  without  breach  of 
charity 

On  Abraham’s  return  out  of  Egypt  to  the 
place  he  had  left,  Lot,  his  brother’s  son,  depart- 
2Gen.  12.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ed  from  him  into  the  land  of  Sodom,  without 
breach  of  charity.  For  they  had  grown  rich,  and 
began  to  have  many  herdmen  of  cattle,  and 
when  these  strove  together,  they  avoided  in  this 
way  the  pugnacious  discord  of  their  families.  In¬ 
deed,  as  human  affairs  go,  this  cause  might  even 
have  given  rise  to  some  strife  between  them¬ 
selves.  Consequently  these  are  the  words  of 
Abraham  to  Lot.  when  taking  precaution  against 
this  evil,  “Let  there  be  no  strife  between  me  and 
thee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and  thy  herd- 
men;  for  we  be  brethren.  Behold,  is  not  the 
whole  land  before  thee?  Separate  thyself  from 
me :  if  thou  wilt  go  to  the  left  hand,  I  will  go  to 
the  right;  or  if  thou  wilt  go  to  the  right  hand, 
I  will  go  to  the  left.” 1  From  this,  perhaps,  has 
arisen  a  pacific  custom  among  men,  that  when 
there  is  any  partition  of  earthly  things,  the 
greater  should  make  the  division,  the  less  the 
choice. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  third  promise  of  God,  by  which 
He  assured  the  land  of  Canaan  to  Abraham 
and  his  seed  in  perpetuity 
Now,  when  Abraham  and  Lot  had  separated, 
and  dwelt  apart,  owing  to  the  necessity  of  sup¬ 
porting  their  families,  and  not  to  vile  discord, 
and  Abraham  was  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  but  Lot 
in  Sodom,  the  Lord  said  to  Abraham  in  a  third 
oracle,  “Lift  up  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the 
place  where  thou  now  art,  to  the  north,  and  to 
Africa,  and  to  the  east,  and  to  the  sea ;  for  all  the 
land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and 
to  thy  seed  for  ever.  And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as 
the  dust  of  the  earth :  if  any  one  can  number  the 
dust  of  the  earth,  thy  seed  shall  also  be  num¬ 
bered.  Arise,  and  walk  through  the  land,  in  the 
length  of  it,  and  in  the  breadth  of  it;  for  unto 
thee  will  I  give  it.”2  It  does  not  clearly  appear 
whether  in  this  promise  that  also  is  contained  by 
which  he  is  made  the  father  of  all  nations.  For 
the  clause,  “And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust 
of  the  earth,”  may  seem  to  refer  to  this,  being 
spoken  by  that  figure  the  Greeks  call  hyperbole, 
which  indeed  is  figurative,  not  literal.  But  no 
person  of  understanding  can  doubt  in  what  man¬ 
ner  the  Scripture  uses  this  and  other  figures.  For 
that  figure  (that  is,  way  of  speaking)  is  used 
when  what  is  said  is  far  larger  than  what  is 
meant  by  it ;  for  who  does  not  see  how  incom¬ 
parably  larger  the  number  of  the  dust  must  be 
than  that  of  all  men  can  be  from  Adam  himself 
down  to  the  end  of  the  world?  How  much  great¬ 
er,  then,  must  it  be  than  the  seed  of  Abraham — 
not  only  that  pertaining  to  the  nation  of  Israel, 
^en.  13.  8,  9.  2Gen.  13.  14-17. 


GOD  XVI.  17-22  435 

but  also  that  which  is  and  shall  be  according  to 
the  imitation  of  faith  in  all  nations  of  the  whole 
wide  world!  For  that  seed  is  indeed  very  small 
in  comparison  with  the  multitude  of  the  wicked, 
although  even  those  few  of  themselves  make  an 
innumerable  multitude,  which  by  a  hyperbole  is 
compared  to  the  dust  of  the  earth.  Truly  that 
multitude  which  was  promised  to  Abraham  is 
not  innumerable  to  God,  although  to  man;  but 
to  God  not  even  the  dust  of  the  earth  is  so.  Fur¬ 
ther,  the  promise  here  made  may  be  understood 
not  only  of  the  nation  of  Israel,  but  of  the  whole 
seed  of  Abraham,  which  may  be  fitly  compared 
to  the  dust  for  multitude,  because  regarding  it 
also  there  is  the  promise3  of  many  children,  not 
according  to  the  flesh,  but  according  to  the 
spirit.  But  we  have  therefore  said  that  this  does 
not  clearly  appear,  because  the  multitude  even 
of  that  one  nation,  which  was  born  according  to 
the  flesh  of  Abraham  through  his  grandson  Ja¬ 
cob,  has  increased  so  much  as  to  fill  almost  all 
parts  of  the  world.  Consequently,  even  it  might 
by  hyperbole  be  compared  to  the  dust  for  mul¬ 
titude,  because  even  it  alone  is  innumerable  by 
man.  Certainly  no  one  questions  that  only  that 
land  is  meant  which  is  called  Canaan.  But  that 
saying,  “To  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed 
for  ever,”  may  move  some,  if  by  “for  ever”  they 
understand  “to  eternity.”  But  if  in  this  passage 
they  take  “for  ever”  thus,  as  we  firmly  hold  it 
means,  that  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  come 
is  to  be  ordered  from  the  end  of  the  present, 
there  is  still  no  difficulty,  because,  although  the 
Israelites  are  expelled  from  Jerusalem,  they  still 
remain  in  other  cities  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
shall  remain  even  to  the  end;  and  when  that 
whole  land  is  inhabited  by  Christians,  they  also 
are  the  very  seed  of  Abraham. 

Chap.  22  .Of  Abraham’s  overcoming  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  Sodom,  when  he  delivered  Lot  from 
captivity  and  was  blessed  by  Melchizedek  the 
priest 

Having  received  this  oracle  of  promise,  Abra¬ 
ham  migrated,  and  remained  in  another  place  of 
the  same  land,  that  is,  beside  the  oak  of  Mamre, 
which  was  Hebron.  Then  on  the  invasion  of  So¬ 
dom,  when  five  kings  carried  on  war  against 
four,  and  Lot  was  taken  captive  with  the  con¬ 
quered  Sodomites,  Abraham  delivered  him  from 
the  enemy,  leading  with  him  to  battle  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  eighteen  of  his  home-born  servants, 
and  won  the  victory  for  the  kings  of  Sodom,  but 
would  take  nothing  of  the  spoils  when  offered  by 
the  king  for  whom  he  had  won  them.  He  was 
3Variant  reading:  “the  express  promise.” 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


436 

then  openly  blessed  by  Melchizedek,  who  was 
priest  of  God  Most  High,  about  whom  many 
and  great  things  are  written  in  the  epistle  which 
is  inscribed  to  the  Hebrews,  which  most  say  is 
by  the  Apostle  Paul,  though  some  deny  this.  For 
then  first  appeared  the  sacrifice  which  is  now  of¬ 
fered  to  God  by  Christians  in  the  whole  wide 
world,  and  that  is  fulfilled  which  long  after  the 
event  was  said  by  the  prophet  to  Christ,  Who 
was  yet  to  come  in  the  flesh,  “Thou  art  a  priest 
for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek” 1 — that 
is  to  say,  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron,  for  that 
order  was  to  be  taken  away  when  the  things 
shone  forth  which  were  intimated  beforehand 
by  these  shadows. 

Chap.  23.  Of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Abraham , 
by  which  it  was  promised  to  him  that  his  pos¬ 
terity  should  be  multiplied  according  to  the 
multitude  of  the  stars;  on  believing  which  he 
was  declared  justified  while  yet  in  uncircum¬ 
cision 

The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Abraham  in  a 
vision  also.  For  when  God  promised  him  protec¬ 
tion  and  exceeding  great  reward,  he,  being  solic¬ 
itous  about  posterity,  said  that  a  certain  Eliezer 
of  Damascus,  born  in  his  house,  would  be  his 
heir.  Immediately  he  was  promised  an  heir,  not 
that  house-born  servant,  but  one  who  was  to 
come  forth  of  Abraham  himself;  and  again  a 
seed  innumerable,  not  as  the  dust  of  the  earth, 
but  as  the  stars  of  heaven — which  rather  seems 
to  me  a  promise  of  a  posterity  exalted  in  celes¬ 
tial  felicity.  For.  so  far  as  multitude  is  con¬ 
cerned,  what  are  the  stars  of  heaven  to  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  unless  one  should  say  the  compari¬ 
son  is  like  inasmuch  as  the  stars  also  cannot  be 
numbered?  For  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  all 
of  them  can  be  seen.  For  the  more  keenly  one 
observes  them,  the  more  does  he  see.  So  that  it 
is  to  be  supposed  some  remain  concealed  from 
the  keenest  observers,  to  say  nothing  of  those 
stars  which  are  said  to  rise  and  set  in  another 
part  of  the  world  most  remote  from  us.  Finally, 
the  authority  of  this  book  condemns  those  like 
Aratus  or  Eudoxus,  or  any  others  who  boast  that 
they  have  found  out  and  written  down  the  com¬ 
plete  number  of  the  stars.  Here,  indeed,  is  set 
down  that  sentence  which  the  apostle  quotes  in 
order  to  commend  the  grace  of  God,  “Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for 
righteousness”;2  lest  the  circumcision  should 
glory,  and  be  unwilling  to  receive  the  uncircum¬ 
cised  nations  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  For  at  the 
Ts.  no.  4.  2Rom.  4.  3;  Gen.  15.  6. 


time  when  he  believed,  and  his  faith  was  count¬ 
ed  to  him  for  righteousness,  Abraham  had  not 
yet  been  circumcised. 

Chap.  24  .Of  the  meaning  of  the  sacrifice  Abra¬ 
ham  was  commanded  to  offer  when  he  suppli¬ 
cated  to  be  taught  about  those  things  he  had 
believed 

In  the  same  vision,  God  in  speaking  to  him 
also  says,  “I  am  God  that  brought  thee  out  of 
the  region  of  the  Chaldees,  to  give  thee  this  land 
to  inherit  it.”3  And  when  Abram  asked  whereby 
he  might  know  that  he  should  inherit  it,  God 
said  to  him,  “Take  me  an  heifer  of  three  years 
old,  and  a  she-goat  of  three  years  old,  and  a  ram 
of  three  years  old,  and  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  pi¬ 
geon.  And  he  took  unto  him  all  these,  and  divid¬ 
ed  them  in  the  midst,  and  laid  each  piece  one 
against  another;  but  the  birds  divided  he  not. 
And  the  fowls  came  down,”  as  it  is  written,  “on 
the  carcasses,  and  Abram  sat  down  by  them. 
But  about  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  great  fear 
fell  upon  Abram;  and,  lo,  an  horror  of  great 
darkness  fell  upon  him.  And  He  said  unto 
Abram,  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be 
a  stranger  in  a  land  not  theirs,  and  they  shall  re¬ 
duce  them  to  servitude  and  shall  afflict  them 
four  hundred  years :  but  the  nation  whom  they 
shall  serve  will  I  judge;  and  afterward  shall 
they  come  out  hither  with  great  substance.  And 
thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace;  kept  in  a 
good  old  age.  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they 
shall  come  hither  again:  for  the  iniquity  of  the 
Amorites  is  not  yet  full.  And  when  the  sun  was 
setting,  there  was  a  flame,  and  a  smoking  fur¬ 
nace,  and  lamps  of  fire,  that  passed  through  be¬ 
tween  those  pieces.  In  that  day  the  Lord  made  a 
covenant  with  Abram,  saying,  Unto  thy  seed 
will  I  give  this  land,  from  the  river  of  Egypt  un¬ 
to  the  great  river  Euphrates:  the  Kenites,  and 
the  Kenizzites,  and  the  Kadmonites,  and  the 
Hittites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Rephaims, 
and  the  Amorites,  and  the  Canaanites,  and  the 
Hivites,  and  the  Girgashites,  and  the  Jebusites.”4 

All  these  things  were  said  and  done  in  a  vision 
from  God;  but  it  would  take  long,  and  would  ex¬ 
ceed  the  scope  of  this  work,  to  treat  of  them  ex¬ 
actly  in  detail.  It  is  enough  that  we  should  know 
that,  after  it  was  said,  Abram  believed  in  God. 
and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness  he 
did  not  fail  in  faith  in  saying.  “Lord  God,  where¬ 
by  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit  it?”  for  the 
inheritance  of  that  land  was  promised  to  him. 
Now  he  does  not  say,  “How  shall  I  know,”  as  if 
3Gen.  15.  7.  4Gen.  is.  9-21. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  23-24 


he  did  not  yet  believe;  but  he  says,  “Whereby 
shall  I  know,”  meaning  that  some  sign  might  be 
given  by  which  he  might  know  the  manner  of 
those  things  which  he  had  believed,  just  as  it  is 
not  for  lack  of  faith  the  Virgin  Mary  says, 
“How  shall  this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  a  man?”1 
for  she  inquired  as  to  the  way  in  which  that 
should  take  place  which  she  was  certain  would 
come  to  pass.  And  when  she  asked  this,  she  was 
told.  “The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee, 
and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow 
thee.”2  Here  also,  in  fine,  a  symbol  was  given, 
consisting  of  three  animals,  a  heifer,  a  she-goat, 
and  a  ram,  and  two  birds,  a  turtle-dove  and  pi¬ 
geon,  that  he  might  know  that  the  things  which 
he  had  not  doubted  should  come  to  pass  were  to 
happen  in  accordance  with  this  symbol.  Wheth¬ 
er.  therefore,  the  heifer  was  a  sign  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  should  be  put  under  the  law,  the  she-goat 
that  the  same  people  was  to  become  sinful,  the 
ram  that  they  should  reign  (and  these  animals 
are  said  to  be  of  three  years  old  for  this  reason, 
that  there  are  three  remarkable  divisions  of 
time,  from  Adam  to  Noah,  and  from  him  to 
Abraham,  and  from  him  to  David,  who,  on  the 
rejection  of  Saul,  was  first  established  by  the 
will  of  the  Lord  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Israelite 
nation:  in  this  third  division,  which  extends 
from  Abraham  to  David,  that  people  grew  up  as 
if  passing  through  the  third  age  of  life),  or 
whether  they  had  some  other  more  suitable 
meaning,  still  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that 
spiritual  things  were  prefigured  by  them  as  well 
as  by  the  turtle-dove  and  pigeon.  And  it  is  said, 
“But  the  birds  divided  he  not,”  because  carnal 
men  are  divided  among  themselves,  but  the  spir¬ 
itual  not  at  all,  whether  they  seclude  themselves 
from  the  busy  conversation  of  men,  like  the  tur¬ 
tle-dove,  or  dwell  among  them,  like  the  pigeon ; 
for  both  birds  are  simple  and  harmless,  signify¬ 
ing  that  even  in  the  Israelite  people,  to  which 
that  land  was  to  be  given,  there  would  be  indi¬ 
viduals  who  were  children  of  the  promise  and 
heirs  of  the  kingdom  that  is  to  remain  in  eternal 
felicity.  But  the  fowls  coming  down  on  the  di¬ 
vided  carcasses  represent  nothing  good,  but  the 
spirits  of  this  air,  seeking  some  food  for  them¬ 
selves  in  the  division  of  carnal  men.  But  that 
Abraham  sat  down  with  them,  signifies  that  even 
amid  these  divisions  of  the  carnal,  true  believers 
shall  persevere  to  the  end.  And  that  about  the 
going  down  of  the  sun  great  fear  fell  upon  Abra¬ 
ham  and  a  horror  of  great  darkness,  signifies 

^uke,  1.  34. 

2Luke,  1.  35. 


437 

that  about  the  end  of  this  world  believers  shall 
be  in  great  perturbation  and  tribulation,  of 
which  the  Lord  said  in  the  Gospel,  “For  then 
shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from 
the  beginning.”3 

But  what  is  said  to  Abraham,  “Know  of  a 
surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land 
not  theirs,  and  they  shall  reduce  them  to  servi¬ 
tude,  and  shall  afflict  them  400  years,”  is  most 
clearly  a  prophecy  about  the  people  of  Israel 
which  was  to  be  in  servitude  in  Egypt.  Not  that 
this  people  was  to  be  in  that  servitude  under  the 
oppressive  Egyptians  for  400  years,  but  it  is 
foretold  that  this  should  take  place  in  the  course 
of  those  400  years.  For  as  it  is  written  of  Terah 
the  father  of  Abraham,  “And  the  days  of  Terah 
in  Haran  were  205  years”4  not  because  they 
were  all  spent  there,  but  because  they  were  com¬ 
pleted  there,  so  it  is  said  here  also,  “And  they 
shall  reduce  them  to  servitude,  and  shall  afflict 
them  400  years,”  for  this  reason,  because  that 
number  was  completed,  not  because  it  was  all 
spent  in  that  affliction.  The  years  are  said  to  be 
400  in  round  numbers,  although  they  were  a  lit¬ 
tle  more — whether  you  reckon  from  this  time, 
when  these  things  were  promised  to  Abraham, 
or  from  the  birth  of  Isaac,  as  the  seed  of  Abra¬ 
ham,  of  which  these  things  are  predicted.  For, 
as  we  have  already  said  above,  from  the  seven¬ 
ty-fifth  year  of  Abraham,  when  the  first  promise 
was  made  to  him,  down  to  the  exodus  of  Israel 
from  Egypt,  there  are  reckoned  430  years, 
which  the  apostle  thus  mentions:  “And  this  I 
say,  that  the  covenant  confirmed  by  God,  the 
law,  which  was  made  430  years  after,  cannot  dis¬ 
annul,  that  it  should  make  the  promise  of  none 
effect.”5  So  then  these  430  years  might  be  called 
400,  because  they  are  not  much  more,  especially 
since  part  even  of  that  number  had  already  gone 
by  when  these  things  were  shown  and  said  to 
Abraham  in  vision,  or  when  Isaac  was  born  in 
his  father’s  100th  year,  twenty-five  years  after 
the  first  promise,  when  of  these  430  years  there 
now  remained  405,  which  God  was  pleased  to 
call  400.  No  one  will  doubt  that  the  other  things 
which  follow  in  the  prophetic  words  of  God  per¬ 
tain  to  the  people  of  Israel. 

When  it  is  added,  “And  when  the  sun  was  now 
setting  there  was  a  flame,  and  lo,  a  smoking  fur¬ 
nace,  and  lamps  of  fire,  which  passed  through 
between  those  pieces,”  this  signifies  that  at  the 
end  of  the  world  the  carnal  shall  be  judged  by 
fire.  For  just  as  the  affliction  of  the  city  of  God, 
such  as  never  was  before,  which  is  expected  to 
3Matt.  24.  21.  4Gen.  n.  32.  5Gal.  3.  17. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


438 

take  place  under  Anti-christ,  was  signified  by 
Abraham’s  horror  of  great  darkness  about  the 
going  down  of  the  sun,  that  is,  when  the  end  of 
the  world  draws  nigh — so  at  the  going  down  of 
the  sun,  that  is,  at  the  very  end  of  the  world, 
there  is  signified  by  that  fire  the  day  of  judg¬ 
ment.  which  separates  the  carnal  who  are  to  be 
saved  by  fire  from  those  who  are  to  be  con¬ 
demned  in  the  fire.  And  then  the  covenant  made 
with  Abraham  particularly  sets  forth  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  names  eleven  tribes  in  it  from  the 
river  of  Egypt  even  to  the  great  river  Euphrates. 
It  is  not  then  from  the  great  river  of  Egypt,  that 
is,  the  Nile,  but  from  a  small  one  which  sepa¬ 
rates  Egypt  from  Palestine,  where  the  city  of 
Rhinocorura  is. 

Chap.  25.  Of  Sarah’s  handmaid ,  Hagar ,  whom 
she  herself  wished  to  he  Abraham’s  concubine 
And  here  follow  the  times  of  Abraham’s  sons, 
the  one  by  Hagar  the  bond  maid,  the  other  by 
Sarah  the  free  woman,  about  whom  we  have  al¬ 
ready  spoken  in  the  previous  book.  As  regards 
this  transaction,  Abraham  is  in  no  way  to-be 
branded  as  guilty  concerning  this  concubine,  for 
he  used  her  for  the  begetting  of  progeny,  not  for 
the  gratification  of  lust;  and  not  to  insult,  but 
rather  to  obey  his  wife,  who  supposed  it  would 
be  a  solace  of  her  barrenness  if  she  could  make 
use  of  the  fruitful  womb  of  her  handmaid  to 
supply  the  defect  of  her  own  nature,  and  by  that 
law  of  which  the  apostle  says,  “Likewise  also  the 
husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body,  but 
the  wife,”1  could,  as  a  wife,  make  use  of  him 
for  childbearing  by  another,  when  she  could  not 
do  so  in  her  own  person.  Here  there  is  no  wan¬ 
ton  lust,  no  filthy  lewdness.  The  handmaid  is  de¬ 
livered  to  the  husband  by  the  wife  for  the  sake 
of  progeny,  and  is  received  by  the  husband  for 
the  sake  of  progeny,  each  seeking,  not  guilty  ex¬ 
cess,  but  natural  fruit.  And  when  the  pregnant 
bond  woman  despised  her  barren  mistress,  and 
Sarah,  with  womanly  jealousy,  rather  laid  the 
blame  of  this  on  her  husband,  even  then  Abra¬ 
ham  showed  that  he  was  not  a  slavish  lover,  but 
a  free  begetter  of  children,  and  that  in  using 
Hagar  he  had  guarded  the  chastity  of  Sarah  his 
wife,  and  had  gratified  her  will  and  not  his  own 
— had  received  her  without  seeking,  had  gone  in 
to  her  without  being  attached,  had  impregnated 
without  loving  her — for  he  says.  “Beheld  thy 
maid  is  in  thy  hands:  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth 
thee”;2  a  man  able  to  use  women  as  a  man 
should — his  wife  temperately,  his  handmaid 
compliantly,  neither  intemperately ! 
lI  Cor.  7.  4.  2Gen.  16.  6. 


Chap.  26.  Of  God’s  attestation  to  Abraham ,  by 
which  He  assures  him,  when  now  old,  of  a  son 
by  the  barren  Sarah,  and  appoints  him  the  fa¬ 
ther  of  the  nations,  and  seals  his  faith  in  the 
promise  by  the  sacrament  of  circumcision 

After  these  things  Ishmael  was  born  of  Ha¬ 
gar;  and  Abraham  might  think  that  in  him  was 
fulfilled  what  God  had  promised  him,  saying, 
when  he  wished  to  adopt  his  home-born  servant, 
“This  shall  not  be  thine  heir;  but  he  that  shall 
come  forth  of  thee,  he  shall  be  thine  heir.”3 
Therefore,  lest  he  should  think  that  what  was 
promised  was  fulfilled  in  the  handmaid’s  son, 
“when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine, 
God  appeared  to  him,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am 
God;  be  well-pleasing  in  my  sight,  and  be  with¬ 
out  complaint,  and  I  will  make  my  covenant 
between  me  and  thee,  and  will  fill  thee  exceed¬ 
ingly.”4 

Here  there  are  more  distinct  promises  about 
the  calling  of  the  nations  in  Isaac,  that  is,  in  the 
son  of  the  promise,  by  which  grace  is  signified, 
and  not  nature;  for  the  son  is  promised  from  an 
old  man  and  a  barren  old  woman.  For  although 
God  effects  even  the  natural  course  of  procrea¬ 
tion,  yet  where  the  agency  of  God  is  manifest, 
through  the  decay  or  failure  of  nature,  grace  is 
more  plainly  discerned.  And  because  this  was  to 
be  brought  about,  not  by  generation,  but  by  re¬ 
generation,  circumcision  was  enjoined  now, 
when  a  son  was  promised  of  Sarah.  And  by  or¬ 
dering  all,  not  only  sons,  but  also  home-born 
and  purchased  servants  to  be  circumcised,  he 
testifies  that  this  grace  pertains  to  all.  For  what 
else  does  circumcision  signify  than  a  nature  re¬ 
newed  on  the  putting  off  of  the  old?  And  what 
else  does  the  eighth  day  mean  than  Christ,  Who 
rose  again  when  the  week  was  completed,  that 
is.  after  the  Sabbath?  The  very  names  of  the 
parents  are  changed:  all  things  proclaim  new¬ 
ness,  and  the  new  covenant  is  shadowed  forth  in 
the  old.  For  what  does  the  term  old  covenant 
imply  but  the  concealing  of  the  new?  And  what 
does  the  term  new  covenant  imply  but  the  re¬ 
vealing  of  the  old?  The  laughter  of  Abraham  is 
the  exultation  of  one  who  rejoices,  not  the 
scornful  laughter  of  one  who  mistrusts.  And 
those  words  of  his  in  his  heart,  “Shall  a  son  be 
born  to  me  that  am  an  hundred  years  old?  and 
shall  Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear?”  are 
not  the  words  of  doubt,  but  of  wonder.  And 
when  it  is  said,  “And  I  will  give  to  thee,  and  to 
thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land  in  which  thou  art  a 
stranger,  all  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlast- 
3Gen.  15.  4.  4Gen.  17.  1-22. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  2^-28  439 


ing  possession,”  if  it  troubles  any  one  whether 
this  is  to  be  held  as  fulfilled,  or  whether  its  ful¬ 
filment  may  still  be  looked  for.  since  no  kind  of 
earthly  possession  can  be  everlasting  for  any 
nation  whatever,  let  him  know  that  the  word 
translated  “everlasting”  by  ourwritersiswhatthe 
Greeks  term  aluviov f  which  is  derived  from 
aluvf  the  Greek  for  sceculum,  an  age.  But  the 
Latins  have  not  ventured  to  translate  this  by 
secular ,  lest  they  should  change  the  meaning  in¬ 
to  something  widely  different.  For  many  things 
are  called  secular  which  so  happen  in  this  world 
as  to  pass  away  even  in  a  short  time ;  but  what 
is  termed  aluviov  either  has  no  end,  or  lasts  to 
the  very  end  of  this  world. 

Chap.  27.  Of  the  male,  who  was  to  lose  his  soul 
if  he  was  not  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day , 
because  he  had  broken  God’s  covenant 
When  it  is  said,  “The  male  who  is  not  circum¬ 
cised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin,  that  soul  shall 
be  cut  off  from  his  people,  because  he  hath 
broken  my  covenant,”1  some  may  be  troubled 
how  that  ought  to  be  understood,  since  it  can  be 
no  fault  of  the  infant  whose  life  it  is  said  must 
perish ;  nor  has  the  covenant  of  God  been  brok¬ 
en  by  him,  but  by  his  parents,  who  have  not  tak¬ 
en  care  to  circumcise  him.  But  even  the  infants, 
not  personally  in  their  own  life,  but  according 
to  the  common  origin  of  the  human  race,  have 
all  broken  God's  covenant  in  that  one  in  whom 
all  have  sinned.2  Now  there  are  many  things 
called  God's  covenants  besides  those  two  great 
ones,  the  old  and  the  new,  which  any  one  who 
pleases  may  read  and  know.  For  the  first  cove¬ 
nant.  which  was  made  with  the  first  man,  is  just 
this :  “In  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  ye  shall  surely 
die.”3  Whence  it  is  written  in  the  book  called 
Ecclesiasticus.  “All  flesh  waxeth  old  as  doth  a 
garment.  For  the  covenant  from  the  beginning 
is.  Thou  shalt  die  the  death.”4  Now.  as  the  law 
was  more  plainly  given  afterward,  and  the  apos¬ 
tle  says,  “Where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  prevari¬ 
cation,”5  on  what  supposition  is  what  is  said  in 
the  psalm  true,  “I  accounted  all  the  sinners  of 
the  earth  prevaricators,”6  except  that  all  who 
are  held  liable  for  any  sin  are  accused  of  dealing 
deceitfully  (prevaricating)  with  some  law?  If 
on  this  account,  then,  even  the  infants  are.  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  true  belief,  born  in  sin.  not  actual 
but  original,  so  that  we  confess  they  have  need 
of  grace  for  the  remission  of  sins,  certainly  it 

^en.  17.  14.  2Rom.  5.  12,  19.  3Gen.  2.  17. 

4Ecclus.  15.  17.  6Rom.  4.  15. 

6Ps.  1 19.  1 19.  Augustine  and  the  Vulgate  follow  the 
Septuagint. 


must  be  acknowledged  that  in  the  same  sense  in 
which  they  are  sinners  they  are  also  prevarica¬ 
tors  of  that  law  which  was  given  in  Paradise,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  truth  of  both  scriptures,  “I  ac¬ 
counted  all  the  sinners  of  the  earth  prevarica¬ 
tors,”  and  “Where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  prevari¬ 
cation.”  And  thus,  because  circumcision  was  the 
sign  of  regeneration,  and  the  infant,  on  account 
of  the  original  sin  by  which  God’s  covenant 
was  first  broken,  was  not  undeservedly  to  lose 
his  generation  unless  delivered  by  regeneration, 
these  divine  words  are  to  be  understood  as  if  it 
had  been  said,  “Whoever  is  not  born  again,  that 
soul  shall  perish  from  his  people,  because  he 
hath  broken  my  covenant,  since  he  also  has 
sinned  in  Adam  with  all  others.”  For  had  He 
said,  “Because  he  hath  broken  this  my  cove¬ 
nant,”  He  would  have  compelled  us  to  under¬ 
stand  by  it  only  this  of  circumcision;  but  since 
He  has  not  expressly  said  what  covenant  the  in¬ 
fant  has  broken,  we  are  free  to  understand  Him 
as  speaking  of  that  covenant  of  which  the 
breach  can  be  ascribed  to  an  infant.  Yet  if  any 
one  contends  that  it  is  said  of  nothing  else  than 
circumcision,  that  in  it  the  infant  has  broken 
the  covenant  of  God  because  he  is  not  circum¬ 
cised,  he  must  seek  some  method  of  explanation 
by  which  it  may  be  understood  without  absurd¬ 
ity  (such  as  this)  that  he  has  broken  the  cove¬ 
nant.  because  it  has  been  broken  in  him  al¬ 
though  not  by  him.  Yet  in  this  case  also  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  soul  of  the  infant,  being 
guilty  of  no  sin  of  neglect  against  itself,  would 
perish  unjustly,  unless  original  sin  rendered  it 
obnoxious  to  punishment. 

Chap.  28.  Of  the  change  of  name  in  Abraham 
and  Sarah,  who  received  the  gift  of  fecimdity 
when  they  were  incapable  of  regeneration  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  barrenness  of  one,  and  the  old  age 
of  both 

Now  when  a  promise  so  great  and  clear  was 
made  to  Abraham,  in  which  it  was  so  plainly 
said  to  him,  “I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many 
nations,  and  I  will  increase  thee  exceedingly, 
and  I  will  make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall 
go  forth  of  thee.  And  I  will  give  thee  a  son  of 
Sarah ;  and  I  will  bless  him,  and  he  shall  become 
nations,  and  kings  of  nations  shall  be  of  him”7 — 
a  promise  which  we  now  see  fulfilled  in  Christ — 
from  that  time  forward  this  couple  are  not 
called  in  Scripture,  as  formerly,  Abram  and 
Sarai,  but  Abraham  and  Sarah,  as  we  have 
called  them  from  the  first,  for  every  one  does  so 
now.  The  reason  why  the  name  of  Abraham  was 
7Gen.  17.  5,  6,  16. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


changed  is  given:  “For,”  He  says,  “I  have  made 
thee  a  father  of  many  nations.”  This,  then,  is  to 
be  understood  to  be  the  meaning  of  Abraham ; 
but  Abram,  as  he  was  formerly  called,  means 
“exalted  father.”  The  reason  of  the  change  of 
Sarah’s  name  is  not  given;  but  as  those  say  who 
have  written  interpretations  of  the  Hebrew 
names  contained  in  these  books,  Sarah  means 
“my  princess,”  and  Sarai  “strength.”  Whence  it 
is  written  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
“Through  faith  also  Sarah  herself  received 
strength  to  conceive  seed.”1  For  both  were  old, 
as  the  Scripture  testifies;  but  she  was  also  bar¬ 
ren.  and  had  ceased  to  menstruate,  so  that  she 
could  no  longer  bear  children  even  if  she  had  not 
been  barren.  Further,  if  a  woman  is  advanced  in 
years,  yet  still  retains  the  custom  of  women,  she 
can  bear  children  to  a  young  man,  but  not  to  an 
old  man,  although  that  same  old  man  can  beget, 
but  only  of  a  young  woman;  as  after  Sarah’s 
death  Abraham  could  of  Keturah,  because  he 
met  with  her  in  her  lively  age.  This,  then,  is 
what  the  apostle  mentions  as  wonderful,  saying, 
besides,  that  Abraham’s  body  was  now  dead;2 
because  at  that  age  he  was  no  longer  able  to  be¬ 
get  children  of  any  woman  who  retained  now 
only  a  small  part  of  her  natural  vigour.  Of  course 
we  must  understand  that  his  body  was  dead  only 
to  some  purposes,  not  to  all;  for  if  it  was  so  to 
all,  it  would  no  longer  be  the  aged  body  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  man,  but  the  corpse  of  a  dead  one.  Although 
that  question,  how  Abraham  begot  children  of 
Keturah,  is  usually  solved  in  this  way.  that  the 
gift  of  begetting  which  he  received  from  the 
Lord,  remained  even  after  the  death  of  his  wife, 
yet  I  think  that  solution  of  the  question  which  I 
have  followed  is  preferable,  because,  although 
in  our  days  an  old  man  of  a  hundred  years  can 
beget  children  of  no  woman,  it  was  not  so  then, 
when  men  still  lived  so  long  that  a  hundred  years 
did  not  yet  bring  on  them  the  decrepitude  of 
old  age. 

Chap.  29.  Of  the  three  men  or  angels,  in  whom 
the  Lord  is  related  to  have  appeared  to  Abra¬ 
ham  at  the  oak  of  Mamre 
God  appeared  again  to  Abraham  at  the  oak  of 
Mamre  in  three  men.  who  it  is  not  to  be  doubted 
were  angels,  although  some  think  that  one  of 
them  was  Christ  and  assert  that  He  was  visible 
before  He  put  on  flesh.  Now  it  belongs  to  the  di¬ 
vine  power,  and  invisible,  incorporeal,  and  in¬ 
commutable  nature,  without  changing  itself  at 
all,  to  appear  even  to  mortal  men,  not  by  what 
it  is,  but  by  what  is  subject  to  it.  And  what  is  not 
^eb.  11.  11.  2Heb.  11.  12. 


subject  to  it?  Yet  if  they  try  to  establish  that 
one  of  these  three  was  Christ  by  the  fact  that, 
although  he  saw  three,  he  addressed  the  Lord  in 
the  singular,  as  it  is  written,  “And,  lo,  three  men 
stood  by  him:  and.  when  he  saw  them,  he  ran 
to  meet  them  from  the  tent-door,  and  wor¬ 
shipped  toward  the  ground,  and  said,  Lord,  if  I 
have  found  favour  before  thee,”3  etc.;  why  do 
they  not  advert  to  this  also,  that  when  two  of 
them  came  to  destroy  the  Sodomites,  while 
Abraham  still  spoke  to  one,  calling  him  Lord, 
and  interceding  that  he  would  not  destroy  the 
righteous  along  with  the  wicked  in  Sodom,  Lot 
received  these  two  in  such  a  way  that  he  too  in 
his  conversation  with  them  addressed  the  Lord 
in  the  singular?  For  after  saying  to  them  in  the 
plural,  “Behold,  my  lords,  turn  aside  into  your 
servant’s  house,”4  etc.,  yet  it  is  afterwards  said, 
“And  the  angels  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and 
the  hand  of  his  wife,  and  the  hands  of  his  two 
daughters,  because  the  Lord  was  merciful  unto 
him.  And  it  came  to  pass,  whenever  they  had  led 
him  forth  abroad,  that  they  said.  Save  thy  life; 
look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay  thou  in  all 
this  region:  save  thyself  in  the  mountain,  lest 
thou  be  caught.  And  Lot  said  unto  them,  I  pray 
thee,  Lord,  since  thy  servant  hath  found  grace 
in  thy  sight,”5  etc.  And  then  after  these  words 
the  Lord  also  answered  him  in  the  singular,  al¬ 
though  He  was  in  two  angels,  saying,  “See,  I 
have  accepted  thy  face,”6  etc.  This  makes  it 
much  more  credible  that  both  Abraham  in  the 
three  men  and  Lot  in  the  two  recognized  the 
Lord,  addressing  Him  in  the  singular  number, 
even  when  they  were  addressing  men;  for  they 
received  them  as  they  did  for  no  other  reason 
than  that  they  might  minister  human  refection 
to  them  as  men  who  needed  it.  Yet  there  was 
about  them  something  so  excellent  that  those 
who  showed  them  hospitality  as  men  could  not 
doubt  that  God  was  in  them  as  He  was  wont  to 
be  in  the  prophets,  and  therefore  sometimes  ad¬ 
dressed  them  in  the  plural  and  sometimes  God 
in  them  in  the  singular.  But  that  they  were  an¬ 
gels  the  Scripture  testifies,  not  only  in  this 
book  of  Genesis,  in  which  these  transactions  are 
related,  but  also  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
where  in  praising  hospitality  it  is  said,  “For 
thereby  some  have  entertained  angels  una¬ 
wares.”  7  By  these  three  men,  then,  when  a  son 
Isaac  was  again  promised  to  Abraham  by  Sarah, 
such  a  divine  oracle  was  also  given  that  it  was 
said,  “Abraham  shall  become  a  great  and  numer¬ 
ous  nation,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall 

3Gen.  18.  2,  3.  4Gen.  19.  2.  5Gen.  19.  16-19. 

6Gen.  19.  21.  7Heb.  13.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  29-32  441 


be  blessed  in  him.” 1  And  here  these  two  things 
are  promised  with  the  utmost  brevity  and  full¬ 
ness — the  nation  of  Israel  according  to  the  flesh, 
and  all  nations  according  to  faith. 

Chap.  30.  Of  Lot's  deliverance  from  Sodom , 
and  its  consumption  by  fire  from  heaven;  and 
of  Abimelech,  whose  lust  could  not  harm  Sar¬ 
ah's  chastity 

After  this  promise  Lot  was  delivered  out  of 
Sodom,  and  a  fiery  rain  from  heaven  turned  into 
ashes  that  whole  region  of  the  impious  city, 
where  custom  had  made  sodomy  as  prevalent  as 
laws  have  elsewhere  made  other  kinds  of  wick¬ 
edness.  But  this  punishment  of  theirs  was  a 
specimen  of  the  divine  judgment  to  come.  For 
what  is  meant  by  the  angels  forbidding  those 
who  were  delivered  to  look  back,  but  that  we 
are  not  to  look  back  in  heart  to  the  old  life 
which,  being  regenerated  through  grace,  we  have 
put  off,  if  we  think  to  escape  the  last  judgment? 
Lot’s  wife,  indeed,  when  she  looked  back,  re¬ 
mained,  and,  being  turned  into  salt,  furnished  to 
believing  men  a  condiment  by  which  to  savour 
somewhat  the  warning  to  be  drawn  from  that 
example.  Then  Abraham  did  again  at  Gerar, 
with  Abimelech  the  king  of  that  city,  what  he 
had  done  in  Egypt  about  his  wife,  and  received 
her  back  untouched  in  the  same  way.  On  this  oc¬ 
casion,  when  the  king  rebuked  Abraham  for  not 
saying  she  was  his  wife,  and  calling  her  his  sis¬ 
ter,  he  explained  what  he  had  been  afraid  of,  and 
added  this  further,  “And  yet  indeed  she  is  my 
sister  by  the  father’s  side,  but  not  by  the  moth¬ 
er’s”;2  for  she  was  Abraham’s  sister  by  his  own 
father,  and  so  near  of  kin.  But  her  beauty  was  so 
great,  that  even  at  that  advanced  age  she  could 
be  fallen  in  love  with. 

Chap.  31  .Of  Isaac,  who  was  born  according  to 
the  promise,  whose  name  was  given  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  laughter  of  both  parents 
After  these  things  a  son  was  born  to  Abra¬ 
ham,  according  to  God’s  promise,  of  Sarah,  and 
was  called  Isaac,  which  means  laughter.  For  his 
father  had  laughed  when  he  was  promised  to 
him,  in  wondering  delight,  and  his  mother,  when 
he  was  again  promised  by  those  three  men,  had 
laughed,  doubting  for  joy;  yet  she  was  blamed 
by  the  angel  because  that  laugher,  although  it 
was  for  joy,  yet  was  not  full  of  faith.  Afterwards 
she  was  confirmed  in  faith  by  the  same  angel. 
From  this,  then,  the  boy  got  his  name.  For  when 
Isaac  was  born  and  called  by  that  name,  Sarah 
showed  that  her  laughter  was  not  that  of  scorn- 
^en.  18.  18.  2Gen.  20.  12. 


ful  reproach,  but  that  of  joyful  praise;  for  she 
said,  “God  hath  made  me  to  laugh,  so  that  every 
one  who  hears  will  laugh  with  me.”3  Then  in  a 
little  while  the  bond  maid  was  cast  out  of  the 
house  with  her  son;  and,  according  to  the  apos¬ 
tle,  these  two  women  signify  the  old  and  new 
covenants — Sarah  representing  that  of  the  Je¬ 
rusalem  which  is  above,  that  is,  the  city  of 
God.4 

Chap.  32.  Of  Abraham's  obedience  and  faith, 
which  were  proved  by  the  offering  up  of  his 
son  in  sacrifice  and  of  Sarah's  death 
Among  other  things,  of  which  it  would  take 
too  long  time  to  mention  the  whole,  Abraham 
was  tempted  about  the  offering  up  of  his  well- 
beloved  son  Isaac,  to  prove  his  pious  obedience, 
and  so  make  it  known  to  the  world,  not  to  God. 
Now  every  temptation  is  not  blame-worthy;  it 
may  even  be  praise-worthy,  because  it  furnishes 
probation.  And,  for  the  most  part,  the  human 
mind  cannot  attain  to  self-knowledge  otherwise 
than  by  making  trial  of  its  powers  through 
temptation,  by  some  kind  of  experimental  and 
not  merely  verbal  self-interrogation;  when,  if 
it  has  acknowledged  the  gift  of  God,  it  is  pious 
and  is  consolidated  by  steadfast  grace  and  not 
puffed  up  by  vain  boasting.  Of  course  Abraham 
could  never  believe  that  God  delighted  in  human 
sacrifices;  yet  when  the  divine  commandment 
thundered,  it  was  to  be  obeyed,  not  disputed. 
Yet  Abraham  is  worthy  of  praise,  because  he  all 
along  believed  that  his  son,  on  being  offered  up, 
would  rise  again;  for  God  had  said  to  him,  when 
he  was  unwilling  to  fulfill  his  wife’s  pleasure  by 
casting  out  the  bond  maid  and  her  son,  “In  Isaac 
shall  thy  seed  be  called.”  No  doubt  He  then  goes 
on  to  say,  “And  as  for  the  son  of  this  bond  wom¬ 
an,  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation,  because  he 
is  thy  seed.” 5  How  then  is  it  said,  “In  Isaac  shall 
thy  seed  be  called,”  when  God  calls  Ishmael  also 
his  seed?  The  apostle,  in  explaining  this,  says, 
“In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called,  that  is,  they 
which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not 
the  children  of  God:  but  the  children  of  the 
promise  are  counted  for  the  seed.”6  In  order, 
then,  that  the  children  of  the  promise  may  be 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  they  are  called  in  Isaac, 
that  is,  are  gathered  together  in  Christ  by  the 
call  of  grace.  Therefore  the  father,  holding  fast 
from  the  first  the  promise  which  behoved  to  be 
fulfilled  through  this  son  whom  God  had  ordered 
him  to  slay,  did  not  doubt  that  he  whom  he  once 
thought  it  hopeless  he  should  ever  receive  would 

3Gen.  21.  6.  4Gal.  4.  24-26.  6Gen.  21.  12,  13. 
6Rom.  9.  7,  8. 


442  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


be  restored  to  him  when  he  had  offered  him  up. 
It  is  in  this  way  the  passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  is  also  to  be  understood  and  explained. 
“By  faith,”  he  says,  “Abraham  overcame,  when 
tempted  about  Isaac:  and  he  who  had  received 
the  promise  offered  up  his  only  son,  to  whom  it 
was  said.  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called: 
thinking  that  God  was  able  to  raise  him  up,  even 
from  the  dead”;  therefore  he  has  added,  “from 
whence  also  he  received  him  in  a  similitude.” 1 
In  Whose  similitude  but  His  of  Whom  the  apos¬ 
tle  says.  “He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all”?2  And  on  this  ac¬ 
count  Isaac  also  himself  carried  to  the  place  of 
sacrifice  the  wood  on  which  he  was  to  be  offered 
up,  just  as  the  Lord  Himself  carried  His  own 
cross.  Finally,  since  Isaac  was  not  to  be  slain, 
after  his  father  was  forbidden  to  smite  him,  who 
was  that  ram  by  the  offering  of  which  that  sacri¬ 
fice  was  completed  with  typical  blood?  For  when 
Abraham  saw  him.  he  was  caught  by  the  horns 
in  a  thicket.  What,  then,  did  he  represent  but 
Jesus,  Who,  before  He  was  offered  up,  was 
crowned  with  thorns  by  the  Jews? 

But  let  us  rather  hear  the  divine  words  spoken 
through  the  angel.  For  the  Scripture  says,  “And 
Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  take  the 
knife,  that  he  might  slay  his  son.  And  the  Angel 
of  the  Lord  called  unto  him  from  heaven,  and 
said,  Abraham.  And  he  said.  Here  am  I.  And  he 
said,  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 
do  thou  anything  unto  him :  for  now  I  know  that 
thou  fearest  God,  and  hast  not  spared  thy  be¬ 
loved  son  for  my  sake.”3  It  is  said,  “Now  I 
know,”  that  is,  “Now  I  have  made  to  be 
known”;  for  God  was  not  previously  ignorant 
of  this.  Then,  having  offered  up  that  ram  in¬ 
stead  of  Isaac  his  son,  “Abraham,”  as  we  read, 
“called  the  name  of  that  place  The  Lord  seeth : 
as  they  say  this  day,  In  the  mount  the  Lord  hath 
appeared.”4  As  it  is  said,  “Now  I  know,”  for 
“Now  I  have  made  to  be  known,”  so  here,  “The 
Lord  sees,”  for  “The  Lord  hath  appeared.”  that 
is,  made  Himself  to  be  seen.  “And  the  Angel  of 
the  Lord  called  unto  Abraham  from  heaven  the 
second  time,  saying.  By  myself  have  I  sworn, 
saith  the  Lord;  because  thou  hast  done  this 
thing,  and  hast  not  spared  thy  beloved  son  for 
my  sake;  that  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and 
in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the 
stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon 
the  seashore;  and  thy  seed  shall  possess  by  in¬ 
heritance  the  cities  of  the  adversaries:  and  in 
thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 

^eb.  ii.  17-19.  2Rom.  8.  32. 

3Gen.  22.  10-12.  4Gen.  22.  14. 


blessed;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice.”5 
In  this  manner  is  that  promise  concerning  the 
calling  of  the  nations  in  the  seed  of  Abraham 
confirmed  even  by  the  oath  of  God,  after  that 
burnt-offering  which  typified  Christ.  For  He  had 
often  promised,  but  never  sworn.  And  what  is 
the  oath  of  God,  the  true  and  faithful,  but  a  con¬ 
firmation  of  the  promise,  and  a  certain  reproof 
to  the  unbelieving? 

After  these  things  Sarah  died,  in  the  127th 
year  of  her  life,  and  the  137th  of  her  husband; 
for  he  was  ten  years  older  than  she,  as  he  him¬ 
self  says,  when  a  son  is  promised  to  him  by  her: 
“Shall  a  son  be  born  to  me  that  am  an  hundred 
years  old?  and  shall  Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years 
old,  bear?”6  Then  Abraham  bought  a  field,  in 
which  he  buried  his  wife.  And  then,  according  to 
Stephen’s  account,  he  was  settled  in  that  land, 
entering  then  on  actual  possession  of  it — that  is, 
after  the  death  of  his  father,  who  is  inferred  to 
have  died  two  years  before. 

Chap.  33.  Of  Rebecca ,  the  grand-daughter  of 
Nahor,  whom  Isaac  took  to  wife 
Isaac  married  Rebecca,  the  grand-daughter  of 
Nahor,  his  father’s  brother,  when  he  was  forty 
years  old,  that  is,  in  the  140th  year  of  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  life,  three  years  after  his  mother’s  death. 
Now  when  a  servant  was  sent  to  Mesopotamia 
by  his  father  to  fetch  her,  and  when  Abraham 
said  to  that  servant,  “Put  thy  hand  under  my 
thigh,  and  I  will  make  thee  swear  by  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  Lord  of  the  earth, 
that  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my  son 
Isaac  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanites,” 7 
what  else  was  pointed  out  by  this,  but  that  the 
Lord,  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  Lord  of  the 
earth,  was  to  come  in  the  flesh  which  was  to  be 
derived  from  that  thigh?  Are  these  small  tokens 
of  the  foretold  truth  which  we  see  fulfilled  in 
Christ? 

Chap.  34.  What  is  meant  by  Abraham’s  marry¬ 
ing  Keturah  after  Sarah’s  death 
What  did  Abraham  mean  by  marrying  Ke¬ 
turah  after  Sarah’s  death?  Far  be  it  from  us  to 
suspect  him  of  incontinence,  especially  when  he 
had  reached  such  an  age  and  such  sanctity  of 
faith.  Or  was  he  still  seeking  to  beget  children, 
though  he  held  fast,  with  most  approved  faith, 
the  promise  of  God  that  his  children  should  be 
multiplied  out  of  Isaac  as  the  stars  of  heaven 
and  the  dust  of  the  earth?  And  yet,  if  Hagar  and 
Ishmael.  as  the  apostle  teaches  us,  signified  the 
carnal  people  of  the  old  covenant,  why  may  not 
6Gen.  22.  15-18.  6Gen.  17.  17.  7Gen.  24.  2  3 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  33-36  443 


Keturah  and  her  sons  also  signify  the  carnal  peo¬ 
ple  who  think  they  belong  to  the  new  covenant? 
For  both  are  called  both  the  wives  and  the  con¬ 
cubines  of  Abraham;  but  Sarah  is  never  called 
a  concubine  (but  only  a  wife).  For  when  Hagar 
is  given  to  Abraham,  it  is  written.  “And  Sarai, 
Abram’s  wife,  took  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  her 
handmaid,  after  Abraham  had  dwelt  ten  years  in 
the  land  of  Canaan,  and  gave  her  to  her  husband 
Abram  to  be  his  wife.” 1  And  of  Keturah,  whom 
he  took  after  Sarah’s  departure,  we  read,  “Then 
again  Abraham  took  a  wife,  whose  name  was 
Keturah.”2  Lo!  both  are  called  wives,  yet  both 
are  found  to  have  been  concubines;  for  the 
Scripture  afterward  says,  “And  Abraham  gave 
his  whole  estate  unto  Isaac  his  son.  But  unto  the 
sons  of  his  concubines  Abraham  gave  gifts,  and 
sent  them  away  from  his  son  Isaac  (while  he 
yet  lived),  eastward,  unto  the  east  country.”3 
Therefore  the  sons  of  the  concubines,  that  is,  the 
heretics  and  the  carnal  Jews,  have  some  gifts, 
but  do  not  attain  the  promised  kingdom;  “For 
they  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these 
are  not  the  children  of  God:  but  the  children  of 
the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed,  of  whom 
it  was  said.  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.”4 
For  I  do  not  see  why  Keturah.  who  was  married 
after  the  wife’s  death,  should  be  called  a  concu¬ 
bine,  except  on  account  of  this  mystery.  But  if 
any  one  is  unwilling  to  put  such  meanings  on 
these  things,  he  need  not  calumniate  Abraham. 
For  what  if  even  this  was  provided  against  the 
heretics  who  were  to  be  the  opponents  of  sec¬ 
ond  marriages,  so  that  it  might  be  shown  that  it 
was  no  sin  in  the  case  of  the  father  of  many  na¬ 
tions  himself,  when,  after  his  wife’s  death,  he 
married  again?  And  Abraham  died  when  he  was 
175  years  old,  so  that  he  left  his  son  Isaac  seven¬ 
ty-five  years  old,  having  begotten  him  when  100 
years  old. 

Chap.  35.  What  was  indicated  by  the  divine  an¬ 
swer  about  the  twins  still  shut  up  in  the  womb 
of  Rebecca  their  mother 
Let  6s  now  see  how  the  times  of  the  city  of 
God  run  on  from  this  point  among  Abraham’s 
descendants.  In  the  time  from  the  first  year  of 
Isaac’s  life  to  the  seventieth,  when  his  sons  were 
born,  the  only  memorable  thing  is  that  when  he 
prayed  God  that  his  wife,  who  was  barren,  might 
bear,  and  the  Lord  granted  what  he  sought,  and 
she  conceived,  the  twins  leapt  while  still  en¬ 
closed  in  her  womb.  And  when  she  was  troubled 
by  this  struggle,  and  inquired  of  the  Lord,  she 

1Gen.  16.  3.  2Gen.  25.  1.  3Gen.  25.  5.  6. 

4Rom.  9.  7,  8. 


received  this  answer:  “Two  nations  are  in  thy 
womb,  and  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  thy  bowels;  and  the  one  people  shall 
overcome  the  other  people,  and  the  elder  shall 
serve  the  younger.”5  The  Apostle  Paul  would 
have  us  understand  this  as  a  great  instance  of 
grace;6  for  the  children  being  not  yet  born,  nei¬ 
ther  having  done  any  good  or  evil,  the  younger 
is  chosen  without  any  good  desert,  and  the  elder 
is  rejected,  when  beyond  doubt,  as  regards  orig¬ 
inal  sin,  both  were  alike,  and,  as  regards  actual 
sin,  neither  had  any.  But  the  plan  of  the  work  on 
hand  does  not  permit  me  to  speak  more  fully  of 
this  matter  now.  and  I  have  said  much  about  it 
in  other  works.  Only  that  saying,  “The  elder 
shall  serve  the  younger,”  is  understood  by  our 
writers,  almost  without  exception,  to  mean  that 
the  elder  people,  the  Jews,  shall  serve  the  young¬ 
er  people,  the  Christians.  And  truly,  although 
this  might  seem  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  Idumean 
nation,  which  was  born  of  the  elder  (who  had 
two  names,  being  called  both  Esau  and  Edom, 
whence  the  name  Idumeans),  because  it  was  af¬ 
terwards  to  be  overcome  by  the  people  which 
sprang  from  the  younger,  that  is,  by  the  Israe¬ 
lites,  and  was  to  become  subject  to  them ;  yet  it 
is  more  suitable  to  believe  that,  when  it  was  said, 
“The  one  people  shall  overcome  the  other  peo¬ 
ple,  and  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger,”  that 
prophecy  meant  some  greater  thing;  and  what  is 
that  except  what  is  evidently  fulfilled  in  the 
Jews  and  Christians? 

Chap.  36.  Of  the  oracle  and  blessing  which  Isaac 
received,  just  as  his  father  did ,  being  beloved 
for  his  sake 

Isaac  also  received  such  an  oracle  as  his  father 
had  often  received.  Of  this  oracle  it  is  thus  writ¬ 
ten  :  “And  there  was  a  famine  over  the  land,  be¬ 
side  the  first  famine  that  was  in  the  days  of 
Abraham.  And  Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech  king 
of  the  Philistines  unto  Gerar.  And  the  Lord  ap¬ 
peared  unto  him,  and  said.  Go  not  down  into 
Egypt;  but  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell 
thee  of.  And  abide  in  this  land,  and  I  will  be  with 
thee,  and  will  bless  thee :  unto  thee  and  unto  thy 
seed  I  will  give  all  this  land;  and  I  will  establish 
mine  oath,  which  I  sware  unto  Abraham  thy  fa¬ 
ther  :  and  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of 
heaven,  and  will  give  unto  thy  seed  all  this  land: 
and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
be  blessed;  because  that  Abraham  thy  father 
obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept  my  precepts,  my 
commandments,  my  righteousness,  and  my 
laws.” 7  This  patriarch  neither  had  another  wife, 
6Gen.  25.  23.  6Rom.  9.  10-13.  7Gen.  26.  1-5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


444 

nor  any  concubine,  but  was  content  with  the 
twin-children  begotten  by  one  act  of  generation. 
He  also  was  afraid,  when  he  lived  among  strang¬ 
ers,  of  being  brought  into  danger  owing  to  the 
beauty  of  his  wife,  and  did  like  his  father  in  call¬ 
ing  her  his  sister,  and  not  telling  that  she  was 
his  wife;  for  she  was  his  near  blood-relation  by 
the  father’s  and  mother’s  side.  She  also  re¬ 
mained  untouched  by  the  strangers,  when  it  was 
known  she  was  his  wife.  Yet  we  ought  not  to 
prefer  him  to  his  father  because  he  knew  no 
woman  besides  his  one  wife.  For  beyond  doubt 
the  merits  of  his  father’s  faith  and  obedience 
were  greater,  inasmuch  as  God  says  it  is  for  his 
sake  He  does  Isaac  good:  “In  thy  seed,”  He 
says,  “shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 
blessed,  because  that  Abraham  thy  father 
obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept  my  precepts,  my 
commandments,  my  statutes,  and  my  laws.” 
And  again  in  another  oracle  He  says,  “I  am  the 
God  of  Abraham  thy  father :  fear  not,  for  I  am 
with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thy 
seed  for  my  servant  Abraham’s  sake.”1  So  that 
we  must  understand  how  chastely  Abraham  act¬ 
ed,  because  imprudent  men,  who  seek  some  sup¬ 
port  for  their  own  wickedness  in  the  Holy  Scrip¬ 
tures,  think  he  acted  through  lust.  We  may  also 
learn  this,  not  to  compare  men  by  single  good 
things,  but  to  consider  everything  in  each;  for  it 
may  happen  that  one  man  has  something  in  his 
life  and  character  in  which  he  excels  another, 
and  it  may  be  far  more  excellent  than  that  in 
which  the  other  excels  him.  And  thus,  according 
to  sound  and  true  judgment,  while  continence 
is  preferable  to  marriage,  yet  a  believing  mar¬ 
ried  man  is  better  than  a  continent  unbeliever ; 
for  the  unbeliever  is  not  only  less  praiseworthy, 
but  is  even  highly  detestable.  We  must  conclude, 
then,  that  both  are  good;  yet  so  as  to  hold  that 
the  married  man  who  is  most  faithful  and  most 
obedient  is  certainly  better  than  the  continent 
man  whose  faith  and  obedience  are  less.  But  if 
equal  in  other  things,  who  would  hesitate  to  pre¬ 
fer  the  continent  man  to  the  married? 

Chap.  37.  Of  the  things  mystically  prefigured 

in  Esau  and  Jacob 

Isaac’s  two  sons,  Esau  and  Jacob,  grew  up  to¬ 
gether.  The  primacy  of  the  elder  was  transferred 
to  the  younger  by  a  bargain  and  agreement  be¬ 
tween  them,  when  the  elder  immoderately  lust¬ 
ed  after  the  lentils  the  younger  had  prepared  for 
food,  and  for  that  price  sold  his  birthright  to 
him.  confirming  it  with  an  oath.  We  learn  from 
this  that  a  person  is  to  be  blamed,  not  for  the 

1Gen.  26.  24. 


kind  of  food  he  eats,  but  for  immoderate  greed. 
Isaac  grew  old,  and  old  age  deprived  him  of  his 
eyesight.  He  wished  to  bless  the  elder  son,  and 
instead  of  the  elder,  who  was  hairy,  unwittingly 
blessed  the  younger,  who  put  himself  under  his 
father’s  hands,  having  covered  himself  with  kid- 
skins,  as  if  bearing  the  sins  of  others.  Lest  we 
should  think  this  guile  of  Jacob’s  was  fraudulent 
guile,  instead  of  seeking  in  it  the  mystery  of  a 
great  thing,  the  Scripture  has  predicted  in  the 
words  just  before,  “Esau  was  a  cunning  hunter, 
a  man  of  the  field;  and  Jacob  was  a  simple  man, 
dwelling  at  home.”2  Some  of  our  writers  have 
interpreted  this,  “without  guile.”  But  whether 
the  Greek  a7rXac ttos  means  without  guile  or 
simple,  or  rather  without  feigning ,  in  the  receiv¬ 
ing  of  that  blessing  what  is  the  guile  of  the  man 
without  guile?  What  is  the  guile  of  the  simple, 
what  the  fiction  of  the  man  who  does  not  lie,  but 
a  profound  mystery  of  the  truth?  But  what  is 
the  blessing  itself?  “See,”  he  says,  “the  smell  of 
my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a  full  field  which  the 
Lord  hath  blessed:  therefore  God  give  thee  of 
the  dew  of  heaven,  and  of  the  fruitfulness  of  the 
earth,  and  plenty  of  corn  and  wine:  let  nations 
serve  thee,  and  princes  adore  thee :  and  be  lord 
of  thy  brethren,  and  let  thy  father’s  sons  adore 
thee:  cursed  be  he  that  curseth  thee,  and  blessed 
be  he  that  blesseth  thee.” 3  The  blessing  of  Ja¬ 
cob  is  therefore  a  proclamation  of  Christ  to  all 
nations.  It  is  this  which  has  come  to  pass,  and 
is  now  being  fulfilled.  Isaac  is  the  law  and  the 
prophecy :  even  by  the  mouth  of  the  Jews  Christ 
is  blessed  by  prophecy  as  by  one  who  knows  not, 
because  it  is  itself  not  understood.  The  world 
like  a  field  is  filled  with  the  odour  of  Christ’s 
name :  His  is  the  blessing  of  the  dew  of  heaven, 
that  is,  of  the  showers  of  divine  words;  and  of 
the  fruitfulness  of  the  earth,  that  is,  of  the  gath¬ 
ering  together  of  the  peoples :  His  is  the  plenty 
of  corn  and  wine,  that  is,  the  multitude  that 
gathers  bread  and  wine  in  the  sacrament  of  His 
body  and  blood.  Him  the  nations  serve,  Him 
princes  adore.  He  is  the  Lord  of  His  brethren, 
because  His  people  rules  over  the  Jews.  Him  His 
Father’s  sons  adore,  that  is,  the  sons  of  Abra¬ 
ham  according  to  faith;  for  He  Himself  is  the 
son  of  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh.  He  is 
cursed  that  curseth  Him,  and  he  that  blesseth 
Him  is  blessed.  Christ,  I  say,  Who  is  ours  is 
blessed,  that  is,  truly  spoken  of  out  of  the 
mouths  of  the  Jews,  when,  although  erring,  they 
yet  sing  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  think  they 
are  blessing  another  for  whom  they  erringlv 
hope.  So.  when  the  elder  son  claims  the  prom- 
2Gen.  25.  27.  3Gen.  27.  27-29. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ised  blessing,  Isaac  is  greatly  afraid,  and  won¬ 
ders  when  he  knows  that  he  has  blessed  one  in¬ 
stead  of  the  other,  and  demands  who  he  is;  yet 
he  does  not  complain  that  he  has  been  deceived, 
yea,  when  the  great  mystery  is  revealed  to  him, 
in  his  secret  heart  he  at  once  eschews  anger,  and 
confirms  the  blessing.  “Who  then,”  he  says, 
“hath  hunted  me  venison,  and  brought  it  me. 
and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou  earnest,  and 
have  blessed  him,  and  he  shall  be  blessed?”  1 
Who  would  not  rather  have  expected  the  curse 
of  an  angry  man  here,  if  these  things  had  been 
done  in  an  earthly  manner,  and  not  by  inspira¬ 
tion  from  above?  0  things  done,  yet  done 
prophetically;  on  the  earth,  yet  celestially;  by 
men,  yet  divinely!  If  everything  that  is  fertile 
of  so  great  mysteries  should  be  examined  care¬ 
fully,  many  volumes  would  be  filled;  but  the 
moderate  compass  fixed  for  this  work  compels 
us  to  hasten  to  other  things. 

Chap.  38.  Of  Jacob’s  mission  to  Mesopotamia 
to  get  a  wife ,  and  of  the  vision  which  he  saw 
in  a  dream  by  the  way,  and  of  his  getting  four 
women  when  he  sought  one  wife 
Jacob  was  sent  by  his  parents  to  Mesopota¬ 
mia  that  he  might  take  a  wife  there.  These  were 
his  father’s  words  on  sending  him :  “Thou  shalt 
not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaan- 
ites.  Arise  fly  to  Mesopotamia,  to  the  house  of 
Bethuel,  thy  mother’s  father,  and  take  thee  a 
wife  from  thence  of  the  daughters  of  Laban  thy 
mother’s  brother.  And  my  God  bless  thee,  and 
increase  thee,  and  multiply  thee;  and  thou  shalt 
be  an  assembly  of  peoples ;  and  give  to  thee  the 
blessing  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  to  thy  seed 
after  thee;  that  thou  mayest  inherit  the  land 
wherein  thou  dwellest.  which  God  gave  unto 
Abraham.” 2  Now  we  understand  here  that  the 
seed  of  Jacob  is  separated  from  Isaac’s  other 
seed  which  came  through  Esau.  For  when  it  is 
said,  “In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called,”  3  by 
this  seed  is  meant  solely  the  city  of  God;  so  that 
from  it  is  separated  Abraham’s  other  seed, 
which  \tas  in  the  son  of  the  bond  woman,  and 
which  was  to  be  in  the  sons  of  Keturah.  But  un¬ 
til  now  it  had  been  uncertain  regarding  Isaac’s 
twin-sons  whether  that  blessing  belonged  to 
both  or  only  to  one  of  them ;  and  if  to  one,  which 
of  them  it  was.  This  is  now  declared  when  Jacob 
is  prophetically  blessed  by  his  father,  and  it  is 
said  to  him,  “And  thou  shalt  be  an  assembly  of 
peoples,  and  God  give  to  thee  the  blessing  of 
Abraham  thy  father.” 

When  Jacob  was  going  to  Mesopotamia,  he 
]Gen.  27.  33.  2Gen.  28.  1-4.  3Gen.  21.  12. 


GOD  XVI.  37-38  445 

received  in  a  dream  an  oracle,  of  which  it  is  thus 
written:  “And  Jacob  went  out  from  the  well  of 
the  oath,4  and  went  to  Haran.  And  he  came  to  a 
place,  and  slept  there,  for  the  sun  was  set ;  and 
he  took  of  the  stones  of  the  place,  and  put  them 
at  his  head,  and  slept  in  that  place,  and  dreamed. 
And  behold  a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth,  and  the 
top  of  it  reached  to  heaven;  and  the  angels  of 
God  ascended  and  descended  by  it.  And  the 
Lord  stood  above  it,  and  said,  I  am  the  God 
of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of  Isaac; 
fear  not:  the  land  whereon  thou  sleepest,  to 
thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed;  and  thy 
seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth;  and  it 
shall  be  spread  abroad  to  the  sea,  and  to  Africa, 
and  to  the  north,  and  to  the  east:  and  all  the 
tribes  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  in  thee  and  in 
thy  seed.  And,  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  to  keep 
thee  in  all  thy  way  wherever  thou  goest,  and  I 
will  bring  thee  back  into  this  land;  for  I  will  not 
leave  thee,  until  I  have  done  all  which  I  have 
spoken  to  thee  of.  And  Jacob  awoke  out  of  his 
sleep,  and  said.  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place, 
and  I  knew  it  not.  And  he  was  afraid,  and  said, 
How  dreadful  is  this  place!  this  is  none  other 
but  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of 
heaven.  And  Jacob  arose,  and  took  the  stone 
that  he  had  put  under  his  head  there,  and  set  it 
up  for  a  memorial,  and  poured  oil  upon  the  top 
of  it.  And  Jacob  called  the  name  of  that  place 
the  house  of  God.”5  This  is  prophetic.  For  Ja¬ 
cob  did  not  pour  oil  on  the  stone  in  an  idolatrous 
way,  as  if  making  it  a  god;  neither  did  he  adore 
that  stone,  or  sacrifice  to  it.  But  since  the  name 
of  Christ  comes  from  the  chrism  or  anointing, 
something  pertaining  to  the  great  mystery  was 
certainly  represented  in  this.  And  the  Saviour 
Himself  is  understood  to  bring  this  latter  to  re¬ 
membrance  in  the  Gospel,  when  He  says  of  Na¬ 
thanael,  “Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is 
no  guile!”6  because  Israel  who  saw  this  vision 
is  no  other  than  Jacob.  And  in  the  same  place 
He  says,  “Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  shall 
see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascend¬ 
ing  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  man.” 

Jacob  went  on  to  Mesopotamia  to  take  a  wife 
from  thence.  And  the  divine  Scripture  points 
out  how,  without  unlawfully  desiring  any  of 
them,  he  came  to  have  four  women,  of  whom  he 
begat  twelve  sons  and  one  daughter;  for  he  had 
come  to  take  only  one.  But  when  one  was  falsely 
given  him  in  place  of  the  other,  he  did  not  send 
her  away  after  unwittingly  using  her  in  the 
night,  lest  he  should  seem  to  have  put  her  to 
shame;  but  as  at  that  time,  in  order  to  multiply 

4Beer-sheba.  5Gen.  28.  10-19.  6John,  1.  47,  51 


446  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


posterity,  no  law  forbade  a  plurality  of  wives, 
he  took  her  also  to  whom  alone  he  had  promised 
marriage.  As  she  was  barren,  she  gave  her  hand¬ 
maid  to  her  husband  that  she  might  have  chil¬ 
dren  by  her;  and  her  elder  sister  did  the  same 
thing  in  imitation  of  her,  although  she  had 
borne,  because  she  desired  to  multiply  progeny. 
We  do  not  read  that  Jacob  sought  any  but  one, 
or  that  he  used  many,  except  for  the  purpose  of 
begetting  offspring,  saving  conjugal  rights;  and 
he  would  not  have  done  this,  had  not  his  wives, 
who  had  legitimate  power  over  their  own  hus¬ 
band’s  body,  urged  him  to  do  it.  So  he  begat 
twelve  sons  and  one  daughter  by  four  women. 
Then  he  entered  into  Egypt  by  his  son  Joseph, 
who  was  sold  by  his  brethren  for  envy,  and  car¬ 
ried  there,  and  who  was  there  exalted. 

Chap.  39.  The  reason  why  Jacob  was  also  called 

Israel 

As  I  said  a  little  ago,  Jacob  was  also  called 
Israel,  the  name  which  was  most  prevalent 
among  the  people  descended  from  him.  Now 
this  name  was  given  him  by  the  angel  who  wres¬ 
tled  with  him  on  the  way  back  from  Mesopota¬ 
mia.  and  who  was  most  evidently  a  type  of 
Christ.  For  when  Jacob  overcame  him.  doubt¬ 
less  with  his  own  consent,  that  the  mystery 
might  be  represented,  it  signified  Christ’s  pas¬ 
sion.  in  which  the  Jews  are  seen  overcoming 
Him.  And  yet  he  besought  a  blessing  from  the 
very  angel  he  had  overcome ;  and  so  the  imposi¬ 
tion  of  this  name  was  the  blessing.  For  Israel 
means  seeing  God }  which  will  at  last  be  the  re¬ 
ward  of  all  the  saints.  The  angel  also  touched 
him  on  the  breadth  of  the  thigh  when  he  was  ov¬ 
ercoming  him.  and  in  that  way  made  him  lame. 
So  that  Jacob  was  at  one  and  the  same  time 
blessed  and  lame :  blessed  in  those  among  that 
people  who  believed  in  Christ,  and  lame  in  the 
unbelieving.  For  the  breadth  of  the  thigh  is  the 
multitude  of  the  family.  For  there  are  many  of 
that  race  of  whom  it  was  prophetically  said  be¬ 
forehand,  “And  they  have  halted  in  their 
paths.” 2 

Chap.  40.  How  it  is  said  that  Jacob  went  into 

Egypt  with  seventy-five  souls ,  when  most  of 

those  who  are  mentioned  were  born  at  a  later 

period 

Seventy-five  men  are  reported  to  have  en¬ 
tered  Egypt  along  with  Jacob,  counting  him  with 
his  children.  In  this  number  only  two  women 

*Gen.  32.  28:  Israel  =  a  prince  of  God;  ver.  30:  Peniel 
=  the  face  of  God.  2Ps.  18.  45. 


are  mentioned,  one  a  daughter,  the  other  a 
grand-daughter.  But  when  the  thing  is  carefully 
considered,  it  does  not  appear  that  Jacob’s  off¬ 
spring  was  so  numerous  on  the  day  or  year  when 
he  entered  Egypt.  There  are  also  included  among 
them  the  great-grandchildren  of  Joseph,  who 
could  not  possibly  be  born  already.  For  Jacob 
was  then  130  years  old.  and  his  son  Joseph  thir¬ 
ty-nine;  and  as  it  is  plain  that  he  took  a  wife 
when  he  was  thirty  or  more,  how  could  he  in 
nine  years  have  great-grandchildren  by  the  chil¬ 
dren  whom  he  had  by  that  wife?  Now  since. 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  the  sons  of  Joseph, 
could  not  even  have  children,  for  Jacob  found 
them  boys  under  nine  years  old  when  he  entered 
Egypt,  in  what  way  are  not  only  their  sons  but 
their  grandsons  reckoned  among  those  seventy- 
five  who  then  entered  Egypt  with  Jacob?  For 
there  is  reckoned  there  Machir  the  son  of  Ma¬ 
nasseh,  grandson  of  Joseph,  and  Machir’s  son, 
that  is,  Gilead,  grandson  of  Manasseh,  great- 
grandsonof  Joseph ;  there,  too,  is  he  whom  Ephra¬ 
im.  Joseph’s  other  son,  begot,  that  is,  Shu- 
thelah,  grandson  of  Joseph,  and  Shuthelah’s  son 
Ezer,  grandson  of  Ephraim,  and  great-grand¬ 
son  of  Joseph,  who  could  not  possibly  be  in  ex¬ 
istence  when  Jacob  came  into  Egypt,  and  there 
found  his  grandsons,  the  sons  of  Joseph,  their 
grandsires,  still  boys  under  nine  years  of  age.3 
But  doubtless,  when  the  Scripture  mentions  Ja¬ 
cob’s  entrance  into  Egypt  with  seventy-five 
souls,  it  does  not  mean  one  day,  or  one  year, 
but  that  whole  time  as  long  as  Joseph  lived,  who 
was  the  cause  of  his  entrance.  For  the  same 
Scripture  speaks  thus  of  Joseph:  “And  Joseph 
dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his  brethren,  and  all  his 
father’s  house:  and  Joseph  lived  no  years,  and 
saw  Ephraim’s  children  of  the  third  genera¬ 
tion.”  4  That  is,  his  great-grandson,  the  third 
from  Ephraim ;  for  the  third  generation  means 
son.  grandson,  great-grandson.  Then  it  is  added, 
“The  children  also  of  Machir.  the  son  of  Manas¬ 
seh,  were  born  upon  Joseph’s  knees.” 5  And  this 
is  that  grandson  of  Manasseh.  and  great-grand¬ 
son  of  Joseph.  But  the  plural  number  is  em¬ 
ployed  according  to  scriptural  usage;  for  the 
one  daughter  of  Jacob  is  spoken  of  as  daughters, 
just  as  in  the  usage  of  the  Latin  tongue  liberi  is 
used  in  the  plural  for  children  even  when  there 
is  only  one.  Now,  when  Joseph’s  own  happiness 
is  proclaimed,  because  he  could  see  his  great- 

3Augustine  here  follows  the  Septuagint,  which  at  Gen. 
46.  20  adds  these  names  to  those  of  Manasseh  and 
Ephraim,  and  at  ver.  27  gives  the  whole  number  as  seven¬ 
ty-five.  4Gen.  50.  22,  23.  5Gen.  50.  23. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  39-42  447 


grandchildren,  it  is  by  no  means  to  be  thought 
they  already  existed  in  the  thirty-ninth  year  of 
their  great-grandsire  Joseph,  when  his  father 
Jacob  came  to  him  in  Egypt.  But  those  who  dil¬ 
igently  look  into  these  things  will  the  less  easily 
be  mistaken,  because  it  is  written,  “These  are 
the  names  of  the  sons  of  Israel  who  entered  into 
Egypt  along  with  Jacob  their  father.”  1  For  this 
means  that  the  seventy-five  are  reckoned  along 
with  him,  not  that  they  were  all  with  him  when 
he  entered  Egypt;  for,  as  I  have  said,  the  whole 
period  during  which  Joseph,  who  occasioned  his 
entrance,  lived,  is  held  to  be  the  time  of  that  en¬ 
trance. 

Chap.  41.  Of  the  blessing  which  Jacob  promised 
in  Judah  his  son 

If,  on  account  of  the  Christian  people  in 
whom  the  city  of  God  sojourns  in  the  earth,  we 
look  for  the  flesh  of  Christ  in  the  seed  of  Abra¬ 
ham.  setting  aside  the  sons  of  the  concubines, 
we  have  Isaac;  if  in  the  seed  of  Isaac,  setting 
aside  Esau,  who  is  also  Edom,  we  have  Jacob, 
who  also  is  Israel;  if  in  the  seed  of  Israel  him¬ 
self,  setting  aside  the  rest,  we  have  Judah,  be¬ 
cause  Christ  sprang  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Let 
us  hear,  then,  how  Israel,  when  dying  in  Egypt, 
in  blessing  his  sons,  prophetically  blessed  Ju¬ 
dah.  He  says:  “Judah,  thy  brethren  shall  praise 
thee :  thy  hands  shall  be  on  the  back  of  thine  en¬ 
emies;  thy  father’s  children  shall  adore  thee. 
Judah  is  a  lion’s  whelp:  from  the  sprouting,  my 
son,  thou  art  gone  up:  lying  down,  thou  hast 
slept  as  a  lion,  and  as  a  lion’s  whelp;  who  shall 
awake  him?  A  prince  shall  not  be  lacking  out  of 
Judah,  and  a  leader  from  his  thighs,  until  the 
things  come  that  are  laid  up  for  him;  and  He 
shall  be  the  expectation  of  the  nations.  Binding 
his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his  ass’s  foal  to  the 
choice  vine;  he  shall  wash  his  robe  in  wine,  and 
his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  the  grape:  his  eyes 
are  red  with  wine,  and  his  teeth  are  whiter  than 
milk.” 2  I  have  expounded  these  words  in  dis¬ 
puting  against  Faustus  the  Manichaean;  and  I 
think  it  is  enough  to  make  the  truth  of  this 
prophecy  shine,  to  remark  that  the  death  of 
Christ  is  predicted  by  the  word  about  his  lying 
down,  and  not  the  necessity,  but  the  voluntary 
character  of  His  death,  in  the  title  of  lion.  That 
power  He  Himself  proclaims  in  the  Gospel,  say¬ 
ing,  “I  have  the  power  of  laying  down  my  life, 
and  I  have  the  power  of  taking  it  again.  No  man 
taketh  it  from  me;  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself, 
and  take  it  again.”3  So  the  lion  roared,  so  He 
^en.  46.  8.  2Gen.  49.  8-12.  3John,  io.  18. 


fulfilled  what  He  said.  For  to  this  power  what  is 
added  about  the  resurrection  refers,  “Who  shall 
awake  him?”  This  means  that  no  man  but  Him¬ 
self  has  raised  Him,  who  also  said  of  His  own 
body,  “Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  raise  it  up.”4  And  the  very  nature  of  His 
death,  that  is,  the  height  of  the  cross,  is  under¬ 
stood  by  the  single  word,  “Thou  are  gone  up.” 
The  evangelist  explains  what  is  added,  “Lying 
down,  thou  hast  slept,”  when  he  says,  “He 
bowed  His  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost.” 5  Or  at 
least  His  burial  is  to  be  understood,  in  which  He 
lay  down  sleeping,  and  whence  no  man  raised 
Him,  as  the  prophets  did  some,  and  as  He  Him¬ 
self  did  others;  but  He  Himself  rose  up  as  if 
from  sleep.  As  for  His  robe  which  He  washes 
in  wine,  that  is,  cleanses  from  sin  in  His  own 
blood,  of  which  blood  those  who  are  baptized 
know  the  mystery,  so  that  he  adds,  “And  his 
clothes  in  the  blood  of  the  grape,”  what  is  it 
but  the  Church?  “And  his  eyes  are  red  with 
wine,”  [these  are]  His  spiritual  people  drunk¬ 
en  with  His  cup,  of  which  the  psalm  sings, 
“And  thy  cup  that  makes  drunken,  how  ex¬ 
cellent  it  is!”  “And  his  teeth  are  whiter  than 
milk”  6 — that  is.  the  nutritive  words  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  apostle,  the  babes  drink,  being 
as  yet  unfit  for  solid  food.7  And  it  is  He  in  whom 
the  promises  of  Judah  were  laid  up,  so  that  un¬ 
til  they  come,  princes,  that  is,  the  kings  of  Is¬ 
rael,  shall  never  be  lacking  out  of  Judah.  “And 
He  is  the  expectation  of  the  nations.”  This  is  too 
plain  to  need  exposition. 

Chap.  42.  Of  the  sons  of  Joseph 7  whom  Jacob 

blessed,  prophetically  changing  his  hands 

Now,  as  Isaac’s  two  sons,  Esau  and  Jacob, 
furnished  a  type  of  the  two  people,  the  Jews  and 
the  Christians  (although  as  pertains  to  carnal 
descent  it  was  not  the  Jews  but  the  Idumeans 
who  came  of  the  seed  of  Esau,  nor  the  Chris¬ 
tian  nations  but  rather  the  Jews  who  came  of 
Jacob’s;  for  the  type  holds  only  as  regards  the 
saying,  “The  elder  shall  serve  the  younger”8) 
so  the  same  thing  happened  in  Joseph’s  two 
sons;  for  the  elder  was  a  type  of  the  Jews,  and 
the  younger  of  the  Christians.  For  when  Jacob 
was  blessing  them,  and  laid  his  right  hand  on  the 
younger,  who  was  at  his  left,  and  his  left  hand  on 
the  elder,  who  was  at  his  right,  this  seemed 
wrong  to  their  father,  and  he  admonished  his 
father  by  trying  to  correct  his  mistake  and  show 
him  which  was  the  elder.  But  he  would  not 

4John,  2.  19.  5John,  19.  30.  6Gen.  49.  12. 

7I  Pet.  2.  2;  I  Cor.  3.  2.  8Gen.  25.  23. 


448  ST.  AUGUSTINE 

change  his  hands,  but  said,  “I  know,  my  son,  I  went  through  the  desert,  under  the  leadership  of 


know.  He  also  shall  become  a  people,  and  he  also 
shall  be  exalted;  but  his  younger  brother  shall 
be  greater  than  he,  and  his  seed  shall  become  a 
multitude  of  nations.”  1  And  these  two  promises 
show  the  same  thing.  For  that  one  is  to  become 
“a  people”;  this  one  “a  multitude  of  nations.” 
And  what  can  be  more  evident  than  that  these 
two  promises  comprehend  the  people  of  Israel, 
and  the  whole  world  of  Abraham’s  seed,  the  one 
according  to  the  flesh,  the  other  according  to 
faith? 

Chap.  43.  Of  the  times  of  Moses  and  Joshua  the 
son  of  Nun ,  of  the  judges ,  and  thereafter  of 
the  kings ,  of  whom  Saul  was  the  first,  hut  Da¬ 
vid  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  chief ,  both  by  the 
oath  and  by  merit 

Jacob  being  dead,  and  Joseph  also,  during  the 
remaining  144  years  until  they  went  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  that  nation  increased  to  an  in¬ 
credible  degree,  even  although  wasted  by  so 
great  persecutions  that  at  one  time  the  male 
children  were  murdered  at  their  birth,  because 
the  wondering  Egyptians  were  terrified  at  the 
too  great  increase  of  that  people.  Then  Moses, 
being  stealthily  kept  from  the  murderers  of  the 
infants,  was  brought  to  the  royal  house,  God 
preparing  to  do  great  things  by  him,  and  was 
nursed  and  adopted  by  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh 
(that  was  the  name  of  all  the  kings  of  Egypt), 
and  became  so  great  a  man  that  he — yea,  rather 
God,  Who  had  promised  this  to  Abraham,  by  him 
— drew  that  nation,  so  wonderfully  multiplied, 
out  of  the  yoke  of  hardest  and  most  grievous 
servitude  it  had  borne  there.  At  first,  indeed,  he 
fled  thence  (we  are  told  he  fled  into  the  land  of 
Midian),  because,  in  defending  an  Israelite,  he 
had  slain  an  Egyptian,  and  was  afraid.  After¬ 
ward,  being  divinely  commissioned  in  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  overcame  the  magi  of 
Pharaoh  who  resisted  him.  Then,  when  the 
Egyptians  would  not  let  God’s  people  go,  ten 
memorable  plagues  were  brought  by  Him  upon 
them — the  water  turned  into  blood,  the  frogs 
and  lice,  the  flies,  the  death  of  the  cattle,  the 
boils,  the  hail,  the  locusts,  the  darkness,  the 
death  of  the  first-born.  At  last  the  Egyptians 
were  destroyed  in  the  Red  Sea  while  pursuing 
the  Israelites,  whom  they  had  let  go  when  at 
length  they  were  broken  by  so  many  great 
plagues.  The  divided  sea  made  a  way  for  the  Is¬ 
raelites  who  were  departing,  but,  returning  on  it¬ 
self,  it  overwhelmed  their  pursuers  with  its 
waves.  Then  for  forty  years  the  people  of  God 
1Gen.  48. 19. 


Moses,  when  the  tabernacle  of  testimony  was 
dedicated,  in  which  God  was  worshipped  by  sac¬ 
rifices  prophetic  of  things  to  come,  and  that  was 
after  the  law  had  been  very  terribly  given  in  the 
mount,  for  its  divinity  was  most  plainly  attested 
by  wonderful  signs  and  voices.  This  took  place 
soon  after  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  when  the 
people  had  entered  the  desert,  on  the  fiftieth  day 
after  the  passover  was  celebrated  by  the  offering 
up  of  a  lamb,  which  is  so  completely  a  type  of 
Christ,  foretelling  that  through  His  sacrificial 
passion  He  should  go  from  this  world  to  the  Fa¬ 
ther  (for  pascha  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  means 
transit ),  that  when  the  new  covenant  was  re¬ 
vealed,  after  Christ  our  passover  was  offered  up, 
the  Holy  Spirit  came  from  heaven  on  the  fiftieth 
day;  and  He  is  called  in  the  gospel  the  Finger  of 
God,  because  He  recalls  to  our  remembrance  the 
things  done  before  by  way  of  types,  and  because 
the  tables  of  that  law  are  said  to  have  been  writ¬ 
ten  by  the  finger  of  God. 

On  the  death  of  Moses,  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun 
ruled  the  people,  and  led  them  into  the  land  of 
promise,  and  divided  it  among  them.  By  these 
two  wonderful  leaders  wars  were  also  carried  on 
most  prosperously  and  wonderfully,  God  calling 
to  witness  that  they  had  got  these  victories  not 
so  much  on  account  of  the  merit  of  the  Hebrew 
people  as  on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  nations 
they  subdued.  After  these  leaders  there  were 
judges,  when  the  people  were  settled  in  the  land 
of  promise,  so  that,  in  the  meantime,  the  first 
promise  made  to  Abraham  began  to  be  fulfilled 
about  the  one  nation,  that  is,  the  Hebrew,  and 
about  the  land  of  Canaan;  but  not  as  yet  the 
promise  about  all  nations,  and  the  whole  wide 
world,  for  that  was  to  be  fulfilled,  not  by  the  ob¬ 
servances  of  the  old  law,  but  by  the  advent  of 
Christ  in  the  flesh,  and  by  the  faith  of  the  gos¬ 
pel.  And  it  was  to  prefigure  this  that  it  was  not 
Moses,  who  received  the  law  for  the  people  on 
Mount  Sinai,  that  led  the  people  into  the  land  of 
promise,  but  Joshua,  whose  name  also  was 
changed  at  God’s  command,  so  that  he  was 
called  Jesus.  But  in  the  times  of  the  judges  pros¬ 
perity  alternated  with  adversity  in  war,  accord¬ 
ing  as  the  sins  of  the  people  and  the  mercy  of 
God  were  displayed. 

We  come  next  to  the  times  of  the  kings.  The 
first  who  reigned  was  Saul ;  and  when  he  was  re¬ 
jected  and  laid  low  in  battle,  and  his  offspring  re¬ 
jected  so  that  no  kings  should  arise  out  of  it, 
David  succeeded  to  the  kingdom,  whose  son 
Christ  is  chiefly  called.  He  was  made  a  kind  of 
starting-point  and  beginning  of  the  advanced 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVI.  43,  XVII.  1  449 


youth  of  God’s  people,  who  had  passed  a  kind  of 
age  of  puberty  from  Abraham  to  this  David. 
And  it  is  not  in  vain  that  the  evangelist  Matthew 
records  the  generations  in  such  a  way  as  to  sum 
up  this  first  period  from  Abraham  to  David  in 
fourteen  generations.  For  from  the  age  of  pu¬ 
berty  man  begins  to  be  capable  of  generation; 
therefore  he  starts  the  list  of  generations  from 
Abraham,  who  also  was  made  the  father  of 
many  nations  when  he  got  his  name  changed.  So 
that  previously  this  family  of  God’s  people  was 
in  its  childhood,  from  Noah  to  Abraham;  and 
for  that  reason  the  first  language  was  then 
learned,  that  is,  the  Hebrew.  For  man  begins  to 
speak  in  childhood,  the  age  succeeding  infancy, 
which  is  so  termed  because  then  he  cannot 


speak.1  And  that  first  age  is  quite  drowned  in  ob¬ 
livion,  just  as  the  first  age  of  the  human  race 
was  blotted  out  by  the  flood;  for  who  is  there 
that  can  remember  his  infancy?  Wherefore  in 
this  progress  of  the  city  of  God,  as  the  previous 
book  contained  that  first  age,  so  this  one  ought 
to  contain  the  second  and  third  ages,  in  which 
third  age,  as  was  shown  by  the  heifer  of  three 
years  old,  the  she-goat  of  three  years  old,  and 
the  ram  of  three  years  old,  the  yoke  of  the  law 
was  imposed,  and  there  appeared  abundance  of 
sins,  and  the  beginning  of  the  earthly  kingdom 
arose,  in  which  there  were  not  lacking  spiritual 
men,  of  whom  the  turtledove  and  pigeon  repre¬ 
sented  the  mystery. 

1 Infans ,  from  in,  not,  and  fari,  to  speak. 


BOOK  XVII 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  the  history  of  the  city  of  god  is  traced  during 

THE  PERIOD  OF  THE  KINGS  AND  PROPHETS  FROM  SAMUEL  TO  DAVID,  EVEN  TO  CHRIST ; 
AND  THE  PROPHECIES  WHICH  ARE  RECORDED  IN  THE  BOOKS  OF  KINGS,  PSALMS,  AND 
THOSE  OF  SOLOMON,  ARE  INTERPRETED  OF  CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH. 


Chap.  1 .  Of  the  prophetic  age 
By  the  favour  of  God  we  have  treated  distinctly 
of  His  promises  made  to  Abraham,  that  both  the 
nation  of  Israel  according  to  the  flesh,  and  all 
nations  according  to  faith,  should  be  his  seed, 
and  the  City  of  God,  proceeding  according  to 
the  order  of  time,  will  point  out  how  they  were 
fulfilled.  Having  therefore  in  the  previous  book 
come  down  to  the  reign  of  David,  we  shall  now 
treat  of  what  remains,  so  far  as  may  seem  suffi¬ 
cient  for  the  object  of  this  work,  beginning  at 
the  same  reign.  Now,  from  the  time  when  holy 
Samuel  began  to  prophesy,  and  ever  onward  un¬ 
til  the  people  of  Israel  was  led  captive  into  Bab¬ 
ylonia,  and  until,  according  to  the  prophecy  of 
holy  Jeremiah,  on  Israel’s  return  thence  after 
seventy  years,  the  house  of  God  was  built  anew, 
this  whole  period  is  the  prophetic  age.  For  al¬ 
though  1  both  the  patriarch  Noah  himself,  in 
whose  days  the  whole  earth  was  destroyed  by 
the  flood,  and  others  before  and  after  him  down 
to  this  time  when  there  began  to  be  kings  over 
the  people  of  God,  may  not  undeservedly  be 
styled  prophets,  on  account  of  certain  things 
pertaining  to  the  city  of  God  and  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  which  they  either  predicted  or  in  any 
way  signified  should  come  to  pass,  and  especially 
since  we  read  that  some  of  them,  as  Abraham 
and  Moses,  were  expressly  so  styled,  yet  those 
are  most  and  chiefly  called  the  days  of  the 


prophets  from  the  time  when  Samuel  began  to 
prophesy,  who  at  God’s  command  first  anointed 
Saul  to  be  king,  and,  on  his  rejection,  David 
himself,  whom  others  of  his  issue  should  suc¬ 
ceed  as  long  as  it  was  fitting  they  should  do  so. 
If,  therefore,  I  wished  to  rehearse  all  that  the 
prophets  have  predicted  concerning  Christ, 
while  the  city  of  God,  with  its  members  dying 
and  being  born  in  constant  succession,  ran  its 
course  through  those  times,  this  work  would  ex¬ 
tend  beyond  all  bounds.  First,  because  the 
Scripture  itself,  even  when,  in  treating  in  order 
of  the  kings  and  of  their  deeds  and  the  events  of 
their  reigns,  it  seems  to  be  occupied  in  narrating 
as  with  historical  diligence  the  affairs  transact¬ 
ed,  will  be  found,  if  the  things  handled  by  it  are 
considered  with  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  ei¬ 
ther  more,  or  certainly  not  less,  intent  on  fore¬ 
telling  things  to  come  than  on  relating  things 
past.  And  who  that  thinks  even  a  little  about  it 
does  not  know  how  laborious  and  prolix  a  work 
it  would  be,  and  how  many  volumes  it  would  re¬ 
quire  to  search  this  out  by  thorough  investiga¬ 
tion  and  demonstrate  it  by  argument?  And  then, 
because  of  that  which  without  dispute  pertains 
to  prophecy,  there  are  so  many  things  concern¬ 
ing  Christ  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is 
the  city  of  God,  that  to  explain  these  a  larger 
discussion  would  be  necessary  than  the  due  pro¬ 
portion  of  this  work  admits  of.  Therefore  I 
shall,  if  I  can,  so  limit  myself,  that  in  carrying 


450  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


through  this  work,  I  may,  with  God's  help,  nei¬ 
ther  say  what  is  superfluous  nor  omit  what  is 
necessary. 

Chap.  2.  At  what  time  the  promise  of  God  was 
fulfilled  concerning  the  land  0 f  Canaan ,  which 
even  carnal  Israel  got  in  possession 
In  the  preceding  book  we  said,  that  in  the 
promise  of  God  to  Abraham  two  things  were 
promised  from  the  beginning,  the  one,  namely, 
that  his  seed  should  possess  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  was  intimated  when  it  was  said,  “Go  into 
a  land  that  I  will  show  thee,  and  I  will  make  of 
thee  a  great  nation”;1  but  the  other  far  more  ex¬ 
cellent,  concerning  not  the  carnal  but  the  spir¬ 
itual  seed,  by  which  he  is  the  father,  not  of  the 
one  nation  of  Israel,  but  of  all  nations  who  fol¬ 
low  the  footsteps  of  his  faith,  which  began  to  be 
promised  in  these  words,  “And  in  thee  shall  all 
families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.”2  And  there¬ 
after  we  showed  by  yet  many  other  proofs  that 
these  two  things  were  promised.  Therefore  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  that  is,  the  people  of  Israel  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  flesh,  already  was  in  the  land  of 
promise ;  and  there,  not  only  by  holding  and  pos¬ 
sessing  the  cities  of  the  enemies,  but  also  by  hav¬ 
ing  kings,  had  already  begun  to  reign,  the  prom¬ 
ises  of  God  concerning  that  people  being  already 
in  great  part  fulfilled:  not  only  those  that  were 
made  to  those  three  fathers.  Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob,  and  whatever  others  were  made  in  their 
times,  but  those  also  that  were  made  through 
Moses  himself,  by  whom  the  same  people  was 
set  free  from  servitude  in  Egypt  and  by  whom 
all  bygone  things  were  revealed  in  his  times, 
when  he  led  the  people  through  the  wilderness. 
But  neither  by  the  illustrious  leader  Jesus  the 
son  of  Nun.  who  led  that  people  into  the  land  of 
promise,  and,  after  driving  out  the  nations,  di¬ 
vided  it  among  the  twelve  tribes  according  to 
God’s  command,  and  died;  nor  after  him,  in  the 
whole  time  of  the  judges,  was  the  promise  of 
God  concerning  the  land  of  Canaan  fulfilled, 
that  it  should  extend  from  some  river  of  Egypt 
even  to  the  great  river  Euphrates ;  nor  yet  was  it 
still  prophesied  as  to  come,  but  its  fulfillment 
was  expected.  And  it  was  fulfilled  through  Da¬ 
vid,  and  Solomon  his  son,  whose  kingdom  was 
extended  over  the  whole  promised  space;  for 
they  subdued  all  those  nations,  and  made  them 
tributary.  And  thus,  under  those  kings,  the  seed 
of  Abraham  was  established  in  the  land  of  prom¬ 
ise  according  to  the  flesh,  that  is,  in  the  land  of 
Canaan,  so  that  nothing  yet  remained  to  the 
complete  fulfillment  of  that  earthly  promise  of 
JGen.  12.  1,  2.  2Gen.  12.  3. 


God,  except  that,  so  far  as  pertains  to  temporal 
prosperity,  the  Hebrew  nation  should  remain  in 
the  same  land  by  the  succession  of  posterity  in 
an  unshaken  state  even  to  the  end  of  this  mortal 
age,  if  it  obeyed  the  laws  of  the  Lord  its  God. 
But  since  God  knew  it  would  not  do  this.  He 
used  His  temporal  punishments  also  for  train¬ 
ing  His  few  faithful  ones  in  it  and  for  giving 
needful  warning  to  those  who  should  afterwards 
be  in  all  nations,  in  whom  the  other  promise,  re¬ 
vealed  in  the  New  Testament,  was  about  to  be 
fulfilled  through  the  incarnation  of  Christ. 

Chap.  3.  Of  the  three- fold  meaning  of  the 
prophecies,  which  are  to  be  referred  now  to 
the  earthly ,  now  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem , 
and  now  again  to  both 

Wherefore  just  as  that  divine  oracle  to  Abra¬ 
ham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all  the  other  pro¬ 
phetic  signs  or  sayings  which  are  given  in  the 
earlier  sacred  writings,  so  also  the  other  prophe¬ 
cies  from  this  time  of  the  kings  pertain  partly  to 
the  nation  of  Abraham’s  flesh  and  partly  to  that 
seed  of  his  in  which  all  nations  are  blessed  as  fel¬ 
low-heirs  of  Christ  by  the  New  Testament,  to 
the  possessing  of  eternal  life  and  the  kingdom  of 
the  heavens.  Therefore  they  pertain  partly  to 
the  bond  maid  who  gendereth  to  bondage,  that 
is,  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  bondage 
with  her  children ;  but  partly  to  the  free  city  of 
God,  that  is,  the  true  Jerusalem  eternal  in  the 
heavens,  whose  children  are  all  those  that  live 
according  to  God  in  the  earth:  but  there  are 
some  things  among  them  which  are  understood 
to  pertain  to  both — to  the  bond  maid  properly, 
to  the  free  woman  figuratively.3 

Therefore  prophetic  utterances  of  three  kinds 
are  to  be  found;  forasmuch  as  there  are  some  re¬ 
lating  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  some  to  the 
heavenly,  and  some  to  both.  I  think  it  proper  to 
prove  what  I  say  by  examples.  The  prophet  Na¬ 
than  was  sent  to  convict  king  David  of  heinous 
sin,  and  predict  to  him  what  future  evils  should 
be  consequent  on  it.  Who  can  question  that  this 
and  the  like  pertain  to  the  terrestrial  city, 
whether  publicly,  that  is,  for  the  safety  or  help 
of  the  people,  or  privately,  when  there  are  given 
forth  for  each  one’s  private  good  divine  utter¬ 
ances  whereby  something  of  the  future  may  be 
known  for  the  use  of  temporal  life?  But  where 
we  read,  “Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord, 
that  I  will  make  for  the  house  of  Israel,  and  for 
the  house  of  Judah,  a  new  testament:  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  testament  that  I  settled  for  their 
fathers  in  the  day  when  I  laid  hold  of  their  hand 
3Gal.  4.  22-31. 


THE  CITY  OF 

to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ;  because 
they  continued  not  in  my  testament,  and  I  re¬ 
garded  them  not,  saith  the  Lord.  For  this  is  the 
testament  that  I  will  make  for  the  house  of  Is¬ 
rael  :  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  give 
my  laws  in  their  mind,  and  will  write  them  upon 
their  hearts,  and  I  will  see  to  them ;  and  I  will 
be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a 
people”;1  without  doubt  this  is  prophesied  to 
the  Jerusalem  above,  whose  reward  is  God  Him¬ 
self,  and  whose  chief  and  entire  good  it  is  to  have 
Him,  and  to  be  His.  But  this  pertains  to  both, 
that  the  city  of  God  is  called  Jerusalem,  and 
that  it  is  prophesied  the  house  of  God  shall  be  in 
it;  and  this  prophecy  seems  to  be  fulfilled  when 
king  Solomon  builds  that  most  noble  temple. 
For  these  things  both  happened  in  the  earthly 
Jerusalem,  as  history  shows,  and  were  types  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  And  this  kind  of  proph¬ 
ecy,  as  it  were  compacted  and  commingled  of 
both  the  others  in  the  ancient  canonical  books, 
containing  historical  narratives,  is  of  very  great 
significance,  and  has  exercised  and  exercises 
greatly  the  wits  of  those  who  search  holy  writ. 
For  example,  what  we  read  of  historically  as 
predicted  and  fulfilled  in  the  seed  of  Abraham 
according  to  the  flesh,  we  must  also  inquire  the 
allegorical  meaning  of,  as  it  is  to  be  fulfilled  in 
the  seed  of  Abraham  according  to  faith.  And  so 
much  is  this  the  case  that  some  have  thought 
there  is  nothing  in  these  books  either  foretold 
and  effected,  or  effected  although  not  foretold, 
that  does  not  insinuate  something  else  which  is 
to  be  referred  by  figurative  signification  to  the 
city  of  God  on  high,  and  to  her  children  who  are 
pilgrims  in  this  life.  But  if  this  be  so,  then  the 
utterances  of  the  prophets,  or  rather  the  whole 
of  those  Scriptures  that  are  reckoned  under  the 
title  of  the  Old  Testament,  will  be  not  of  three, 
but  of  two  different  kinds.  For  there  will  be 
nothing  there  which  pertains  to  the  terrestrial 
Jerusalem  only,  if  whatever  is  there  said  and 
fulfilled  of  or  concerning  her  signifies  something 
which  also  refers  by  allegorical  prefiguration  to 
the  celestial  Jerusalem;  but  there  will  be  only 
two  kinds,  one  that  pertains  to  the  free  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  the  other  to  both.  But  just  as,  I  think,  they 
err  greatly  who  are  of  opinion  that  none  of  the 
records  of  affairs  in  that  kind  of  writings  mean 
anything  more  than  that  they  so  happened,  so  I 
think  those  very  daring  who  contend  that  the 
whole  gist  of  their  contents  lies  in  allegorical 
significations.  Therefore  I  have  said  they  are 
three-fold,  not  two-fold.  Yet,  in  holding  this 
opinion,  I  do  not  blame  those  who  may  be  able 
^eb.  8.  8-10. 


GOD  XVII.  2-4  451 

to  draw  out  of  everything  there  a  spiritual 
meaning,  only  saving,  first  of  all,  the  historical 
truth.  For  the  rest,  what  believer  can  doubt  that 
those  things  are  spoken  vainly  which  are  such 
that,  whether  said  to  have  been  done  or  to  be 
yet  to  come,  they  do  not  beseem  either  human 
or  divine  affairs?  Who  would  not  recall  these  to 
spiritual  understanding  if  he  could,  or  confess 
that  they  should  be  recalled  by  him  who  is  able? 

Chap.  4.  About  the  prefigured  change  of  the  Is¬ 
raelite  kingdom  and  priesthood,  and  about 
the  things  Hannah  the  mother  of  Samuel 
prophesied,  personating  the  Church 
Therefore  the  advance  of  the  city  of  God, 
where  it  reached  the  times  of  the  kings,  yielded 
a  figure,  when,  on  the  rejection  of  Saul,  David 
first  obtained  the  kingdom  on  such  a  footing 
that  thenceforth  his  descendants  should  reign  in 
the  earthly  Jerusalem  in  continual  succession; 
for  the  course  of  affairs  signified  and  foretold 
what  is  not  to  be  passed  by  in  silence,  concern¬ 
ing  the  change  of  things  to  come,  what  belongs 
to  both  Testaments,  the  Old  and  the  New — 
where  the  priesthood  and  kingdom  are  changed 
by  one  who  is  a  priest,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
king,  new  and  everlasting,  even  Christ  Jesus. 
For  both  the  substitution  in  the  ministry  of 
God,  on  Eli’s  rejection  as  priest,  of  Samuel,  who 
executed  at  once  the  office  of  priest  and  judge, 
and  the  establishment  of  David  in  the  kingdom, 
when  Saul  was  rejected,  typified  this  of  which  I 
speak.  And  Hannah  herself,  the  mother  of  Sam¬ 
uel,  who  formerly  was  barren,  and  afterwards 
was  gladdened  with  fertility,  does  not  seem  to 
prophesy  anything  else,  when  she  exultingly 
pours  forth  her  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord,  on 
yielding  up  to  God  the  same  boy  she  had  borne 
and  weaned  with  the  same  piety  with  which  she 
had  vowed  him.  For  she  says,  “My  heart  is  made 
strong  in  the  Lord,  and  my  horn  is  exalted  in  my 
God;  my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  enemies; 
I  am  made  glad  in  Thy  salvation.  Because  there 
is  none  holy  as  the  Lord;  and  none  is  righteous 
as  our  God:  there  is  none  holy  save  Thee.  Do 
not  glory  so  proudly,  and  do  not  speak  lofty 
things,  neither  let  vaunting  talk  come  out  of 
your  mouth;  for  a  God  of  knowledge  is  the 
Lord,  and  a  God  preparing  His  curious  designs. 
The  bow  of  the  mighty  hath  He  made  weak,  and 
the  weak  are  girded  with  strength.  They  that 
were  full  of  bread  are  diminished;  and  the  hun¬ 
gry  have  passed  beyond  the  earth :  for  the  barren 
hath  borne  seven ;  and  she  that  hath  many  chil¬ 
dren  is  waxed  feeble.  The  Lord  killeth  and  mak- 
eth  alive :  He  bringeth  down  to  hell,  and  bring- 


452  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


eth  up  again.  The  Lord  maketh  poor  and  maketh 
rich :  He  bringeth  low  and  lifteth  up.  He  raiseth 
up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifteth  up  the 
beggar  from  the  dunghill,  that  He  may  set  him 
among  the  mighty  of  [His]  people,  and  maketh 
them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory;  giving  the  vow 
to  him  that  voweth,  and  He  hath  blessed  the 
years  of  the  just:  for  man  is  not  mighty  in 
strength.  The  Lord  shall  make  His  adversary 
weak:  the  Lord  is  holy.  Let  not  the  prudent 
glory  in  his  prudence;  and  let  not  the  mighty 
glory  in  his  might ;  and  let  not  the  rich  glory  in 
his  riches :  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this, 
to  understand  and  know  the  Lord,  and  to  do 
judgment  and  justice  in  the  midst  of  the  earth. 
The  Lord  hath  ascended  into  the  heavens,  and 
hath  thundered:  He  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  for  He  is  righteous:  and  He  giveth 
strength  to  our  kings,  and  shall  exalt  the  horn  of 
His  Christ.”  1 

Do  you  say  that  these  are  the  words  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  weak  woman  giving  thanks  for  the  birth  of 
a  son?  Can  the  mind  of  men  be  so  much  averse 
to  the  light  of  truth  as  not  to  perceive  that  the 
sayings  this  woman  pours  forth  exceed  her  mea¬ 
sure?  Moreover,  he  who  is  suitably  inteiested  in 
these  things  which  have  already  begun  to  be  ful¬ 
filled  even  in  this  earthly  pilgrimage  also,  does 
he  not  apply  his  mind,  and  perceive,  and  ac¬ 
knowledge,  that  through  this  woman — whose 
very  name,  which  is  Hannah,  means  His  grace — 
the  very  Christian  religion,  the  very  city  of  God, 
whose  king  and  founder  is  Christ,  in  fine,  the 
very  grace  of  God,  hath  thus  spoken  by  the  pro¬ 
phetic  Spirit,  whereby  the  proud  are  cut  off  so 
that  they  fall,  and  the  humble  are  filled  so  that 
they  rise,  which  that  hymn  chiefly  celebrates? 
Unless  perchance  any  one  will  say  that  this 
woman  prophesied  nothing,  but  only  lauded  God 
with  exulting  praise  on  account  of  the  son  whom 
she  had  obtained  in  answer  to  prayer.  What  then 
does  she  mean  when  she  says,  “The  bow  of  the 
mighty  hath  He  made  weak,  and  the  weak  are 
girded  with  strength;  they  that  were  full  of 
bread  are  diminished,  and  the  hungry  have  gone 
beyond  the  earth ;  for  the  barren  hath  borne  sev¬ 
en,  and  she  that  hath  many  children  is  waxed 
feeble”?  Had  she  herself  borne  seven,  although 
she  had  been  barren?  She  had  only  one  when 
she  said  that;  neither  did  she  bear  seven  after¬ 
wards,  nor  six,  with  whom  Samuel  himself  might 
be  the  seventh,  but  three  males  and  two  females. 
And  then,  when  as  yet  no  one  was  king  over  that 
people,  whence,  if  she  did  not  prophesy,  did  she 

1I  Sam.  2.  i-io. 


say  what  she  puts  at  the  end,  “He  giveth 
strength  to  our  kings,  and  shall  exalt  the  horn  of 
His  Christ”? 

Therefore  let  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  city  of 
the  great  King,2  full  of  grace,  prolific  of  off¬ 
spring,  let  her  say  what  the  prophecy  uttered 
about  her  so  long  before  by  the  mouth  of  this 
pious  mother  confesses,  “My  heart  is  made 
strong  in  the  Lord,  and  my  horn  is  exalted  in  my 
God.”  Her  heart  is  truly  made  strong,  and  her 
horn  is  truly  exalted,  because  not  in  herself,  but 
in  the  Lord  her  God.  “My  mouth  is  enlarged 
over  mine  enemies”;  because  even  in  pressing 
straits  the  word  of  God  is  not  bound,  not  even  in 
preachers  who  are  bound.3  “I  am  made  glad,” 
she  says,  “in  Thy  salvation.”  This  is  Christ 
Jesus  Himself,  whom  old  Simeon,  as  we  read  in 
the  Gospel,  embracing  as  a  little  one,  yet  recog¬ 
nizing  as  great,  said,  “Lord,  now  lettest  Thou 
Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have 
seen  Thy  salvation.” 4  Therefore  may  the 
Church  say,  “I  am  made  glad  in  Thy  salvation. 
For  there  is  none  holy  as  the  Lord,  and  none  is 
righteous  as  our  God”;  as  holy  and  sanctifying, 
just  and  justifying.5  “There  is  none  holy  beside 
Thee”;  because  no  one  becomes  so  except  by 
reason  of  Thee.  And  then  it  follows,  “Do  not 
glory  so  proudly,  and  do  not  speak  lofty  things, 
neither  let  vaunting  talk  come  out  of  your 
mouth.  For  a  God  of  knowledge  is  the  Lord.”  He 
knows  you  even  when  no  one  knows;  for  “he 
who  thinketh  himself  to  be  something  when  he 
is  nothing  deceiveth  himself.”  6  These  things  are 
said  to  the  adversaries  of  the  city  of  God  who 
belong  to  Babylon,  who  presume  in  their  own 
strength,  and  glory  in  themselves,  not  in  the 
Lord;  of  wThom  are  also  the  carnal  Israelites,  the 
earth-born  inhabitants  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem, 
who,  as  saith  the  apostle,  “being  ignorant  of  the 
righteousness  of  God,”7  that  is,  wThich God,  Who 
alone  is  just,  and  the  justifier,  gives  to  man. 
“and  wishing  to  establish  their  own,”  that  is, 
which  is  as  it  were  procured  by  their  own  selves, 
not  bestowed  by  Him,  “are  not  subject  to  the 
righteousness  of  God.”  just  because  they  are 
proud,  and  think  they  are  able  to  please  God 
with  their  own,  not  with  that  which  is  of  God. 
who  is  the  God  of  knowledge,  and  therefore  also 
takes  the  oversight  of  consciences,  there  behold¬ 
ing  the  thoughts  of  men  that  they  are  vain,8  if 
they  are  of  men,  and  are  not  from  Him.  “And 
preparing,”  she  says,  “His  curious  designs.” 

2Ps.  48.  2.  3II  Tim.  2.  9;  Eph.  6.  20. 

4Luke,  2.  25-30.  5Rom.  3.  26?  6Gal.  6.  3. 

7Rom.  10.  3.  8Ps.  94.  11 ;  I  Cor.  3.  20. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  4  453 


What  curious  designs  do  we  think  these  are, 
save  that  the  proud  must  fall,  and  the  humble 
rise?  These  curious  designs  she  recounts,  say¬ 
ing,  “The  bow  of  the  mighty  is  made  weak,  and 
the  weak  are  girded  with  strength.”  The  bow  is 
made  weak,  that  is,  the  intention  of  those  who 
think  themselves  so  powerful,  that  without  the 
gift  and  help  of  God  they  are  able  by  human 
sufficiency  to  fulfill  the  divine  commandments; 
and  those  are  girded  with  strength  whose  inward 
cry  is,  ‘'Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord,  for  I  am 
weak.”1 

“They  that  were  full  of  bread.”  she  says,  “are 
diminished,  and  the  hungry  have  gone  beyond 
the  earth.”  Who  are  to  be  understood  as  full  of 
bread  except  those  same  who  were  as  if  mighty, 
that  is.  the  Israelites,  to  whom  were  committed 
the  oracles  of  God?2  But  among  that  people  the 
children  of  the  bond  maid  were  diminished — by 
which  word  minus ,  although  it  is  Latin,  the 
idea  is  well  expressed  that  from  being  greater 
they  were  made  less — because,  even  in  the  very 
bread,  that  is,  the  divine  oracles,  which  the  Is¬ 
raelites  alone  of  all  nations  have  received,  they 
savour  earthly  things.  But  the  nations  to  whom 
that  law  was  not  given,  after  they  have  come 
through  the  New  Testament  to  these  oracles,  by 
thirsting  much  have  gone  beyond  the  earth,  be¬ 
cause  in  them  they  have  savoured  not  earthly, 
but  heavenly  things.  And  the  reason  why  this  is 
done  is  as  it  were  sought;  “for  the  barren,”  she 
says,  “hath  borne  seven,  and  she  that  hath  many 
children  is  waxed  feeble.”  Here  all  that  had  been 
prophesied  hath  shone  forth  to  those  who  un¬ 
derstood  the  number  seven,  which  signifies  the 
perfection  of  the  universal  Church.  For  which 
reason  also  the  Apostle  John  writes  to  the  seven 
churches,3  showing  in  that  way  that  he  writes  to 
the  totality  of  the  one  Church;  and  in  the  Prov¬ 
erbs  of  Solomon  it  is  said  aforetime,  prefiguring 
this,  “Wisdom  hath  builded  her  house,  she  hath 
strengthened  her  seven  pillars.”4  For  the  city  of 
God  was  barren  in  all  nations  before  that  child 
arose  whom  we  see.  We  also  see  that  the  tem¬ 
poral  Jerusalem,  who  had  many  children,  is  now 
waxed  feeble.  Because,  whoever  in  her  were 
sons  of  the  free  woman  were  her  strength;  but 
now,  forasmuch  as  the  letter  is  there,  and  not 
the  spirit,  having  lost  her  strength,  she  is  waxed 
feeble. 

“The  Lord  killeth  and  maketh  alive” :  He  has 
killed  her  who  had  many  children,  and  made  this 
barren  one  alive,  so  that  she  has  borne  seven.  Al¬ 
though  it  may  be  more  suitably  understood  that 
4Ps.  6.  2.  2Rom.  3.  2.  3Rev.  i.  4.  4Prov.  9. 1. 


He  has  made  those  same  alive  whom  He  has 
killed.  For  she,  as  it  were,  repeats  that  by  add¬ 
ing,  “He  bringeth  down  to  hell,  and  bringeth 
up.”  To  whom  truly  the  apostle  says,  “If  ye  be 
dead  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.”5  Therefore  they  are  killed  by  the  Lord  in 
a  salutary  way,  so  that  he  adds,  “Savour  things 
which  are  above,  not  things  on  the  earth”;  so 
that  these  are  they  who,  hungering,  have  passed 
beyond  the  earth.  “For  ye  are  dead,”  he  says: 
behold  how  God  savingly  kills !  Then  there  fol¬ 
lows,  “And  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God”: 
behold  how  God  makes  the  same  alive!  But  does 
He  bring  them  down  to  hell  and  bring  them  up 
again?  It  is  without  controversy  among  believ¬ 
ers  that  we  best  see  both  parts  of  this  work  ful¬ 
filled  in  Him,  to  wit  our  Head,  with  whom  the 
apostle  has  said  our  life  is  hid  in  God.  “For  when 
He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him 
up  for  us  all,” 6  in  that  way,  certainly.  He  has 
killed  Him.  And  forasmuch  as  He  raised  Him 
up  again  from  the  dead,  He  has  made  Him  alive 
again.  And  since  His  voice  is  acknowledged  in 
the  prophecy,  “Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
hell,”7  He  has  brought  Him  down  to  hell  and 
brought  Him  up  again.  By  this  poverty  of  His 
we  are  made  rich;8  for  “the  Lord  maketh  poor 
and  maketh  rich.”  But  that  we  may  know  what 
this  is,  let  us  hear  what  follows:  “He  bringeth 
low  and  lifteth  up”;  and  truly  He  humbles  the 
proud  and  exalts  the  humble.  Which  wTe  also 
read  elsewhere,  “God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 
giveth  grace  to  the  humble.”  9  This  is  the  bur¬ 
den  of  the  entire  song  of  this  woman  whose 
name  is  interpreted  His  grace. 

Farther,  what  is  added,  “He  raiseth  up  the 
poor  from  the  earth,”  I  understand  of  none  bet¬ 
ter  than  of  Him  Who,  as  was  said  a  little  ago, 
“was  made  poor  for  us,  when  He  was  rich,  that 
by  His  poverty  we  might  be  made  rich.”  For  He 
raised  Him  from  the  earth  so  quickly  that  His 
flesh  did  not  see  corruption.  Nor  shall  I  divert 
from  Him  what  is  added,  “And  raiseth  up  the 
poor  from  the  dunghill.”  For  indeed  he  who  is 
the  poor  man  is  also  the  beggar.  But  by  the 
dunghill  from  which  he  is  lifted  up  wre  are  with 
the  greatest  reason  to  understand  the  persecut¬ 
ing  Jews,  of  whom  the  apostle  says,  when  telling 
that  when  he  belonged  to  them  he  persecuted 
the  Church,  “What  things  were  gain  to  me, 
those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ;  and  I  have 

5Col.  3.  1-3.  6Rom.  8.  32. 

7Ps.  16.  10;  Acts,  2.  27,  31.  8II  Cor.  8.  9. 

9Jas.  4-  6;  I  Pet.  5.  5. 


454  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


counted  them  not  only  loss,  but  even  dung,  that 
I  might  win  Christ.”  1  Therefore  that  poor  one 
is  raised  up  from  the  earth  above  all  the  rich, 
and  that  beggar  is  lifted  up  from  that  dunghill 
above  all  the  wealthy,  “that  he  may  sit  among 
the  mighty  of  the  people,”  to  whom  He  says. 
“Ye  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,”  2  “and  to 
make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory.”  For 
these  mighty  ones  had  said,  “Lo,  we  have  for¬ 
saken  all  and  followed  Thee.”  They  had  most 
mightily  vowed  this  vow. 

But  whence  do  they  receive  this,  except  from 
Him  of  whom  it  is  here  immediately  said,  “Giv¬ 
ing  the  vow  to  him  that  voweth”?  Otherwise 
they  would  be  of  those  mighty  ones  whose  bow 
is  weakened.  “Giving,”  she  saith,  “the  vow  to 
him  that  voweth.”  For  no  one  could  vow  any¬ 
thing  acceptable  to  God,  unless  he  received  from 
Him  that  which  he  might  vow.  There  follows, 
“And  He  hath  blessed  the  years  of  the  just,”  to 
wit,  that  he  may  live  for  ever  with  Him  to  whom 
it  is  said,  “And  Thy  years  shall  have  no  end.” 
For  there  the  years  abide;  but  here  they  pass 
away,  yea,  they  perish;  for  before  they  Qpme 
they  are  not,  and  when  they  shall  have  come 
they  shall  not  be,  because  they  bring  their  own 
end  with  them.  Now  of  these  two,  that  is,  “giv¬ 
ing  the  vow  to  him  that  voweth,”  and  “He  hath 
blessed  the  years  of  the  just,”  the  one  is  what  we 
do.  the  other  what  we  receive.  But  this  other  is 
not  received  from  God,  the  liberal  giver,  until 
He,  the  helper.  Himself  has  enabled  us  for  the 
former;  “for  man  is  not  mighty  in  strength.” 
“The  Lord  shall  make  his  adversary  weak,”  to 
wit,  him  who  envies  the  man  that  vows,  and  re¬ 
sists  him,  lest  he  should  fulfil  what  he  has 
vowed.  Owing  to  the  ambiguity  of  the  Greek,  it 
may  also  be  understood  “his  own  adversary.” 
For  when  God  has  begun  to  possess  us.  immedi¬ 
ately  he  who  had  been  our  adversary  becomes 
His,  and  is  conquered  by  us ;  but  not  by  our  own 
strength,  “for  man  is  not  mighty  in  strength.” 
Therefore  “the  Lord  shall  make  His  own  adver¬ 
sary  weak,  the  Lord  is  holy,”  that  he  may  be 
conquered  by  the  saints,  whom  the  Lord,  the 
Holy  of  holies,  hath  made  saints.  For  this  rea¬ 
son,  “let  not  the  prudent  glory  in  his  prudence, 
and  let  not  the  mighty  glory  in  his  might,  and 
let  not  the  rich  glory  in  his  riches ;  but  let  him 
that  glorieth  glory  in  this — to  understand  and 
know  the  Lord,  and  to  do  judgment  and  justice 
in  the  midst  of  the  earth.”  He  in  no  small  mea¬ 
sure  understands  and  knows  the  Lord  who  un¬ 
derstands  and  knows  that  even  this,  that  he  can 
understand  and  know  the  Lord,  is  given  to  him 

1Phil.  3.  7,  8.  2Matt.  ig.  27,  28. 


by  the  Lord.  “For  what  hast  thou,”  saith  the 
apostle,  “that  thou  hast  not  received?  But  if 
thou  hast  received  it,  why  dost  thou  glory  as  if 
thou  hadst  not  received  it?”  3  That  is,  as  if  thou 
hadst  of  thine  own  self  whereof  thou  mightest 
glory.  Now,  he  does  judgment  and  justice  who 
lives  aright.  But  he  lives  aright  who  yields  obedi¬ 
ence  to  God  when  He  commands.  “The  end  of 
the  commandment,”  that  is,  to  which  the  com¬ 
mandment  has  reference,  “is  charity  out  of  a 
pure  heart,  and  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  un¬ 
feigned.”  Moreover,  this  “charity,”  as  the  Apos¬ 
tle  John  testifies,  “is  of  God.”  4  Therefore  to  do 
justice  and  judgment  is  of  God.  But  what  is  “in 
the  midst  of  the  earth”?  For  ought  those  who 
dwell  in  the  ends  of  the  earth  not  to  do  judg¬ 
ment  and  justice?  Who  would  say  so?  Why, 
then,  is  it  added,  “in  the  midst  of  the  earth”? 
For  if  this  had  not  been  added,  and  it  had  only 
been  said,  “To  do  judgment  and  justice,”  this 
commandment  would  rather  have  pertained  to 
both  kinds  of  men — both  those  dwelling  inland 
and  those  on  the  sea-coast.  But  lest  any  one 
should  think  that,  after  the  end  of  the  life  led  in 
this  body,  there  remains  a  time  for  doing  judg¬ 
ment  and  justice  which  he  has  not  done  while 
he  was  in  the  flesh,  and  that  the  divine  judg¬ 
ment  can  thus  be  escaped,  “in  the  midst  of  the 
earth”  appears  to  me  to  be  said  of  the  time  when 
every  one  lives  in  the  body;  for  in  this  life  every 
one  carries  about  his  own  earth,  which,  on  a 
man’s  dying,  the  common  earth  takes  back,  to 
be  surely  returned  to  him  on  his  rising  again. 
Therefore  “in  the  midst  of  the  earth.”  that  is, 
while  our  soul  is  shut  up  in  this  earthly  body, 
judgment  and  justice  are  to  be  done,  which 
shall  be  profitable  for  us  hereafter,  when  “every 
one  shall  receive  according  to  that  he  hath  done 
in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad.”5  For  when 
the  apostle  there  says  “in  the  body,”  he  means 
in  the  time  he  has  lived  in  the  body.  Yet  if  any 
one  blaspheme  with  malicious  mind  and  impious 
thought,  without  any  member  of  his  body  being 
employed  in  it,  he  shall  not  therefore  be  guilt¬ 
less  because  he  has  not  done  it  with  bodily  mo¬ 
tion,  for  he  will  have  done  it  in  that  time  which 
he  has  spent  in  the  body.  In  the  same  way  we 
may  suitably  understand  what  we  read  in  the 
psalm,  “But  God,  our  King  before  the  worlds, 
hath  wrought  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the 
earth”;6  so  that  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be  under¬ 
stood  to  be  our  God  Who  is  before  the  worlds, 
because  by  Him  the  worlds  were  made,  working 
our  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  earth,  for  the 

3I  Cor.  4.  7.  4I  John,  4.  7.  5II  Cor.  5.  10. 

6Ps.  74.  12. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  in  an  earthly 
body. 

Then  after  Hannah  has  prophesied  in  these 
words,  that  he  who  glorieth  ought  to  glory  not 
in  himself  at  all,  but  in  the  Lord,  she  says,  on 
account  of  the  retribution  which  is  to  come  on 
the  day  of  judgment,  “The  Lord  hath  ascended 
into  the  heavens,  and  hath  thundered :  He  shall 
judge  the  ends  of  the  earth,  for  He  is  righteous.” 
Throughout  she  holds  to  the  order  of  the  creed 
of  Christians:  “For  the  Lord  Christ  has  ascend¬ 
ed  into  heaven,  and  is  to  come  thence  to  judge 
the  quick  and  dead.”1  For,  as  saith  the  apostle, 
“Who  hath  ascended  but  He  Who  hath  also  de¬ 
scended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth?  He 
that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  ascended 
up  above  all  heavens,  that  He  might  fill  all 
things.”2  Therefore  He  hath  thundered  through 
His  clouds,  which  He  hath  filled  with  His  Holy 
Spirit  when  He  ascended  up.  Concerning  which 
the  bond  maid  Jerusalem — that  is,  the  unfruit¬ 
ful  vineyard — is  threatened  in  Isaiah  the  proph¬ 
et  that  they  shall  rain  no  showers  upon  her.  But 
“He  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  earth”  is  spok¬ 
en  as  if  it  had  been  said,  “even  the  extremes  of 
the  earth.”  For  it  does  not  mean  that  He  shall 
not  judge  the  other  parts  of  the  earth,  who, 
without  doubt,  shall  judge  all  men.  But  it  is  bet¬ 
ter  to  understand  by  the  extremes  of  the  earth 
the  extremes  of  man,  since  those  things  shall  not 
be  judged  which,  in  the  middle  time,  are  changed 
for  the  better  or  the  worse,  but  the  ending  in 
which  he  shall  be  found  who  is  judged.  For 
which  reason  it  is  said,  “He  that  shall  persevere 
even  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved.”3 
He,  therefore,  who  perseveringly  does  judg¬ 
ment  and  justice  in  the  midst  of  the  earth  shall 
not  be  condemned  when  the  extremes  of  the 
earth  shall  be  judged.  “And  giveth,”  she  saith, 
“strength  to  our  kings,”  that  He  may  not  con¬ 
demn  them  in  judging.  He  giveth  them  strength 
whereby  as  kings  they  rule  the  flesh,  and  con¬ 
quer  the  world  in  Him  who  hath  poured  out  His 
blood  for  them.  “And  shall  exalt  the  horn  of  His 
Christ.’/  How  shall  Christ  exalt  the  horn  of  His 
Christ?  For  He  of  Whom  it  was  said  above,  “The 
Lord  hath  ascended  into  the  heavens,”  meaning 
the  Lord  Christ,  Himself,  as  it  is  said  here, 
“shall  exalt  the  horn  of  His  Christ.”  Who,  there¬ 
fore,  is  the  Christ  of  His  Christ?  Does  it  mean 
that  He  shall  exalt  the  horn  of  each  one  of  His 
believing  people,  as  she  says  in  the  beginning  of 
this  hymn,  “Mine  horn  is  exalted  in  my  God”? 
For  we  can  rightly  call  all  those  christs  who  are 
anointed  with  His  chrism,  forasmuch  as  the 

lActs,  io.  42.  2Eph.  4.  9,  10.  3Matt.  24.  13. 


GOD  XVII.  5  455 

whole  body  with  its  head  is  one  Christ.4  These 
things  hath  Hannah,  the  mother  of  Samuel,  the 
holy  and  much-praised  man,  prophesied,  in 
which,  indeed,  the  change  of  the  ancient  priest¬ 
hood  was  then  figured  and  is  now  fulfilled,  since 
she  that  had  many  children  is  waxed  feeble,  that 
the  barren  who  hath  borne  seven  might  have  the 
new  priesthood  in  Christ. 

Chap.  5.  Of  those  things  which  a  man  of  God 
spake  by  the  Spirit  to  Eli  the  priest,  signifying 
that  the  priesthood  which  had  been  appointed 
according  to  Aaron  was  to  be  taken  away 

But  this  is  said  more  plainly  by  a  man  of  God 
sent  to  Eli  the  priest  himself,  whose  name  in¬ 
deed  is  not  mentioned,  but  whose  office  and 
ministry  show  him  to  have  been  indubitably  a 
prophet.  For  it  is  thus  written:  “And  there  came 
a  man  of  God  unto  Eli,  and  said,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  I  plainly  revealed  myself  unto  thy  father’s 
house,  when  they  were  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
slaves  in  Pharaoh’s  house;  and  I  chose  thy  fa¬ 
ther’s  house  out  of  all  the  sceptres  of  Israel  to 
fill  the  office  of  priest  for  me,  to  go  up  to  my 
altar,  to  burn  incense  and  wear  the  ephod;  and  I 
gave  thy  father’s  house  for  food  all  the  offerings 
made  by  fire  of  the  children  of  Israel.  Where¬ 
fore  then  hast  thou  looked  at  mine  incense  and 
at  mine  offerings  with  an  impudent  eye,  and  hast 
glorified  thy  sons  above  me,  to  bless  the  first 
fruits  of  every  sacrifice  in  Israel  before  me? 
Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I 
said  thy  house  and  thy  father’s  house  should 
walk  before  me  for  ever:  but  now  the  Lord 
saith,  Be  it  far  from  me;  for  them  that  honour 
me  will  I  honour,  and  he  that  despiseth  me  shall 
be  despised.  Behold,  the  days  come,  that  I  will 
cut  off  thy  seed,  and  the  seed  of  thy  father’s 
house,  and  thou  shalt  never  have  an  old  man  in 
my  house.  And  I  will  cut  off  the  man  of  thine 
from  mine  altar,  so  that  his  eyes  shall  be  con¬ 
sumed,  and  his  heart  shall  melt  away;  and  every 
one  of  thy  house  that  is  left  shall  fall  by  the 
sword  of  men.  And  this  shall  be  a  sign  unto  thee 
that  shall  come  upon  these  thy  two  sons,  Hoph- 
ni  and  Phinehas ;  in  one  day  they  shall  die  both 
of  them.  And  I  will  raise  me  up  a  faithful  priest, 
that  shall  do  according  to  all  that  is  in  mine 
heart  and  in  my  soul ;  and  I  will  build  him  a  sure 
house,  and  he  shall  walk  before  my  Christ  for 
ever.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  he  who  is 
left  in  thine  house  shall  come  to  worship  him 
with  a  piece  of  money,  saying.  Put  me  into  one 
part  of  thy  priesthood,  that  I  may  eat  bread.”5 

4I  Cor.  12.  12.  5I  Sam.  2.  27-36. 


456  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


We  cannot  say  that  this  prophecy,  in  which 
the  change  of  the  ancient  priesthood  is  foretold 
with  so  great  plainness,  was  fulfilled  in  Samuel ; 
for  although  Samuel  was  not  of  another  tribe 
than  that  which  had  been  appointed  by  God  to 
serve  at  the  altar,  yet  he  was  not  of  the  sons  of 
Aaron,  whose  offspring  was  set  apart  that  the 
priests  might  be  taken  out  of  it.  And  thus  by 
that  transaction  also  the  same  change  which 
should  come  to  pass  through  Christ  Jesus  is  shad¬ 
owed  forth,  and  the  prophecy  itself  in  deed,  not 
in  word,  belonged  to  the  Old  Testament  prop¬ 
erly,  but  figuratively  to  the  New,  signifying  by 
the  fact  just  what  was  said  by  the  word  to  Eli 
the  priest  through  the  prophet.  For  there  were 
afterwards  priests  of  Aaron’s  race,  such  as  Za- 
dok  and  Abiathar  during  David’s  reign,  and  oth¬ 
ers  in  succession,  before  the  time  came  when 
those  things  which  were  predicted  so  long  before 
about  the  changing  of  the  priesthood  behoved 
to  be  fulfilled  by  Christ.  But  who  that  now  views 
these  things  with  a  believing  eye  does  not  see 
that  they  are  fulfilled?  Since,  indeed,  no  taber¬ 
nacle,  no  temple,  no  altar,  no  sacrifice,  and 
therefore  no  priest  either,  has  remained  to  the 
Jews,  to  whom  it  was  commanded  in  the  law 
of  God  that  he  should  be  ordained  of  the  seed 
of  Aaron ;  which  is  also  mentioned  here  by  the 
prophet,  when  he  says,  “Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel.  I  said  thy  house  and  thy  father’s 
house  shall  walk  before  me  for  ever:  but  now 
the  Lord  saith,  That  be  far  from  me:  for  them 
that  honour  me  will  I  honour,  and  he  that  de- 
spiseth  me  shall  be  despised.”  For  that  in  nam¬ 
ing  his  father’s  house  he  does  not  mean  that  of 
his  immediate  father,  but  that  of  Aaron,  who 
first  was  appointed  priest,  to  be  succeeded  by 
others  descended  from  him,  is  shown  by  the  pre¬ 
ceding  words,  when  he  says,  “I  was  revealed  un¬ 
to  thy  father’s  house,  when  they  were  in  the 
land  of  Egypt  slaves  in  Pharaoh’s  house;  and  I 
chose  thy  father’s  house  out  of  all  the  sceptres 
of  Israel  to  fill  the  office  of  priest  for  me.” 
Which  of  the  fathers  in  that  Egyptian  slavery, 
but  Aaron,  was  his  father,  who.  when  they  were 
set  free,  was  chosen  to  the  priesthood?  It  was  of 
his  lineage,  therefore,  he  has  said  in  this  passage 
it  should  come  to  pass  that  they  should  no  long¬ 
er  be  priests;  which  already  we  see  fulfilled.  If 
faith  be  watchful,  the  things  are  before  us:  they 
are  discerned,  they  are  grasped,  and  are  forced 
on  the  eyes  of  the  unwilling,  so  that  they  are 
seen:  “Behold  the  days  come,”  he  says,  “that  I 
will  cut  off  thy  seed,  and  the  seed  of  thy  father’s 
house,  and  thou  shalt  never  have  an  old  man  in 


mine  house.  And  I  will  cut  off  the  man  of  thine 
from  mine  altar,  so  that  his  eyes  shall  be  con¬ 
sumed  and  his  heart  shall  melt  away.”  Behold 
the  days  which  were  foretold  have  already  come. 
There  is  no  priest  after  the  order  of  Aaron;  and 
whoever  is  a  man  of  his  lineage,  when  he  sees 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Christians  prevailing  over 
the  whole  world,  but  that  great  honour  taken 
away  from  himself,  his  eyes  fail  and  his  soul 
melts  away  consumed  with  grief. 

But  what  follows  belongs  properly  to  the 
house  of  Eli,  to  whom  these  things  were  said: 
“And  every  one  of  thine  house  that  is  left  shall 
fall  by  the  sword  of  men.  And  this  shall  be  a 
sign  unto  thee  that  shall  come  upon  these  thy 
two  sons,  Hophni  and  Phinehas;  in  one  day  they 
shall  die  both  of  them.”  This,  therefore,  is  made 
a  sign  of  the  change  of  the  priesthood  from  this 
man’s  house,  by  which  it  is  signified  that  the 
priesthood  of  Aaron’s  house  is  to  be  changed. 
For  the  death  of  this  man’s  sons  signified  the 
death  not  of  the  men,  but  of  the  priesthood  it¬ 
self  of  the  sons  of  Aaron.  But  what  follows  per¬ 
tains  to  that  Priest  whom  Samuel  typified  by 
succeeding  this  one.  Therefore  the  things  which 
follow  are  said  of  Christ  Jesus,  the  true  Priest 
of  the  New  Testament:  “And  I  will  raise  me  up 
a  faithful  Priest  that  shall  do  according  to  all 
that  is  in  mine  heart  and  in  my  soul;  and  I  will 
build  Him  a  sure  house.”  The  same  is  the  eternal 
Jerusalem  above.  “And  He  shall  walk,”  saith 
He,  “before  my  Christ  always.”  “He  shall  wTalk” 
means  “he  shall  be  conversant  with,”  just  as  He 
had  said  before  of  Aaron’s  house,  “I  said  that 
thine  house  and  thy  father’s  house  shall  walk  be¬ 
fore  me  for  ever.”  But  what  He  says,  “He  shall 
walk  before  my  Christ.”  is  to  be  understood  en¬ 
tirely  of  the  house  itself,  not  of  the  priest,  who 
is  Christ  Himself,  the  Mediator  and  Saviour. 
His  house,  therefore,  shall  walk  before  Him. 
“Shall  walk”  may  also  be  understood  to  mean 
from  death  to  life,  all  the  time  this  mortality 
passes  through,  even  to  the  end  of  this  world. 
But  where  God  says,  “Who  will  do  all  that  is  in 
mine  heart  and  in  my  soul,”  we  must  not  think 
that  God  has  a  soul,  for  He  is  the  Author  of 
souls;  but  this  is  said  of  God  tropically,  not 
properly,  just  as  He  is  said  to  have  hands  and 
feet,  and  other  corporal  members.  And,  lest  it 
should  be  supposed  from  such  language  that 
man  in  the  form  of  this  flesh  is  made  in  the  im¬ 
age  of  God.  wings  also  are  ascribed  to  Him. 
which  man  has  not  at  all;  and  it  is  said  to  God. 
“Hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings,”1 
^s.  17.  8. 


THE  CITY  OF 

that  men  may  understand  that  such  things  are 
said  of  that  ineffable  nature  not  in  proper  but  in 
figurative  words. 

But  what  is  added,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
that  he  who  is  left  in  thine  house  shall  come  to 
worship  him,”  is  not  said  properly  of  the  house 
of  this  Eli,  but  of  that  Aaron,  the  men  of  which 
remained  even  to  the  advent  of  Jesus  Christ,  of 
which  race  there  are  not  wanting  men  even  to 
this  present.  For  of  that  house  of  Eli  it  had  al¬ 
ready  been  said  above,  “And  every  one  of  thine 
house  that  is  left  shall  fall  by  the  sword  of  men.” 
How,  therefore,  could  it  be  truly  said  here,  “And 
it  shall  come  to  pass  that  every  one  that  is  left 
shall  come  to  worship  him,”  if  that  is  true  that 
no  one  shall  escape  the  avenging  sword,  unless 
he  would  have  it  understood  of  those  who  belong 
to  the  race  of  that  whole  priesthood  after  the  or¬ 
der  of  Aaron?  Therefore,  if  it  is  of  these  the 
predestinated  remnant,  about  whom  another 
prophet  has  said,  “The  remnant  shall  be  saved” ; 1 
whence  the  apostle  also  says,  “Even  so  then  at 
this  time  also  the  remnant  according  to  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  grace  is  saved”;2  since  it  is  easily  under¬ 
stood  to  be  of  such  a  remnant  that  it  is  said,  “He 
that  is  left  in  thine  house,”  assuredly  he  believes 
in  Christ;  just  as  in  the  time  of  the  apostle  very 
many  of  that  nation  believed;  nor  are  there  now 
wanting  those,  although  very  few,  who  yet  be¬ 
lieve,  and  in  them  is  fulfilled  what  this  man  of 
God  has  here  immediately  added,  “He  shall 
come  to  worship  him  with  a  piece  of  money” ;  to 
worship  whom,  if  not  that  Chief  Priest,  Who  is 
also  God?  For  in  that  priesthood  after  the  order 
of  Aaron  men  did  not  come  to  the  temple  or  al¬ 
tar  of  God  for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  the 
priest.  But  what  is  that  he  says,  “With  a  piece 
of  money,”  if  not  the  short  word  of  faith,  about 
which  the  apostle  quotes  the  saying,  “A  consum¬ 
mating  and  shortening  word  will  the  Lord  make 
upon  the  earth”?3  But  that  money  is  put  for  the 
■word  the  psalm  is  a  witness,  where  it  is  sung, 
“The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words,  money 
tried  with  the  fire.”4 

What  jthen  does  he  say  who  comes  to  worship 
the  priest  of  God,  even  the  Priest  Who  is  God? 
“Put  me  into  one  part  of  Thy  priesthood,  to  eat 
bread.”  I  do  not  wish  to  be  set  in  the  honour  of 
my  fathers,  which  is  none;  put  me  in  a  part  of 
Thy  priesthood.  For  “I  have  chosen  to  be  mean 
in  Thine  house”;5  I  desire  to  be  a  member,  no 
matter  what,  or  how  small,  of  Thy  priesthood. 

By  the  priesthood  he  here  means  the  people  it- 

^sa.  io.  21.  2Rom.  n.  5.  3Isa.  38.  22;  Rom.  9.  28. 

4Ps.  12.  6.  8Ps.  84.  10. 


GOD  XVII.  6  457 

self,  of  which  He  is  the  Priest  Who  is  the  Media¬ 
tor  between  God  and  men.  the  man  Christ 
Jesus.6  This  people  the  Apostle  Peter  calls  “a 
holy  people,  a  royal  priesthood.”7  But  some 
have  translated,  “Of  Thy  sacrifice,”  not  “Of 
Thy  priesthood,”  which  no  less  signifies  the 
same  Christian  people.  Whence  the  Apostle  Paul 
says,  “We  being  many  are  one  bread,  one 
body.”8  What,  therefore,  he  has  added,  to  “eat 
bread,”  also  elegantly  expresses  the  very  kind  of 
sacrifice  of  which  the  Priest  Himself  says,  “The 
bread  which  I  will  give  is  my  flesh  for  the  life  of 
the  world.”9  The  same  is  the  sacrifice  not  after 
the  order  of  Aaron,  but  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chizedek:10  let  him  that  readeth  understand.11 
Therefore  this  short  and  salutarily  humble  con¬ 
fession,  in  which  it  is  said,  “Put  me  in  a  part  of 
Thy  priesthood,  to  eat  bread,”  is  itself  the  piece 
of  money,  for  it  is  both  brief,  and  it  is  the  Word 
of  God  who  dwells  in  the  heart  of  one  who  be¬ 
lieves.  For  because  He  had  said  above,  that  He 
had  given  for  food  to  Aaron’s  house  the  sacrifi¬ 
cial  victims  of  the  Old  Testament,  where  He 
says,  “I  have  given  thy  father’s  house  for  food 
all  things  which  are  offered  by  fire  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Israel,”  which  indeed  were  the  sacrifices 
of  the  Jews ;  therefore  here  He  has  said,  “To  eat 
bread,”  which  is  in  the  New  Testament  the  sac¬ 
rifice  of  the  Christians. 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  Jewish  priesthood  and  kingdom , 
whichy  although  promised  to  be  established  for 
every  did  not  continue;  so  that  other  things  are 
to  be  understood  to  which  eternity  is  assured. 
While,  therefore,  these  things  now  shine  forth 
as  clearly  as  they  were  loftily  foretold,  still 
some  one  may  not  vainly  be  moved  to  ask.  How 
can  we  be  confident  that  all  things  are  to  come 
to  pass  which  are  predicted  in  these  books  as 
about  to  come,  if  this  very  thing  which  is  there 
divinely  spoken,  “Thine  house  and  thy  father’s 
house  shall  walk  before  me  for  ever,”  could  not 
have  effect?  For  we  see  that  priesthood  has  been 
changed;  and  there  can  be  no  hope  that  what 
was  promised  to  that  house  may  some  time  be 
fulfilled,  because  that  which  succeeds  on  its  be¬ 
ing  rejected  and  changed  is  rather  predicted  as 
eternal.  He  who  says  this  does  not  yet  under¬ 
stand,  or  does  not  recollect,  tnat  this  very  priest¬ 
hood  after  the  order  of  Aaron  was  appointed  as 
the  shadow  of  a  future  eternal  priesthood;  and 
therefore,  when  eternity  is  promised  to  it,  it  is 
not  promised  to  the  mere  shadow  and  figure,  but 

6I  Tim.  2.  5.  7I  Pet.  2.  9.  8I  Cor.  10.  17. 

9John,  6.  si.  10Heb.  7.  11,  27.  nMatt.  24.  15. 


458  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  what  is  shadowed  forth  and  prefigured  by  it. 
But  lest  it  should  be  thought  the  shadow  itself 
was  to  remain,  therefore  its  mutation  also  be¬ 
hoved  to  be  foretold. 

In  this  way,  too,  the  kingdom  of  Saul  himself, 
who  certainly  was  reprobated  and  rejected,  was 
the  shadow  of  a  kingdom  yet  to  come  which 
should  remain  to  eternity.  For,  indeed,  the  oil 
with  which  he  was  anointed,  and  from  that 
chrism  he  is  called  Christ,  is  to  be  taken  in  a 
mystical  sense,  and  is  to  be  understood  as  a 
great  mystery;  which  David  himself  venerated 
so  much  in  him,  that  he  trembled  with  smitten 
heart  when,  being  hid  in  a  dark  cave,  which  Saul 
also  entered  when  pressed  by  the  necessity  of 
nature,  he  had  come  secretly  behind  him  and 
cut  off  a  small  piece  of  his  robe,  that  he  might  be 
able  to  prove  him  he  had  spared  him  when  he 
could  have  killed  him.  and  might  thus  remove 
from  his  mind  the  suspicion  through  which  he 
had  vehemently  persecuted  the  holy  David, 
thinking  him  his  enemy.  Therefore  he  was  much 
afraid  lest  he  should  be  accused  of  violating  so 
great  a  mystery  in  Saul,  because  he  hadjthus 
meddled  even  his  clothes.  For  thus  it  is  written : 
“And  David’s  heart  smote  him  because  he  had 
taken  away  the  skirt  of  his  cloak.”1  But  to  the 
men  with  him,  who  advised  him  to  destroy  Saul 
thus  delivered  up  into  his  hands,  he  saith,  “The 
Lord  forbid  that  I  should  do  this  thing  to  my 
lord,  the  Lord’s  christ.  to  lay  my  hand  upon 
him.  because  he  is  the  Lord’s  christ.”  Therefore 
he  showed  so  great  reverence  to  this  shadow  of 
what  was  to  come,  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for 
the  sake  of  what  it  prefigured.  Whence  also  that 
which  Samuel  says  to  Saul,  “Since  thou  hast  not 
kept  my  commandment  which  the  Lord  com¬ 
manded  thee,  whereas  now  the  Lord  would  have 
prepared  thy  kingdom  over  Israel  for  ever,  yet 
now  thy  kingdom  shall  not  continue  for  thee; 
and  the  Lord  will  seek  Him  a  man  after  His  own 
heart,  and  the  Lord  will  command  him  to  be 
prince  over  His  people,  because  thou  hast  not 
kept  that  which  the  Lord  commanded  thee,”2  is 
not  to  be  taken  as  if  God  had  settled  that  Saul 
himself  should  reign  for  ever,  and,  afterwards, 
on  his  sinning,  would  not  keep  this  promise;  nor 
was  He  ignorant  that  he  would  sin,  but  He  had 
established  his  kingdom  that  it  might  be  a  figure 
of  the  eternal  kingdom.  Therefore  he  added, 
“Yet  now  thy  kingdom  shall  not  continue  for 
thee  ”  Therefore  what  it  signified  has  stood  and 
shall  stand;  but  it  shall  not  stand  for  this  man, 
because  he  himself  was  not  to  reign  for  ever,  nor 
his  offspring;  so  that  at  least  that  word  “for 
ll  Sam.  24.  5,  6.  2I  Sam.  13.  13,  14. 


ever”  might  seem  to  be  fulfilled  through  his  pos¬ 
terity  one  to  another.  “And  the  Lord,”  he  saith, 
“will  seek  Him  a  man,”  meaning  either  David  or 
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament,3  who  was 
figured  in  the  chrism  with  which  David  also  and 
his  offspring  was  anointed.  But  it  is  not  as  if  He 
knew  not  where  he  was  that  God  thus  seeks  Him 
a  man,  but,  speaking  through  a  man.  He  speaks 
as  a  man,  and  in  this  sense  seeks  us.  For  not  only 
to  God  the  Father,  but  also  to  His  Only-begot¬ 
ten,  who  came  to  seek  what  was  lost,4  we  had 
been  known  already  even  so  far  as  to  be  chosen 
in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.5  “He 
will  seek  Him”  therefore  means,  “He  will  have 
His  own”  (just  as  if  He  had  said,  Whom  He  al¬ 
ready  has  known  to  be  His  own  He  will  show  to 
others  to  be  His  friend).  Whence  in  Latin  this 
word  ( qucerit )  receives  a  preposition  and  be¬ 
comes  acquirit  (acquires),  the  meaning  of  which 
is  plain  enough ;  although  even  without  the  ad¬ 
dition  of  the  preposition  qucerere  is  understood 
as  acquirere,  whence  gains  are  called  qucestus. 

Chap.  7.  Of  the  disruption  of  the  kingdom  of 

Israel ,  by  which  the  perpetual  division  of  the 

spiritual  from  the  carnal  Israel  was  prefigured 

Again  Saul  sinned  through  disobedience,  and 
again  Samuel  says  to  him  in  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  “Because  thou  hast  despised  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  the  Lord  hath  despised  thee,  that  thou 
mayest  not  be  king  over  Israel.”6  And  again  for 
the  same  sin,  when  Saul  confessed  it,  and  prayed 
for  pardon,  and  besought  Samuel  to  return  with 
him  to  appease  the  Lord,  he  said,  “I  will  not  re¬ 
turn  with  thee:  for  thou  hast  despised  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  will  despise  thee  that 
thou  mayest  not  be  king  over  Israel.  And  Sam¬ 
uel  turned  his  face  to  go  away,  and  Saul  laid  hold 
upon  the  skirt  of  his  mantle,  and  rent  it.  And 
Samuel  said  unto  him,  The  Lord  hath  rent  the 
kingdom  from  Israel  out  of  thine  hand  this  day, 
and  will  give  it  to  thy  neighbour,  who  is  good 
above  thee,  and  will  divide  Israel  in  twain.  And 
He  will  not  be  changed,  neither  will  He  repent: 
for  He  is  not  as  a  man,  that  He  should  repent; 
who  threatens  and  does  not  persist.”7  He  to 
whom  it  is  said,  “The  Lord  will  despise  thee  that 
thou  mayest  not  be  king  over  Israel,”  and  “The 
Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  from  Israel  out  of 
thine  hand  this  day,”  reigned  forty  years  over 
Israel — that  is,  just  as  long  a  time  as  David  him¬ 
self — yet  heard  this  in  the  first  period  of  his 
reign  that  we  may  understand  it  was  said  be¬ 
cause  none  of  his  race  was  to  reign,  and  that  we 

3Heb.  9.  15.  4Luke,  19.  10.  6Eph.  1.  4. 

6I  Sam.  15.  23.  7I  Sam.  15.  26-29. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  7  459 


may  look  to  the  race  of  David,  whence  also  is 
sprung,  according  to  the  flesh,1  the  Mediator  be¬ 
tween  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.2 

But  the  Scripture  has  not  what  is  read  in  most 
Latin  copies,  “The  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  out  of  thine  hand  this  day,”  but  just  as 
we  have  set  it  down  it  is  found  in  the  Greek  cop¬ 
ies,  “The  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  from  Is¬ 
rael  out  of  thine  hand”;  that  the  words  “out  of 
thine  hand”  may  be  understood  to  mean  “from 
Israel.”  Therefore,  this  man  figuratively  repre¬ 
sented  the  people  of  Israel,  which  was  to  lose 
the  kingdom,  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  being  about 
to  reign,  not  carnally,  but  spiritually.  And  when 
it  is  said  of  Him,  “And  will  give  it  to  thy  neigh¬ 
bour,”  that  is  to  be  referred  to  the  fleshly  kin¬ 
ship,  for  Christ,  according  to  the  flesh,  was  of  Is¬ 
rael,  whence  also  Saul  sprang.  But  what  is  add¬ 
ed,  “Good  above  thee,”  may  indeed  be  under¬ 
stood,  “Better  than  thee,”  and  indeed  some  have 
thus  translated  it;  but  it  is  better  taken  thus, 
“Good  above  thee,”  as  meaning  that  because  He 
is  good,  therefore  He  must  be  above  thee,  ac¬ 
cording  to  that  other  prophetic  saying,  “Till  I 
put  all  Thine  enemies  under  Thy  feet.”3  And 
among  them  is  Israel,  from  whom,  as  His  perse¬ 
cutor,  Christ  took  away  the  kingdom ;  although 
the  Israel  in  whom  there  was  no  guile  may  have 
been  there  too,  a  sort  of  grain,  as  it  were,  of  that 
chaff.  For  certainly  thence  came  the  apostles, 
thence  so  many  martyrs,  of  whom  Stephen  is  the 
first,  thence  so  many  churches,  which  the  Apos¬ 
tle  Paul  names,  magnifying  God  in  their  con¬ 
version. 

Of  which  thing  I  do  not  doubt  what  follows 
is  to  be  understood,  “And  will  divide  Israel  in 
twain,”  to  wit,  into  Israel  pertaining  to  the  bond 
woman  and  Israel  pertaining  to  the  free.  For 
these  two  kinds  were  at  first  together,  as  Abra¬ 
ham  still  clave  to  the  bond  woman,  until  the 
barren,  made  fruitful  by  the  grace  of  God,  cried, 
“Cast  out  the  bond  woman  and  her  son.”4  We 
know,  indeed,  that  on  account  of  the  sin  of  Solo¬ 
mon,  in  the  reign  of  his  son  Rehoboam,  Israel 
was  divided  in  two,  and  continued  so,  the  sepa¬ 
rate  parts  having  their  own  kings,  until  that 
whole  nation  was  overthrown  with  a  great  de¬ 
struction,  and  carried  away  by  the  Chaldeans. 
But  what  was  this  to  Saul,  when,  if  any  such 
thing  was  threatened,  it  would  be  threatened 
against  David  himself,  wrhose  son  Solomon  was? 
Finally,  the  Hebrew  nation  is  not  now  divided 
internally,  but  is  dispersed  through  the  earth  in¬ 
discriminately  in  the  fellowship  of  the  same  er¬ 
ror.  But  that  division  with  which  God  threat- 

lRom.  1.  3.  2ITim.  2.  5.  3Ps.  no.  1.  4Gen.  21.  10. 


ened  the  kingdom  and  people  in  the  person  of 
Saul,  who  represented  them,  is  shown  to  be  eter¬ 
nal  and  unchangeable  by  this  which  is  added. 
“And  He  will  not  be  changed,  neither  will  He 
repent:  for  He  is  not  as  a  man,  that  He  should 
repent;  who  threatens  and  does  not  persist”; 
that  is,  a  man  threatens  and  does  not  persist,  but 
not  God,  who  does  not  repent  like  man.  For 
when  we  read  that  He  repents,  a  change  of  cir¬ 
cumstance  is  meant,  flowing  from  the  divine 
immutable  foreknowledge.  Therefore,  when 
God  is  said  not  to  repent,  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  He  does  not  change. 

We  see  that  this  sentence  concerning  this  di¬ 
vision  of  the  people  of  Israel,  divinely  uttered 
in  these  words,  has  been  altogether  irremediable 
and  quite  perpetual.  For  whoever  have  turned, 
or  are  turning,  or  shall  turn  thence  to  Christ,  it 
has  been  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God, 
not  according  to  the  one  and  the  same  nature  of 
the  human  race.  Certainly  none  of  the  Israel¬ 
ites,  who,  cleaving  to  Christ,  have  continued  in 
Him,  shall  ever  be  among  those  Israelites  who 
persist  in  being  His  enemies  even  to  the  end  of 
this  life,  but  shall  for  ever  remain  in  the  separa¬ 
tion  which  is  here  foretold.  For  the  Old  Testa¬ 
ment,  from  the  Mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth  to 
bondage,5  profiteth  nothing,  unless  because  it 
bears  witness  to  the  New  Testament.  Otherwise, 
however  long  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  put  over 
their  heart ;  but  when  any  one  shall  turn  thence 
to  Christ,  the  veil  shall  be  taken  away.6  For  the 
very  desire  of  those  who  turn  is  changed  from 
the  old  to  the  new,  so  that  each  no  longer  desires 
to  obtain  carnal  but  spiritual  felicity.  Wherefore 
that  great  prophet  Samuel  himself,  before  he 
had  anointed  Saul,  when  he  had  cried  to  the 
Lord  for  Israel,  and  He  had  heard  him,  and 
when  he  had  offered  a  whole  burnt-offering,  as 
the  aliens  were  coming  to  battle  against  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  God,  and  the  Lord  thundered  above  them 
and  they  were  confused,  and  fell  before  Israel 
and  were  overcome ;  he  took  one  stone  and  set  it 
up  between  the  old  and  new  Massephat,  and 
called  its  name  Ebenezer,  which  means  the  stone 
of  the  helper,  and  said.  “Hitherto  hath  the  Lord 
helped  us.”7  Massephat  is  interpreted  desire. 
That  stone  of  the  helper  is  the  mediation  of  the 
Saviour,  by  which  we  go  from  the  old  Massephat 
to  the  new — that  is,  from  the  desire  with  which 
carnal  happiness  was  expected  in  the  carnal 
kingdom  to  the  desire  with  which  the  truest  spir¬ 
itual  happiness  is  expected  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven;  and  since  nothing  is  better  than  that, 
the  Lord  helpeth  us  hitherto. 

6Gal.  4.  25.  6II  Cor.  3.  15,  16.  7I  Sam.  7.  9-12. 


46o  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  8.  Of  the  promises  made  to  David  in  his 

son ,  which  are  in  no  wise  fulfilled  in  Solomon, 

but  most  fully  in  Christ 

And  now  I  see  I  must  show  what,  pertaining 
to  the  matter  I  treat  of,  God  promised  to  David 
himself,  who  succeeded  Saul  in  the  kingdom, 
whose  change  prefigured  that  final  change  on  ac¬ 
count  of  which  all  things  were  divinely  spoken, 
all  things  were  committed  to  writing.  When 
many  things  had  gone  prosperously  with  king 
David,  he  thought  to  make  a  house  for  God, 
even  that  temple  of  most  excellent  renown 
which  was  afterwards  built  by  king  Solomon 
his  son.  While  he  was  thinking  of  this,  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  Nathan  the  prophet,  which 
he  brought  to  the  king,  in  which,  after  God  had 
said  that  a  house  should  not  be  built  unto  Him 
by  David  himself,  and  that  in  all  that  long  time 
He  had  never  commanded  any  of  His  people  to 
build  Him  a  house  of  cedar,  he  says,  “And  now 
thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  my  servant  David, 
Thus  saith  God  Almighty,  I  took  thee  from  the 
sheep-cote  that  thou  mightest  be  for  a  rulerj)ver 
my  people  in  Israel :  and  I  was  with  thee  with¬ 
ersoever  thou  wentest,  and  have  cut  off  all  thine 
enemies  from  before  thy  face,  and  have  made 
thee  a  name,  according  to  the  name  of  the  great 
ones  who  are  over  the  earth.  And  I  will  appoint 
a  place  for  my  people  Israel,  and  will  plant  him, 
and  he  shall  dwell  apart,  and  shall  be  troubled  no 
more;  and  the  son  of  wickedness  shall  not  hum¬ 
ble  him  any  more,  as  from  the  beginning,  from 
the  days  when  I  appointed  judges  over  my  peo¬ 
ple  Israel.  And  I  will  give  thee  rest  from  all  thine 
enemies,  and  the  Lord  will  tell  thee,  because 
thou  shalt  build  an  house  for  Him.  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  when  thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and 
thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers,  that  I  will 
raise  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which  shall  proceed 
out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I  will  prepare  his  king¬ 
dom.  He  shall  build  me  an  house  for  my  name; 
and  I  will  order  his  throne  even  to  eternity.  I 
will  be  his  Father,  and  he  shall  be  my  son.  And 
if  he  commit  iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him  with 
the  rod  of  men,  and  with  the  stripes  of  the  sons 
of  men :  but  my  mercy  I  will  not  take  away  from 
him,  as  I  took  it  away  from  those  whom  I  put 
away  from  before  my  face.  And  his  house  shall 
be  faithful,  and  his  kingdom  even  for  evermore 
before  me,  and  his  throne  shall  be  set  up  even 
for  evermore.”1 

He  who  thinks  this  grand  promise  was  ful¬ 
filled  in  Solomon  greatly  errs;  for  he  attends  to 
the  saying,  “He  shall  build  me  an  house,”  but 

*11  Sam.  7.  8-16. 


he  does  not  attend  to  the  saying,  “His  house 
shall  be  faithful,  and  his  kingdom  for  evermore 
before  me.”  Let  him  therefore  attend  and  be¬ 
hold  the  house  of  Solomon  full  of  strange  wom¬ 
en  worshipping  false  gods,  and  the  king  himself, 
aforetime  wise,  seduced  by  them,  and  cast  down 
into  the  same  idolatry :  and  let  him  not  dare  to 
think  that  God  either  promised  this  falsely,  or 
was  unable  to  foreknow  that  Solomon  and  his 
house  would  become  what  they  did.  But  we 
ought  not  to  be  in  doubt  here,  or  to  see  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  these  things  save  in  Christ  our  Lord, 
Who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  according 
to  the  flesh,2  lest  we  should  vainly  and  uselessly 
look  for  some  other  here,  like  the  carnal  Jews. 
For  even  they  understand  this  much,  that  the 
son  whom  they  read  of  in  that  place  as  promised 
to  David  was  not  Solomon;  so  that,  with  won¬ 
derful  blindness  to  Him  Who  was  promised  and 
is  now  declared  with  so  great  manifestation, 
they  say  they  hope  for  another.  Indeed,  even  in 
Solomon  there  appeared  some  image  of  the  fu¬ 
ture  event,  in  that  he  built  the  temple,  and  had 
peace  according  to  his  name  (for  Solomon 
means  pacific),  and  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign 
was  wonderfully  praiseworthy;  but  while,  as  a 
shadow  of  Him  that  should  come,  he  foreshowed 
Christ  our  Lord,  he  did  not  also  in  his  own  per¬ 
son  resemble  Him.  Whence  some  things  con¬ 
cerning  him  are  so  written  as  if  they  were  proph¬ 
esied  of  himself,  while  the  Holy  Scripture, 
prophesying  even  by  events,  somehow  delineates 
in  him  the  figure  of  things  to  come.  For,  besides 
the  books  of  divine  history,  in  which  his  reign  is 
narrated,  the  7 2d  Psalm  also  is  inscribed  in  the 
title  with  his  name,  in  which  so  many  things  are 
said  which  cannot  at  all  apply  to  him,  but  which 
apply  to  the  Lord  Christ  with  such  evident  fit¬ 
ness  as  makes  it  quite  apparent  that  in  the  one 
the  figure  is  in  some  way  shadowed  forth,  but  in 
the  other  the  truth  itself  is  presented.  For  it  is 
known  within  what  bounds  the  kingdom  of  Solo¬ 
mon  was  enclosed;  and  yet  in  that  psalm,  not 
to  speak  of  other  things,  we  read,  “He  shall 
have  dominion  from  sea  even  to  sea,  and  from 
the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,”3  which  we 
see  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Truly  he  took  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  His  reigning  from  the  river  where 
John  baptized;  for,  when  pointed  out  by 
him.  He  began  to  be  acknowledged  by  the  dis¬ 
ciples,  who  called  Him  not  only  Master,  but 
also  Lord. 

Nor  was  it  for  any  other  reason  that,  while 
his  father  David  was  still  living,  Solomon  began 
to  reign,  which  happened  to  none  other  of  their 

2Rom.  1.  3.  3Ps.  72.  8. 


THE  CITY  OF 

kings,  except  that  from  this  also  it  might  be 
clearly  apparent  that  it  was  not  himself  this 
prophecy  spoken  to  his  father  signified  before¬ 
hand,  saying,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass  when 
thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with 
thy  fathers,  that  I  will  raise  up  thy  seed  which 
shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I  will  pre¬ 
pare  His  kingdom.”  How,  therefore,  shall  it  be 
thought  on  account  of  what  follows,  “He  shall 
build  me  an  house,”  that  this  Solomon  is  proph¬ 
esied,  and  not  rather  be  understood  on  account 
of  what  precedes,  “When  thy  days  be  fulfilled, 
and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers,  I  will  raise 
up  thy  seed  after  thee,”  that  another  pacific  One 
is  promised,  who  is  foretold  as  about  to  be  raised 
up,  not  before  David’s  death,  as  he  was,  but  af¬ 
ter  it?  For  however  long  the  interval  of  time 
might  be  before  Jesus  Christ  came,  beyond 
doubt  it  was  after  the  death  of  king  David,  to 
whom  He  was  so  promised,  that  He  behoved  to 
come,  who  should  build  an  house  of  God,  not  of 
wood  and  stone,  but  of  men,  such  as  we  rejoice 
He  does  build.  For  to  this  house,  that  is,  to  be¬ 
lievers,  the  apostle  saith,  “The  temple  of  God  is 
holy,  which  temple  ye  are.”  1 

Chap.  9.  How  like  the  prophecy  about  Christ  in 
the  8gth  psalm  is  to  the  things  promised  in 
Nathan’s  prophecy  in  the  books  of  Samuel 
Wherefore  also  in  the  89th  Psalm,  of  which 
the  title  is,  “An  instruction  for  himself  by  Ethan 
the  Israelite,”  mention  is  made  of  the  promises 
God  made  to  king  David,  and  some  things  are 
there  added  similar  to  those  found  in  the  Book 
of  Samuel,  such  as  this,  “I  have  sworn  to  David 
my  servant  that  I  will  prepare  his  seed  for 
ever.”  2  And  again,  “Then  thou  spakest  in  vision 
to  thy  sons,  and  saidst,  I  have  laid  help  upon  the 
mighty  One,  and  have  exalted  the  chosen  One 
out  of  my  people.  I  have  found  David  my  serv¬ 
ant,  and  with  my  holy  oil  I  have  anointed  him. 
For  mine  hand  shall  help  him,  and  mine  arm 
shall  strengthen  him.  The  enemy  shall  not  pre¬ 
vail  against  him,  and  the  son  of  iniquity  shall 
harm  hijn  no  more.  And  I  will  beat  down  his 
foes  from  before  his  face,  and  those  that  hate 
him  will  I  put  to  flight.  And  my  truth  and  my 
mercy  shall  be  with  him,  and  in  my  name  shall 
his  horn  be  exalted.  I  will  set  his  hand  also  in 
the  sea,  and  his  right  hand  in  the  rivers.  He  shall 
cry  unto  me,  Thou  art  my  Father,  my  God,  and 
the  undertaker  of  my  salvation.  Also  I  will  make 
him  my  first-born,  high  among  the  kings  of  the 
earth.  My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  ever¬ 
more.  and  my  covenant  shall  be  faithful  (sure) 
H  Cor.  3.  17.  2Ps.  89.  3,  4. 


GOD  XVII.  8-9  461 

with  him.  His  seed  also  will  I  set  for  ever  and 
ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven.”3 
Which  words,  when  rightly  understood,  are  all 
understood  to  be  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
under  the  name  of  David,  on  account  of  the 
form  of  a  servant,  which  the  same  Mediator  as¬ 
sumed  4  from  the  virgin  of  the  seed  of  David.5 
For  immediately  something  is  said  about  the 
sins  of  his  children,  such  as  is  set  down  in  the 
Book  of  Samuel,  and  is  more  readily  taken  as  if 
of  Solomon.  For  there,  that  is,  in  the  Book  of 
Samuel,  he  says,  “And  if  he  commit  iniquity  I 
will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men,  and  with 
the  stripes  of  the  sons  of  men;  but  my  mercy 
will  I  not  take  away  from  him,” 6  meaning  by 
stripes  the  strokes  of  correction.  Hence  that 
saying,  “Touch  ye  not  my  christs.”  7  For  what 
else  is  that  than,  Dp  not  harm  them?  But  in  the 
psalm,  when  speaking  as  if  of  David,  He  says 
something  of  the  same  kind  there  too.  “If  his 
children,”  saith  He,  “forsake  my  law,  and  walk 
not  in  my  judgments;  if  they  profane  my  right¬ 
eousnesses,  and  keep  not  my  commandments;  I 
will  visit  their  iniquities  with  the  rod,  and  their 
faults  with  stripes :  but  my  mercy  I  will  not  make 
void  from  him.” 8  He  did  not  say  “from  them,” 
although  He  spoke  of  his  children,  not  of  Him¬ 
self;  but  he  said  “from  him,”  which  means  the 
same  thing  if  rightly  understood.  For  of  Christ 
Himself,  Who  is  the  head  of  the  Church,  there 
could  not  be  found  any  sins  which  required  to 
be  divinely  restrained  by  human  correction, 
mercy  being  still  continued;  but  they  are  found 
in  His  body  and  members,  which  is  His  people. 
Therefore  in  the  Book  of  Samuel  it  is  said,  “in¬ 
iquity  of  Him,”  but  in  the  psalm,  “of  His  chil¬ 
dren,”  that  we  may  understand  that  what  is  said 
of  His  body  is  in  some  way  said  of  Himself. 
Wherefore  also,  when  Saul  persecuted  His  body, 
that  is,  His  believing  people,  He  Himself  saith 
from  heaven,  “Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 
me?” 9  Then  in  the  following  words  of  the  psalm 
He  says,  “Neither  will  I  hurt  in  my  truth,  nor 
profane  my  covenant,  and  the  things  that  pro¬ 
ceed  from  my  lips  I  will  not  disallow.  Once  have 
I  sworn  by  my  holiness,  if  I  lie  unto  David”  10 — 
that  is,  I  will  in  no  wise  lie  unto  David;  for 
Scripture  is  wont  to  speak  thus.  But  what  that  is 
in  which  He  will  not  lie,  He  adds,  saying,  “His 
seed  shall  endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne  as  the 
sun  before  me,  and  as  the  moon  perfected  for 
ever,  and  a  faithful  witness  in  heaven.”11 

3Ps.  89.  19-29.  4Phil.  2.  7. 

6Matt.  1.  1,  18;  Luke,  1.  27.  6II  Sam.  7.  14,  15. 

7Ps.  105.  15.  8Ps.  89.  30-33-  9Acts,  9.  4. 

10Ps.  89.  34,  35.  uPs.  89.  36,  37. 


462 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  10.  How  different  the  acts  in  the  kingdom 
of  the  earthly  Jerusalem  are  from  those  which 
God  had  promised ,  so  that  the  truth  of  the 
promise  should  be  understood  to  pertain  to 
the  glory  of  the  other  king  and  kingdom 

That  it  might  not  be  supposed  that  a  prom¬ 
ise  so  strongly  expressed  and  confirmed  was  ful¬ 
filled  in  Solomon,  as  if  he  hoped  for,  yet  did  not 
find  it,  he  says,  “But  Thou  hast  cast  off,  and 
hast  brought  to  nothing,  0  Lord.”1  This  truly 
was  done  concerning  the  kingdom  of  Solomon 
among  his  posterity,  even  to  the  overthrow  of 
the  earthly  Jerusalem  itself,  which  was  the  seat 
of  the  kingdom,  and  especially  the  destruction 
of  the  very  temple  which  had  been  built  by  Sol¬ 
omon.  But  lest  on  this  account  God  should  be 
thought  to  have  done  contrary  to  His  promise, 
immediately  he  adds,  “Thou  hast  delayed  Thy 
Christ.”2  Therefore  he  is  not  Solomon,  nor  yet 
David  himself,  if  the  Christ  of  the  Lord  is  de¬ 
layed.  For  while  all  the  kings  are  called  His 
christs,  who  were  consecrated  with  that  mysti¬ 
cal  chrism,  not  only  from  king  David  down¬ 
wards,  but  even  from  that  Saul  who  first  was 
anointed  king  of  that  same  people,  David  him¬ 
self  indeed  calling  him  the  Lord’s  christ,  yet 
there  was  one  true  Christ,  whose  figure  they 
bore  by  the  prophetic  unction,  who,  according 
to  the  opinion  of  men,  who  thought  he  was  to  be 
understood  as  come  in  David  or  in  Solomon,  was 
long  delayed,  but  who,  according  as  God  had  dis¬ 
posed,  was  to  come  in  His  own  time.  The  follow¬ 
ing  part  of  this  psalm  goes  on  to  say  what  in  the 
meantime,  while  He  was  delayed,  was  to  become 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  where 
it  was  hoped  He  would  certainly  reign:  “Thou 
hast  overthrown  the  covenant  of  Thy  servant; 
Thou  hast  profaned  in  the  earth  his  sanctuary. 
Thou  hast  broken  down  all  his  walls;  Thou  hast 
put  his  strong-holds  in  fear.  All  that  pass  by  the 
way  spoil  him;  he  is  made  a  reproach  to  his 
neighbours.  Thou  hast  set  up  the  right  hand  of 
his  enemies ;  Thou  hast  made  all  his  enemies  to 
rejoice.  Thou  hast  turned  aside  the  help  of  his 
sword,  and  hast  not  helped  him  in  war.  Thou 
hast  destroyed  him  from  cleansing;  Thou  hast 
dashed  down  his  seat  to  the  ground.  Thou  hast 
shortened  the  days  of  his  seat;  Thou  hast 
poured  confusion  over  him.”3  All  these  things 
came  upon  Jerusalem  the  bondwoman,  in  which 
some  also  reigned  who  were  children  of  the  free 
woman,  holding  that  kingdom  in  temporary 
stewardship,  but  holding  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  whose  children  they  were, 
JPs.  89.  38.  2Ibid.  3Ps.  89.  39-45. 


in  true  faith,  and  hoping  in  the  true  Christ.  But 
how  these  things  came  upon  that  kingdom,  the 
history  of  its  affairs  points  out  if  it  is  read. 

Chap.  ii.  Of  the  substance  of  the  people  of 

God,  which  through  His  assumption  of  flesh  is 

in  Christ,  Who  alone  had  power  to  deliver  His 

own  soul  from  hell 

But  after  having  prophesied  these  things,  the 
prophet  betakes  him  to  praying  to  God;  yet 
even  the  very  prayer  is  prophecy:  “How  long. 
Lord,  dost  Thou  turn  away  in  the  end?”4  “Thy 
face”  is  understood,  as  it  is  elsewhere  said, 
“How  long  dost  Thou  turn  away  Thy  face  from 
me?”5  For  therefore  some  copies  have  here  not 
“dost,”  but  “wilt  Thou  turn  away” ;  although  it 
could  be  understood,  “Thou  turnest  away  Thy 
mercy,  which  Thou  didst  promise  to  David.” 
But  when  he  says,  “in  the  end,”  what  does  it 
mean,  except  even  to  the  end?  By  which  end  is 
to  be  understood  the  last  time,  when  even  that 
nation  is  to  believe  in  Christ  Jesus,  before  which 
end  what  He  has  just  sorrowfully  bewailed  must 
come  to  pass.  On  account  of  which  it  is  also  add¬ 
ed  here,  “Thy  wrath  shall  burn  like  fire.  Remem¬ 
ber  what  is  my  substance.”6  This  cannot  be  bet¬ 
ter  understood  than  of  Jesus  Himself,  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  His  people,  of  whose  nature  His  flesh 
is.  “For  not  in  vain,”  he  says,  “hast  Thou  made 
all  the  sons  of  men.”7  For  unless  the  one  Son  of 
man  had  been  the  substance  of  Israel,  through 
which  Son  of  man  many  sons  of  men  should  be 
set  free,  all  the  sons  of  men  would  have  been 
made  wholly  in  vain.  But  now,  indeed,  all  man¬ 
kind  through  the  fall  of  the  first  man  has  fallen 
from  the  truth  into  vanity;  for  which  reason  an¬ 
other  psalm  says,  “Man  is  like  to  vanity:  his 
days  pass  away  as  a  shadow”;8  yet  God  has  not 
made  all  the  sons  of  men  in  vain,  because  He 
frees  many  from  vanity  through  the  Mediator 
Jesus,  and  those  whom  He  did  not  foreknow  as 
to  be  delivered,  He  made  not  wholly  in  vain  in 
the  most  beautiful  and  most  just  ordination  of 
the  whole  rational  creation,  for  the  use  of  those 
who  were  to  be  delivered,  and  for  the  compari¬ 
son  of  the  two  cities  by  mutual  contrast.  There¬ 
after  it  follows,  “Who  is  the  man  that  shall  live, 
and  shall  not  see  death?  shall  he  snatch  his  soul 
from  the  hand  of  hell?”9  Who  is  this  but  that 
substance  of  Israel  out  of  the  seed  of  David, 
Christ  Jesus,  of  Whom  the  apostle  says,  that 
“rising  from  the  dead  He  now  dieth  not,  and 
death  shall  no  more  have  dominion  over  Him”?10 

4Ps.  89.  46.  5Ps.  13.  1.  6Ps.  89.  46,  47. 

7Ps.  89.  47.  8Ps.  144.  4.  9Ps.  89.  48. 

10Rom.  6.  9. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  10-12  463 


For  He  shall  so  live  and  not  see  death  that  yet 
He  shall  have  been  dead ;  but  shall  have  deliv¬ 
ered  His  soul  from  the  hand  of  hell,  whither  He 
had  descended  in  order  to  loose  some  from  the 
chains  of  hell;  but  He  hath  delivered  it  by  that 
power  of  which  He  says  in  the  Gospel,  “I  have 
the  power  of  laying  down  my  life,  and  I  have 
the  power  of  taking  it  again.”1 

Chap.  12.  To  whose  person  the  entreaty  for  the 
promises  is  to  be  understood  to  belong ,  when 
he  says  in  the  psalm,  “Where  are  thine  ancient 
compassions ,  Lord?”  etc. 

But  the  rest  of  this  psalm  runs  thus:  “Where 
are  Thine  ancient  compassions.  Lord,  which 
Thou  swarest  unto  David  in  Thy  truth?  Re¬ 
member,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  Thy  servants, 
which  I  have  borne  in  my  bosom  of  many  na¬ 
tions  ;  wherewith  Thine  enemies  have  re¬ 
proached,  0  Lord,  wherewith  they  have  re¬ 
proached  the  change  of  Thy  Christ.”2  Now  it 
may  with  very  good  reason  be  asked  whether 
this  is  spoken  in  the  person  of  those  Israelites 
who  desired  that  the  promise  made  to  David 
might  be  fulfilled  to  them;  or  rather  of  the 
Christians,  who  are  Israelites  not  after  the  flesh 
but  after  the  Spirit.3  This  certainly  was  spoken 
or  written  in  the  time  of  Ethan,  from  whose 
name  this  psalm  gets  its  title,  and  that  was  the 
same  as  the  time  of  David’s  reign;  and  there¬ 
fore  it  would  not  have  been  said,  “Where  are 
Thine  ancient  compassions,  Lord,  which  Thou 
hast  sworn  unto  David  in  Thy  truth?”  unless 
the  prophet  had  assumed  the  person  of  those 
who  should  come  long  afterwards,  to  whom 
that  time  when  these  things  were  promised  to 
David  was  ancient.  But  it  may  be  understood 
thus,  that  many  nations,  when  they  persecuted 
the  Christians,  reproached  them  with  the  pas¬ 
sion  of  Christ,  which  Scripture  calls  His  change, 
because  by  dying  He  is  made  immortal.  The 
change  of  Christ,  according  to  this  passage,  may 
also  be  understood  to  be  reproached  by  the  Is¬ 
raelites,  because,  when  they  hoped  He  would  be 
theirs.  He  was  made  the  Saviour  of  the  nations; 
and  many  nations  who  have  believed  in  Him  by 
the  New  Testament  now  reproach  them  who  re¬ 
main  in  the  Old  with  this :  so  that  it  is  said,  “Re¬ 
member,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  Thy  servants”; 
because  through  the  Lord’s  not  forgetting,  but 
rather  pitying  them,  even  they  after  this  re¬ 
proach  are  to  believe.  But  what  I  have  put  first 
seems  to  me  the  most  suitable  meaning.  For  to 
the  enemies  of  Christ  who  are  reproached  with 
^ohn,  10.  18.  2Ps.  89.  49-51.  3Rom.  3.  28,  29. 


this,  that  Christ  hath  left  them,  turning  to  the 
Gentiles.4  this  speech  is  incongruously  assigned, 
“Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  Thy  serv¬ 
ants,”  for  such  Jews  are  not  to  be  styled  the 
servants  of  God;  but  these  words  fit  those  who, 
if  they  suffered  great  humiliations  through  per¬ 
secution  for  the  name  of  Christ,  could  call  to 
mind  that  an  exalted  kingdom  had  been  prom¬ 
ised  to  the  seed  of  David,  and  in  desire  of  it, 
could  say  not  despairingly,  but  as  asking,  seek¬ 
ing,  knocking,5  “Where  are  Thine  ancient  com¬ 
passions,  Lord,  which  Thou  swarest  unto  David 
in  Thy  truth?  Remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of 
Thy  servants,  that  I  have  borne  in  my  bosom  of 
many  nations”;  that  is,  have  patiently  endured 
in  my  inward  parts.  “That  Thine  enemies  have 
reproached,  0  Lord,  wherewith  they  have  re¬ 
proached  the  change  of  Thy  Christ,”  not  think¬ 
ing  it  a  change,  but  a  consumption.6  But  what 
does  “Remember,  Lord,”  mean,  but  that  Thou 
wouldst  have  compassion,  and  wouldst  for  my 
patiently  borne  humiliation  reward  me  with  the 
excellency  which  Thou  swarest  unto  David  in 
Thy  truth?  But  if  we  assign  these  words  to  the 
Jews,  those  servants  of  God  who,  on  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  before  Jesus 
Christ  was  born  after  the  manner  of  men,  were 
led  into  captivity,  could  say  such  things,  under¬ 
standing  the  change  of  Christ,  because  indeed 
through  Him  was  to  be  surely  expected,  not  an 
earthly  and  carnal  felicity  such  as  appeared  dur¬ 
ing  the  few  years  of  king  Solomon,  but  a  heaven¬ 
ly  and  spiritual  felicity;  and  when  the  nations, 
then  ignorant  of  this  through  unbelief,  exulted 
over  and  insulted  the  people  of  God  for  being 
captives,  what  else  was  this  than  ignorantly  to 
reproach  with  the  change  of  Christ  those  who 
understand  the  change  of  Christ?  And  therefore 
what  follows  when  this  psalm  is  concluded,  “Let 
the  blessing  of  the  Lord  be  for  evermore,  amen, 
amen,”  is  suitable  enough  for  the  whole  people 
of  God  belonging  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
whether  for  those  things  that  lay  hid  in  the  Old 
Testament  before  the  New  was  revealed,  or  for 
those  that,  being  now  revealed  in  the  New  Tes¬ 
tament,  are  manifestly  discerned  to  belong  to 
Christ.  For  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  in  the  seed 
of  David  does  not  belong  to  any  particular  time, 
such  as  appeared  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  but  is 
for  evermore  to  be  hoped  for,  in  which  most  cer¬ 
tain  hope  it  is  said,  “Amen,  amen”;  for  this  rep¬ 
etition  of  the  word  is  the  confirmation  of  that 
hope.  Therefore,  David,  understanding  this, 
says  in  the  second  Book  of  Kings,  in  the  passage 

4Acts,  13.  46.  6Matt.  7.  7,  8. 

6Another  reading:  “consummation.” 


464  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


from  which  we  digressed  to  this  psalm,1  “Thou 
hast  spoken  also  for  Thy  servant’s  house  for  a 
great  while  to  come.”2  Therefore  also  a  little 
after  he  says,  “Now  begin,  and  bless  the  house 
of  Thy  servant  for  evermore,”  etc.,  because  the 
son  was  then  about  to  be  born  from  whom  his 
posterity  should  be  continued  to  Christ,  through 
whom  his  house  should  be  eternal,  and  should 
also  be  the  house  of  God.  For  it  is  called  the 
house  of  David  on  account  of  David’s  race;  but 
the  selfsame  is  called  the  house  of  God  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  temple  of  God,  made  of  men,  not 
of  stones,  where  shall  dwell  for  evermore  the 
people  with  and  in  their  God,  and  God  with  and 
in  His  people,  so  that  God  may  fill  His  people, 
and  the  people  be  filled  with  their  God.  while 
God  shall  be  all  in  all,  Himself  their  reward  in 
peace  Who  is  their  strength  in  war.  Therefore, 
when  it  is  said  in  the  words  of  Nathan,  “And  the 
Lord  will  tell  thee  what  an  house  thou  shalt 
build  for  Him,”3  it  is  afterwards  said  in  the 
words  of  David,  “For  Thou,  Lord  Almighty, 
God  of  Israel,  hast  opened  the  ear  of  Thy  serv¬ 
ant,  saying,  I  will  build  thee  an  house.”  4  For 
this  house  is  built  both  by  us  through  living 
well,  and  by  God  through  helping  us  to  live  well; 
for  “except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour 
in  vain  that  build  it.”  5  And  when  the  final  dedi¬ 
cation  of  this  house  shall  take  place,  then  what 
God  here  says  by  Nathan  shall  be  fulfilled,  “And 
I  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  plant  him.  and  he  shall  dwell  apart,  and  shall 
be  troubled  no  more;  and  the  son  of  iniquity 
shall  not  humble  him  any  more,  as  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  from  the  days  when  I  appointed  judges 
over  my  people  Israel.”  6 

Chap.  13.  Whether  the  truth  of  this  promised 

peace  can  be  ascribed  to  those  times  passed 

away  under  Solomon 

Whoever  hopes  for  this  so  great  good  in  this 
world  and  in  this  earth,  his  wisdom  is  but  folly. 
Can  any  one  think  it  was  fulfilled  in  the  peace  of 
Solomon’s  reign?  Scripture  certainly  commends 
that  peace  with  excellent  praise  as  a  shadow  of 
that  which  is  to  come.  But  this  opinion  is  to  be 
vigilantly  opposed,  since  after  it  is  said,  “And 
the  son  of  iniquity  shall  not  humble  him  any 
more,”  it  is  immediately  added,  “as  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  from  the  days  in  which  I  appointed 
judges  over  my  people  Israel.” 7  For  the  judges 
were  appointed  over  that  people  from  the  time 
when  they  received  the  land  of  promise,  before 

^ee  above,  Chap.  8.  2II  Sam.  7.  19. 

3II  Sam.  7.  8.  4II  Sam.  7.  2.  6Ps.  127.  1. 

6II  Sam.  7.  10,  11.  7 Ibid. 


kings  had  begun  to  be  there.  And  certainly  the 
son  of  iniquity,  that  is,  the  foreign  enemy,  hum¬ 
bled  him  through  periods  of  time  in  which  we 
read  that  peace  alternated  with  wars;  and  in 
that  period  longer  times  of  peace  are  found  than 
Solomon  had,  who  reigned  forty  years.  For  un¬ 
der  that  judge  who  is  called  Ehud  there  were 
eighty  years  of  peace.8  Be  it  far  from  us,  there¬ 
fore,  that  we  should  believe  the  times  of  Solo¬ 
mon  are  predicted  in  this  promise,  much  less  in¬ 
deed  those  of  any  other  king  whatever.  For  none 
other  of  them  reigned  in  such  great  peace  as  he; 
nor  did  that  nation  ever  at  all  hold  that  king¬ 
dom  so  as  to  have  no  anxiety  lest  it  should  be 
subdued  by  enemies :  for  in  the  very  great  muta¬ 
bility  of  human  affairs  such  great  security  is 
never  given  to  any  people,  that  it  should  not 
dread  invasions  hostile  to  this  life.  Therefore 
the  place  of  this  promised  peaceful  and  secure 
habitation  is  eternal,  and  of  right  belongs  eter¬ 
nally  to  Jerusalem  the  free  mother,  where  the 
genuine  people  of  Israel  shall  be :  for  this  name 
is  interpreted  Seeing  God;  in  the  desire  of  which 
reward  a  pious  life  is  to  be  led  through  faith  in 
this  miserable  pilgrimage.9 

Chap.  14  .Of  David’s  concern  in  the  writing  of 

the  Psalms 

In  the  progress  of  the  city  of  God  through  the 
ages,  therefore,  David  first  reigned  in  the  earth¬ 
ly  Jerusalem  as  a  shadow  of  that  which  was  to 
come.  Now  David  was  a  man  skilled  in  songs, 
who  dearly  loved  musical  harmony,  not  with  a 
vulgar  delight,  but  with  a  believing  disposition, 
and  by  it  served  his  God,  who  is  the  true  God, 
by  the  mystical  representation  of  a  great  thing. 
For  the  rational  and  well-ordered  concord  of  di¬ 
verse  sounds  in  harmonious  variety  suggests  the 
compact  unity  of  the  well-ordered  city.  Then 
almost  all  his  prophecy  is  in  psalms,  of  which  a 
hundred  and  fifty  are  contained  in  what  we  call 
the  Book  of  Psalms,  of  which  some  will  have  it 
those  only  were  made  by  David  which  are  in¬ 
scribed  with  his  name.  But  there  are  also  some 
who  think  none  of  them  were  made  by  him  ex¬ 
cept  those  which  are  marked  “Of  David”;  but 
those  which  have  in  the  title  “For  David”  have 
been  made  by  others  who  assumed  his  person. 
Which  opinion  is  refuted  by  the  voice  of  the 
Saviour  Himself  in  the  Gospel,  when  He  says 
that  David  himself  by  the  Spirit  said  Christ  was 
his  Lord;  for  the  noth  Psalm  begins  thus,  “The 
Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou  at  my  right 

8Judg.  3.  30. 

9Israel  =  a  prince  of  God;  Peniel  =  the  face  of  God  (Gen. 
32.  28-30). 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  13-16  465 


hand,  until  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy  foot¬ 
stool.”  1  And  truly  that  very  psalm,  like  many 
more,  has  in  the  title,  not  “of  David,”  but  “for 
David.”  But  those  seem  to  me  to  hold  the  more 
credible  opinion  who  ascribe  to  him  the  author¬ 
ship  of  all  these  hundred  and  fifty  psalms  and 
think  that  he  prefixed  to  some  of  them  the 
names  even  of  other  men,  who  prefigured  some¬ 
thing  pertinent  to  the  matter,  but  chose  to  have 
no  man’s  name  in  the  titles  of  the  rest,  just  as 
God  inspired  him  in  the  management  of  this  va¬ 
riety,  which,  although  dark,  is  not  meaningless. 
Neither  ought  it  to  move  one  not  to  believe  this 
that  the  names  of  some  prophets  who  lived  long 
after  the  times  of  king  David  are  read  in  the  in¬ 
scriptions  of  certain  psalms  in  that  book,  and 
that  the  things  said  there  seem  to  be  spoken  as 
it  were  by  them.  Nor  was  the  prophetic  Spirit 
unable  to  reveal  to  king  David,  when  he  prophe¬ 
sied,  even  these  names  of  future  prophets,  so 
that  he  might  prophetically  sing  something 
which  should  suit  their  persons;  just  as  it  was 
revealed  to  a  certain  prophet  that  king  Josiah 
should  arise  and  reign  after  more  than  three 
hundred  years,  who  predicted  his  future  deeds 
also  along  with  his  name.2 

Chap.  15.  Whether  all  the  things  prophesied  in 
the  Psalms  concerning  Christ  and  his  Church 
should  he  taken  up  in  the  text  of  this  work 
And  now  I  see  it  may  be  expected  of  me  that 
I  shall  open  up  in  this  part  of  this  book  what 
David  may  have  prophesied  in  the  Psalms  con¬ 
cerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  or  His  Church. 
But  although  I  have  already  done  so  in  one  in¬ 
stance,  I  am  prevented  from  doing  as  that  ex¬ 
pectation  seems  to  demand,  rather  by  the  abun¬ 
dance  than  the  scarcity  of  matter.  For  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  shunning  prolixity  forbids  my  setting 
down  all  things;  yet  I  fear  lest  if  I  select  some  I 
shall  appear  to  many,  who  know  these  things,  to 
have  passed  by  the  more  necessary.  Besides,  the 
proof  that  is  adduced  ought  to  be  supported  by 
the  context  of  the  whole  psalm,  so  that  at  least 
there  may  be  nothing  against  it  if  everything 
does  not  support  it;  lest  we  should  seem,  after 
the  fashion  of  the  centos,  to  gather  for  the  thing 
we  wish,  as  it  were,  verses  out  of  a  grand  poem, 
what  shall  be  found  to  have  been  written  not 
about  it,  but  about  some  other  and  widely  differ¬ 
ent  thing.  But  ere  this  could  be  pointed  out  in 
each  psalm,  the  whole  of  it  must  be  expounded; 
and  how  great  a  work  that  would  be,  the  vol¬ 
umes  of  others,  as  well  as  our  own,  in  which  we 

Ws.  no.  1,  quoted  in  Matt.  22.  44. 

2I  Kings,  13.  2;  fulfilled  II  Kings,  23.  15-17. 


have  done  it,  show  well  enough.  Let  him  then 
who  will,  or  can,  read  these  volumes,  and  he  will 
find  out  how  many  and  great  things  David,  at 
once  king  and  prophet,  has  prophesied  concern¬ 
ing  Christ  and  His  Church,  to  wit,  concerning 
the  King  and  the  city  which  He  has  built. 

Chap.  16  .Of  the  things  pertaining  to  Christ  and 

the  Church,  said  either  openly  or  tropically 

in  the  45th  Psalm 

For  whatever  direct  and  manifest  prophetic 
utterances  there  may  be  about  anything,  it  is 
necessary  that  those  which  are  tropical  should 
be  mingled  with  them;  which,  chiefly  on  account 
of  those  of  slower  understanding,  thrust  upon 
the  more  learned  the  laborious  task  of  clearing 
up  and  expounding  them.  Some  of  them,  indeed, 
on  the  very  first  blush,  as  soon  as  they  are  spok¬ 
en,  exhibit  Christ  and  the  Church,  although 
some  things  in  them  that  are  less  intelligible  re¬ 
main  to  be  expounded  at  leisure.  We  have  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  this  in  that  same  Book  of  Psalms :  “My 
heart  bubbled  up  a  good  matter:  I  utter  my 
words  to  the  king.  My  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a 
scribe,  writing  swiftly. Thy  form  is  beautiful  be¬ 
yond  the  sons  of  men;  grace  is  poured  out  in 
Thy  lips:  therefore  God  hath  blessed  Thee  for 
evermore.  Gird  Thy  sword  about  Thy  thigh,  0 
Most  Mighty.  With  Thy  goodliness  and  Thy 
beauty  go  forward,  proceed  prosperously,  and 
reign,  because  of  Thy  truth,  and  meekness,  and 
righteousness;  and  Thy  right  hand  shall  lead 
Thee  forth  wonderfully.  Thy  sharp  arrows  are 
most  powerful:  in  the  heart  of  the  king’s  ene¬ 
mies.  The  people  shall  fall  under  Thee.  Thy 
throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever:  a  rod  of  di¬ 
rection  is  the  rod  of  Thy  kingdom.  Thou  hast 
loved  righteousness,  and  hast  hated  iniquity: 
therefore  God,  Thy  God,  hath  anointed  Thee 
with  the  oil  of  exultation  above  Thy  fellows. 
Myrrh  and  drops,  and  cassia  from  Thy  vest¬ 
ments,  from  the  houses  of  ivory:  out  of  which 
the  daughters  of  kings  have  delighted  Thee  in 
Thine  honour.”  3  Who  is  there,  no  matter  how 
slow,  but  must  here  recognize  Christ  whom  we 
preach,  and  in  whom  we  believe,  if  he  hears  that 
He  is  God,  whose  throne  is  for  ever  and  ever, 
and  that  He  is  anointed  by  God,  as  God  indeed 
anoints,  not  with  a  visible,  but  with  a  spiritual 
and  intelligible  chrism?  For  who  is  so  untaught 
in  this  religion,  or  so  deaf  to  its  far  and  wide 
spread  fame,  as  not  to  know  that  Christ  is 
named  from  this  chrism,  that  is,  from  this 
anointing?  But  when  it  is  acknowledged  that 
this  King  is  Christ,  let  each  one  who  is  already 

3Ps.  45.  1-9. 


466  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


subject  to  Him  who  reigns  because  of  truth, 
meekness,  and  righteousness,  inquire  at  his  lei¬ 
sure  into  these  other  things  that  are  here  said 
tropically:  how  His  form  is  beautiful  beyond  the 
sons  of  men,  with  a  certain  beauty  that  is  the 
more  to  be  loved  and  admired  the  less  it  is  cor¬ 
poreal;  and  what  His  sword,  arrows,  and  other 
things  of  that  kind  may  be,  wrhich  are  set  down, 
not  properly,  but  tropically. 

Then  let  him  look  upon  His  Church,  joined  to 
her  so  great  Husband  in  spiritual  marriage  and 
divine  love,  of  which  it  is  said  in  these  words 
whch  follow,  “The  queen  stood  upon  Thy  right 
hand  in  gold-embroidered  vestments,  girded 
about  wTith  variety.  Hearken,  0  daughter,  and 
look,  and  incline  thine  ear;  forget  also  thy  peo¬ 
ple.  and  thy  father’s  house.  Because  the  King 
hath  greatly  desired  thy  beauty;  for  He  is  the 
Lord  thy  God.  And  the  daughters  of  Tyre  shall 
worship  Him  with  gifts;  the  rich  among  the  peo¬ 
ple  shall  entreat  Thy  face.  The  daughter  of  the 
King  has  all  her  glory  within,  in  golden  fringes, 
girded  about  with  variety.  The  virgins  shall  be 
brought  after  her  to  the  King:  her  neighbours 
shall  be  brought  to  Thee.  They  shall  be  brought 
wTith  gladness  and  exultation :  they  shall  be  led 
into  the  temple  of  the  King.  Instead  of  thy  fa¬ 
thers,  sons  shall  be  born  to  thee :  thou  shalt  es¬ 
tablish  them  as  princes  over  all  the  earth.  They 
shall  be  mindful  of  thy  name  in  every  genera¬ 
tion  and  descent.  Therefore  shall  the  people  ac¬ 
knowledge  thee  for  evermore,  even  for  ever  and 
ever.”  1 1  do  not  think  any  one  is  so  stupid  as  to 
believe  that  some  poor  woman  is  here  praised 
and  described,  as  the  spouse,  to  wit,  of  Him  to 
whom  it  is  said.  “Thy  throne.  0  God,  is  for  ever 
and  ever:  a  rod  of  direction  is  the  rod  of  Thy 
kingdom.  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness  and 
hated  iniquity:  therefore  God,  Thy  God.  hath 
anointed  Thee  with  the  oil  of  exultation  above 
Thy  fellows”;2  that  is.  plainly,  Christ  above 
Christians.  For  these  are  His  fellows,  out  of  the 
unity  and  concord  of  whom  in  all  nations  that 
queen  is  formed,  as  it  is  said  of  her  in  another 
psalm,  “The  city  of  the  great  King.”  3  The  same 
is  Sion  spiritually,  which  name  in  Latin  is  inter¬ 
preted  speculatio  (discovery) ;  for  she  descries 
the  great  good  of  the  world  to  come,  because  her 
attention  is  directed  thither.  In  the  same  way 
she  is  also  Jerusalem  spiritually,  of  which  we 
have  already  said  many  things.  Her  enemy  is  the 
city  of  the  devil,  Babylon,  which  is  interpreted 
“confusion.”  Yet  out  of  this  Babylon  this  queen 
is  in  all  nations  set  free  by  regeneration,  and 
passes  from  the  worst  to  the  best  King — that  is, 
^s.  45.  9-17.  2Ps.  45.  7.  3Ps.  48.  2. 


from  the  devil  to  Christ.  Wherefore  it  is  said  to 
her,  “Forget  thy  people  and  thy  father’s  house.” 
Of  this  impious  city  those  also  are  a  portion  who 
are  Israelites  only  in  the  flesh  and  not  by  faith, 
enemies  also  of  this  great  King  Himself  and  of 
His  queen.  For  Christ,  having  come  to  them,  and 
been  slain  by  them,  has  the  more  become  the 
King  of  others,  whom  He  did  not  see  in  the  flesh. 
Whence  our  King  Himself  says  through  the 
prophecy  of  a  certain  psalm,  “Thou  wilt  deliver 
me  from  the  contradictions  of  the  people;  Thou 
wilt  make  me  head  of  the  nations.  A  people 
whom  I  have  not  known  hath  served  me :  in  the 
hearing  of  the  ear  it  hath  obeyed  me.”  4  There¬ 
fore  this  people  of  the  nations,  which  Christ  did 
not  know  in  His  bodily  presence,  yet  has  be¬ 
lieved  in  that  Christ  as  announced  to  it;  so  that 
it  might  be  said  of  it  with  good  reason,  “In  the 
hearing  of  the  ear  it  hath  obeyed  me,”  for  “faith 
is  by  hearing.”5  This  people,  I  say,  added  to 
those  who  are  the  true  Israelites  both  by  the 
flesh  and  by  faith,  is  the  city  of  God.  which  has 
brought  forth  Christ  Himself  according  to  the 
flesh,  since  He  was  in  these  Israelites  only.  For 
thence  came  the  Virgin  Mary,  in  whom  Christ 
assumed  flesh  that  He  might  be  man.  Of  which 
city  another  psalm  says,  “Mother  Sion,  shall  a 
man  say.  and  the  man  is  made  in  her,  and  the 
Highest  Himself  hath  founded  her.”  6  Who  is 
this  Highest,  save  God?  And  thus  Christ,  who  is 
God,  before  He  became  man  through  Mary  in 
that  city,  Himself  founded  it  by  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets.  As  therefore  was  said  by  prophecy 
so  long  before  to  this  queen,  the  city  of  God, 
what  we  already  can  see  fulfilled,  “Instead  of 
thy  fathers,  sons  are  born  to  thee;  thou  shalt 
make  them  princes  over  all  the  earth”;7  so  out 
of  her  sons  truly  are  set  up  even  her  fathers 
through  all  the  earth,  when  the  people,  coming 
together  to  her,  confess  to  her  with  the  confes¬ 
sion  of  eternal  praise  for  ever  and  ever.  Beyond 
doubt,  whatever  interpretation  is  put  on  what  is 
here  expressed  somewhat  darkly  in  figurative 
language  ought  to  be  in  agreement  with  these 
most  manifest  things. 

Chap.  17.  Of  those  things  in  the  noth  Psalm 
which  relate  to  the  priesthood  of  Christy  and 
in  the  22d  to  his  passion 
Just  as  in  that  psalm  also  where  Christ  is  most 
openly  proclaimed  as  Priest,  even  as  He  is  here 
as  King,  “The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou 
at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  Thine  enemies 
Thy  footstool.”8  That  Christ  sits  on  the  right 

4Ps.  18.  43.  5Rom.  10.  5.  6Ps.  87.  5. 

7Ps.  45.  16.  8Ps.  no.  1. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  17-18  467 


hand  of  God  the  Father  is  believed,  not  seen; 
that  His  enemies  also  are  put  under  His  feet 
doth  not  yet  appear;  it  is  being  done,  it  will  ap¬ 
pear  at  last :  yea,  this  is  now  believed,  afterward 
it  shall  be  seen.  But  what  follows,  “The  Lord 
will  send  forth  the  rod  of  Thy  strength  out  of 
Sion,  and  rule  Thou  in  the  midst  of  Thine  ene¬ 
mies,”1  is  so  clear  that  to  deny  it  would  imply 
not  merely  unbelief  and  mistake,  but  downright 
impudence.  And  even  enemies  must  certainly 
confess  that  out  of  Sion  has  been  sent  the  law 
of  Christ  which  we  call  the  gospel  and  acknowl¬ 
edge  as  the  rod  of  His  strength.  But  that  He 
rules  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  these  same 
enemies  among  whom  He  rules  themselves  bear 
witness,  gnashing  their  teeth  and  consuming 
away,  and  having  power  to  do  nothing  against 
Him.  Then  what  he  says  a  little  after,  “The  Lord 
hath  sworn  and  will  not  repent,”2  by  which 
words  He  intimates  that  what  He  adds  is  im¬ 
mutable,  “Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the 
order  of  Melchizedek,”3  who  is  permitted  to 
doubt  of  whom  these  things  are  said,  seeing  that 
now  there  is  nowhere  a  priesthood  and  sacrifice 
after  the  order  of  Aaron,  and  everywhere  men 
offer  under  Christ  as  the  Priest,  which  Melchize¬ 
dek  showed  when  he  blessed  Abraham?  There¬ 
fore  to  these  manifest  things  are  to  be  referred, 
when  rightly  understood,  those  things  in  the 
same  psalm  that  are  set  down  a  little  more  ob¬ 
scurely,  and  we  have  already  made  known  in  our 
popular  sermons  how  these  things  are  to  be 
rightly  understood.  So  also  in  that  where  Christ 
utters  through  prophecy  the  humiliation  of  His 
passion,  saying,  “They  pierced  my  hands  and 
feet;  they  counted  all  my  bones.  Yea,  they 
looked  and  stared  at  me.”4  By  which  words  he 
certainly  meant  His  body  stretched  out  on  the 
cross,  with  the  hands  and  feet  pierced  and  per¬ 
forated  by  the  striking  through  of  the  nails,  and 
that  He  had  in  that  way  made  Himself  a  specta¬ 
cle  to  those  who  looked  and  stared.  And  he  adds, 
“They  parted  my  garments  among  them,  and 
over  my  vesture  they  cast  lots.”5  How  this 
prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  the  Gospel  history 
narrates.  Then,  indeed,  the  other  things  also 
which  are  said  there  less  openly  are  rightly  un¬ 
derstood  when  they  agree  with  those  which  shine 
with  so  great  clearness ;  especially  because  those 
things  also  which  we  do  not  believe  as  past,  but 
survey  as  present,  are  beheld  by  the  whole 
world,  being  now  exhibited  just  as  they  are  read 
of  in  this  very  psalm  as  predicted  so  long  before. 
For  it  is  there  said  a  little  after,  “All  the  ends  of 

lPs.  no.  2.  2Ps.  no.  4.  zIbid. 

4Ps.  22.  16,  17.  6Ps.  22.  18,  19. 


the  earth  shall  remember,  and  turn  unto  the 
Lord,  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall 
worship  before  Him;  for  the  kingdom  is  the 
Lord’s,  and  He  shall  rule  the  nations.” 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  3d,  41st,  16th,  and  68th 
Psalms,  in  which  the  death  and  resurrection 
of  the  Lord  are  prophesied 
About  His  resurrection  also  the  oracles  of  the 
Psalms  are  by  no  means  silent.  For  what  else  is 
it  that  is  sung  in  His  person  in  the  3d  Psalm,  “I 
laid  me  down  and  took  a  sleep,  and  I  awaked, 
for  the  Lord  shall  sustain  me”?6  Is  there  per¬ 
chance  any  one  so  stupid  as  to  believe  that  the 
prophet  chose  to  point  it  out  to  us  as  something 
great  that  He  had  slept  and  risen  up,  unless  that 
sleep  had  been  death,  and  that  awaking  the  res¬ 
urrection,  which  behoved  to  be  thus  prophesied 
concerning  Christ?  For  in  the  41st  Psalm  also  it 
is  shown  much  more  clearly,  where  in  the  per¬ 
son  of  the  Mediator,  in  the  usual  way,  things  are 
narrated  as  if  past  which  were  prophesied  as  yet 
to  come,  since  these  things  which  were  yet  to 
come  were  in  the  predestination  and  foreknowl¬ 
edge  of  God  as  if  they  were  done,  because  they 
were  certain.  He  says,  “Mine  enemies  speak  evil 
of  me;  When  shall  he  die,  and  his  name  perish? 
And  if  he  came  in  to  see  me,  his  heart  spake  vain 
things :  he  gathered  iniquity  to  himself.  He  went 
out  of  doors,  and  uttered  it  all  at  once.  Against 
me  all  mine  enemies  whisper  together:  against 
me  do  they  devise  evil.  They  have  planned  an 
unjust  thing  against  me.  Shall  not  he  that  sleeps 
also  rise  again?”7  These  words  are  certainly  so 
set  down  here  that  he  may  be  understood  to  say 
nothing  else  than  if  he  said,  “Shall  not  He  that 
died  recover  life  again?”  The  previous  words 
clearly  show  that  His  enemies  have  meditated 
and  planned  His  death,  and  that  this  was  exe¬ 
cuted  by  him  who  came  in  to  see,  and  went  out 
to  betray.  But  to  whom  does  not  Judas  here  oc¬ 
cur,  who,  from  being  His  disciple,  became  His 
betrayer?  Therefore  because  they  were  about  to 
do  what  they  had  plotted — that  is,  were  about 
to  kill  Him — he,  to  show  them  that  with  useless 
malice  they  were  about  to  kill  Him  Who  should 
rise  again,  so  adds  this  verse,  as  if  he  said, 
“What  vain  thing  are  you  doing?  What  will  be 
your  crime  will  be  my  sleep.”  “Shall  not  He  that 
sleeps  also  rise  again?”  And  yet  he  indicates  in 
the  following  verses  that  they  should  not  com¬ 
mit  so  great  an  impiety  with  impunity,  saying, 
“Yea,  the  man  of  my  peace  in  whom  I  trusted, 
who  ate  my  bread,  hath  enlarged  the  heel  over 
me”;8  that  is,  hath  trampled  me  under  foot. 

6Ps.  3.  5.  7Ps.  41.  5-8.  8Ps.  41.  9. 


468  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


“But  Thou,”  he  saith,  “0  Lord,  be  merciful  unto 
me,  and  raise  me  up,  that  I  may  requite  them.”1 
Who  can  now  deny  this  who  sees  the  Jews,  after 
the  passion  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  utterly 
rooted  up  from  their  abodes  by  warlike  slaugh¬ 
ter  and  destruction?  For,  being  slain  by  them. 
He  has  risen  again,  and  has  requited  them  mean¬ 
while  by  temporary  discipline,  save  that  for 
those  who  are  not  corrected  He  keeps  it  in  store 
for  the  time  when  He  shall  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead.2  For  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself,  in  point¬ 
ing  out  that  very  man  to  the  apostles  as  His  be¬ 
trayer,  quoted  this  very  verse  of  this  psalm  and 
said  it  was  fulfilled  in  Himself:  “He  that  ate  my 
bread  enlarged  the  heel  over  me.”  But  what  he 
says,  “In  whom  I  trusted,”  does  not  suit  the 
head  but  the  body.  For  the  Saviour  Himself  was 
not  ignorant  of  him  concerning  whom  He  had 
already  said  before,  “One  of  you  is  a  devil.”3 
But  He  is  wont  to  assume  the  person  of  His 
members,  and  to  ascribe  to  Himself  what  should 
be  said  of  them,  because  the  head  and  the  body 
is  one  Christ;4  whence  that  saying  in  the  Gos¬ 
pel,  “I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  to 
eat.”5  Expounding  which  He  says,  “Since  ye 
did  it  to  one  of  the  least  of  mine,  ye  did  it 
to  me.”6  Therefore  He  said  that  He  had 
trusted,  because  his  disciples  then  had  trusted 
concerning  Judas;  for  he  was  numbered  with 
the  apostles.7 

But  the  Jews  do  not  expect  that  the  Christ 
whom  they  expect  will  die;  therefore  they  do 
not  think  ours  to  be  Him  Whom  the  law  and  the 
prophets  announced,  but  feign  to  themselves  I 
know  not  whom  of  their  own,  exempt  from  the 
suffering  of  death.  Therefore,  with  wonderful 
emptiness  and  blindness,  they  contend  that  the 
words  we  have  set  down  signify,  not  death  and 
resurrection,  but  sleep  and  awaking  again.  But 
the  1 6th  Psalm  also  cries  to  them,  “Therefore 
my  heart  is  jocund,  and  my  tongue  hath  exulted ; 
moreover,  my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope:  for 
Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell ;  neither  wilt 
Thou  give  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.”8 
Who  but  He  that  rose  again  the  third  day  could 
say  His  flesh  had  rested  in  this  hope;  that  His 
soul,  not  being  left  in  hell,  but  speedily  return¬ 
ing  to  it,  should  revive  it,  that  it  should  not  be 
corrupted  as  corpses  are  wont  to  be,  which  they 
can  in  no  wise  say  of  David  the  prophet  and 
king?  The  68th  Psalm  also  cries  out,  “Our  God 
is  the  God  of  salvation:  even  of  the  Lord  the 

^s.  41.  io.  2II  Tim.  4.  i;  II  Pet.  4.  5. 

3 John,  6.  70.  4I  Cor.  12.  12.  6Matt.  25.  35. 

6Matt.  25.  40.  7Acts,  1.  17.  8Ps.  16.  9,  10. 


exit  was  by  death.”9  What  could  be  more  open¬ 
ly  said?  For  the  God  of  salvation  is  the  Lord 
Jesus,  which  is  interpreted  Saviour,  or  Healing 
One.  For  this  reason  this  name  was  given,  when 
it  was  said  before  He  was  born  of  the  virgin: 
“Thou  shalt  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  shalt  call  His 
name  Jesus;  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from 
their  sins.”10  Because  His  blood  was  shed  for 
the  remission  of  their  sins,  it  behoved  Him  to 
have  no  other  exit  from  this  life  than  death. 
Therefore,  when  it  had  been  said,  “Our  God  is 
the  God  of  salvation,”  immediately  it  was  add¬ 
ed,  “Even  of  the  Lord  the  exit  was  by  death,”  in 
order  to  show  that  we  were  to  be  saved  by  His 
dying.  But  that  saying  is  marvellous,  “Even  of 
the  Lord,”  as  if  it  was  said,  Such  is  that  life  of 
mortals,  that  not  even  the  Lord  Himself  could 
go  out  of  it  otherwise  save  through  death. 

Chap.  19.  Of  the  6gth  Psalm,  in  which  the  ob¬ 
stinate  unbelief  of  the  Jews  is  declared 
But  when  the  Jews  will  not  in  the  least  yield 
to  the  testimonies  of  this  prophecy,  which  are 
so  manifest,  and  are  also  brought  by  events  to 
so  clear  and  certain  a  completion,  certainly  that 
is  fulfilled  in  them  which  is  written  in  that 
psalm  which  here  follows.  For  when  the  things 
which  pertain  to  His  passion  are  prophetically 
spoken  there  also  in  the  person  of  Christ,  that 
is  mentioned  which  is  unfolded  in  the  Gospel: 
“They  gave  me  gall  for  my  meat;  and  in  my 
thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  for  drink.”11  And 
as  it  were  after  such  a  feast  and  dainties  in  this 
way  given  to  Himself,  presently  He  brings  in: 
“Let  their  table  become  a  trap  before  them,  and 
a  retribution,  and  an  offence :  let  their  eyes  be 
dimmed  that  they  see  not,  and  their  back  be  al¬ 
ways  bowed  down,”12  etc.  Which  things  are  not 
spoken  as  wished  for,  but  are  predicted  under 
the  prophetic  form  of  wishing.  What  wonder, 
then,  if  those  whose  eyes  are  dimmed  that  they 
see  not  do  not  see  these  manifest  things?  What 
wonder  if  those  do  not  look  up  at  heavenly 
things  whose  back  is  always  bowed  down  that 
they  may  grovel  among  earthly  things?  For 
these  words  transferred  from  the  body  signify 
mental  faults.  Let  these  things  which  have  been 
said  about  the  Psalms,  that  is,  about  king  Da¬ 
vid’s  prophecy,  suffice,  that  we  may  keep  within 
some  bound.  But  let  those  readers  excuse  us  who 
knew  them  all  before;  and  let  them  not  com¬ 
plain  about  those  perhaps  stronger  proofs  which 
they  know  or  think  I  have  passed  by. 

9Ps.  68.  20.  10Matt.  1.  21. 

nPs.  69.  21;  Matt.  27.  34,  48.  ^Ps.  69.  22,  23. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  19-20  469 


Chap.  20.  Of  David’s  reign  and  merit;  and  of  his 
son  Solomon ,  and  that  prophecy  relating  to 
Christ  which  is  found  either  in  those  books 
which  are  joined  to  those  written  by  him ,  or 
in  those  which  are  indubitably  his 

David  therefore  reigned  in  the  earthly  Jeru¬ 
salem.  a  son  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  much 
praised  by  the  divine  testimony;  for  even  his 
faults  are  overcome  by  great  piety,  through  the 
most  salutary  humility  of  his  repentance,  that 
he  is  altogether  one  of  those  of  whom  he  himself 
says,  “Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  for¬ 
given  and  whose  sins  are  covered.”  1  After  him 
Solomon  his  son  reigned  over  the  same  whole 
people,  who,  as  was  said  before,  began  to  reign 
while  his  father  was  still  alive.  This  man,  after 
good  beginnings,  made  a  bad  end.  For  indeed 
“prosperity,  which  wears  out  the  minds  of  the 
wise,”  hurt  him  more  than  that  wisdom  profited 
him,  which  even  yet  is  and  shall  hereafter  be  re¬ 
nowned,  and  was  then  praised  far  and  wide.  He 
also  is  found  to  have  prophesied  in  his  books,  of 
which  three  are  received  as  of  canonical  authori¬ 
ty,  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the  Song  of 
Songs.  But  it  has  been  customary  to  ascribe  to 
Solomon  other  two,  of  which  one  is  called  Wis¬ 
dom,  the  other  Ecclesiasticus,  on  account  of 
some  resemblance  of  style — but  the  more 
learned  have  no  doubt  that  they  are  not  his ;  yet 
of  old  the  Church,  especially  the  Western,  re¬ 
ceived  them  into  authority — in  the  one  of 
which,  called  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  the  pas¬ 
sion  of  Christ  is  most  openly  prophesied.  For 
indeed  His  impious  murderers  are  quoted  as  say¬ 
ing,  “Let  us  lie  in  wait  for  the  righteous,  for  he 
is  unpleasant  to  us,  and  contrary  to  our  works; 
and  he  upbraideth  us  with  our  transgressions  of 
the  law,  and  objecteth  to  our  disgrace  the  trans¬ 
gressions  of  our  education.  He  professeth  to 
have  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  he  calleth  him¬ 
self  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  made  to  reprove  our 
thoughts.  He  is  grievous  for  us  even  to  behold; 
for  his  life  is  unlike  other  men’s,  and  his  ways 
are  different.  We  are  esteemed  of  him  as  coun¬ 
terfeits;  and  he  abstaineth  from  our  ways  as 
from  filthiness.  He  extols  the  latter  end  of  the 
righteous;  and  glorieth  that  he  hath  God  for  his 
Father.  Let  us  see,  therefore,  if  his  words  be 
true;  and  let  us  try  what  shall  happen  to  him, 
and  we  shall  know  what  shall  be  the  end  of  him. 
For  if  the  righteous  be  the  Son  of  God,  He  will 
undertake  for  him,  and  deliver  him  out  of  the 
hand  of  those  that  are  against  him.  Let  us  put 
lPs.  32.  I. 


him  to  the  question  with  contumely  and  torture, 
that  we  may  know  his  reverence,  and  prove  his 
patience.  Let  us  condemn  him  to  the  most 
shameful  death ;  for  by  His  own  sayings  He  shall 
be  respected.  These  things  did  they  imagine,  and 
were  mistaken;  for  their  own  malice  hath  quite 
blinded  them.” 2  But  in  Ecclesiasticus  the  future 
faith  of  the  nations  is  predicted  in  this  manner: 
“Have  mercy  upon  us,  0  God,  Ruler  of  all,  and 
send  Thy  fear  upon  all  the  nations :  lift  up  Thine 
hand  over  the  strange  nations,  and  let  them  see 
Thy  power.  As  Thou  wast  sanctified  in  us  before 
them,  so  be  Thou  sanctified  in  them  before  us. 
and  let  them  acknowledge  Thee,  according  as 
we  also  have  acknowledged  Thee;  for  there  is 
not  a  God  beside  Thee,  0  Lord.”  3  We  see  this 
prophecy  in  the  form  of  a  wish  and  prayer  ful¬ 
filled  through  Jesus  Christ.  But  the  things  which 
are  not  written  in  the  canon  of  the  Jews  cannot 
be  quoted  against  their  contradictions  with  so 
great  validity. 

But  as  regards  those  three  books  which  it  is 
evident  are  Solomon’s  and  held  canonical  by  the 
Jews,  to  show  what  of  this  kind  may  be  found  in 
them  pertaining  to  Christ  and  the  Church  de¬ 
mands  a  laborious  discussion,  which,  if  now  en¬ 
tered  on,  would  lengthen  this  work  unduly.  Yet 
what  we  read  in  the  Proverbs  of  impious  men 
saying,  “Let  us  unrighteously  hide  in  the  earth 
the  righteous  man;  yea,  let  us  swallow  him  up 
alive  as  hell,  and  let  us  take  away  his  memory 
from  the  earth :  let  us  seize  his  precious  posses¬ 
sion,”  4  is  not  so  obscure  that  it  may  not  be  un¬ 
derstood,  without  laborious  exposition,  of  Christ 
and  His  possession  the  Church.  Indeed,  the  Gos¬ 
pel  parable  about  the  wicked  husbandmen  shows 
that  our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  said  something  like 
it:  “This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and 
the  inheritance  shall  be  ours.” 5  In  like  manner 
also  that  passage  in  this  same  book,  on  which  we 
have  already  touched6  when  we  were  speaking 
of  the  barren  woman  who  hath  borne  seven,  must 
soon  after  it  was  uttered  have  come  to  be  under¬ 
stood  of  only  Christ  and  the  Church  by  those 
who  knew  that  Christ  was  the  Wisdom  of  God. 
“Wisdom  hath  builded  her  an  house,  and  hath 
set  up  seven  pillars;  she  hath  sacrificed  her  vic¬ 
tims,  she  hath  mingled  her  wine  in  the  bowl ;  she 
hath  also  furnished  her  table.  She  hath  sent  her 
servants  summoning  to  the  bowl  with  excellent 
proclamation,  saying,  Who  is  simple,  let  him 
turn  aside  to  me.  And  to  the  void  of  sense  she 
hath  said.  Come,  eat  of  my  bread,  and  drink  of 

2Wisd.  2.  12-21.  3Ecclus.  36.  1-5. 

4Prov.  1.  11-13.  6Matt.  21.  38.  6Chap.  4. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  wine  which  I  have  mingled  for  you.”1  Here 
certainly  we  perceive  that  the  Wisdom  of  God, 
that  is,  the  Word  co-eternal  with  the  Father, 
hath  builded  Him  an  house,  even  a  human  body 
in  the  virgin  womb,  and  hath  subjoined  the 
Church  to  it  as  members  to  a  head,  hath  slain 
the  martyrs  as  victims,  hath  furnished  a  table 
with  wine  and  bread,  where  appears  also  the 
priesthood  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  and 
hath  called  the  simple  and  the  void  of  sense,  be¬ 
cause,  as  saith  the  apostle,  “He  hath  chosen  the 
weak  things  of  this  world  that  He  might  con¬ 
found  the  things  which  are  mighty.”2  Yet  to 
these  weak  ones  she  saith  what  follows,  “For¬ 
sake  simplicity,  that  ye  may  live ;  and  seek  pru¬ 
dence,  that  ye  may  have  life.”3  But  to  be  made 
partakers  of  this  table  is  itself  to  begin  to  have 
life.  For  when  he  says  in  another  book,  which  is 
called  Ecclesiastes,  “There  is  no  good  for  a  man, 
except  that  he  should  eat  and  drink,” 4  what  can 
he  be  more  credibly  understood  to  say  than  what 
belongs  to  the  participation  of  this  table  which 
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament  Himself, 
the  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek^  fur¬ 
nishes  with  His  own  body  and  blood?  For  that 
sacrifice  has  succeeded  all  the  sacrifices  of  the 
Old  Testament,  which  were  slain  as  a  shadow  of 
that  which  was  to  come;  wherefore  also  we  rec¬ 
ognize  the  voice  in  the  40th  Psalm  as  that  of  the 
same  Mediator  speaking  through  prophesy, 
“Sacrifice  and  offering  Thou  didst  not  desire; 
but  a  body  hast  Thou  perfected  for  me.”5  Be¬ 
cause,  instead  of  all  these  sacrifices  and  obla¬ 
tions,  His  body  is  offered,  and  is  served  up  to 
the  partakers  of  it.  For  that  this  Ecclesiastes,  in 
this  sentence  about  eating  and  drinking,  which 
he  often  repeats  and  very  much  commends,  does 
not  savour  the  dainties  of  carnal  pleasures,  is 
made  plain  enough  when  he  says,  “It  is  better  to 
go  into  the  house  of  mourning  than  to  go  into 
the  house  of  feasting.”6  And  a  little  after  he 
says,  “The  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  house  of 
mourning,  and  the  heart  of  the  simple  in  the 
house  of  feasting.”7  But  I  think  that  more  wor¬ 
thy  of  quotation  from  this  book  which  relates  to 
both  cities,  the  one  of  the  devil,  the  other  of 
Christ,  and  to  their  kings,  the  devil  and  Christ: 
“Woe  to  thee,  0  land,”  he  says,  “when  thy  king 
is  a  youth,  and  thy  princes  eat  in  the  morning! 
Blessed  art  thou,  0  land,  when  thy  king  is  the 
son  of  nobles,  and  thy  princes  eat  in  season,  in 
fortitude,  and  not  in  confusion !  ” 8  He  has  called 
the  devil  a  youth,  because  of  the  folly  and  pride, 

^rov.  9.  1-5.  2I  Cor.  1.  27.  3Prov.  9.  6. 

4Eccles.  2.  24;  3.  13;  5.  18;  8.  15.  5Ps.  40.  6. 

8Eccles.  7.  2  7Eccles.  7.  4.  8Eccles.  10.  16,  17. 


and  rashness  and  unruliness,  and  other  vices 
which  are  wont  to  abound  at  that  age;  but 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  nobles,  that  is,  of  the  holy 
patriarchs,  of  those  belonging  to  the  free  city,  of 
whom  He  was  begotten  in  the  flesh.  The  princes 
of  that  and  other  cities  are  eaters  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  that  is,  before  the  suitable  hour,  because 
they  do  not  expect  the  seasonable  felicity,  which 
is  the  true,  in  the  world  to  come,  desiring  to  be 
speedily  made  happy  with  the  renown  of  this 
world ;  but  the  princes  of  the  city  of  Christ  pa¬ 
tiently  wait  for  the  time  of  a  blessedness  that  is 
not  fallacious.  This  is  expressed  by  the  words,  “in 
fortitude,  and  not  in  confusion,”  because  hope 
does  not  deceive  them;  of  which  the  apostle 
says,  “But  hope  maketh  not  ashamed.”9  A 
psalm  also  saith,  “For  they  that  hope  in  Thee 
shall  not  be  put  to  shame.” 10  But  now  the  Song 
of  Songs  is  a  certain  spiritual  pleasure  of  holy 
minds,  in  the  marriage  of  that  King  and  Queen- 
city,  that  is,  Christ  and  the  Church.  But  this 
pleasure  is  wrapped  up  in  allegorical  veils,  that 
the  Bridegroom  may  be  more  ardently  desired, 
and  more  joyfully  unveiled,  and  may  appear;  to 
whom  it  is  said  in  this  same  song.  “Equity  hath 
delighted  Thee”;11  and  the  bride  who  there 
hears,  “Charity  is  in  thy  delights.”12  We  pass 
over  many  things  in  silence,  in  our  desire  to  fin¬ 
ish  this  work. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  kings  after  Solomon,  both  in 

Judah  and  Israel 

The  other  kings  of  the  Hebrews  after  Solo¬ 
mon  are  scarcely  found  to  have  prophesied, 
through  certain  enigmatic  words  or  actions  of 
theirs,  what  may  pertain  to  Christ  and  the 
Church,  either  in  Judah  or  Israel;  for  so  were 
the  parts  of  that  people  styled,  when,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  Solomon’s  offence,  from  the  time  of 
Rehoboam  his  son,  who  succeeded  him  in  the 
kingdom,  it  was  divided  by  God  as  a  punish¬ 
ment.  The  ten  tribes,  indeed,  which  Jeroboam 
the  servant  of  Solomon  received,  being  appoint¬ 
ed  the  king  in  Samaria,  were  distinctively  called 
Israel,  although  this  had  been  the  name  of  that 
whole  people;  but  the  two  tribes,  namely,  of  Ju¬ 
dah  and  Benjamin,  which  for  David’s  sake,  lest 
the  kingdom  should  be  wholly  wrenched  from 
his  race,  remained  subject  to  the  city  of  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  were  called  Judah,  because  that  was  the 
tribe  whence  David  sprang.  But  Benjamin,  the 
other  tribe  which,  as  was  said,  belonged  to  the 
same  kingdom,  was  that  whence  Saul  sprang  be¬ 
fore  David.  But  these  two  tribes  together,  as 

9Rom.  5.  5.  10Ps.  69.  6.?  nSong  of  Sol.  1.  4. 

12Song  of  Sol.  7.  6. 


47i 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVII.  21-24 


was  said,  were  called  Judah,  and  were  distin¬ 
guished  by  this  name  from  Israel,  which  was  the 
distinctive  title  of  the  ten  tribes  under  their  own 
king.  For  the  tribe  of  Levi,  because  it  was  the 
priestly  one,  bound  to  the  servitude  of  God,  not 
of  the  kings,  was  reckoned  the  thirteenth.  For 
Joseph,  one  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Israel,  did  not, 
like  the  others,  form  one  tribe,  but  two,  Eph¬ 
raim  and  Manasseh.  Yet  the  tribe  of  Levi  also 
belonged  more  to  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
where  was  the  temple  of  God  Whom  it  served. 
On  the  division  of  the  people,  therefore,  Reho- 
boam,  son  of  Solomon,  reigned  in  Jerusalem  as 
the  first  king  of  Judah,  and  Jeroboam,  servant 
of  Solomon,  in  Samaria  as  king  of  Israel.  And 
when  Rehoboam  wished  as  a  tyrant  to  pursue 
that  separated  part  with  war,  the  people  were 
prohibited  from  fighting  with  their  brethren  by 
God,  who  told  them  through  a  prophet  that 
He  had  done  this;  whence  it  appeared  that  in 
this  matter  there  had  been  no  sin  either  of 
the  king  or  people  of  Israel,  but  the  accom¬ 
plished  will  of  God  the  avenger.  When  this 
was  known,  both  parts  settled  down  peaceably, 
for  the  division  made  was  not  religious  but 
political. 

Chap.  22  .Of  Jeroboam,  who  profaned  the  peo¬ 
ple  put  under  him  by  the  impiety  of  idolatry, 
amid  which,  however,  God  did  not  cease  to 
inspire  the  prophets ,  and  to  guard  many  from 
the  crime  of  idolatry 

But  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel,  with  perverse 
mind,  not  believing  in  God,  whom  he  had  proved 
true  in  promising  and  giving  him  the  kingdom, 
was  afraid  lest,  by  coming  to  the  temple  of  God 
which  was  in  Jerusalem,  where,  according  to  the 
divine  law,  that  whole  nation  was  to  come  in  or¬ 
der  to  sacrifice,  the  people  should  be  seduced 
from  him  and  return  to  David’s  line  as  the  seed 
royal;  and  set  up  idolatry  in  his  kingdom,  and 
with  horrible  impiety  beguiled  the  people,  en¬ 
snaring  them  to  the  worship  of  idols  with  him¬ 
self.  Yet  God  did  not  altogether  cease  to  reprove 
by  the  ptophets,  not  only  that  king,  but  also  his 
successors  and  imitators  in  his  impiety,  and  the 
people  too.  For  there  the  great  and  illustrious 
prophet  Elijah  and  Elisha  his  disciple  arose,  who 
also  did  many  wonderful  works.  Even  there, 
when  Elijah  said,  “0  Lord,  they  have  slain 
Thy  prophets,  they  have  digged  down  Thine 
altars;  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my 
life,”  it  was  answered  that  seven  thousand 
men  were  there  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee 
to  Baal.1 

Kings,  19.  10,  14,  15. 


Chap.  2 3.  Of  the  varying  condition  of  both  the 
Hebrew  kingdoms,  until  the  people  of  both 
were  at  different  times  led  into  captivity,  Ju¬ 
dah  being  afterwards  recalled  into  his  king¬ 
dom,  which  finally  passed  into  the  power  of 
the  Romans 

So  also  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah  pertaining  to 
Jerusalem  prophets  were  not  lacking  even  in  the 
times  of  succeeding  kings,  just  as  it  pleased  God 
to  send  them,  either  for  the  prediction  of  what 
was  needful,  or  for  correction  of  sin  and  instruc¬ 
tion  in  righteousness;2  for  there,  too,  although 
far  less  than  in  Israel,  kings  arose  who  grievous¬ 
ly  offended  God  by  their  impieties,  and,  along 
with  their  people,  who  were  like  them,  were 
smitten  with  moderate  scourges.  The  no  small 
merits  of  the  pious  kings  there  are  praised  in¬ 
deed.  But  we  read  that  in  Israel  the  kings  were, 
some  more,  others  less,  yet  all  wicked.  Each 
part,  therefore,  as  the  divine  providence  either 
ordered  or  permitted,  was  both  lifted  up  by 
prosperity  and  weighed  down  by  adversity  of 
various  kinds;  and  it  was  afflicted  not  only  by 
foreign,  but  also  by  civil  wars  with  each  other, 
in  order  that  by  certain  existing  causes  the  mer¬ 
cy  or  anger  of  God  might  be  manifested;  until, 
by  His  growing  indignation,  that  whole  nation 
was  by  the  conquering  Chaldeans  not  only  over¬ 
thrown  in  its  abode,  but  also  for  the  most  part 
transported  to  the  lands  of  the  Assyrians — first, 
that  part  of  the  thirteen  tribes  called  Israel,  but 
afterwards  Judah  also,  when  Jerusalem  and  that 
most  noble  temple  was  cast  down — in  which 
lands  it  rested  seventy  years  in  captivity.  Being 
after  that  time  sent  forth  thence,  they  rebuilt 
the  overthrown  temple.  And  although  very 
many  stayed  in  the  lands  of  the  strangers,  yet 
the  kingdom  no  longer  had  two  separate  parts, 
with  different  kings  over  each,  but  in  Jerusalem 
there  was  one  prince  over  them ;  and  at  certain 
times,  from  every  direction  wherever  they  were, 
and  from  whatever  place  they  could,  they  all 
came  to  the  temple  of  God  which  was  there.  Yet 
not  even  then  were  they  without  foreign  ene¬ 
mies  and  conquerors;  yea,  Christ  found  them 
tributaries  of  the  Romans. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  prophets,  who  either  were  the 
last  among  the  Jews,  or  whom  the  Gospel  his¬ 
tory  reports  about  the  time  of  Christ1  s  nativ¬ 
ity 

But  in  that  whole  time  after  they  returned 
from  Babylon,  after  Malachi,  Haggai,  and  Ze- 
chariah,  who  then  prophesied,  and  Ezra,  they 
2II  Tim.  3.  16. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


472 

had  no  prophets  down  to  the  time  of  the  Sav¬ 
iour’s  advent  except  another  Zechariah.  the  fa¬ 
ther  of  John,  and  Elisabeth  his  wife,  when  the 
nativity  of  Christ  was  already  close  at  hand; 
and  when  He  was  already  born,  Simeon  the 
aged,  and  Anna  a  widow,  and  now  very  old ;  and, 
last  of  all.  John  himself,  who,  being  a  young 
man.  did  not  predict  that  Christ,  now  a  young 
man,  was  to  come,  but  by  prophetic  knowledge 
pointed  Him  out  although  unknown;  for  which 
reason  the  Lord  Himself  says,  “The  law  and  the 
prophets  were  until  John.”  1  But  the  prophesy¬ 
ing  of  these  five  is  made  known  to  us  in  the  gos¬ 
pel,  where  the  virgin  mother  of  our  Lord  herself  is 
also  found  to  have  prophesied  before  John.  But 
this  prophecy  of  theirs  the  wicked  Jews  do  not 
xMatt.  11.  13. 


receive ;  but  those  innumerable  persons  received 
it  who  from  them  believed  the  gospel.  For  then 
truly  Israel  was  divided  in  two.  by  that  division 
which  was  foretold  by  Samuel  the  prophet  to 
king  Saul  as  immutable.  But  even  the  reprobate 
Jews  hold  Malachi,  Haggai.  Zechariah,  and  Ezra 
as  the  last  received  into  canonical  authority.  For 
there  are  also  writings  of  these,  as  of  others, 
who  being  but  a  very  few  in  the  great  multitude 
of  prophets,  have  written  those  books  which 
have  obtained  canonical  authority,  of  whose 
predictions  it  seems  good  to  me  to  put  in  this 
work  some  which  pertain  to  Christ  and  His 
Church;  and  this,  by  the  Lord’s  help,  shall  be 
done  more  conveniently  in  the  following  book, 
that  we  may  not  further  burden  this  one,  which 
is  already  too  long. 


BOOK  XVIII 

ARGUMENT.  Augustine  traces  the  parallel  courses  of  the  earthly  and 

HEAVENLY  CITIES  FROM  THE  TIME  OF  ABRAHAM  TO  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD ;  AND  AL¬ 
LUDES  TO  THE  ORACLES  REGARDING  CHRIST,  BOTH  THOSE  UTTERED  BY  THE  SIBYLS, 
AND  THOSE  OF  THE  SACRED  PROPHETS  WHO  WROTE  AFTER  THE  FOUNDATION  OF 
ROME,  HOSEA,  AMOS,  ISAIAH,  MICAH,  AND  THEIR  SUCCESSORS. 


Chap.  1.  Of  those  things  down  to  the  times  of 
the  Saviour  which  have  been  discussed  in  the 
seventeen  books 

I  promised  to  write  of  the  rise,  progress,  and 
appointed  end  of  the  two  cities,  one  of  which  is 
God’s,  the  other  this  world’s,  in  which,  so  far  as 
mankind  is  concerned,  the  former  is  now  a 
stranger.  But  first  of  all  I  undertook,  so  far  as 
His  grace  should  enable  me,  to  refute  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  the  city  of  God,  who  prefer  their  gods  to 
Christ  its  founder,  and  fiercely  hate  Christians 
with  the  most  deadly  malice.  And  this  I  have 
done  in  the  first  ten  books.  Then,  as  regards  my 
three-fold  promise  which  I  have  just  mentioned, 
I  have  treated  distinctly,  in  the  four  books 
which  follow  the  tenth,  of  the  rise  of  both  cities. 
After  that,  I  have  proceeded  from  the  first  man 
down  to  the  flood  in  one  book,  which  is  the  fif¬ 
teenth  of  this  work ;  and  from  that  again  down 
to  Abraham  our  work  has  followed  both  in 
chronological  order.  From  the  patriarch  Abra¬ 
ham  down  to  the  time  of  the  Israelite  kings,  at 
which  we  close  our  sixteenth  book,  and  thence 
down  to  the  advent  of  Christ  Himself  in  the 
flesh,  to  which  period  the  seventeenth  book 
reaches,  the  City  of  God  appears  from  my  way  of 
writing  to  have  run  its  course  alone;  whereas  it 
did  not  run  its  course  alone  in  this  age,  for  both 


cities,  in  their  course  amid  mankind,  certainly 
experienced  chequered  times  together  just  as 
from  the  beginning.  But  I  did  this  in  order  that, 
first  of  all,  from  the  time  when  the  promises  of 
God  began  to  be  more  clear,  down  to  the  virgin 
birth  of  Him  in  Whom  those  things  promised 
from  the  first  were  to  be  fulfilled,  the  course  of 
that  city  which  is  God’s  might  be  made  more 
distinctly  apparent,  without  interpolation  of 
foreign  matter  from  the  history  of  the  other 
city,  although  down  to  the  revelation  of  the  new 
covenant  it  ran  its  course,  not  in  light,  but  in 
shadow.  Now,  therefore,  I  think  fit  to  do  what  I 
passed  by,  and  show,  so  far  as  seems  necessary, 
how  that  other  city  ran  its  course  from  the  times 
of  Abraham,  so  that  attentive  readers  may  com¬ 
pare  the  two. 

Chap.  2.  Of  the  kings  and  times  of  the  earthly 
city  which  were  synchronous  with  the  times 
of  the  saints,  reckoning  from  the  rise  of 
Abraham 

The  society  of  mortals  spread  abroad  through 
the  earth  everywhere,  and  in  the  most  diverse 
places,  although  bound  together  by  a  certain 
fellowship  of  our  common  nature,  is  yet  for  the 
most  part  divided  against  itself,  and  the  strong¬ 
est  oppress  the  others,  because  all  follow  after 
their  own  interests  and  lusts,  while  what  is 


THE  CITY  OF 

longed  for  either  suffices  for  none,  or  not  for  all, 
because  it  is  not  the  very  thing.  For  the  van¬ 
quished  succumb  to  the  victorious,  preferring 
any  sort  of  peace  and  safety  to  freedom  itself ; 
so  that  they  who  chose  to  die  rather  than  be 
slaves  have  been  greatly  wondered  at.  For  in  al¬ 
most  all  nations  the  very  voice  of  nature  some¬ 
how  proclaims,  that  those  who  happen  to  be  con¬ 
quered  should  choose  rather  to  be  subject  to 
their  conquerors  than  to  be  killed  by  all  kinds  of 
warlike  destruction.  This  does  not  take  place 
without  the  providence  of  God,  in  whose  power 
it  lies  that  any  one  either  subdues  or  is  subdued 
in  war;  that  some  are  endowed  with  kingdoms, 
others  made  subject  to  kings.  Now,  among  the 
very  many  kingdoms  of  the  earth  into  which,  by 
earthly  interests  or  lust,  society  is  divided 
(which  we  call  by  the  general  name  of  the  city 
of  this  world),  we  see  that  two,  settled  and  kept 
distinct  from  each  other  both  in  time  and  place, 
have  grown  far  more  famous  than  the  rest,  first 
that  of  the  Assyrians,  then  that  of  the  Romans. 
First  came  the  one  then  the  other.  The  former 
arose  in  the  east,  and,  immediately  on  its  close, 
the  latter  in  the  west.  I  may  speak  of  other 
kingdoms  and  other  kings  as  appendages  of 
these. 

Ninus,  then,  who  succeeded  his  father  Belus, 
the  first  king  of  Assyria,  was  already  the  second 
king  of  that  kingdom  when  Abraham  was  born 
in  the  land  of  the  Chaldees.  There  was  also  at 
that  time  a  very  small  kingdom  of  Sicyon,  with 
which,  as  from  an  ancient  date,  that  most  uni¬ 
versally  learned  man  Marcus  Varro  begins,  in 
writing  of  the  Roman  race.  For  from  these  kings 
of  Sicyon  he  passes  to  the  Athenians,  from  them 
to  the  Latins,  and  from  these  to  the  Romans. 
Yet  very  little  is  related  about  these  kingdoms, 
before  the  foundation  of  Rome,  in  comparison 
with  that  of  Assyria.  For  although  even  Sallust, 
the  Roman  historian,  admits  that  the  Athenians 
were  very  famous  in  Greece,  yet  he  thinks  they 
were  greater  in  fame  than  in  fact.  For  in  speak¬ 
ing  of  them  he  says,  “The  deeds  of  the  Atheni¬ 
ans,  as  I  think,  were  very  great  and  magnificent, 
but  yet  somewhat  less  than  reported  by  fame. 
But  because  writers  of  great  genius  arose 
among  them,  the  deeds  of  the  Athenians  were 
celebrated  throughout  the  world  as  very  great. 
Thus  the  virtue  of  those  who  did  them  was  held 
to  be  as  great  as  men  of  transcendent  genius 
could  represent  it  to  be  by  the  power  of  lauda¬ 
tory  words.”  This  city  also  derived  no  small 
glory  from  literature  and  philosophy,  the  study 
of  which  chiefly  flourished  there.  But  as  regards 


GOD  XVIII.  1-2  473 

empire,  none  in  the  earliest  times  was  greater 
than  the  Assyrian,  or  so  widely  extended.  For 
when  Ninus  the  son  of  Belus  was  king,  he  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  subdued  the  whole  of  Asia,  even 
to  the  boundaries  of  Libya,  which  as  to  number 
is  called  the  third  part,  but  as  to  size  is  found  to 
be  the  half  of  the  whole  world.  The  Indians  in 
the  eastern  regions  were  the  only  people  over 
whom  he  did  not  reign;  but  after  his  death  Sem- 
iramis  his  wife  made  war  on  them.  Thus  it  came 
to  pass  that  all  the  people  and  kings  in  those 
countries  were  subject  to  the  kingdom  and  au¬ 
thority  of  the  Assyrians  and  did  whatever  they 
were  commanded.  Now  Abraham  was  born  in 
that  kingdom  among  the  Chaldees,  in  the  time 
of  Ninus.  But  since  Grecian  affairs  are  much 
better  known  to  us  than  Assyrian,  and  those  who 
have  diligently  investigated  the  antiquity  of  the 
Roman  nation’s  origin  have  followed  the  order 
of  time  through  the  Greeks  to  the  Latins,  and 
from  them  to  the  Romans,  who  themselves  are 
Latins,  we  ought  on  this  account,  where  it  is 
needful,  to  mention  the  Assyrian  kings,  that  it 
may  appear  how  Babylon,  like  a  first  Rome,  ran 
its  course  along  with  the  city  of  God,  which  is  a 
stranger  in  this  world.  But  the  things  proper  for 
insertion  in  this  work  in  comparing  the  two 
cities,  that  is,  the  earthly  and  heavenly,  ought 
to  be  taken  mostly  from  the  Greek  and  Latin 
kingdoms,  where  Rome  herself  is  like  a  second 
Babylon. 

At  Abraham’s  birth,  then,  the  second  kings  of 
Assyria  and  Sicyon  respectively  were  Ninus  and 
Europs,  the  first  having  been  Belus  and  ^Egia- 
leus.  But  when  God  promised  Abraham,  on  his 
departure  from  Babylonia,  that  he  should  be¬ 
come  a  great  nation,  and  that  in  his  seed  all  na¬ 
tions  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,  the  Assyri¬ 
ans  had  their  seventh  king,  the  Sicyons  their 
fifth;  for  the  son  of  Ninus  reigned  among  them 
after  his  mother  Semiramis,  who  is  said  to  have 
been  put  to  death  by  him  for  attempting  to  de¬ 
file  him  by  incestuously  lying  with  him.  Some 
think  that  she  founded  Babylon,  and  indeed  she 
may  have  founded  it  anew.  But  we  have  told,  in 
the  sixteenth  book,  when  or  by  whom  it  was 
founded.  Now  the  son  of  Ninus  and  Semiramis, 
who  succeeded  his  mother  in  the  kingdom,  is 
also  called  Ninus  by  some,  but  by  others  Ninias, 
a  patronymic  word.  Telexion  then  held  the  king¬ 
dom  of  the  Sicyons.  In  his  reign  times  were 
quiet  and  joyful  to  such  a  degree  that  after  his 
death  they  worshipped  him  as  a  god  by  offering 
sacrifices  and  by  celebrating  games,  which  are 
said  to  have  been  first  instituted  on  this  occasion. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  3.  What  kings  reigned  in  Assyria  and  Si- 
cyon  when,  according  to  the  promise ,  Isaac 
was  born  to  Abraham  in  his  hundredth  year, 
and  when  the  twins  Esau  and  Jacob  were  born 
oj  Rebecca  to  Isaac  in  his  sixtieth  year 

In  his  times  also,  by  the  promise  of  God. 
Isaac,  the  son  of  Abraham,  was  born  to  his  fa¬ 
ther  when  he  was  a  hundred  years  old,  of  Sarah 
his  wife,  who,  being  barren  and  old.  had  already 
lost  hope  of  issue.  Aralius  was  then  the  fifth 
king  of  the  Assyrians.  To  Isaac  himself,  in  his 
sixtieth  year,  were  born  twin-sons,  Esau  and 
Jacob,  whom  Rebecca  his  wife  bore  to  him.  their 
grandfather  Abraham,  who  died  on  completing 
a  hundred  and  seventy  years,  being  still  alive 
and  reckoning  his  hundred  and  sixtieth  year.1  At 
that  time  there  reigned  as  the  seventh  kings — 
among  the  Assyrians,  that  more  ancient  Xerxes, 
who  was  also  called  Balaeus;  and  among  the  Si- 
cyons,  Thuriachus,  or,  as  some  write  his  name, 
Thurimachus.  The  kingdom  of  Argos,  in  which 
Inachus  reigned  first,  arose  in  the  time  of  Abra¬ 
ham’s  grandchildren.  And  I  must  not  omit  \^hat 
Varro  relates,  that  the  Sicyons  were  also  wont 
to  sacrifice  at  the  tomb  of  their  seventh  king 
Thuriachus.  In  the  reign  of  Armamitres  in  As¬ 
syria  and  Leucippus  in  Sicyon  as  the  eighth 
kings,  and  of  Inachus  as  the  first  in  Argos,  God 
spoke  to  Isaac,  and  promised  the  same  two 
things  to  him  as  to  his  father — namely,  the  land 
of  Canaan  to  his  seed  and  the  blessing  of  all  na¬ 
tions  in  his  seed.  These  same  things  were  prom¬ 
ised  to  his  son,  Abraham’s  grandson,  who  was  at 
first  called  Jacob,  afterwards  Israel,  when  Belo- 
cus  was  the  ninth  king  of  Assyria,  and  Phoro- 
neus,  the  son  of  Inachus,  reigned  as  the  second 
king  of  Argos,  Leucippus  still  continuing  king  of 
Sicyon.  In  those  times,  under  the  Argive  king 
Phoroneus,  Greece  was  made  more  famous  by 
the  institution  of  certain  laws  and  judges.  On 
the  death  of  Phoroneus,  his  younger  brother 
Phegous  built  a  temple  at  his  tomb,  in  which  he 
was  worshipped  as  God,  and  oxen  were  sacrificed 
to  him.  I  believe  they  thought  him  worthy  of  so 
great  honour,  because  in  his  part  of  the  king¬ 
dom  (for  their  father  had  divided  his  territories 
between  them,  in  which  they  reigned  during  his 
life)  he  had  founded  chapels  for  the  worship  of 
the  gods,  and  had  taught  them  to  measure  time 
by  months  and  years  and  to  that  extent  to  keep 
count  and  reckoning  of  events.  Men  still  uncul¬ 
tivated,  admiring  him  for  these  novelties,  either 
fancied  he  was,  or  resolved  that  he  should  be 

Hn  the  Hebrew  text,  Gen.  25.  7,  a  hundred  and  seventy- 
five  years. 


made,  a  god  after  his  death.  Io  also  is  said  to 
have  been  the  daughter  of  Inachus,  who  was  af¬ 
terwards  called  Isis,  when  she  was  worshipped 
in  Egypt  as  a  great  goddess;  although  others 
write  that  she  came  as  a  queen  out  of  Ethiopia, 
and  because  she  ruled  extensively  and  justly, 
and  instituted  for  her  subjects  letters  and  many 
useful  things,  such  divine  honour  was  given  her 
there  after  she  died  that,  if  any  one  said  she  had 
been  human,  he  was  charged  with  a  capital  crime. 

Chap.  4.  Of  the  times  of  Jacob  and  his  son 

Joseph 

In  the  reign  of  Balseus,  the  ninth  king  of  As¬ 
syria,  and  Mesappus,  the  eighth  of  Sicyon,  who 
is  said  by  some  to  have  been  also  called  Cephi- 
sos  (if  indeed  the  same  man  had  both  names, 
and  those  who  put  the  other  name  in  their  writ¬ 
ings  have  not  rather  confounded  him  with  an¬ 
other  man),  while  Apis  was  third  king  of  Argos, 
Isaac  died,  a  hundred  and  eighty  years  old,  and 
left  his  twin-sons  a  hundred  and  twenty  years 
old.  Jacob,  the  younger  of  these,  belonged  to  the 
city  of  God  about  which  we  write  (the  elder  be¬ 
ing  wholly  rejected)  and  had  twelve  sons,  one  of 
whom,  called  Joseph,  was  sold  by  his  brothers 
to  merchants  going  down  to  Egypt,  while  his 
grandfather  Isaac  was  still  alive.  But  when  he 
was  thirty  years  of  age,  Joseph  stood  before 
Pharaoh,  being  exalted  out  of  the  humiliation 
he  endured,  because,  in  divinely  interpreting  the 
king’s  dreams,  he  foretold  that  there  would  be 
seven  years  of  plenty,  the  very  rich  abundance 
of  which  would  be  consumed  by  seven  other 
years  of  famine  that  should  follow.  On  this  ac¬ 
count  the  king  made  him  ruler  over  Egypt,  lib¬ 
erating  him  from  prison,  into  which  he  had  been 
thrown  for  keeping  his  chastity  intact;  for  he 
bravely  preserved  it  from  his  mistress,  who 
wickedly  loved  him,  and  told  lies  to  his  weakly 
credulous  master,  and  did  not  consent  to  com¬ 
mit  adultery  with  her,  but  fled  from  her,  leaving 
his  garment  in  her  hands  when  she  laid  hold  of 
him.  In  the  second  of  the  seven  years  of  famine 
Jacob  came  down  into  Egypt  to  his  son  with  all 
he  had,  being  a  hundred  and  thirty  years  old,  as 
he  himself  said  in  answer  to  the  king’s  question. 
Joseph  was  then  thirty-nine,  if  we  add  seven 
years  of  plenty  and  two  of  famine  to  the  thirty 
he  reckoned  when  honoured  by  the  king. 

Chap.  5.  Of  Apis  king  of  Argos,  whom  the 

Egyptians  called  Serapis,  and  worshipped 

with  divine  honours 

In  these  times  Apis  king  of  Argos  crossed  over 
into  Egypt  in  ships  and,  on  dying  there,  was 


THE  CITY  OF 

made  Serapis,the  chief  god  of  all  the  Egyptians. 
Now  Varro  gives  this  very  ready  reason  why,  af¬ 
ter  his  death,  he  was  called,  not  Apis,  but  Sera- 
pis.  The  ark  in  which  he  was  placed  when  dead, 
which  every  one  now  calls  a  sarcophagus,  was 
then  called  in  Greek  aopo's,  and  they  began  to 
worship  him  when  buried  in  it  before  his  temple 
was  built;  and  from  Soros  and  Apis  he  was 
called  first  Sorapis,  and  then  Serapis,  by  chang¬ 
ing  a  letter,  as  easily  happens.  It  was  decreed  re¬ 
garding  him  also,  that  whoever  should  say  he 
had  been  a  man  should  be  capitally  punished. 
And  since  in  every  temple  where  Isis  and  Sera¬ 
pis  were  worshipped  there  was  also  an  image 
which,  with  finger  pressed  on  the  lips,  seemed  to 
warn  men  to  keep  silence,  Varro  thinks  this  sig¬ 
nifies  that  it  should  be  kept  secret  that  they  had 
been  human.  But  that  bull  which,  with  wonder¬ 
ful  folly,  deluded  Egypt  nourished  with  abun¬ 
dant  delicacies  in  honour  of  him,  was  not  called 
Serapis,  but  Apis,  because  they  worshipped  him 
alive  without  a  sarcophagus.  On  the  death  of 
that  bull,  when  they  sought  and  found  a  calf  of 
the  same  colour — that  is,  similarly  marked  with 
certain  white  spots — they  believed  it  was  some¬ 
thing  miraculous,  and  divinely  provided  for 
them.  Yet  it  was  no  great  thing  for  the  demons, 
in  order  to  deceive  them,  to  show  to  a  cow  when 
she  was  conceiving  and  pregnant  the  image  of 
such  a  bull,  which  she  alone  could  see,  and  by 
it  attract  the  breeding  passion  of  the  mother, 
so  that  it  might  appear  in  a  bodily  shape  in 
her  young,  just  as  Jacob  so  managed  with  the 
spotted  rods  that  the  sheep  and  goats  were 
born  spotted.  For  what  men  can  do  with  real 
colours  and  substances,  the  demons  can  very 
easily  do  by  showing  unreal  forms  to  breeding 
animals. 

Chap.  6.  Who  were  kings  of  Argos,  and  of  As- 
syria,  when  Jacob  died  in  Egypt 
Apis,  then,  who  died  in  Egypt,  was  not  the 
king  of  Egypt,  but  of  Argos.  He  was  succeeded 
by  his  son  Argus,  from  whose  name  the  land  was 
called  Argos  and  the  people  Argives,  for  under 
the  earlier  kings  neither  the  place  nor  the  nation 
as  yet  had  this  name.  While  he  then  reigned  over 
Argos,  and  Eratus  over  Sicyon,  and  Balaeus  still 
remained  king  of  Assyria,  Jacob  died  in  Egypt  a 
hundred  and  forty-seven  years  old,  after  he  had, 
when  dying,  blessed  his  sons  and  his  grandsons 
by  Joseph,  and  prophesied  most  plainly  of 
Christ,  saying  in  the  blessing  of  Judah,  “A 
prince  shall  not  fail  out  of  Judah,  nor  a  leader 
from  his  thighs,  until  those  things  come  which 
are  laid  up  for  him ;  and  He  is  the  expectation  of 


GOD  XVIII.  3-8  475 

the  nations.”1  In  the  reign  of  Argus,  Greece  be¬ 
gan  to  use  fruits,  and  to  have  crops  of  corn  in 
cultivated  fields,  the  seed  having  been  brought 
from  other  countries.  Argus  also  began  to  be  ac¬ 
counted  a  god  after  his  death,  and  was  honoured 
with  a  temple  and  sacrifices.  This  honour  was 
conferred  in  his  reign,  before  being  given  to  him, 
on  a  private  individual  for  being  the  first  to 
yoke  oxen  in  the  plough.  This  was  one  Homo¬ 
gyrus,  who  was  struck  by  lightning. 

Chap.  7.  Who  were  kings  when  Joseph  died  in 
Egypt 

In  the  reign  of  Mamitus,  the  twelfth  king  of 
Assyria,  and  Plemnaeus,  the  eleventh  of  Sicyon, 
while  Argus  still  reigned  over  the  Argives,  Jo¬ 
seph  died  in  Egypt  a  hundred  and  ten  years  old. 
After  his  death,  the  people  of  God,  increasing 
wonderfully,  remained  in  Egypt  a  hundred  and 
forty-five  years,  in  tranquillity  at  first,  until 
those  who  knew  Joseph  were  dead.  Afterward, 
through  envy  of  their  increase  and  the  suspicion 
that  they  would  at  length  gain  their  freedom, 
they  were  oppressed  with  persecutions  and  the 
labours  of  intolerable  servitude,  amid  which, 
however,  they  still  grew,  being  multiplied  with 
God-given  fertility.  During  this  period  the  same 
kingdoms  continued  in  Assyria  and  Greece. 

Chap.  8.  Who  were  kings  when  Moses  was  born , 
and  what  gods  began  to  be  worshipped  then 
When  Saphrus  reigned  as  the  fourteenth  king 
of  Assyria,  and  Orthopolis  as  the  twelfth  of  Si¬ 
cyon,  and  Criasus  as  the  fifth  of  Argos,  Moses 
was  born  in  Egypt,  by  whom  the  people  of  God 
were  liberated  from  the  Egyptian  slavery,  in 
which  they  behoved  to  be  thus  tried  that  they 
might  desire  the  help  of  their  Creator.  Some 
have  thought  that  Prometheus  lived  during  the 
reign  of  the  kings  now  named.  He  is  reported  to 
have  formed  men  out  of  clay,  because  he  was  es¬ 
teemed  the  best  teacher  of  wisdom ;  yet  it  does 
not  appear  what  wise  men  there  were  in  his  days. 
His  brother  Atlas  is  said  to  have  been  a  great  as¬ 
trologer;  and  this  gave  occasion  for  the  fable 
that  he  held  up  the  sky,  although  the  vulgar 
opinion  about  his  holding  up  the  sky  appears 
rather  to  have  been  suggested  by  a  high  moun¬ 
tain  named  after  him.  Indeed,  from  those  times 
many  other  fabulous  things  began  to  be  invent¬ 
ed  in  Greece;  yet,  down  to  Cecrops  king  of  Ath¬ 
ens,  in  whose  reign  that  city  received  its  name, 
and  in  whose  reign  God  brought  His  people  out 
of  Egypt  by  Moses,  only  a  few  dead  heroes  are 
reported  to  have  been  deified  according  to  the 
1Gen.  49.  10. 


476  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


vain  superstition  of  the  Greeks.  Among  these 
were  Melantomice,  the  wife  of  king  Criasus,  and 
Phorbas  their  son,  who  succeeded  his  father  as 
sixth  king  of  the  Argives,  and  Iasus,  son  of  Trio- 
pas,  their  seventh  king,  and  their  ninth  king, 
Sthenelas,  or  Stheneleus,  or  Sthenelus — for  his 
name  is  given  differently  by  different  authors. 
In  those  times  also,  Mercury,  the  grandson  of 
Atlas  by  his  daughter  Maia,  is  said  to  have  lived, 
according  to  the  common  report  in  books.  He 
was  famous  for  his  skill  in  many  arts,  and  taught 
them  to  men,  for  which  they  resolved  to  make 
him,  and  even  believed  that  he  deserved  to  be,  a 
god  after  death.  Hercules  is  said  to  have  been 
later,  yet  belonging  to  the  same  period ;  although 
some,  whom  I  think  mistaken,  assign  him  an 
earlier  date  than  Mercury.  But  at  whatever  time 
they  were  born,  it  is  agreed  among  grave  histor¬ 
ians,  who  have  committed  these  ancient  things 
to  writing,  that  both  were  men,  and  that  they 
merited  divine  honours  from  mortals  because 
they  conferred  on  them  many  benefits  to  make 
this  life  more  pleasant  to  them.  Minerva  was  far 
more  ancient  than  these;  for  she  is  reported  to 
have  appeared  in  virgin  age  in  the  times  of  Ogy- 
ges  at  the  lake  called  Triton,  from  which  she 
is  also  styled  Tritonia,  the  inventress  truly  of 
many  works  and  the  more  readily  believed  to  be 
a  goddess  because  her  origin  was  so  little  known. 
For  what  is  sung  about  her  having  sprung  from 
the  head  of  Jupiter  belongs  to  the  region  of 
poetry  and  fable,  and  not  to  that  of  history  and 
real  fact.  And  historical  writers  are  not  agreed 
when  Ogyges  flourished,  in  whose  time  also  a 
great  flood  occurred — not  that  greatest  one 
from  which  no  man  escaped  except  those  who 
could  get  into  the  ark,  for  neither  Greek  nor 
Latin  history  knew  of  it,  yet  a  greater  flood  than 
that  which  happened  afterward  in  Deucalion’s 
time.  For  Varro  begins  the  book  I  have  already 
mentioned  at  this  date,  and  does  not  propose  to 
himself,  as  the  starting-point  from  which  he 
may  arrive  at  Roman  affairs,  anything  more  an¬ 
cient  than  the  flood  of  Ogyges,  that  is,  which 
happened  in  the  time  of  Ogyges.  Now  our  writ¬ 
ers  of  chronicles — first  Eusebius,  and  after¬ 
wards  Jerome,  who  entirely  follow  some  earlier 
historians  in  this  opinion — relate  that  the  flood 
of  Ogyges  happened  more  than  three  hundred 
years  after,  during  the  reign  of  Phoroneus,  the 
second  king  of  Argos.  But  whenever  he  may 
have  lived,  Minerva  was  already  worshipped  as 
a  goddess  when  Cecrops  reigned  in  Athens,  in 
whose  reign  the  city  itself  is  reported  to  have 
been  rebuilt  or  founded. 


Chap.  g.  When  the  city  of  Athens  was  founded , 

and  what  reason  Varro  assigns  for  its  name 

Athens  certainly  derived  its  name  from  Mi¬ 
nerva,  who  in  Greek  is  called  ’A dr^vr],  and 
Varro  points  out  the  following  reason  why  it 
was  so  called.  When  an  olive-tree  suddenly  ap¬ 
peared  there,  and  water  burst  forth  in  another 
place,  these  prodigies  moved  the  king  to  send  to 
the  Delphic  Apollo  to  inquire  what  they  meant 
and  what  he  should  do.  He  answered  that  the 
olive  signified  Minerva,  the  water  Neptune,  and 
that  the  citizens  had  it  in  their  power  to  name 
their  city  as  they  chose,  after  either  of  these  two 
gods  whose  signs  these  were.  On  receiving  this 
oracle,  Cecrops  convoked  all  the  citizens  of  ei¬ 
ther  sex  to  give  their  vote,  for  it  was  then  the 
custom  in  those  parts  for  the  women  also  to  take 
part  in  public  deliberations.  When  the  multitude 
was  consulted,  the  men  gave  their  votes  for 
Neptune,  the  women  for  Minerva;  and  as  the 
women  had  a  majority  of  one,  Minerva  con¬ 
quered.  Then  Neptune,  being  enraged,  laid 
waste  the  lands  of  the  Athenians,  by  casting  up 
the  waves  of  the  sea;  for  the  demons  have  no 
difficulty  in  scattering  any  waters  more  widely. 
The  same  authority  said  that  to  appease  his 
wrath  the  women  should  be  visited  by  the  Athe¬ 
nians  with  the  three-fold  punishment — that 
they  should  no  longer  have  any  vote ;  that  none 
of  their  children  should  be  named  after  their 
mothers;  and  that  no  one  should  call  them 
Athenians.  Thus  that  city,  the  mother  and  nurse 
of  liberal  doctrines,  and  of  so  many  and  so  great 
philosophers,  than  whom  Greece  had  nothing 
more  famous  and  noble,  by  the  mockery  of  de¬ 
mons  about  the  strife  of  their  gods,  a  male  and 
female,  and  from  the  victory  of  the  female  one 
through  the  women,  received  the  name  of  Ath¬ 
ens  ;  and,  on  being  damaged  by  the  vanquished 
god,  was  compelled  to  punish  the  very  victory 
of  the  victress,  fearing  the  waters  of  Neptune 
more  than  the  arms  of  Minerva.  For  in  the  wom¬ 
en  who  were  thus  punished,  Minerva,  who  had 
conquered,  was  conquered  too,  and  could  not 
even  help  her  voters  so  far  that,  although  the 
right  of  voting  was  henceforth  lost  and  the 
mothers  could  not  give  their  names  to  the  chil¬ 
dren,  they  might  at  least  be  allowed  to  be  called 
Athenians,  and  to  merit  the  name  of  that  god¬ 
dess  whom  they  had  made  victorious  over  a 
male  god  by  giving  her  their  votes.  What  and 
how  much  could  be  said  about  this,  if  we  had 
not  to  hasten  to  other  things  in  our  discourse,  is 
obvious. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  9-12  477 


Chap.  10.  What  Varro  reports  about  the  term 

Areopagus,  and  about  Deucalion’s  flood 

Marcus  Varro,  however,  is  not  willing  to  cred¬ 
it  lying  fables  against  the  gods,  lest  he  should 
find  something  dishonouring  to  their  majesty; 
and  therefore  he  will  not  admit  that  the  Areopa¬ 
gus,  the  place  where  the  Apostle  Paul  disputed 
with  the  Athenians,  got  this  name  because  Mars, 
who  in  Greek  is  called  ’'Ap^s,  when  he  was 
charged  with  the  crime  of  homicide  and  was 
judged  by  twelve  gods  in  that  field,  was  acquit¬ 
ted  by  the  sentence  of  six;  because  it  was  the 
custom,  when  the  votes  were  equal,  to  acquit 
rather  than  condemn.  Against  this  opinion,  which 
is  much  most  widely  published,  he  tries,  from 
the  notices  of  obscure  books,  to  support  another 
reason  for  this  name,  lest  the  Athenians  should 
be  thought  to  have  called  it  Areopagus  from  the 
words  “Mars”  and  “field,”1  as  if  it  were  the  field 
of  Mars,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  gods,  forsooth, 
from  whom  he  thinks  lawsuits  and  judgments 
far  removed.  And  he  asserts  that  this  which  is 
said  about  Mars  is  not  less  false  than  what  is 
said  about  the  three  goddesses,  to  wit,  Juno,  Mi¬ 
nerva,  and  Venus,  whose  contest  for  the  palm  of 
beauty,  before  Paris  as  judge,  in  order  to  obtain 
the  golden  apple,  is  not  only  related,  but  is  cele¬ 
brated  in  songs  and  dances- amid  the  applause  of 
the  theatres,  in  plays  meant  to  please  the  gods 
who  take  pleasure  in  these  crimes  of  their  own 
whether  real  or  fabled.  Varro  does  not  believe 
these  things,  because  they  are  incompatible  with 
the  nature  of  the  gods  and  of  morality;  and  yet, 
in  giving  not  a  fabulous  but  a  historic  reason  for 
the  name  of  Athens,  he  inserts  in  his  books  the 
strife  between  Neptune  and  Minerva  as  to 
whose  name  should  be  given  to  that  city,  which 
was  so  great  that,  when  they  contended  by  the 
display  of  prodigies,  even  Apollo  dared  not 
judge  between  them  when  consulted;  but,  in  or¬ 
der  to  end  the  strife  of  the  gods,  just  as  Jupiter 
sent  the  three  goddesses  we  have  named  to 
Paris,  so  he  sent  them  to  men,  when  Minerva 
won  by  the  vote,  and  yet  was  defeated  by  the 
punishment  of  her  own  voters,  for  she  was  un¬ 
able  to  confer  the  title  of  Athenians  on  the 
women  who  were  her  friends,  although  she  could 
impose  it  on  the  men  who  were  her  opponents. 
In  these  times,  when  Cranaos  reigned  at  Athens 
as  the  successor  of  Cecrops,  as  Varro  writes, 
but,  according  to  our  Eusebius  and  Jerome, 
while  Cecrops  himself  still  remained,  the  flood 
occurred  which  is  called  Deucalion’s,  because  it 

l*A prjs  and  irayos. 


occurred  chiefly  in  those  parts  of  the  earth  in 
which  he  reigned.  But  this  flood  did  not  at  all 
reach  Egypt  or  its  vicinity. 

Chap.  ii.  When  Moses  led  the  people  out  of 
Egypt ;  and  who  were  kings  when  his  succes¬ 
sor  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  died 
Moses  led  the  people  out  of  Egypt  in  the  last 
time  of  Cecrops  king  of  Athens,  when  Ascatades 
reigned  in  Assyria,  Marathus  in  Sicyon,  Triopas 
in  Argos;  and  having  led  forth  the  people,  he 
gave  them  at  Mount  Sinai  the  law  he  received 
from  God,  which  is  called  the  Old  Testament, 
because  it  has  earthly  promises,  and  because, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  there  was  to  be  a  New 
Testament,  in  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
should  be  promised.  For  the  same  order  be¬ 
hoved  to  be  observed  in  this  as  is  observed  in 
each  man  who  prospers  in  God,  according  to  the 
saying  of  the  apostle,  “That  is  not  first  which  is 
spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural,”  since,  as  he 
says,  and  that  truly,  “The  first  man  of  the  earth, 
is  earthly;  the  second  man,  from  heaven,  is 
heavenly.”2  Now  Moses  ruled  the  people  for 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness  and  died  a  hundred 
and  twenty  years  old,  after  he  had  prophesied 
of  Christ  by  the  types  of  carnal  observances  in 
the  tabernacle,  priesthood,  and  sacrifices,  and 
many  other  mystic  ordinances.  Joshua  the  son 
of  Nun  succeeded  Moses,  and  settled  in  the  land 
of  promise  the  people  he  had  brought  in,  having 
by  divine  authority  conquered  the  people  by 
whom  it  was  formerly  possessed.  He  also  died, 
after  ruling  the  people  twenty-seven  years  after 
the  death  of  Moses,  when  Amyntas  reigned  in 
Assyria  as  the  eighteenth  king,  Coracos  as  the 
sixteenth  in  Sicyon,  Danaos  as  the  tenth  in  Ar¬ 
gos,  Erichthonius  as  the  fourth  in  Athens. 

Chap.  12.  Of  the  rituals  of  false  gods  instituted 
by  the  kings  of  Greece  in  the  period  from  Is¬ 
rael’s  exodus  from  Egypt  down  to  the  death 
of  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun 
During  this  period,  that  is,  from  Israel’s  exo¬ 
dus  from  Egypt  down  to  the  death  of  Joshua  the 
son  of  Nun,  through  whom  that  people  received 
the  land  of  promise,  rituals  were  instituted  to 
the  false  gods  by  the  kings  of  Greece,  which,  by 
stated  celebration,  recalled  the  memory  of  the 
flood,  and  of  men’s  deliverance  from  it,  and  of 
that  troublous  life  they  then  led  in  migrating 
to  and  fro  between  the  heights  and  the  plains. 
For  even  the  Luperci,  when  they  ascend  and  de¬ 
scend  the  sacred  path,  are  said  to  represent  the 
2I  Cor.  15.  46,  47. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


478 

men  who  sought  the  mountain  summits  because 
of  the  inundation  of  water,  and  returned  to  the 
lowlands  on  its  subsidence.  In  those  times,  Di¬ 
onysus,  who  was  also  called  Father  Liber,  and 
was  esteemed  a  god  after  death,  is  said  to  have 
shown  the  vine  to  his  host  in  Attica.  Then  the 
musical  games  were  instituted  for  the  Delphic 
Apollo,  to  appease  his  anger,  through  which  they 
thought  the  regions  of  Greece  were  afflicted  with 
barrenness,  because  they  had  not  defended  his 
temple  which  Danaos  burnt  when  he  invaded 
those  lands;  for  they  were  warned  by  his  oracle 
to  institute  these  games.  But  king  Ericthonius 
first  instituted  games  to  him  in  Attica,  and  not 
to  him  only,  but  also  to  Minerva,  in  which 
games  the  olive  was  given  as  the  prize  to  the 
victors,  because  they  relate  that  Minerva  was 
the  discoverer  of  that  fruit,  as  Liber  was  of  the 
grape.  In  those  years  Europa  is  alleged  to  have 
been  carried  off  by  Xanthus  king  of  Crete  (to 
whom  we  find  some  give  another  name),  and  to 
have  borne  him  Rhadamanthus,  Sarpedon.  and 
Minos,  who  are  more  commonly  reported  to 
have  been  the  sons  of  Jupiter  by  the  same  wom¬ 
an.  Now  those  who  worship  such  gods  regard 
what  we  have  said  about  Xanthus  king  of  Crete 
as  true  history;  but  this  about  Jupiter,  which 
the  poets  sing,  the  theatres  applaud,  and  the 
people  celebrate,  as  empty  fable  got  up  as  a  rea¬ 
son  for  games  to  appease  the  deities,  even  with 
the  false  ascription  of  crimes  to  them.  In  those 
times  Hercules  was  held  in  honour  in  Tyre,  but 
that  was  not  the  same  one  as  he  whom  we  spoke 
of  above.  In  the  more  secret  history  there  are 
said  to  have  been  several  who  were  called  Father 
Liber  and  Hercules.  This  Hercules,  whose  great 
deeds  are  reckoned  as  twelve  (not  including  the 
slaughter  of  Antaeus  the  African,  because  that 
affair  pertains  to  another  Hercules),  is  declared 
in  their  books  to  have  burned  himself  on  Mount 
(Eta,  because  he  was  not  able,  by  that  strength 
with  which  he  had  subdued  monsters,  to  endure 
the  disease  under  which  he  languished.  At  that 
time  the  king,  or  rather  tyrant  Busiris,  who  is 
alleged  to  have  been  the  son  of  Neptune  by  Li¬ 
bya  the  daughter  of  Epaphus,  is  said  to  have  of¬ 
fered  up  his  guests  in  sacrifice  to  the  gods.  Now 
it  must  not  be  believed  that  Neptune  committed 
this  adultery,  lest  the  gods  should  be  criminat¬ 
ed  ;  yet  such  things  must  be  ascribed  to  them  by 
the  poets  and  in  the  theatres,  that  they  may  be 
pleased  with  them.  Vulcan  and  Minerva  are  said 
to  have  been  the  parents  of  Ericthonius  king  of 
Athens,  in  whose  last  years  Joshua  the  son  of 
Nun  is  found  to  have  died.  But  since  they  will 


have  it  that  Minerva  is  a  virgin,  they  say  that 
Vulcan,  being  disturbed  in  the  struggle  between 
them,  poured  out  his  seed  into  the  earth,  and  on 
that  account  the  man  born  of  it  received  that 
name;  for  in  the  Greek  language  epts  is  “strife,” 
and  “earth,”  of  which  two  words  Eric¬ 

thonius  is  a  compound.  Yet  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  more  learned  disprove  and  disown  such 
things  concerning  their  gods,  and  declare  that 
this  fabulous  belief  originated  in  the  fact  that  in 
the  temple  at  Athens,  which  Vulcan  and  Miner¬ 
va  had  in  common,  a  boy  who  had  been  exposed 
was  found  wrapped  up  in  the  coils  of  a  dragon, 
which  signified  that  he  would  become  great,  and, 
as  his  parents  were  unknown,  he  was  called  the 
son  of  Vulcan  and  Minerva,  because  they  had 
the  temple  in  common.  Yet  that  fable  accounts 
for  the  origin  of  his  name  better  than  this  his¬ 
tory.  But  what  does  it  matter  to  us?  Let  the  one 
in  books  that  speak  the  truth  edify  religious 
men,  and  the  other  in  lying  fables  delight  im¬ 
pure  demons.  Yet  these  religious  men  worship 
them  as  gods.  Still,  while  they  deny  these  things 
concerning  them  they  cannot  clear  them  of  all 
crime,  because  at  their  demand  they  exhibit 
plays  in  which  the  very  things  they  wisely  deny 
are  basely  done,  and  the  gods  are  appeased  by 
these  false  and  base  things.  Now,  even  although 
the  play  celebrates  an  unreal  crime  of  the  gods, 
yet  to  delight  in  the  ascription  of  an  unreal 
crime  is  a  real  one. 

Chap.  13.  What  fables  were  invented  at  the 
time  when  judges  began  to  rule  the  Hebrews 
After  the  death  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  the 
people  of  God  had  judges,  in  whose  times  they 
were  alternately  humbled  by  afflictions  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  sins  and  consoled  by  prosperity 
through  the  compassion  of  God.  In  those  times 
were  invented  the  fables  about  Triptolemus, 
who,  at  the  command  of  Ceres,  borne  by  winged 
snakes,  bestowed  corn  on  the  needy  lands  in  fly¬ 
ing  over  them;  about  that  beast  the  Minotaur, 
which  was  shut  up  in  the  Labyrinth,  from  which 
men  who  entered  its  inextricable  mazes  could 
find  no  exit;  about  the  Centaurs,  whose  form 
was  a  compound  of  horse  and  man;  about  Cer¬ 
berus,  the  three-headed  dog  of  hell ;  about  Phryx- 
us  and  his  sister  Hellas,  who  fled,  borne  by  a 
winged  ram;  about  the  Gorgon,  whose  hair  was 
composed  of  serpents,  and  who  turned  those 
who  looked  on  her  into  stone;  about  Bellero- 
phon,  who  was  carried  by  a  winged  horse  called 
Pegasus ;  about  Amphion,  who  charmed  and  at¬ 
tracted  the  stones  by  the  sweetness  of  his  harp; 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  13-15  479 


about  the  artificer  Daedalus  and  his  son  Icarus, 
who  flew  on  wings  they  had  fitted  on;  about 
(Edipus,  who  compelled  a  certain  four-footed 
monster  with  a  human  face,  called  a  sphynx,  to 
destroy  herself  by  casting  herself  headlong,  hav¬ 
ing  solved  the  riddle  she  was  wont  to  propose  as 
insoluble ;  about  Antaeus,  who  was  the  son  of  the 
earth,  for  which  reason,  on  falling  on  the  earth, 
he  was  wont  to  rise  up  stronger,  whom  Hercules 
slew;  and  perhaps  there  are  others  which  I  have 
forgotten.  These  fables,  easily  found  in  histories 
containing  a  true  account  of  events,  bring  us 
down  to  the  Trojan  war,  at  which  Marcus  Varro 
has  closed  his  second  book  about  the  race  of  the 
Roman  people ;  and  they  are  so  skillfully  invent¬ 
ed  by  men  as  to  involve  no  scandal  to  the  gods. 
But  whoever  have  pretended  as  to  Jupiter’s  rape 
of  Ganymede,  a  very  beautiful  boy,  that  king 
Tantalus  committed  the  crime,  and  the  fable  as¬ 
cribed  it  to  Jupiter;  or  as  to  his  impregnating 
Danae  as  a  golden  shower,  that  it  means  that  the 
woman’s  virtue  was  corrupted  by  gold:  whether 
these  things  were  really  done  or  only  fabled  in 
those  days,  or  were  really  done  by  others  and 
falsely  ascribed  to  Jupiter,  it  is  impossible  to  tell 
how  much  wickedness  must  have  been  taken  for 
granted  in  men’s  hearts  that  they  should  be 
thought  able  to  listen  to  such  lies  with  patience. 
And  yet  they  willingly  accepted  them,  when,  in¬ 
deed,  the  more  devotedly  they  worshipped  Jupi¬ 
ter,  they  ought  the  more  severely  to  have  pun¬ 
ished  those  who  durst  say  such  things  of  him. 
But  they  not  only  were  not  angry  at  those  who 
invented  these  things,  but  were  afraid  that  the 
gods  would  be  angry  at  them  if  they  did  not  act 
such  fictions  even  in  the  theatres.  In  those  times 
Latona  bore  Apollo,  not  him  of  whose  oracle  we 
have  spoken  above  as  so  often  consulted,  but 
him  who  is  said,  along  with  Hercules,  to  have 
fed  the  flocks  of  king  Admetus;  yet  he  was  so 
believed  to  be  a  god,  that  very  many,  indeed  al¬ 
most  all,  have  believed  him  to  be  the  self-same 
Apollo.  Then  also  Father  Liber  made  war  in  In¬ 
dia,  and  led  in  his  army  many  women  called 
BacchaS,  who  were  notable  not  so  much  for  val¬ 
our  as  for  fury.  Some,  indeed,  write  that  this 
Liber  was  both  conquered  and  bound ;  and  some 
that  he  was  slain  in  Persia,  even  telling  where  he 
was  buried;  and  yet  in  his  name,  as  that  of  a 
god,  the  unclean  demons  have  instituted  the  sa¬ 
cred,  or  rather  the  sacrilegious,  Bacchanalia,  of 
the  outrageous  vileness  of  which  the  senate,  af¬ 
ter  many  years,  became  so  much  ashamed  as  to 
prohibit  them  in  the  city  of  Rome.  Men  believed 
that  in  those  times  Perseus  and  his  wife  Andro¬ 


meda  were  raised  into  heaven  after  their  death, 
so  that  they  were  not  ashamed  or  afraid  to  mark 
out  their  images  by  constellations  and  call  them 
by  their  names. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  theological  poets 
During  the  same  period  of  time  arose  the 
poets,  who  were  also  called  theolognes,  because 
they  made  hymns  about  the  gods;  yet  about 
such  gods  as,  although  great  men,  were  yet  but 
men,  or  the  elements  of  this  world  which  the 
true  God  made,  or  creatures  who  were  ordained 
as  principalities  and  powers  according  to  the 
will  of  the  Creator  and  their  own  merit.  And  if, 
among  much  that  was  vain  and  false,  they  sang 
anything  of  the  one  true  God,  yet,  by  worship¬ 
ping  Him  along  with  others  who  are  not  gods, 
and  showing  them  the  service  that  is  due  to  Him 
alone,  they  did  not  serve  Him  at  all  rightly;  and 
even  such  poets  as  Orpheus,  Musaeus,  and  Linus, 
were  unable  to  abstain  from  dishonouring  their 
gods  by  fables.  But  yet  these  theologues  wor¬ 
shipped  the  gods,  and  were  not  worshipped  as 
gods,  although  the  city  of  the  ungodly  is  wont, 
I  know  not  how,  to  set  Orpheus  over  the  sacred, 
or  rather  sacrilegious,  rites  of  hell.  The  wife  of 
king  Athamas,  who  was  called  Ino,  and  her  son 
Melicertes,  perished  by  throwing  themselves 
into  the  sea,  and  were,  according  to  popular  be¬ 
lief,  reckoned  among  the  gods,  like  other  men 
of  the  same  times,  Castor  and  Pollux.  The 
Greeks,  indeed,  called  her  who  was  the  mother 
of  Melicertes,  Leucothea,  the  Latins,  Matuta; 
but  both  thought  her  a  goddess. 

Chap.  15.  Of  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Argos, 
when  Ficus  the  son  of  Saturn  first  received  his 
father’s  kingdom  of  Laurentum 
During  those  times  the  kingdom  of  Argos 
came  to  an  end,  being  transferred  to  Mycene, 
from  which  Agamemnon  came,  and  the  kingdom 
of  Laurentum  arose,  of  which  Picus  son  of  Sat¬ 
urn  was  the  first  king,  when  the  woman  Deborah 
judged  the  Hebrews;  but  it  was  the  Spirit  of 
God  who  used  her  as  His  agent,  for  she  was  also 
a  prophetess,  although  her  prophecy  is  so  ob¬ 
scure  that  we  could  not  demonstrate,  without  a 
long  discussion,  that  it  was  uttered  concerning 
Christ.  Now  the  Laurentes  already  reigned  in 
Italy,  from  whom  the  origin  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  is  quite  evidently  derived  after  the  Greeks; 
yet  the  kingdom  of  Assyria  still  lasted,  in  which 
Lampares  was  the  twenty-third  king  when  Picus 
first  began  to  reign  at  Laurentum.  The  worship¬ 
pers  of  such  gods  may  see  what  they  are  to  think 


48o  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  Saturn  the  father  of  Picus.  who  deny  that  he 
was  a  man;  of  whom  some  also  have  written 
that  he  himself  reigned  in  Italy  before  Picus  his 
son ;  and  Virgil  in  his  well-known  book  says. 

That  race  indocile,  and  through  mountains  high 
Dispersed,  he  settled,  and  endowed  with  laws, 

And  named  their  country  Latium,  because 
Latent  within  their  coasts  he  dwelt  secure. 
Tradition  says  the  golden  ages  pure 
Began  when  he  was  king.1 

But  they  regard  these  as  poetic  fancies,  and  as¬ 
sert  that  the  father  of  Picus  was  Sterces  rather, 
and  relate  that,  being  a  most  skillful  husband¬ 
man,  he  discovered  that  the  fields  could  be  fer¬ 
tilized  by  the  dung  of  animals,  which  is  called 
stercus  from  his  name.  Some  say  he  was  called 
Stercutius.  But  for  whatever  reason  they  chose 
to  call  him  Saturn,  it  is  yet  certain  they  made 
this  Sterces  or  Stercutius  a  god  for  his  merit  in 
agriculture;  and  they  likewise  received  into  the 
number  of  these  gods  Picus  his  son,  whom  they 
affirm  to  have  been  a  famous  augur  and  warrior. 
Picus  begot  Faunus.  the  second  king  of  Lauren- 
tum;  and  he  too  is,  or  was,  a  god  with  them. 
These  divine  honours  they  gave  to  dead  men  be¬ 
fore  the  Trojan  war. 

Chap.  16.  Of  Diomede,  who  after  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Troy  was  placed  among  the  gods,  while 
his  companions  are  said  to  have  been  changed 
into  birds 

Troy  was  overthrown,  and  its  destruction  was 
everywhere  sung  and  made  well  known  even  to 
boys;  for  it  was  signally  published  and  spread 
abroad,  both  by  its  own  greatness  and  by  writers 
of  excellent  style.  And  this  was  done  in  the  reign 
of  Latinus  the  son  of  Faunus,  from  whom  the 
kingdom  began  to  be  called  Latium  instead  of 
Laurentum.  The  victorious  Greeks,  on  leaving 
Troy  destroyed  and  returning  to  their  own  coun¬ 
tries,  were  torn  and  crushed  by  divers  and  hor¬ 
rible  calamities.  Yet  even  from  among  them 
they  increased  the  number  of  their  gods  for  they 
made  Diomede  a  god.  They  allege  that  his  re¬ 
turn  home  was  prevented  by  a  divinely  imposed 
punishment,  and  they  prove,  not  by  fabulous 
and  poetic  falsehood,  but  by  historic  attestation, 
that  his  companions  were  turned  into  birds.  Yet 
they  think  that,  even  although  he  was  made  a 
god.  he  could  neither  restore  them  to  the  human 
form  by  his  own  power,  nor  yet  obtain  it  from 
Jupiter  his  king,  as  a  favour  granted  to  a  new  in¬ 
habitant  of  heaven.  They  also  say  that  his  tem- 
1<£neid,  bk.  viii.  321. 


pie  is  in  the  island  of  Diomedaea.  not  far  from 
Mount  Garganus  in  Apulia,  and  that  these  birds 
fly  around  about  this  temple,  and  worship  in  it 
with  such  wonderful  obedience,  that  they  All 
their  beaks  with  water  and  sprinkle  it;  and  if 
Greeks,  or  those  born  of  the  Greek  race,  come 
there,  they  are  not  only  still,  but  fly  to  meet 
them;  but  if  they  are  foreigners,  they  fly  up  at 
their  heads  and  wound  them  with  such  severe 
strokes  as  even  to  kill  them.  For  they  are  said 
to  be  well  enough  armed  for  these  combats  with 
their  hard  and  large  beaks. 

Chap.  17.  What  Varro  says  of  the  incredible 
transformations  of  men 
In  support  of  this  story,  Varro  relates  others 
no  less  incredible  about  that  most  famous  sor¬ 
ceress  Circe,  who  changed  the  companions  of 
Ulysses  into  beasts,  and  about  the  Arcadians, 
who,  by  lot,  swam  across  a  certain  pool,  and 
were  turned  into  wolves  there,  and  lived  in  the 
deserts  of  that  region  with  wild  beasts  like 
themselves.  But  if  they  never  fed  on  human 
flesh  for  nine  years,  they  were  restored  to  the 
human  form  on  swimming  back  again  through 
the  same  pool.  Finally,  he  expressly  names  one 
Demaenetus,  who,  on  tasting  a  boy  offered  up  in 
sacrifice  by  the  Arcadians  to  their  god  Lycaeus 
according  to  their  custom,  was  changed  into  a 
wolf,  and.  being  restored  to  his  proper  form  in 
the  tenth  year,  trained  himself  as  a  pugilist,  and 
was  victorious  at  the  Olympic  Games.  And  the 
same  historian  thinks  that  the  epithet  Lycaeus 
was  applied  in  Arcadia  to  Pan  and  Jupiter  for  no 
other  reason  than  this  metamorphosis  of  men 
into  wolves,  because  it  was  thought  it  could  not 
be  wrought  except  by  a  divine  power.  For  a  wolf 
is  called  in  Greek  \vkos ,  from  which  the  name 
Lycaeus  appears  to  be  formed.  He  says  also  that 
the  Roman  Luperci  were  as  it  were  sprung  of 
the  seed  of  these  mysteries. 

Chap.  18.  What  we  should  believe  concerning 
the  transformations  which  seem  to  happen  to 
men  through  the  art  of  demons 
Perhaps  our  readers  expect  us  to  say  some¬ 
thing  about  this  so  great  delusion  wrought  by 
the  demons ;  and  what  shall  we  say  but  that  men 
must  fly  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon?  2  For  this 
prophetic  precept  is  to  be  understood  spiritually 
in  this  sense,  that  by  going  forward  in  the  living 
God,  by  the  steps  of  faith,  which  worketh  by 
love,  we  must  flee  out  of  the  city  of  this  world, 
which  is  altogether  a  society  of  ungodly  angels 

2Isa.  48.  20. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  16-18  481 


and  men.  Yea.  the  greater  we  see  the  power  of 
the  demons  to  be  in  these  depths,  so  much  the 
more  tenaciously  must  we  cleave  to  the  Media¬ 
tor  through  whom  we  ascend  from  these  lowest 
to  the  highest  places.  For  if  we  should  say  these 
things  are  not  to  be  credited,  there  are  not  want¬ 
ing  even  now  some  who  would  affirm  that  they 
had  either  heard  on  the  best  authority,  or  even 
themselves  experienced,  something  of  that  kind. 
Indeed  we  ourselves,  when  in  Italy,  heard  such 
things  about  a  certain  region  there,  where  land¬ 
ladies  of  inns,  imbued  with  these  wicked  arts, 
were  said  to  be  in  the  habit  of  giving  to  such 
travellers  as  they  chose,  or  could  manage,  some¬ 
thing  in  a  piece  of  cheese  by  which  they  were 
changed  on  the  spot  into  beasts  of  burden,  and 
carried  whatever  was  necessary,  and  were  re¬ 
stored  to  their  own  form  when  the  work  was 
done.  Yet  their  mind  did  not  become  bestial,  but 
remained  rational  and  human,  just  as  Apuleius. 
in  the  books  he  wrote  with  the  title  of  The  Gold¬ 
en  Ass ,  has  told,  or  feigned,  that  it  happened  to 
his  own  self  that,  on  taking  poison,  he  became 
an  ass,  while  retaining  his  human  mind. 

These  things  are  either  false,  or  so  extraordi¬ 
nary  as  to  be  with  good  reason  disbelieved.  But 
it  is  to  be  most  firmly  believed  that  Almighty 
God  can  do  whatever  He  pleases,  whether  in 
punishing  or  favouring,  and  that  the  demons  can 
accomplish  nothing  by  their  natural  power  (for 
their  created  being  is  itself  angelic,  although 
made  malign  by  their  own  fault),  except  what 
He  may  permit,  whose  judgments  are  often  hid¬ 
den,  but  never  unrighteous.  And  indeed  the  de¬ 
mons.  if  they  really  do  such  things  as  these  on 
which  this  discussion  turns,  do  not  create  real 
substances,  but  only  change  the  appearance  of 
things  created  by  the  true  God  so  as  to  make 
them  seem  to  be  what  they  are  not.  I  cannot 
therefore  believe  that  even  the  body,  much  less 
the  mind,  can  really  be  changed  into  bestial 
forms  and  lineaments  by  any  reason,  art.  or 
power  of  the  demons;  but  the  phantasm  of  a 
man  which  even  in  thought  or  dreams  goes 
through  innumerable  changes,  may,  when  the 
man’s  senses  are  laid  asleep  or  overpowered,  be 
presented  to  the  senses  of  others  in  a  corporeal 
form,  in  some  indescribable  way  unknown  to 
me.  so  that  men’s  bodies  themselves  may  lie 
somewhere,  alive,  indeed,  yet  with  their  senses 
locked  up  much  more  heavily  and  firmly  than  by 
sleep,  while  that  phantasm,  as  it  were  embodied 
in  the  shape  of  some  animal,  may  appear  to  the 
senses  of  others  and  may  even  seem  to  the  man 
himself  to  be  changed,  just  as  he  may  seem  to 


himself  in  sleep  to  be  so  changed,  and  to  bear 
burdens;  and  these  burdens,  if  they  are  real  sub¬ 
stances.  are  borne  by  the  demons,  that  men  may 
be  deceived  by  beholding  at  the  same  time  the 
real  substance  of  the  burdens  and  the  simulated 
bodies  of  the  beasts  of  burden.  For  a  certain 
man  called  Praestantius  used  to  tell  that  it  had 
happened  to  his  father  in  his  own  house  that  he 
took  that  poison  in  a  piece  of  cheese,  and  lay  in 
his  bed  as  if  sleeping,  yet  could  by  no  means  be 
aroused.  But  he  said  that  after  a  few  days  he  as 
it  were  woke  up  and  related  the  things  he  had 
suffered  as  if  they  had  been  dreams,  namely, 
that  he  had  been  made  a  sumpter  horse,  and, 
along  with  other  beasts  of  burden,  had  carried 
provisions  for  the  soldiers  of  what  is  called  the 
Rhoetian  Legion,  because  it  was  sent  to  Rhoetia. 
And  all  this  was  found  to  have  taken  place  just 
as  he  told,  yet  it  had  seemed  to  him  to  be  his 
own  dream.  And  another  man  declared  that  in 
his  own  house  at  night,  before  he  slept,  he  saw  a 
certain  philosopher,  whom  he  knew  very  well, 
come  to  him  and  explain  to  him  some  things  in 
the  Platonic  philosophy  which  he  had  previously 
declined  to  explain  when  asked.  And  when  he 
had  asked  this  philosopher  why  he  did  in  his 
house  what  he  had  refused  to  do  at  home,  he 
said.  “I  did  not  do  it,  but  I  dreamed  I  had  done 
it.”  And  thus  what  the  one  saw  when  sleeping 
was  shown  to  the  other  when  awake  by  a  phan¬ 
tasmal  image. 

These  things  have  not  come  to  us  from  per¬ 
sons  we  might  deem  unworthy  of  credit,  but 
from  informants  we  could  not  suppose  to  be  de¬ 
ceiving  us.  Therefore  what  men  say  and  have 
committed  to  writing  about  the  Arcadians  be¬ 
ing  often  changed  into  wolves  by  the  Arcadian 
gods,  or  demons  rather,  and  what  is  told  in  song 
about  Circe  transforming  the  companions  of 
Ulysses,1  if  they  were  really  done.  may.  in  my 
opinion,  have  been  done  in  the  way  I  have  said. 
As  for  Diomede’s  birds,  since  their  race  is  al¬ 
leged  to  have  been  perpetuated  by  constant 
propagation,  I  believe  they  were  not  made 
through  the  metamorphosis  of  men.  but  were 
slyly  substituted  for  them  on  their  removal,  just 
as  the  hind  was  for  Iphigenia,  the  daughter  of 
king  Agamemnon.  For  juggleries  of  this  kind 
could  not  be  difficult  for  the  demons  if  permit¬ 
ted  by  the  judgment  of  God;  and  since  that  vir¬ 
gin  was  afterwards  found  alive  it  is  easy  to  see 
that  a  hind  had  been  slyly  substituted  for  her. 
But  because  the  companions  of  Diomede  were 
of  a  sudden  nowhere  to  be  seen,  and  afterwards 

1Virgilf  Eclogues,  bk.  vhi.  70. 


482  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


could  nowhere  be  found,  being  destroyed  by  bad 
avenging  angels,  they  were  believed  to  have 
been  changed  into  those  birds,  which  were  se¬ 
cretly  brought  there  from  other  places  where 
such  birds  were,  and  suddenly  substituted  for 
them  by  fraud.  But  that  they  bring  water  in 
their  beaks  and  sprinkle  it  on  the  temple  of  Dio¬ 
mede,  and  that  they  fawn  on  men  of  Greek  race 
and  persecute  aliens,  is  no  wonderful  thing  to  be 
done  by  the  inward  influence  of  the  demons, 
whose  interest  it  is  to  persuade  men  that  Dio¬ 
mede  was  made  a  god,  and  thus  to  beguile  them 
into  worshipping  many  false  gods,  to  the  great 
dishonour  of  the  true  God;  and  to  serve  dead 
men,  who  even  in  their  lifetime  did  not  truly 
live,  with  temples,  altars,  sacrifices,  and  priests, 
all  which,  when  of  the  right  kind,  are  due  only 
to  the  one  living  and  true  God. 

Chap.  19.  That  HLneas  came  into  Italy  when  Ab- 

don  the  judge  ruled  over  the  Hebrews 

After  the  capture  and  destruction  of  Troy, 
iEneas,  with  twenty  ships  laden  with  the  Trojan 
relics,  came  into  Italy,  when  Latinus  reigned 
there,  Menestheus  in  Athens,  Polyphidos  in  Si- 
cyon,  and  Tautanos  in  Assyria,  and  Abdon  was 
judge  of  the  Hebrews.  On  the  death  of  Latinus, 
Emeas  reigned  three  years,  the  same  kings  con¬ 
tinuing  in  the  above-named  places,  except  that 
Pelasgus  was  now  king  in  Sicyon,  and  Samson 
was  judge  of  the  Hebrews,  who  is  thought  to  be 
Hercules,  because  of  his  wonderful  strength. 
Now  the  Latins  made  Emeas  one  of  their  gods, 
because  at  his  death  he  was  nowhere  to  be 
found.  The  Sabines  also  placed  among  the  gods 
their  first  king,  Sancus,  or  Sanctus,  as  some  call 
him.  At  that  time  Codrus  king  of  Athens  ex¬ 
posed  himself  incognito  to  be  slain  by  the  Pelo¬ 
ponnesian  foes  of  that  city,  and  so  was  slain.  In 
this  way,  they  say,  he  delivered  his  country.  For 
the  Peloponnesians  had  received  a  response 
from  the  oracle  that  they  should  overcome  the 
Athenians  only  on  condition  that  they  did  not 
slay  their  king.  Therefore  he  deceived  them  by 
appearing  in  a  poor  man’s  dress,  and  provoking 
them,  by  quarrelling,  to  murder  him.  Whence 
Virgil  says,  “Or  the  quarrels  of  Codrus.”  1  And 
the  Athenians  worshipped  this  man  as  a  god 
with  sacrificial  honours.  The  fourth  king  of 
the  Latins  was  Silvius  the  son  of  Emeas,  not  by 
Creiisa,  of  whom  Ascanius  the  third  king  was 
born,  but  by  Lavinia  the  daughter  of  Latinus, 
and  he  is  said  to  have  been  his  posthumous  child. 
Oneus  was  the  twenty-ninth  king  of  Assyria, 
Melanthus  the  sixteenth  of  the  Athenians,  and 

lIbid.,  bk.  V.  11. 


Eli  the  priest  was  judge  of  the  Hebrews ;  and  the 
kingdom  of  Sicyon  then  came  to  an  end,  after 
lasting,  it  is  said,  for  nine  hundred  and  fifty-nine 
years. 

Chap.  20.  Of  the  succession  of  the  line  of  kings 
among  the  Israelites  after  the  times  of  the 
judges 

While  these  kings  reigned  in  the  places  men¬ 
tioned,  the  period  of  the  judges  being  ended,  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  next  began  with  king  Saul, 
when  Samuel  the  prophet  lived.  At  that  date 
those  Latin  kings  began  who  were  surnamed  Sil- 
vii,  having  that  surname,  in  addition  to  their 
proper  name,  from  their  predecessor,  that  son 
of  Emeas  who  was  called  Silvius;  just  as,  long 
afterward,  the  successors  of  Caesar  Augustus 
were  surnamed  Caesars.  Saul  being  rejected,  so 
that  none  of  his  issue  should  reign,  on  his  death 
David  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom,  after  he 
had  reigned  forty  years.  Then  the  Athenians 
ceased  to  have  kings  after  the  death  of  Codrus, 
and  began  to  have  a  magistracy  to  rule  the  re¬ 
public.  After  David,  who  also  reigned  forty 
years,  his  son  Solomon  was  king  of  Israel,  who 
built  that  most  noble  temple  of  God  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem.  In  his  time  Alba  was  built  among  the  Lat¬ 
ins,  from  which  thereafter  the  kings  began  to 
be  styled  kings  not  of  the  Latins,  but  of  the  Al¬ 
bans,  although  in  the  same  Latium.  Solomon 
was  succeeded  by  his  son  Rehoboam,  under 
whom  that  people  was  divided  into  two  king¬ 
doms,  and  its  separate  parts  began  to  have  sepa¬ 
rate  kings. 

Chap.  21.  Of  the  kings  of  Latium ,  the  first  and 
twelfth  of  whom,  JZneas  and  Aventinus,  were 
made  gods 

After  Emeas,  whom  they  deified,  Latium  had 
eleven  kings,  none  of  whom  was  deified.  But 
Aventinus,  who  was  the  twelfth  after  Emeas, 
having  been  laid  low  in  war,  and  buried  in  that 
hill  still  called  by  his  name,  was  added  to  the 
number  of  such  gods  as  they  made  for  them¬ 
selves.  Some,  indeed,  were  unwilling  to  write 
that  he  was  slain  in  battle,  but  said  he  was  no¬ 
where  to  be  found,  and  that  it  was  not  from  his 
name,  but  from  the  alighting  of  birds,  that  hill 
was  called  Aventinus.  After  this  no  god  was 
made  in  Latium  except  Romulus  the  founder  of 
Rome.  But  two  kings  are  found  between  these 
two,  the  first  of  whom  I  shall  describe  in  the 
Virgilian  verse : 

Next  came  that  Procas, 

Glory  of  the  Trojan  race1 
2&neid,  bk.  vi.  767. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  19-23  483 


That  greatest  of  all  kingdoms,  the  Assyrian, 
had  its  long  duration  brought  to  a  close  in  his 
time,  the  time  of  Rome’s  birth  drawing  nigh. 
For  the  Assyrian  empire  was  transferred  to  the 
Medes  after  nearly  thirteen  hundred  and  five 
years,  if  we  include  the  reign  of  Belus,  who  be¬ 
got  Ninus  and,  content  with  a  small  kingdom, 
was  the  first  king  there.  Now  Procas  reigned  be¬ 
fore  Amulius.  And  Amulius  had  made  his  broth¬ 
er  Numitor’s  daughter,  Rhea  by  name,  who  was 
also  called  Ilia,  a  vestal  virgin,  who  conceived 
twin  sons  by  Mars,  as  they  will  have  it,  in  that 
way  honouring  or  excusing  her  adultery,  adding 
as  a  proof  that  a  she-wolf  nursed  the  infants 
when  exposed.  For  they  think  this  kind  of  beast 
belongs  to  Mars,  so  that  the  she-wolf  is  believed 
to  have  given  her  teats  to  the  infants,  because 
she  knew  they  were  the  sons  of  Mars  her  lord; 
although  there  are  not  wanting  persons  who  say 
that  when  the  crying  babes  lay  exposed,  they 
were  first  of  all  picked  up  by  I  know  not  what 
harlot,  and  sucked  her  breasts  first  (now  harlots 
were  called  lupcB,  she-wolves,  from  which  their 
vile  abodes  are  even  yet  called  lupanaria),  and 
that  afterwards  they  came  into  the  hands  of  the 
shepherd  Faustulus,  and  were  nursed  by  Acca 
his  wife.  Yet  what  wonder  is  it,  if,  to  rebuke  the 
king  who  had  cruelly  ordered  them  to  be  thrown 
into  the  water,  God  was  pleased,  after  divinely 
delivering  them  from  the  water,  to  succour,  by 
means  of  a  wild  beast  giving  milk,  these  infants 
by  whom  so  great  a  city  was  to  be  founded? 
Amulius  was  succeeded  in  the  Latian  kingdom 
by  his  brother  Numitor,  the  grandfather  of 
Romulus;  and  Rome  was  founded  in  the  first 
year  of  this  Numitor,  who  from  that  time 
reigned  along  with  his  grandson  Romulus. 

Chap.  22.  That  Rome  was  founded  when  the 
Assyrian  kingdom  perished ,  at  which  time 
Hezekiah  reigned  in  Judah 
To  be  brief,  the  city  of  Rome  was  founded, 
like  another  Babylon,  and  as  it  were  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of  the  former  Babylon,  by  which  God  was 
pleased  to  conquer  the  whole  world,  and  subdue 
it  far  and  wide  by  bringing  it  into  one  fellowship 
of  government  and  laws.  For  there  were  already 
powerful  and  brave  peoples  and  nations  trained 
to  arms,  who  did  not  easily  yield,  and  whose 
subjugation  necessarily  involved  great  danger 
and  destruction  as  well  as  great  and  horrible  la¬ 
bour.  For  when  the  Assyrian  kingdom  subdued 
almost  all  Asia,  although  this  was  done  by  fight¬ 
ing,  yet  the  wars  could  not  be  very  fierce  or  dif¬ 
ficult,  because  the  nations  were  as  yet  untrained 
to  resist,  and  neither  so  many  nor  so  great  as  af¬ 


terward;  forasmuch  as,  after  that  greatest  and 
indeed  universal  flood,  when  only  eight  men  es¬ 
caped  in  Noah’s  ark,  not  much  more  than  a 
thousand  years  had  passed  when  Ninus  subdued 
all  Asia  with  the  exception  of  India.  But  Rome 
did  not  with  the  same  quickness  and  facility 
wholly  subdue  all  those  nations  of  the  east  and 
west  which  we  see  brought  under  the  Roman 
empire,  because,  in  its  gradual  increase,  in  what¬ 
ever  direction  it  was  extended,  it  found  them 
strong  and  warlike.  At  the  time  when  Rome  was 
founded,  then,  the  people  of  Israel  had  been  in 
the  land  of  promise  seven  hundred  and  eighteen 
years.  Of  these  years  twenty-seven  belong  to 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  after  that  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty-nine  to  the  period  of  the  judg¬ 
es.  But  from  the  time  when  the  kings  began  to 
reign  there,  three  hundred  and  sixty-two  years 
had  passed.  And  at  that  time  there  was  a  king  in 
Judah  called  Ahaz,  or,  as  others  compute,  Heze¬ 
kiah  his  successor,  the  best  and  most  pious  king, 
who  it  is  admitted  reigned  in  the  times  of  Rom¬ 
ulus.  And  in  that  part  of  the  Hebrew  nation 
called  Israel,  Hosea  had  begun  to  reign. 

Chap.  23.  Of  the  Erythrcean  sibyl,  who  is  known 
to  have  sung  many  things  about  Christ  more 
plainly  than  the  other  sibyls 
Some  say  the  Erythraean  sibyl  prophesied  at 
this  time.  Now  Varro  declares  there  were  many 
sibyls,  and  not  merely  one.  This  sibyl  of  Ery- 
thrae  certainly  wrote  some  things  concerning 
Christ  which  are  quite  manifest,  and  we  first 
read  them  in  the  Latin  tongue  in  verses  of  bad 
Latin,  and  unrhythmical,  through  the  unskillful¬ 
ness,  as  we  afterwards  learned,  of  some  interpre¬ 
ter  unknown  to  me.  For  Flaccianus,  a  very  fa¬ 
mous  man,  who  was  also  a  proconsul,  a  man  of 
most  ready  eloquence  and  much  learning,  when 
we  were  speaking  about  Christ,  produced  a 
Greek  manuscript,  saying  that  it  was  the  proph¬ 
ecies  of  the  Erythraean  sibyl,  in  which  he  point¬ 
ed  out  a  certain  passage  which  had  the  initial 
letters  of  the  lines  so  arranged  that  these  words 
could  be  read  in  them:  'l^aovs  Xpcaros  Oeov 
vlos  ow?7p,  which  means,  “Jesus  Christ  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Saviour.”  And  these  verses,  of 
which  the  initial  letters  yield  that  meaning,  con¬ 
tain  what  follows  as  translated  by  some  one  in¬ 
to  Latin  in  good  rhythm : 

hh  Judgment  shall  moisten  the  earth  with  the 
sweat  of  its  standard , 

W  Ever  enduring,  behold  the  King  shall  come 
through  the  ages, 

M  Sent  to  be  here  in  the  flesh,  and  Judge  at  the 
last  of  the  world. 


484  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


O  0  God,  the  believing  and  faithless  alike  shall 
behold  Thee 

S  Uplifted  with  saints,  when  at  last  the  ages  are 
ended. 

M  Seated  before  Him  are  souls  in  the  flesh  for  His 
judgment. 

X  Hid  in  thick  vapours,  the  while  desolate  lieth 
the  earth. 

Rejected  by  men  are  the  idols  and  long  hidden 
treasures; 

W  Earth  is  consumed  by  the  fire,  and  it  searcheth 
the  ocean  and  heaven; 

►h  Issuing  forth,  it  destroyeth  the  terrible  portals 
of  hell. 

M  Saints  in  their  body  and  sold  freedom  and  light 
shall  inherit; 

h3  Those  who  are  guilty  shall  burn  in  fire  and 
brimstone  for  ever. 

O  Occult  actions  revealing,  each  one  shall  publish 
his  secrets; 

M  Secrets  of  every  man’s  heart  God  shall  reveal  in 
the  light. 

0  Then  shall  be  weeping  and  wailing,  yea,  and 
gnashing  of  teeth; 

W  Eclipsed  is  the  sun,  and  silenced  the  stars  in 
their  chorus. 

O  Over  and  gone  is  the  splendour  of  moonlight, 
melted  the  heaven. 

hb  Uplifted  by  Him  are  the  valleys,  and  cast  down 
the  mountains. 

•-3  Utterly  gone  among  men  are  distinctions  of 
lofty  and  lowly. 

►h  Into  the  plains  rush  the  hills,  the  skies  and 
oceans  are  mingled. 

O  Oh,  what  an  end  of  all  things  l  earth  broken  in 
pieces  shall  perish; 

M  Swelling  together  at  once  shall  the  waters  and 
flames  flow  in  rivers. 

M  Sounding  the  archangel’s  trumpet  shall  peal 
down  from  heaven, 

EC  Over  the  wicked  who  groan  in  their  guilt  and 
their  manifold  sorrows. 

H  Trembling,  the  earth  shall  be  opened,  revealing 
chaos  and  hell. 

K  Every  king  before  God  shall  stand  in  that  day 
to  be  judged. 

Rivers  of  fire  and  brimstone  shall  fall  from  the 
heavens. 

In  these  Latin  verses  the  meaning  of  the 
Greek  is  correctly  given,  although  not  in  the  ex¬ 
act  order  of  the  lines  as  connected  with  the  in¬ 
itial  letters;  for  in  three  of  them,  the  fifth,  eigh¬ 
teenth,  and  nineteenth,  where  the  Greek  letter 
T  occurs,  Latin  words  could  not  be  found  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  corresponding  letter  and  yield¬ 
ing  a  suitable  meaning.  So  that,  if  we  note  down 
together  the  initial  letters  of  all  the  lines  in  our 


Latin  translation  except  those  three  in  which  we 
retain  the  letter  T  in  the  proper  place,  they  will 
express  in  five  Greek  words  this  meaning,  “Jesus 
Christ  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour.”  And  the 
verses  are  twenty-seven,  which  is  the  cube  of 
three.  For  three  times  three  are  nine;  and  nine 
itself,  if  tripled,  so  as  to  rise  from  the  superficial 
square  to  the  cube,  comes  to  twenty-seven.  But 
if  you  join  the  initial  letters  of  these  five 
Greek  words,  *Iriaovs  Xpiaros  GeoD  vtos  coiTrjp, 
which  mean,  “Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God, 
the  Saviour,”  they  will  make  the  word 
that  is,  “fish,”  in  which  word  Christ  is  mystical¬ 
ly  understood,  because  He  was  able  to  live,  that 
is,  to  exist,  without  sin  in  the  abyss  of  this  mor¬ 
tality  as  in  the  depth  of  waters. 

But  this  sibyl,  whether  she  is  the  Erythraean, 
or,  as  some  rather  believe,  the  Cumaean,  in  her 
whole  poem,  of  which  this  is  a  very  small  por¬ 
tion,  not  only  has  nothing  that  can  relate  to  the 
worship  of  the  false  or  feigned  gods,  but  rather 
speaks  against  them  and  their  worshippers  in 
such  a  way  that  we  might  even  think  she  ought 
to  be  reckoned  among  those  who  belong  to  the 
city  of  God.  Lactantius  also  inserted  in  his  work 
the  prophecies  about  Christ  of  a  certain  sibyl, 
he  does  not  say  which.  But  I  have  thought  fit  to 
combine  in  a  single  extract,  which  may  seem 
long,  what  he  has  set  down  in  many  short  quota¬ 
tions.  She  says,  “Afterward  He  shall  come  into 
the  injurious  hands  of  the  unbelieving,  and  they 
will  give  God  buffets  with  profane  hands,  and 
with  impure  mouth  will  spit  out  envenomed 
spittle;  but  He  will  with  simplicity  yield  His 
holy  back  to  stripes.  And  He  will  hold  His  peace 
when  struck  with  the  fist,  that  no  one  may  find 
out  what  word,  or  whence,  He  comes  to  speak  to 
hell;  and  He  shall  be  crowned  with  a  crown  of 
thorns.  And  they  gave  Him  gall  for  meat,  and 
vinegar  for  His  thirst:  they  will  spread  this  ta¬ 
ble  of  inhospitality.  For  thou  thyself,  being  fool¬ 
ish,  hast  not  understood  thy  God,  deluding  the 
minds  of  mortals,  but  hast  both  crowned  Him 
with  thorns  and  mingled  for  Him  bitter  gall.  But 
the  veil  of  the  temple  shall  be  rent;  and  at  mid¬ 
day  it  shall  be  darker  than  night  for  three  hours. 
And  He  shall  die  the  death,  taking  sleep  for 
three  days;  and  then  returning  from  hell,  He 
first  shall  come  to  the  light,  the  beginning  of  the 
resurrection  being  shown  to  the  recalled.”  Lac¬ 
tantius  made  use  of  these  sibylline  testimonies, 
introducing  them  bit  by  bit  in  the  course  of  his 
discussion  as  the  things  he  intended  to  prove 
seemed  to  require,  and  we  have  set  them  down 
in  one  connected  series,  uninterrupted  by  com- 


485 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  24-26 


ment.  only  taking  care  to  mark  them  by  capitals, 
if  only  the  transcribers  do  not  neglect  to  pre¬ 
serve  them  hereafter.  Some  writers,  indeed,  say 
that  the  Erythraean  sibyl  was  not  in  the  time  of 
Romulus,  but  of  the  Trojan  war. 

Chap.  24.  That  the  seven  sages  flourished  in  the 
reign  of  Romulus ,  when  the  ten  tribes  which 
were  called  Israel  were  led  into  captivity  by 
the  Chaldeans ,  and  Romulus ,  when  dead ,  had 
divine  honours  conferred  on  him 
While  Romulus  reigned.  Thales  the  Milesian 
is  said  to  have  lived,  being  one  of  the  seven 
sages,  who  succeeded  the  theological  poets,  of 
whom  Orpheus  was  the  most  renow7ned,  and 
were  called  'Eocpoi,  that  is,  sages.  During  that 
time  the  ten  tribes,  which  on  the  division  of  the 
people  were  called  Israel,  were  conquered  by  the 
Chaldeans  and  led  captive  into  their  lands,  while 
the  two  tribes  which  were  called  Judah,  and  had 
the  seat  of  their  kingdom  in  Jerusalem,  re¬ 
mained  in  the  land  of  Judea.  As  Romulus,  when 
dead,  could  nowhere  be  found,  the  Romans,  as 
is  everywhere  notorious,  placed  him  among  the 
gods — a  thing  which  by  that  time  had  already 
ceased  to  be  done,  and  which  was  not  done  af¬ 
terwards  till  the  time  of  the  Caesars,  and  then 
not  through  error,  but  in  flattery;  so  that  Cicero 
ascribes  great  praises  to  Romulus,  because  he 
merited  such  honours  not  in  rude  and  unlearned 
times,  when  men  were  easily  deceived,  but  in 
times  already  polished  and  learned,  although  the 
subtle  and  acute  loquacity  of  the  philosophers 
had  not  yet  culminated.  But  although  the  later 
times  did  not  deify  dead  men,  still  they  did  not 
cease  to  hold  and  worship  as  gods  those  deified 
of  old;  nay,  by  images,  which  the  ancients  never 
had,  they  even  increased  the  allurements  of  vain 
and  impious  superstition,  the  unclean  demons 
effecting  this  in  their  heart,  and  also  deceiving 
them  by  lying  oracles,  so  that  even  the  fabulous 
crimes  of  the  gods,  which  were  not  once  imag¬ 
ined  by  a  more  polite  age,  were  yet  basely  acted 
in  the  plays  in  honour  of  these  same  false  dei¬ 
ties.  Numa  reigned  after  Romulus;  and  al¬ 
though  he  had  thought  that  Rome  would  be  bet¬ 
ter  defended  the  more  gods  there  were,  yet  on 
his  death  he  himself  was  not  counted  worthy  of 
a  place  among  them,  as  if  it  were  supposed  that 
he  had  so  crowded  heaven  that  a  place  could  not 
be  found  for  him  there.  They  report  that  the 
Samian  sibyl  lived  while  he  reigned  at  Rome, 
and  when  Manasseh  began  to  reign  over  the  He¬ 
brews — an  impious  king,  by  whom  the  prophet 
Isaiah  is  said  to  have  been  slain. 


Chap.  25.  What  philosophers  were  famous  when 
Tarquinius  Priscus  reigned  over  the  Romans , 
and  Zedekiah  over  the  Hebrews ,  when  Jerusa¬ 
lem  was  taken  and  the  temple  overthrown 

When  Zedekiah  reigned  over  the  Hebrews, 
and  Tarquinius  Priscus,  the  successor  of  Ancus 
Martius,  over  the  Romans,  the  Jewish  people 
was  led  captive  into  Babylon,  Jerusalem  and  the 
temple  built  by  Solomon  being  overthrown.  For 
the  prophets,  in  chiding  them  for  their  iniquity 
and  impiety,  predicted  that  these  things  should 
come  to  pass,  especially  Jeremiah,  who  even 
stated  the  number  of  years.  Pittacus  of  Mity- 
lene,  another  of  the  sages,  is  reported  to  have 
lived  at  that  time.  And  Eusebius  writes  that, 
while  the  people  of  God  were  held  captive  in 
Babylon,  the  five  other  sages  lived,  who  must  be 
added  to  Thales,  whom  we  mentioned  above, 
and  Pittacus,  in  order  to  make  up  the  seven. 
These  are  Solon  of  Athens,  Chilo  of  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  Periander  of  Corinth,  Cleobulus  of  Lindus, 
and  Bias  of  Priene.  These  flourished  after  the 
theological  poets,  and  were  called  sages,  because 
they  excelled  other  men  in  a  certain  laudable 
line  of  life,  and  summed  up  some  moral  precepts 
in  epigrammatic  sayings.  But  they  left  posterity 
no  literary  monuments,  except  that  Solon  is  al¬ 
leged  to  have  given  certain  laws  to  the  Atheni¬ 
ans,  and  Thales  was  a  natural  philosopher  and 
left  books  of  his  doctrine  in  short  proverbs.  In 
that  time  of  the  Jewish  captivity,  Anaximander, 
Anaximenes,  and  Xenophanes,  the  natural  phi¬ 
losophers,  flourished.  Pythagoras  also  lived 
then,  and  at  this  time  the  name  philosopher  was 
first  used. 

Chap.  26.  That  at  the  time  when  the  captivity 
of  the  Jews  was  brought  to  an  end ,  on  the 
completion  of  seventy  years,  the  Romans  also 
were  freed  from  kingly  rule 
At  this  time,  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  who  also 
ruled  the  Chaldeans  and  Assyrians,  having 
somewhat  relaxed  the  captivity  of  the  Jews, 
made  fifty  thousand  of  them  return  in  order  to 
rebuild  the  temple.  They  only  began  the  first 
foundations  and  built  the  altar;  but,  owing  to 
hostile  invasions,  they  were  unable  to  go  on,  and 
the  work  was  put  off  to  the  time  of  Darius.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  same  time  also  those  things  were  done 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  Judith,  which, 
indeed,  the  Jews  are  said  not  to  have  received 
into  the  canon  of  the  Scriptures.  Under  Darius 
king  of  Persia,  then,  on  the  completion  of  the 
seventy  years  predicted  by  Jeremiah  the  proph- 


486  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


et,  the  captivity  of  the  Jews  was  brought  to  an 
end.  and  they  were  restored  to  liberty.  Tarquin 
then  reigned  as  the  seventh  king  of  the  Romans. 
On  his  expulsion,  they  also  began  to  be  free 
from  the  rule  of  their  kings.  Down  to  this  time 
the  people  of  Israel  had  prophets;  but,  although 
they  were  numerous,  the  canonical  writings  of 
only  a  few  of  them  have  been  preserved  among 
the  Jews  and  among  us.  In  closing  the  previous 
book,  I  promised  to  set  down  something  in  this 
one  about  them,  and  I  shall  now  do  so. 

Chap.  27  .Of  the  times  of  the  prophets  whose 
oracles  are  contained  in  books ,  and  who  sang 
many  things  about  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  at 
the  time  when  the  Roman  kingdom  began  and 
the  Assyrian  came  to  an  end 
In  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  consider  these 
times,  let  us  go  back  a  little  to  earlier  times.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  book  of  the  prophet  Hosea, 
who  is  placed  first  of  twelve,  it  is  written,  “The 
word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  Hosea  in  the 
days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah, 
kings  of  Judah.”1  Amos  also  writes  tha^  he 
prophesied  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  and  adds  the 
name  of  Jeroboam  king  of  Israel,  who  lived  at 
the  same  time.2  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amos — either 
the  above-named  prophet,  or,  as  is  rather  af¬ 
firmed,  another  who  was  not  a  prophet,  but  was 
called  by  the  same  name — also  puts  at  the  head 
of  his  book  these  four  kings  named  by  Hosea, 
saying  by  way  of  preface  that  he  prophesied  in 
their  days.3  Micah  also  names  the  same  times  as 
those  of  his  prophecy,  after  the  days  of  Uzziah;4 
for  he  names  the  same  three  kings  as  Hosea 
named — Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah.  We  find 
from  their  own  writings  that  these  men  prophe¬ 
sied  contemporaneously.  To  these  are  added  Jo¬ 
nah  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah.  and  Joel  in  that  of 
Jotham,  who  succeeded  Uzziah.  But  we  can  find 
the  date  of  these  two  prophets  in  the  chronicles,5 
not  in  their  own  writings,  for  they  say  nothing 
about  it  themselves.  Now  these  days  extend 
from  Procas  king  of  the  Latins,  or  his  predeces¬ 
sor  Aventinus.  down  to  Romulus  king  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  or  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
his  successor  Numa  Pompilius.  Hezekiah  king 
of  Judah  certainly  reigned  till  then.  So  that  thus 
these  fountains  of  prophecy,  as  I  may  call  them, 
burst  forth  at  once  during  those  times  when  the 
Assyrian  kingdom  failed  and  the  Roman  began; 
so  that,  just  as  in  the  first  period  of  the  Assyrian 
kingdom  Abraham  arose,  to  whom  the  most  dis¬ 
cos.  1.  1.  2Amos,  1.  1. 

3Isa.  1.  1.  Isaiah’s  father  was  Amoz,  a  different  name. 
4Mic.  1.  1.  5The  chronicles  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome. 


tinct  promises  were  made  that  all  nations  should 
be  blessed  in  his  seed,  so  at  the  beginning  of  the 
western  Babylon,  in  the  time  of  whose  govern¬ 
ment  Christ  was  to  come  in  Whom  these  prom¬ 
ises  were  to  be  fulfilled,  the  oracles  of  the  proph¬ 
ets  were  given  not  only  in  spoken  but  in  written 
words,  for  a  testimony  that  so  great  a  thing 
should  come  to  pass.  For  although  the  people  of 
Israel  hardly  ever  lacked  prophets  from  the  time 
when  they  began  to  have  kings,  these  were  only 
for  their  own  use,  not  for  that  of  the  nations. 
But  when  the  more  manifestly  prophetic  Scrip¬ 
ture  began  to  be  formed,  which  was  to  benefit 
the  nations  too,  it  was  fitting  that  it  should  be¬ 
gin  when  this  city  was  founded  which  was  to 
rule  the  nations. 

Chap.  28.  Of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Gospel 
of  Christ  which  Hosea  and  Amos  prophesied 
The  prophet  Hosea  speaks  so  very  profoundly 
that  it  is  laborious  work  to  penetrate  his  mean¬ 
ing.  But,  according  to  promise,  we  must  insert 
something  from  his  book.  He  says,  “And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said 
unto  them,  Ye  are  not  my  people,  there  they 
shall  be  called  the  sons  of  the  living  God.” 6 
Even  the  apostles  understood  this  as  a  prophetic 
testimony  of  the  calling  of  the  nations  who  did 
not  formerly  belong  to  God;  and  because  this 
same  people  of  the  Gentiles  is  itself  spiritually 
among  the  children  of  Abraham,  and  for  that 
reason  is  rightly  called  Israel,  therefore  he  goes 
on  to  say,  “And  the  children  of  Judah  and  the 
children  of  Israel  shall  be  gathered  together  in 
one,  and  shall  appoint  themselves  one  headship, 
and  shall  ascend  from  the  earth.” 7  We  should 
but  weaken  the  savour  of  this  prophetic  oracle 
if  we  set  ourselves  to  expound  it.  Let  the  reader 
but  call  to  mind  that  corner-stone  and  those  two 
walls  of  partition,  the  one  of  the  Jews,  the  other 
of  the  Gentiles,8  and  he  will  recognize  them,  the 
one  under  the  term  sons  of  Jadah ,  the  other  as 
sons  of  Israel ,  supporting  themselves  by  one  and 
the  same  headship,  and  ascending  from  the 
earth.  But  that  those  carnal  Israelites  who  are 
now  unwilling  to  believe  in  Christ  shall  after¬ 
ward  believe,  that  is,  their  children  shall  (for 
they  themselves,  of  course,  shall  go  to  their  own 
place  by  dying),  this  same  prophet  testifies,  say¬ 
ing,  “For  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many 
days  without  a  king,  without  a  prince,  without  a 
sacrifice,  without  an  altar,  without  a  priesthood, 
without  manifestations.” 9  Who  does  not  see 
that  the  Jews  are  now  thus?  But  let  us  hear  what 

6Hos.  1.  10.  7Hos.  1.  11.  8Gal.  2.  14-20. 

9Hos.  3.  4- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  27-30 


he  adds:  “And  afterward  shall  the  children  of 
Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  and 
David  their  king,  and  shall  be  amazed  at  the 
Lord  and  at  His  goodness  in  the  latter  days.”  1 
Nothing  is  clearer  than  this  prophecy,  in  which 
by  David,  as  distinguished  by  the  title  of  king, 
Christ  is  to  be  understood,  “who  is  made,”  as  the 
apostle  says,  “of  the  seed  of  David  according  to 
the  flesh.”  2  This  prophet  has  also  foretold  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  on  the  third  day,  as  it  be¬ 
hoved  to  be  foretold,  with  prophetic  loftiness, 
when  he  says,  “He  will  heal  us  after  two  days, 
and  in  the  third  day  we  shall  rise  again.”  3  In 
agreement  with  this  the  apostle  says  to  us,  “If 
ye  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which 
are  above.” 4  Amos  also  prophesies  thus  con¬ 
cerning  such  things:  “Prepare  thee,  that  thou 
mayst  invoke  thy  God,  0  Israel;  for  lo,  I  am 
binding  the  thunder,  and  creating  the  spirit,  and 
announcing  to  men  their  Christ.” 5  And  in  an¬ 
other  place  he  says,  “In  that  day  will  I  raise  up 
the  tabernacle  of  David  that  is  fallen,  and  build 
up  the  breaches  thereof :  and  I  will  raise  up  his 
ruins,  and  will  build  them  up  again  as  in  the  days 
of  old:  that  the  residue  of  men  may  inquire  for 
me  and  all  the  nations  upon  whom  my  name  is 
invoked,  saith  the  Lord  that  doeth  this.” 6 

Chap.  29.  What  things  are  predicted  by  Isaiah 

concerning  Christ  and  the  Church 

The  prophecy  of  Isaiah  is  not  in  the  book  of 
the  twelve  prophets,  who  are  called  the  minor 
from  the  brevity  of  their  writings,  as  compared 
with  those  who  are  called  the  greater  prophets 
because  they  published  larger  volumes.  Isaiah 
belongs  to  the  latter,  yet  I  connect  him  with  the 
two  above  named,  because  he  prophesied  at  the 
same  time.  Isaiah,  then,  together  with  his  re¬ 
bukes  of  wickedness,  precepts  of  righteousness, 
and  predictions  of  evil,  also  prophesied  much 
more  than  the  rest  about  Christ  and  the  Church, 
that  is,  about  the  King  and  that  city  which  he 
founded;  so  that  some  say  he  should  be  called 
an  evangelist  rather  than  a  prophet.  But,  in  or¬ 
der  tor  finish  this  work,  I  quote  only  one  out  of 
many  in  this  place.  Speaking  in  the  person  of 
the  Father,  he  says,  “Behold,  my  servant  shall 
understand,  and  shall  be  exalted  and  glorified 
very  much.  As  many  shall  be  astonished  at 
Thee.”  7  This  is  about  Christ. 

But  let  us  now  hear  what  follows  about  the 
Church.  He  says,  “Rejoice,  0  barren,  thou  that 
barest  not;  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  didst 

^os.  3.  5.  2Rom.  1.  3.  3Hos.  6.  2. 

4Col.  3.  1.  5Amos,  4.  12,  13. 

6Amos,  9. 11,  12;  Acts,  15. 15-17*  7Isa.  52. 13;  53. 13. 


487 

not  travail  with  child:  for  many  more  are  the 
children  of  the  desolate  than  of  her  that  has  an 
husband.”8  But  these  must  suffice;  and  some 
things  in  them  ought  to  be  expounded;  yet  I 
think  those  parts  sufficient  which  are  so  plain 
that  even  enemies  must  be  compelled  against 
their  will  to  understand  them. 

Chap.  30.  What  Micah,  Jonah,  and  Joel  prophe¬ 
sied  in  accordance  with  the  New  Testament 

The  prophet  Micah,  representing  Christ  un¬ 
der  the  figure  of  a  great  mountain,  speaks  thus: 
“It  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  that  the 
manifested  mountain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  pre¬ 
pared  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  it  shall 
be  exalted  above  the  hills;  and  people  shall  has¬ 
ten  unto  it.  Many  nations  shall  go,  and  shall  say, 
Come,  let  us  go  up  into  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord,  and  into  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob; 
and  He  will  show  us  His  way,  and  we  will  go  in 
His  paths :  for  out  of  Zion  shall  proceed  the  law, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Jerusalem.  And 
He  shall  judge  among  many  people,  and  rebuke 
strong  nations  afar  off.” 9  This  prophet  predicts 
the  very  place  in  which  Christ  was  born,  saying, 
“And  thou,  Bethlehem,  of  the  house  of  Ephra- 
tah,  art  the  least  that  can  be  reckoned  among 
the  thousands  of  Judah;  out  of  thee  shall  come 
forth  unto  me  a  leader,  to  be  the  prince  in  Is¬ 
rael;  and  His  going  forth  is  from  the  beginning, 
even  from  the  days  of  eternity.  Therefore  will 
He  give  them  even  until  the  time  when  she  that 
travaileth  shall  bring  forth;  and  the  remnant  of 
His  brethren  shall  be  converted  to  the  sons  of 
Israel.  And  He  shall  stand,  and  see,  and  feed  His 
flock  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  His  God:  for  now 
shall  He  be  magnified  even  to  the  utmost  of  the 
earth.”  10 

The  prophet  Jonah,  not  so  much  by  speech  as 
by  his  own  painful  experience,  prophesied 
Christ’s  death  and  resurrection  much  more 
clearly  than  if  he  had  proclaimed  them  with  his 
voice.  For  why  was  he  taken  into  the  whale’s 
belly  and  restored  on  the  third  day,  but  that  he 
might  be  a  sign  that  Christ  should  return  from 
the  depths  of  hell  on  the  third  day? 

I  should  be  obliged  to  use  many  words  in  ex¬ 
plaining  all  that  Joel  prophesies  in  order  to  make 
those  that  pertain  to  Christ  and  the  Church. 
But  there  is  one  passage  I  must  not  pass  by, 
which  the  apostles  also  quoted  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  came  down  from  above  on  the  assem¬ 
bled  believers  according  to  Christ’s  promise. 
He  says,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass  after  these 

8Isa.  54.  1-5.  9Mic.  4.  1-3.  10Mic.  5.  2-4. 


488  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


things,  that  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all 
flesh;  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall 
prophesy,  and  your  old  men  shall  dream,  and 
your  young  men  shall  see  visions :  and  even  on 
my  servants  and  mine  handmaids  in  those  days 
will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit.”  1 

Chap.  31  .Of  the  predictions  concerning  the  sal¬ 
vation  of  the  world  in  Christ ,  in  Obadiah ,  Na¬ 
hum ,  and  Habakkuk 

The  date  of  three  of  the  minor  prophets,  Oba¬ 
diah,  Nahum,  and  Habakkuk,  is  neither  men¬ 
tioned  by  themselves  nor  given  in  the  chronicles 
of  Eusebius  and  Jerome.  For  although  they  put 
Obadiah  with  Micah,  yet  when  Micah  prophe¬ 
sied  does  not  appear  from  that  part  of  their 
writings  in  which  the  dates  are  noted.  And  this, 
I  think,  has  happened  through  their  error  in  neg¬ 
ligently  copying  the  works  of  others.  But  we 
could  not  find  the  two  others  now  mentioned  in 
the  copies  of  the  chronicles  which  we  have;  yet 
because  they  are  contained  in  the  canon,  we 
ought  not  to  pass  them  by. 

Obadiah,  so  far  as  his  writings  are  concerned, 
the  briefest  of  all  the  prophets,  speaks  against 
Idumea,  that  is,  the  nation  of  Esau,  that  repro¬ 
bate  elder  of  the  twin  sons  of  Isaac  and  grand¬ 
sons  of  Abraham.  Now  if,  by  that  form  of 
speech  in  which  a  part  is  put  for  the  whole,  we 
take  Idumea  as  put  for  the  nations,  we  may  un¬ 
derstand  of  Christ  what  he  says  among  other 
things,  “But  upon  Mount  Sion  shall  be  safety, 
and  there  shall  be  a  Holy  One.”  2  And  a  little  af¬ 
ter.  at  the  end  of  the  same  prophecy,  he  says, 
“And  those  who  are  saved  again  shall  come  up 
out  of  Mount  Sion,  that  they  may  defend  Mount 
Esau,  and  it  shall  be  a  kingdom  to  the  Lord.”  3 
It  is  quite  evident  this  was  fulfilled  when  those 
saved  again  out  of  Mount  Sion — that  is,  the  be¬ 
lievers  in  Christ  from  Judea,  of  whom  the  apos¬ 
tles  are  chiefly  to  be  acknowledged — went  up  to 
defend  Mount  Esau.  How  could  they  defend  it 
except  by  making  safe,  through  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  those  who  believed  that  they  might 
be  “delivered  from  the  power  of  darkness  and 
translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God”?  4  This  he 
expressed  as  an  inference,  adding,  “And  it  shall 
be  to  the  Lord  a  kingdom.”  For  Mount  Sion  sig¬ 
nifies  Judea,  where  it  is  predicted  there  shall  be 
safety  and  a  Holy  One,  that  is,  Christ  Jesus.  But 
Mount  Esau  is  Idumea,  which  signifies  the 
Church  of  the  Gentiles,  which,  as  I  have  ex¬ 
pounded,  those  saved  again  out  of  Sion  have 
defended  that  it  should  be  a  kingdom  to  the 

^Joel,  2.  28,  29.  2Obad.  17.  3Obad.  21. 

4Col.  1.  13. 


Lord.  This  was  obscure  before  it  took  place; 
but  what  believer  does  not  find  it  out  now  that 
it  is  done? 

As  for  the  prophet  Nahum,  through  him  God 
says,  “I  will  exterminate  the  graven  and  the 
molten  things :  I  will  make  thy  burial.  For  lo,  the 
feet  of  Him  that  bringeth  good  tidings  and  an¬ 
nounced  peace  are  swift  upon  the  mountains! 
0  Judah,  celebrate  thy  festival  days,  and  per¬ 
form  thy  vows ;  for  now  they  shall  not  go  on  any 
more  so  as  to  become  antiquated.  It  is  complet¬ 
ed,  it  is  consumed,  it  is  taken  away.  He  ascend¬ 
ed  who  breathes  in  thy  face,  delivering  thee  out 
of  tribulation.” 5  Let  him  that  remembers  the 
gospel  call  to  mind  who  hath  ascended  from  hell 
and  breathed  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  face  of  Ju¬ 
dah,  that  is,  of  the  Jewish  disciples;  for  they  be¬ 
long  to  the  New  Testament,  whose  festival  days 
are  so  spiritually  renewed  that  they  cannot  be¬ 
come  antiquated.  Moreover,  we  already  see  the 
graven  and  molten  things,  that  is,  the  idols  of 
the  false  gods,  exterminated  through  the  gospel, 
and  given  up  to  oblivion  as  of  the  grave,  and  we 
know  that  this  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  this  very 
thing. 

Of  what  else  than  the  advent  of  Christ,  who 
was  to  come,  is  Habakkuk  understood  to  say, 
“And  the  Lord  answered  me,  and  said,  Write  the 
vision  openly  on  a  tablet  of  boxwood,  that  he 
that  readeth  these  things  may  understand.  For 
the  vision  is  yet  for  a  time  appointed,  and  it  will 
arise  in  the  end,  and  will  not  become  void:  if  it 
tarry,  wait  for  it;  because  it  will  surely  come, 
and  will  not  be  delayed”?  6 

Chap.  32  .Of  the  prophecy  that  is  contained  in 

the  prayer  and  song  of  Habakkuk 

In  his  prayer,  with  a  song,  to  whom  but  the 
Lord  Christ  does  he  say,  “0  Lord,  I  have  heard 
Thy  hearing,  and  was  afraid:  0  Lord,  I  have 
considered  Thy  works,  and  was  greatly  afraid”?7 
What  is  this  but  the  inexpressible  admiration  of 
the  foreknown,  new,  and  sudden  salvation  of 
men?  “In  the  midst  of  two  living  creatures  thou 
shalt  be  recognized.”  What  is  this  but  either  be¬ 
tween  the  two  testaments,  or  between  the  two 
thieves,  or  between  Moses  and  Elias  talking 
with  Him  on  the  mount?  “While  the  years  draw 
nigh.  Thou  wilt  be  recognized;  at  the  coming  of 
the  time  Thou  wilt  be  shown,”  does  not  even 
need  exposition.  “While  my  soul  shall  be  trou¬ 
bled  at  Him.  in  wrath  Thou  wilt  be  mindful  of 
mercy.”  What  is  this  but  that  He  puts  Himself 
for  the  Jews,  of  whose  nation  He  was,  who  were 
troubled  with  great  anger  and  crucified  Christ, 

6Nah.  1.  14;  2.  1.  6Hab.  2.  2,  3.  7Hab.  3.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  31-32  489 


when  He,  mindful  of  mercy,  said,  “Father,  for¬ 
give  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do”?  1 
“God  shall  come  from  Teman,  and  the  Holy  One 
from  the  shady  and  close  mountain.”  2  What  is 
said  here,  “He  shall  come  from  Teman,”  some 
interpret  “from  the  south,”  or  “from  the  south¬ 
west,”  by  which  is  signified  the  noonday,  that  is, 
the  fervour  of  charity  and  the  splendour  of  truth. 
“The  shady  and  close  mountain”  might  be  un¬ 
derstood  in  many  ways,  yet  I  prefer  to  take  it  as 
meaning  the  depth  of  the  divine  Scriptures,  in 
which  Christ  is  prophesied:  for  in  the  Scriptures 
there  are  many  things  shady  and  close  which  ex¬ 
ercise  the  mind  of  the  reader;  and  Christ  comes 
thence  when  he  who  has  understanding  finds 
Him  there.  “His  power  covereth  up  the  heavens, 
and  the  earth  is  full  of  His  praise.”  What  is  this 
but  what  is  also  said  in  the  psalm,  “Be  Thou  ex¬ 
alted,  0  God,  above  the  heavens ;  and  Thy  glory 
above  all  the  earth”?3  “His  splendour  shall  be  as 
the  light.”  What  is  it  but  that  the  fame  of  Him 
shall  illuminate  believers?  “Horns  are  in  His 
hands.”  What  is  this  but  the  trophy  of  the  cross? 
“And  He  hath  placed  the  firm  charity  of  His 
strength” 4  needs  no  exposition.  “Before  His 
face  shall  go  the  word,  and  it  shall  go  forth  into 
the  field  after  His  feet.”  What  is  this  but  that 
He  should  both  be  announced  before  His  com¬ 
ing  hither  and  after  His  return  hence?  “He 
stood,  and  the  earth  was  moved.”  What  is  this 
but  that  “He  stood”  for  succour,  “and  the  earth 
was  moved”  to  believe?  “He  regarded,  and  the 
nations  melted”;  that  is,  He  had  compassion, 
and  made  the  people  penitent.  “The  mountains 
are  broken  with  violence”;  that  is,  through  the 
power  of  those  who  work  miracles  the  pride  of 
the  haughty  is  broken  “The  everlasting  hills 
flowed  down” ;  that  is,  they  are  humbled  in  time 
that  they  may  be  lifted  up  for  eternity.  “I  saw 
His  goings  eternal  for  his  labours”;  that  is,  I  be¬ 
held  His  labour  of  love  not  left  without  the  re¬ 
ward  of  eternity.  “The  tents  of  Ethiopia  shall 
be  greatly  afraid,  and  the  tents  of  the  land  of 
Midian”;  that  is,  even  those  nations  which  are 
not  under  the  Roman  authority,  being  suddenly 
terrified  by  the  news  of  Thy  wonderful  works, 
shall  become  a  Christian  people.  “Wert  Thou 
angry  at  the  rivers,  0  Lord?  or  was  Thy  fury 
against  the  rivers?  or  was  Thy  rage  against  the 
sea?”  This  is  said  because  He  does  not  now  come 
to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world 
through  Him  might  be  saved.5  “For  Thou  shalt 
mount  upon  Thy  horses,  and  Thy  riding  shall  be 
salvation”;  that  is,  Thine  evangelists  shall  carry 

Tuke,  23.  34.  2Hab.  3.  3.  3Ps.  57.  5,  11. 

4Hab.  3.  4.  5John,  3,  17. 


Thee,  for  they  are  guided  by  Thee,  and  Thy  gos¬ 
pel  is  salvation  to  them  that  believe  in  Thee. 
“Bending,  Thou  wilt  bend  Thy  bow  against  the 
sceptres,  saith  the  Lord”;  that  is,  Thou  wilt 
threaten  even  the  kings  of  the  earth  with  Thy 
judgment.  “The  earth  shall  be  cleft  with  riv¬ 
ers”;  that  is,  by  the  sermons  of  those  who 
preach  Thee  flowing  in  upon  them,  men’s  hearts 
shall  be  opened  to  make  confession,  to  whom  it 
is  said,  “Rend  your  hearts  and  not  your  gar¬ 
ments.”  6  What  does  “The  people  shall  see  Thee 
and  grieve”  mean,  but  that  in  mourning  they 
shall  be  blessed?  7  What  is  “Scattering  the  wa¬ 
ters  in  marching,”  but  that  by  walking  in  those 
who  everywhere  proclaim  Thee,  Thou  wilt  scat¬ 
ter  hither  and  thither  the  streams  of  Thy  doc¬ 
trine?  What  is  “The  abyss  uttered  its  voice”?  Is 
it  not  that  the  depth  of  the  human  heart  ex¬ 
pressed  what  it  perceived?  The  words,  “The 
depth  of  its  phantasy,”  are  an  explanation  of  the 
previous  verse,  for  the  depth  is  the  abyss ;  and 
“Uttered  its  voice”  is  to  be  understood  before 
them,  that  is,  as  we  have  said,  it  expressed  what 
it  perceived.  Now  the  phantasy  is  the  vision, 
which  it  did  not  hold  or  conceal,  but  poured 
forth  in  confession.  “The  sun  was  raised  up,  and 
the  moon  stood  still  in  her  course”;  that  is, 
Christ  ascended  into  heaven,  and  the  Church 
was  established  under  her  King.  “Thy  darts  shall 
go  in  the  light”;  that  is,  Thy  words  shall  not  be 
sent  in  secret,  but  openly.  For  He  had  said  to 
His  own  disciples,  “What  I  tell  you  in  darkness, 
that  speak  ye  in  the  light.”8  “By  threatening 
thou  shalt  diminish  the  earth”;  that  is,  by  that 
threatening  Thou  shalt  humble  men.  “And  in 
fury  Thou  shalt  cast  down  the  nations”;  for  in 
punishing  those  who  exalt  themselves  Thou 
dashest  them  one  against  another.  “Thou  went- 
est  forth  for  the  salvation  of  Thy  people,  that 
Thou  mightest  save  Thy  Christ ;  Thou  hast  sent 
death  on  the  heads  of  the  wicked.”  None  of 
these  words  require  exposition.  “Thou  hast  lift¬ 
ed  up  the  bonds,  even  to  the  neck.”  This  may  be 
understood  even  of  the  good  bonds  of  wisdom, 
that  the  feet  may  be  put  into  its  fetters,  and  the 
neck  into  its  collar.  “Thou  hast  struck  off  in 
amazement  of  mind  the  bonds”  must  be  under¬ 
stood  for,  “He  lifts  up  the  good  and  strikes  off 
the  bad,”  about  which  it  is  said  to  Him,  “Thou 
hast  broken  asunder  my  bonds,” 9  and  that  “in 
amazement  of  mind,”  that  is,  wonderfully.  “The 
heads  of  the  mighty  shall  be  moved  in  it”;  to 
wit,  in  that  wonder.  “They  shall  open  their  teeth 
like  a  poor  man  eating  secretly.”  For  some  of 

6Joel,  2.  13.  7Matt.  5.  4.  8Matt.  10.  27. 

9Ps.  1 16.  16. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  mighty  among  the  Jews  shall  come  to  the 
Lord,  admiring  His  works  and  words,  and  shall 
greedily  eat  the  bread  of  His  doctrine  in  secret 
for  fear  of  the  Jews,  just  as  the  Gospel  has 
shown  they  did.  “And  Thou  hast  sent  into  the 
sea  Thy  horses,  troubling  many  waters,”  which 
are  nothing  else  than  many  people;  for  unless 
all  were  troubled,  some  would  not  be  converted 
with  fear,  others  pursued  with  fury.  “I  gave 
heed,  and  my  belly  trembled  at  the  voice  of  the 
prayer  of  my  lips;  and  trembling  entered  into 
my  bones,  and  my  habit  of  body  was  troubled 
under  me.”  He  gave  heed  to  those  things  which 
he  said  and  was  himself  terrified  at  his  own 
prayer,  which  he  had  poured  forth  prophetically 
and  in  which  he  discerned  things  to  come.  For 
when  many  people  are  troubled,  he  saw  the 
threatening  tribulation  of  the  Church,  and  at 
once  acknowledged  himself  a  member  of  it,  and 
said,  “I  shall  rest  in  the  day  of  tribulation,”  as 
being  one  of  those  who  are  rejoicing  in  hope,  pa¬ 
tient  in  tribulation.1  “That  I  may  ascend,”  he 
says,  “among  the  people  of  my  pilgrimage,”  de¬ 
parting  quite  from  the  wicked  people  of  his  car¬ 
nal  kinship,  who  are  not  pilgrims  in  this  earth, 
and  do  not  seek  the  country  above.2  “Although 
the  fig-tree,”  he  says,  “shall  not  blossom,  neither 
shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines ;  the  labour  of  the  olive 
shall  lie,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat ;  the 
sheep  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  meat,  and  there 
shall  be  no  oxen  in  the  stalls.”  He  sees  that  na¬ 
tion  which  was  to  slay  Christ  about  to  lose  the 
abundance  of  spiritual  supplies,  which,  in  proph¬ 
etic  fashion,  he  has  set  forth  by  the  figure  of 
earthly  plenty.  And  because  that  nation  was  to 
suffer  such  wrath  of  God,  because,  being  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  it  wished  to 
establish  its  own,3  he  immediately  says,  “Yet 
will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord;  I  will  joy  in  God  my 
salvation.  The  Lord  God  is  my  strength,  and  He 
will  set  my  feet  in  completion;  He  will  place  me 
above  the  heights,  that  I  may  conquer  in  His 
song,”  to  wit,  in  that  song  of  which  something 
similar  is  said  in  the  psalm,  “He  set  my  feet 
upon  a  rock,  and  directed  my  goings,  and  put  in 
my  mouth  a  new  song,  a  hymn  to  our  God.” 4  He 
therefore  conquers  in  the  song  of  the  Lord,  who 
takes  pleasure  in  His  praise,  not  in  his  own;  that 
“He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord.”5 
But  some  copies  have,  “I  will  joy  in  God  my 
Jesus,”  which  seems  to  me  better  than  the  ver¬ 
sion  of  those  who.  wishing  to  put  it  in  Latin, 
have  not  set  down  that  very  name  which  for  us 
it  is  dearer  and  sweeter  to  name. 

^om.  12.  12.  2Heb.  n.  13.  16.  3Rom.  10.  3. 

4Ps.  40.  2,  3.  6Jer.  9.  23.  24,  as  in  I  Cor.  1.  31. 


Chap.  33.  What  Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah  have, 
by  the  prophetic  spirit,  spoken  before  con¬ 
cerning  Christ  and  the  calling  of  the  nations 

Jeremiah,  like  Isaiah,  is  one  of  the  greater 
prophets,  not  of  the  minor,  like  the  others  from 
whose  writings  I  have  just  given  extracts.  He 
prophesied  when  Josiah  reigned  in  Jerusalem, 
and  Ancus  Martius  at  Rome,  when  the  captivity 
of  the  Jews  was  already  at  hand;  and  he  contin¬ 
ued  to  prophesy  down  to  the  fifth  month  of  the 
captivity,  as  we  find  from  his  writings.  Zephani¬ 
ah,  one  of  the  minor  prophets,  is  put  along  with 
him,  because  he  himself  says  that  he  prophesied 
in  the  days  of  Josiah;  but  he  does  not  say  till 
when.  Jeremiah  thus  prophesied  not  only  in  the 
times  of  Ancus  Martius,  but  also  in  those  of 
Tarquinius  Priscus,  whom  the  Romans  had  for 
their  fifth  king.  For  he  had  already  begun  to 
reign  when  that  captivity  took  place.  Jeremiah, 
in  prophesying  of  Christ,  says,  “The  breath  of 
our  mouth,  the  Lord  Christ,  was  taken  in  our 
sins,” 6  thus  briefly  showing  both  that  Christ  is 
our  Lord  and  that  He  suffered  for  us.  Also  in  an¬ 
other  place  he  says,  “This  is  my  God,  and  there 
shall  none  other  be  accounted  of  in  comparison 
of  Him ;  who  hath  found  out  all  the  way  of  pru¬ 
dence,  and  hath  given  it  to  Jacob  His  servant, 
and  to  Israel  His  beloved:  afterwards  He  was 
seen  on  the  earth,  and  conversed  with  men.”7 
Some  attribute  this  testimony  not  to  Jeremiah, 
but  to  his  secretary,  who  was  called  Baruch;  but 
it  is  more  commonly  ascribed  to  Jeremiah. 
Again  the  same  prophet  says  concerning  Him, 
“Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I 
will  raise  up  unto  David  a  righteous  shoot,  and 
a  King  shall  reign  and  shall  be  wise,  and  shall  do 
judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth.  In  those  days 
Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell  con¬ 
fidently:  and  this  is  the  name  which  they  shall 
call  Him,  Our  righteous  Lord.” 8  And  of  the  call¬ 
ing  of  the  nations  which  was  to  come  to  pass, 
and  which  we  now  see  fulfilled,  he  thus  spoke: 
“0  Lord  my  God,  and  my  refuge  in  the  day  of 
evils,  to  Thee  shall  the  nations  come  from  the 
utmost  end  of  the  earth,  saying,  Truly  our  fa¬ 
thers  have  worshipped  lying  images,  wherein 
there  is  no  profit.” 9  But  that  the  Jews,  by  whom 
He  behoved  even  to  be  slain,  were  not  going  to 
acknowledge  Him,  this  prophet  thus  intimates: 
“Heavy  is  the  heart  through  all;  and  He  is  a 
man,  and  who  shall  know  Him?”  10  That  passage 
also  is  his  which  I  have  quoted  in  the  seven¬ 
teenth  book  concerning  the  new  testament,  of 

6Lam.  4.  20.  7Bar.  3.  35-37.  8Jer.  23.  5,  6. 

9Jer.  16.  19.  10Jer.  17.  9. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  33-35  49* 


which  Christ  is  the  Mediator.  For  Jeremiah  him¬ 
self  says,  “Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the 
Lord,  that  I  will  complete  over  the  house  of  Ja¬ 
cob  a  new  testament,”  and  the  rest,  which  may 
be  read  there.1 

For  the  present  I  shall  put  down  those  predic¬ 
tions  about  Christ  by  the  prophet  Zephaniah, 
who  prophesied  with  Jeremiah.  “Wait  ye  upon 
me,  saith  the  Lord,  in  the  day  of  my  resurrec¬ 
tion,  in  the  future;  because  it  is  my  determina¬ 
tion  to  assemble  the  nations,  and  gather  together 
the  kingdoms.”  2  And  again  he  says,  “The  Lord 
will  be  terrible  upon  them,  and  will  exterminate 
all  the  gods  of  the  earth;  and  they  shall  worship 
Him  every  man  from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles 
of  the  nations.”  3  And  a  little  after  he  says, 
“Then  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  tongue,  and  to 
His  offspring,  that  they  may  call  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  and  serve  Him  under  one  yoke. 
From  the  borders  of  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  shall 
they  bring  sacrifices  unto  me.  In  that  day  thou 
shalt  not  be  confounded  for  all  thy  curious  in¬ 
ventions,  which  thou  hast  done  impiously 
against  me:  for  then  I  will  take  away  from  thee 
the  naughtiness  of  thy  trespass ;  and  thou  shalt 
no  more  magnify  thyself  above  thy  holy  moun¬ 
tain.  And  I  will  leave  in  thee  a  meek  and  hum¬ 
ble  people,  and  they  who  shall  be  left  of  Israel 
shall  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord.”  4  These  are  the 
remnant  of  whom  the  apostle  quotes  that  which 
is  elsewhere  prophesied:  “Though  the  number  of 
the  children  of  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  a 
remnant  shall  be  saved.”5  These  are  the  remnant 
of  that  nation  who  have  believed  in  Christ. 

Chap.  34.  Of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  and  Eze¬ 
kiel,  other  two  of  the  greater  prophets 

Daniel  and  Ezekiel,  other  two  of  the  greater 
prophets,  also  first  prophesied  in  the  very  cap¬ 
tivity  of  Babylon.  Daniel  even  defined  the  time 
when  Christ  was  to  come  and  suffer  by  the  exact 
date.  It  would  take  too  long  to  show  this  by 
computation,  and  it  has  been  done  often  by  oth¬ 
ers  before  us.  But  of  His  power  and  glory  he  has 
thus  spoken:  “I  saw  in  a  night  vision,  and,  be¬ 
hold,  one  like  the  Son  of  man  was  coming  with 
the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  He  came  even  to  the 
Ancient  of  days,  and  He  was  brought  into  His 
presence.  And  to  Him  there  was  given  dominion, 
andhonour,  anda  kingdom :  andall  people,  tribes, 
and  tongues  shall  serve  Him.  His  power  is  an  ev¬ 
erlasting  power,  which  shall  not  pass  away,  and 
His  kingdom  shall  not  be  destroyed.”  6 

^er.  31.  31;  see  bk.  xvii.  3.  2Zeph.  3.  8. 

3Zeph.  2.  11.  4Zeph.  3.  9-12. 

sIsa.  10.  22;  Rom.  9.  27.  6Dan.  7.  13,  14. 


Ezekiel  also,  speaking  prophetically  in  the 
person  of  God  the  Father,  thus  foretells  Christ, 
speaking  of  Him  in  the  prophetic  manner  as 
David,  because  He  assumed  flesh  of  the  seed  of 
David,  and  on  account  of  that  form  of  a  servant 
in  which  He  was  made  man,  He  who  is  the  Son 
of  God  is  also  called  the  servant  of  God.  He 
says,  “And  I  will  set  up  over  my  sheep  one  Shep¬ 
herd,  who  will  feed  them,  even  my  servant  Da¬ 
vid;  and  He  shall  feed  them,  and  He  shall  be 
their  shepherd.  And  I  the  Lord  will  be  their  God, 
and  my  servant  David  a  prince  in  the  midst  of 
them;  I  the  Lord  have  spoken.”7  And  in  another 
place  he  says,  “And  one  King  shall  be  over  them 
all:  and  they  shall  no  more  be  two  nations,  nei¬ 
ther  shall  they  be  divided  any  more  into  two 
kingdoms;  neither  shall  they  defile  themselves 
any  more  with  their  idols,  and  their  abomina¬ 
tions,  and  all  their  iniquities.  And  I  will  save 
them  out  of  all  their  dwelling-places  wherein 
they  have  sinned,  and  will  cleanse  them;  and 
they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God. 
And  my  servant  David  shall  be  king  over  them, 
and  there  shall  be  one  Shepherd  for  them  all.” 8 

Chap.  35.  Of  the  prophecy  of  the  three  proph¬ 
ets,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi 
There  remain  three  minor  prophets,  Haggai, 
Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  who  prophesied  at  the 
close  of  the  captivity.  Of  these  Haggai  more 
openly  prophesies  of  Christ  and  the  Church  thus 
briefly:  “Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Yet  one 
little  while,  and  I  will  shake  the  heaven,  and  the 
earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  dry  land;  and  I  will 
move  all  nations,  and  the  desired  of  all  nations 
shall  come.” 9  The  fulfillment  of  this  prophecy 
is  in  part  already  seen,  and  in  part  hoped  for  in 
the  end.  For  He  moved  the  heaven  by  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  the  angels  and  the  stars,  when  Christ 
became  incarnate.  He  moved  the  earth  by  the 
great  miracle  of  His  birth  of  the  virgin.  He 
moved  the  sea  and  the  dry  land,  when  Christ  was 
proclaimed  both  in  the  isles  and  in  the  whole 
world.  So  we  see  all  nations  moved  to  the  faith; 
and  the  fulfillment  of  what  follows,  “And  the 
desired  of  all  nations  shall  come,”  is  looked  for 
at  His  last  coming.  For  ere  men  can  desire  and 
wait  for  Him,  they  must  believe  and  love 
Him. 

Zechariah  says  of  Christ  and  the  Church, 
“Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Sion;  shout  joy¬ 
fully,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem;  behold,  thy 
King  shall  come  unto  thee,  just  and  the  Saviour; 
Himself  poor,  and  mounting  an  ass,  and  a  colt 
the  foal  of  an  ass:  and  His  dominion  shall  be 
7Ezek.  34.  23.  8Ezek.  37.  22-24.  9Hag.  2.  6. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth.”  1  How  this  was  done,  when 
the  Lord  Christ  on  His  journey  used  a  beast  of 
burden  of  this  kind,  we  read  in  the  Gospel, 
where,  also,  as  much  of  this  prophecy  is  quoted 
as  appears  sufficient  for  the  context.  In  another 
place,  speaking  in  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  to 
Christ  Himself  of  the  remission  of  sins  through 
His  blood,  he  says,  “Thou  also,  by  the  blood  of 
Thy  testament,  hast  sent  forth  Thy  prisoners 
from  the  lake  wherein  is  no  water.”  2  Different 
opinions  may  be  held,  consistently  with  right  be¬ 
lief,  as  to  what  he  meant  by  this  lake.  Yet  it 
seems  to  me  that  no  meaning  suits  better  than 
that  of  the  depth  of  human  misery,  which  is,  as 
it  were,  dry  and  barren,  where  there  are  no 
streams  of  righteousness,  but  only  the  mire  of 
iniquity.  For  it  is  said  of  it  in  the  Psalms,  “And 
He  led  me  forth  out  of  the  lake  of  misery,  and 
from  the  miry  clay.” 3 

Malachi,  foretelling  the  Church  which  we 
now  behold  propagated  through  Christ,  says 
most  openly  to  the  Jews,  in  the  person  of  God, 
“I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  and  I  will  not  accept 
a  gift  at  your  hand.  For  from  the  rising  even  to 
the  going  down  of  the  sun,  my  name  is  great 
among  the  nations;  and  in  every  place  sacrifice 
shall  be  made,  and  a  pure  oblation  shall  be  of¬ 
fered  unto  my  name :  for  my  name  shall  be  great 
among  the  nations,  saith  the  Lord.”  4  Since  we 
can  already  see  this  sacrifice  offered  to  God  in 
every  place,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  his  go¬ 
ing  down,  through  Christ’s  priesthood  after  the 
order  of  Melchisedek,  while  the  Jews,  to  whom 
it  was  said,  “I  have  no  pleasure  in  you.  neither 
will  I  accept  a  gift  at  your  hand,”  cannot  deny 
that  their  sacrifice  has  ceased,  why  do  they  still 
look  for  another  Christ,  when  they  read  this  in 
the  prophecy,  and  see  it  fulfilled,  which  could 
not  be  fulfilled  except  through  Him?  And  a  little 
after  he  says  of  Him,  in  the  person  of  God.  “My 
covenant  was  with  Him  of  life  and  peace;  and  I 
gave  to  Him  that  He  might  fear  me  with  fear, 
and  be  afraid  before  my  name.  The  law  of  truth 
was  in  His  mouth:  directing  in  peace  He  hath 
walked  with  me,  and  hath  turned  many  away 
from  iniquity.  For  the  Priest’s  lips  shall  keep 
knowledge  and  they  shall  seek  the  law  at  His 
mouth:  for  He  is  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  Al¬ 
mighty.”5  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  Christ 
Jesus  is  called  the  Angel  of  the  Almighty  God. 
For  just  as  He  is  called  a  servant  on  account  of 
the  form  of  a  servant  in  which  He  came  to  men, 
so  He  is  called  an  angel  on  account  of  the  evan- 

^ech.  g.  g,  io.  2Zech.  g.  n.  3Ps.  40.  2. 

4Mal.  1.  10,  11.  6Mal.  2.  5-7. 


gel  which  He  proclaimed  to  men.  For  if  we  inter¬ 
pret  these  Greek  words,  evangel  is  good  news, 
and  angel  is  messenger.  Again  he  says  of  Him, 
“Behold  I  will  send  mine  angel,  and  He  will  look 
out  the  way  before  my  face:  and  the  Lord, 
Whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come  into  His 
temple,  even  the  Angel  of  the  testament,  whom 
ye  desire.  Behold,  He  cometh,  saith  the  Lord  Al¬ 
mighty,  and  who  shall  abide  the  day  of  His  en¬ 
try,  or  who  shall  stand  at  His  appearing?”6  In 
this  place  he  has  foretold  both  the  first  and  sec¬ 
ond  advent  of  Christ:  the  first,  to  wit,  of  which 
he  says,  “And  He  shall  come  suddenly  into  His 
temple” :  that  is,  into  His  flesh,  of  which  He  said 
in  the  Gospel,  “Destroy  this  temple,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  again.”7  And  of  the 
second  advent  he  says,  “Behold,  He  cometh, 
saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  and  who  shall  abide 
the  day  of  His  entry,  or  who  shall  stand  at  His 
appearing?”  But  what  he  says,  “The  Lord  whom 
ye  seek,  and  the  Angel  of  the  testament  whom 
ye  desire,”  just  means  that  even  the  Jews,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Scriptures  which  they  read,  shall 
seek  and  desire  Christ.  But  many  of  them  did 
not  acknowledge  that  He  Whom  they  sought  and 
desired  had  come,  being  blinded  in  their  hearts, 
which  were  preoccupied  with  their  own  merits. 
Now  what  he  here  calls  the  testament,  either 
above,  where  he  says,  “My  testament  had  been 
with  Him,”  or  here,  where  he  has  called  Him  the 
Angel  of  the  testament,  we  ought,  beyond  a 
doubt,  to  take  to  be  the  New  Testament,  in  which 
the  things  promised  are  eternal,  and  not  the  Old, 
in  which  they  are  only  temporal.  Yet  many  who 
are  weak  are  troubled  when  they  see  the  wicked 
abound  in  such  temporal  things,  because  they 
value  them  greatly,  and  serve  the  true  God  to 
be  rewarded  with  them.  On  this  account,  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  eternal  blessedness  of  the  N ewTesta- 
ment,  which  shall  be  given  only  to  the  good, 
from  the  earthly  felicity  of  the  Old,  which  for 
the  most  part  is  given  to  the  bad  as  well,  the 
same  prophet  says.  “Ye  have  made  your  words 
burdensome  to  me:  yet  ye  have  said,  In  what 
have  we  spoken  ill  of  Thee?  Ye  have  said,  Fool¬ 
ish  is  every  one  who  serves  God ;  and  what  profit 
is  it  that  we  have  kept  His  observances,  and 
that  we  have  walked  as  suppliants  before  the 
face  of  the  Lord  Almighty?  And  now  we  call  the 
aliens  blessed,  yea,  all  that  do  wicked  things  are 
built  up  again ;  yea,  they  are  opposed  to  God  and 
are  saved.  They  that  feared  the  Lord  uttered 
these  reproaches  every  one  to  his  neighbour: 
and  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard;  and  He 
wrote  a  book  of  remembrance  before  Him,  for 
6Mal.  3.  1,  2.  7John,  2.  19. 


493 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  36-37 


them  that  fear  the  Lord  and  that  revere  His 
name.”  1  By  that  book  is  meant  the  New  Testa¬ 
ment.  Finally,  let  us  hear  what  follows:  “And 
they  shall  be  an  acquisition  for  me,  saith  the 
Lord  Almighty,  in  the  day  which  I  make ;  and  I 
will  choose  them  as  a  man  chooseth  his  son  that 
serveth  him.  And  ye  shall  return,  and  shall  dis¬ 
cern  between  the  just  and  the  unjust,  and  be¬ 
tween  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serv¬ 
eth  Him  not.  For,  behold,  the  day  cometh  burn¬ 
ing  as  an  oven,  and  it  shall  burn  them  up ;  and 
all  the  aliens  and  all  that  do  wickedly  shall  be 
stubble:  and  the  day  that  shall  come  will  set 
them  on  fire,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  and  shall 
leave  neither  root  nor  branch.  And  unto  you  that 
fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
arise,  and  health  shall  be  in  His  wings;  and  ye 
shall  go  forth,  and  exult  as  calves  let  loose  from 
bonds.  And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked,  and 
they  shall  be  ashes  under  your  feet,  in  the  day 
in  which  I  shall  do,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty.” 2 
This  day  is  the  day  of  judgment,  of  which,  if 
God  will,  we  shall  speak  more  fully  in  its  own 
place. 

Chap.  36.  About  Esdras  and  the  books  of  the 

Maccabees 

After  these  three  prophets,  Haggai,  Zecha- 
riah,  and  Malachi,  during  the  same  period  of  the 
liberation  of  the  people  from  the  Babylonian 
servitude  Esdras  also  wrote,  who  is  historical 
rather  than  prophetical,  as  is  also  the  book 
called  Esther,  which  is  found  to  relate,  for  the 
praise  of  God,  events  not  far  from  those  times; 
unless,  perhaps,  Esdras  is  to  be  understood  as 
prophesying  of  Christ  in  that  passage  where,  on 
a  question  having  arisen  among  certain  young 
men  as  to  what  is  the  strongest  thing,  when  one 
had  said  kings,  another  wine,  the  third  women, 
who  for  the  most  part  rule  kings,  yet  that  same 
third  youth  demonstrated  that  the  truth  is  vic¬ 
torious  over  all.3  For  by  consulting  the  Gospel 
we  learn  that  Christ  is  the  Truth.  From  this 
time,  when  the  temple  was  rebuilt,  down  to  the 
time  of'Aristobulus,  the  Jews  had  not  kings  but 
princes;  and  the  reckoning  of  their  dates  is 
found,  not  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  which  are 
called  canonical,  but  in  others,  among  which  are 
also  the  books  of  the  Maccabees.  These  are  held 
as  canonical,  not  by  the  Jews,  but  by  the 
Church,  on  account  of  the  extreme  and  wonder¬ 
ful  sufferings  of  certain  martyrs,  who,  before 
Christ  had  come  in  the  flesh,  contended  for  the 
law  of  God  even  unto  death  and  endured  most 
grievous  and  horrible  evils. 

*Mal.  3.  13-16.  2Mal.  3.  17;  4.  3.  3I  Esdras,  3,  4. 


Chap.  37.  That  prophetic  records  are  found 
which  are  more  ancient  than  any  fountain  of 
the  Gentile  philosophy 

In  the  time  of  our  prophets,  then,  whose  writ¬ 
ings  had  already  come  to  the  knowledge  of  al¬ 
most  all  nations,  the  philosophers  of  the  nations 
had  not  yet  arisen — at  least,  not  those  who 
were  called  by  that  name,  which  originated  with 
Pythagoras  the  Samian,  who  was  becoming  fa¬ 
mous  at  the  time  when  the  Jewish  captivity  end¬ 
ed.  Much  more,  then,  are  the  other  philosophers 
found  to  be  later  than  the  prophets.  For  even 
Socrates  the  Athenian,  the  master  of  all  who 
were  then  most  famous,  holding  the  pre-emi¬ 
nence  in  that  department  that  is  called  the  moral 
or  active,  is  found  after  Esdras  in  the  chronicles. 
Plato  also  was  born  not  much  later,  who  far  out¬ 
went  the  other  disciples  of  Socrates.  If,  besides 
these,  we  take  their  predecessors,  who  had  not 
yet  been  styled  philosophers,  to  wit,  the  seven 
sages,  and  then  the  physicists,  who  succeeded 
Thales,  and  imitated  his  studious  search  into  the 
nature  of  things,  namely,  Anaximander,  Anaxi¬ 
menes,  and  Anaxagoras,  and  some  others,  before 
Pythagoras  first  professed  himself  a  philoso¬ 
pher,  even  these  did  not  precede  the  whole  of 
our  prophets  in  antiquity  of  time,  since  Thales, 
whom  the  others  succeeded,  is  said  to  have 
flourished  in  the  reign  of  Romulus,  when  the 
stream  of  prophecy  burst  forth  from  the  foun¬ 
tains  of  Israel  in  those  writings  which  spread 
over  the  whole  world.  So  that  only  those  theo¬ 
logical  poets,  Orpheus,  Linus,  and  Musseus,  and, 
it  may  be,  some  others  among  the  Greeks,  are 
found  earlier  in  date  than  the  Hebrew  prophets 
whose  writings  we  hold  as  authoritative.  But  not 
even  these  preceded  in  time  our  true  divine, 
Moses,  who  authentically  preached  the  one  true 
God,  and  whose  writings  are  first  in  the  authori¬ 
tative  canon ;  and  therefore  the  Greeks,  in  whose 
tongue  the  literature  of  this  age  chiefly  appears, 
have  no  ground  for  boasting  of  their  wisdom,  in 
which  our  religion,  wherein  is  true  wisdom,  is 
not  evidently  more  ancient  at  least,  if  not  su¬ 
perior.  Yet  it  must  be  confessed  that  before 
Moses  there  had  already  been,  not  indeed  among 
the  Greeks,  but  among  barbarous  nations,  as  in 
Egypt,  some  doctrine  which  might  be  called 
their  wisdom,  else  it  would  not  have  been  writ¬ 
ten  in  the  holy  books  that  Moses  was  learned  in 
all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,4  as  he  was, 
when,  being  born  there,  and  adopted  and  nursed 
by  Pharaoh’s  daughter,  he  was  also  liberally  ed¬ 
ucated.  Yet  not  even  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyp- 
4Acts,  7.  22. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tians  could  be  antecedent  in  time  to  the  wisdom 
of  our  prophets,  because  even  Abraham  was  a 
prophet.  And  what  wisdom  could  there  be  in 
Egypt  before  Isis  had  given  them  letters,  whom 
they  thought  fit  to  worship  as  a  goddess  after 
her  death?  Now  Isis  is  declared  to  have  been  the 
daughter  of  Inachus,  who  first  began  to  reign  in 
Argos  when  the  grandsons  of  Abraham  are 
known  to  have  been  already  born. 

Chap.  38.  That  the  ecclesiastical  canon  has  not 
admitted  certain  writings  on  account  of  their 
too  great  antiquity ,  lest  through  them  false 
things  should  he  inserted  instead  of  true 
If  I  may  recall  far  more  ancient  times,  our 
patriarch  Noah  was  certainly  even  before  that 
great  deluge,  and  I  might  not  undeservedly  call 
him  a  prophet,  forasmuch  as  the  ark  he  made, 
in  which  he  escaped  with  his  family,  was  itself  a 
prophecy  of  our  times.1  What  of  Enoch,  the  sev¬ 
enth  from  Adam?  Does  not  the  canonical  epistle 
of  the  Apostle  Jude  declare  that  he  prophesied?2 
But  the  writings  of  these  men  could  not  be  held 
as  authoritative  either  among  the  Jews  or  us*,  on 
account  of  their  too  great  antiquity,  which  made 
it  seem  needful  to  regard  them  with  suspicion, 
lest  false  things  should  be  set  forth  instead  of 
true.  For  some  writings  which  are  said  to  be 
theirs  are  quoted  by  those  who,  according  to 
their  own  humour,  loosely  believe  what  they 
please.  But  the  purity  of  the  canon  has  not  ad¬ 
mitted  these  writings,  not  because  the  authority 
of  these  men  who  pleased  God  is  rejected,  but 
because  they  are  not  believed  to  be  theirs.  Nor 
ought  it  to  appear  strange  if  writings  for  which 
so  great  antiquity  is  claimed  are  held  in  suspi¬ 
cion,  seeing  that  in  the  very  history  of  the  kings 
of  Judah  and  Israel  containing  their  acts,  which 
we  believe  to  belong  to  the  canonical  Scripture, 
very  many  things  are  mentioned  which  are  not 
explained  there,  but  are  said  to  be  found  in  other 
books  which  the  prophets  wrote,  the  very  names 
of  these  prophets  being  sometimes  given,  and 
yet  they  are  not  found  in  the  canon  which  the 
people  of  God  received.  Now  I  confess  the  rea¬ 
son  of  this  is  hidden  from  me;  only  I  think  that 
even  those  men.  to  whom  certainly  the  Holy 
Spirit  revealed  those  things  which  ought  to  be 
held  as  of  religious  authority,  might  write  some 
things  as  men  by  historical  diligence,  and  others 
as  prophets  by  divine  inspiration;  and  these 
things  were  so  distinct,  that  it  was  judged  that 
the  former  should  be  ascribed  to  themselves, 
but  the  latter  to  God  speaking  through  them; 
and  so  the  one  pertained  to  the  abundance  of 
^eb.  11.  7;  I  Pet.  3.  20,  21.  2Jude,  14. 


knowledge,  the  other  to  the  authority  of  religion. 
In  that  authority  the  canon  is  guarded.  So  that, 
if  any  writings  outside  of  it  are  now  brought  for¬ 
ward  under  the  name  of  the  ancient  prophets, 
they  cannot  serve  even  as  an  aid  to  knowledge, 
because  it  is  uncertain  whether  they  are  genu¬ 
ine  ;  and  on  this  account  they  are  not  trusted,  es¬ 
pecially  those  of  them  in  which  some  things  are 
found  that  are  even  contrary  to  the  truth  of  the 
canonical  books,  so  that  it  is  quite  apparent  they 
do  not  belong  to  them. 

Chap.  39.  About  the  Hebrew  written  characters 
which  that  language  always  possessed 
Now  we  must  not  believe  that  Heber,  from 
whose  name  the  word  Hebrew  is  derived,  pre¬ 
served  and  transmitted  the  Hebrew  language  to 
Abraham  only  as  a  spoken  language,  and  that 
the  Hebrew  letters  began  with  the  giving  of  the 
law  through  Moses;  but  rather  that  this  lan¬ 
guage,  along  with  its  letters,  was  preserved  by 
that  succession  of  fathers.  Moses,  indeed,  ap¬ 
pointed  some  among  the  people  of  God  to 
teach  letters,  before  they  could  know  any  let¬ 
ters  of  the  divine  law.  The  Scripture  calls  these 
men  7  pa jz/zar  eia  ay  coy  els ,  who  may  be  called 
in  Latin  inductores  or  introductores  of  letters, 
because  they,  as  it  were,  introduce  them  into  the 
hearts  of  the  learners,  or  rather  lead  those  whom 
they  teach  into  them.  Therefore  no  nation  could 
vaunt  itself  over  our  patriarchs  and  prophets  by 
any  wicked  vanity  for  the  antiquity  of  its  wis¬ 
dom;  since  not  even  Egypt,  which  is  wont  false¬ 
ly  and  vainly  to  glory  in  the  antiquity  of  her 
doctrines,  is  found  to  have  preceded  in  time  the 
wisdom  of  our  patriarchs  in  her  own  wisdom, 
such  as  it  is.  Neither  will  any  one  dare  to  say 
that  they  were  most  skillful  in  wonderful  sci¬ 
ences  before  they  knew  letters,  that  is,  before 
Isis  came  and  taught  them  there.  Besides,  what, 
for  the  most  part,  was  that  memorable  doctrine 
of  theirs  which  was  called  wisdom  but  astrono¬ 
my,  and  it  may  be  some  other  sciences  of  that 
kind,  which  usually  have  more  power  to  exer¬ 
cise  men’s  wit  than  to  enlighten  their  minds  with 
true  wisdom?  As  regards  philosophy,  which  pro¬ 
fesses  to  teach  men  something  which  shall  make 
them  happy,  studies  of  that  kind  flourished  in 
those  lands  about  the  times  of  Mercury,  whom 
they  called  Trismegistus,  long  before  the  sages 
and  philosophers  of  Greece,  but  yet  after  Abra¬ 
ham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Joseph,  and  even  after 
Moses  himself.  At  that  time,  indeed,  when 
Moses  was  born,  Atlas  is  found  to  have  lived, 
that  great  astronomer,  the  brother  of  Prome¬ 
theus,  and  maternal  grandson  of  the  elder  Mer- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  38-41  495 


cury,  of  whom  that  Mercury  Trismegistus  was 
the  grandson. 

Chap.  40.  About  the  most  mendacious  vanity  of 
the  Egyptians ,  in  which  they  ascribe  to  their  . 
science  an  antiquity  of  a  hundred  thousand 
years 

In  vain,  then,  do  some  babble  with  most  emp¬ 
ty  presumption,  saying  that  Egypt  has  under¬ 
stood  the  reckoning  of  the  stars  for  more  than  a 
hundred  thousand  years.  For  in  what  books  have 
they  collected  that  number  who  learned  letters 
from  Isis  their  mistress,  not  much  more  than 
two  thousand  years  ago?  Varro,  who  has  de¬ 
clared  this,  is  no  small  authority  in  history,  and 
it  does  not  disagree  with  the  truth  of  the  divine 
books.  For  as  it  is  not  yet  six  thousand  years 
since  the  first  man,  who  is  called  Adam,  are  not 
those  to  be  ridiculed  rather  than  refuted  who  try 
to  persuade  us  of  anything  regarding  a  space  of 
time  so  different  from,  and  contrary  to,  the  as¬ 
certained  truth?  For  what  historian  of  the  past 
should  we  credit  more  than  him  who  has  also 
predicted  things  to  come  which  we  now  see  ful¬ 
filled?  And  the  very  disagreement  of  the  his¬ 
torians  among  themselves  furnishes  a  good  rea¬ 
son  why  we  ought  rather  to  believe  him  who 
does  not  contradict  the  divine  history  which  we 
hold.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  citizens  of  the 
impious  city,  scattered  everywhere  through  the 
earth,  when  they  read  the  most  learned  writers, 
none  of  whom  seems  to  be  of  contemptible  au¬ 
thority,  and  find  them  disagreeing  among  them¬ 
selves  about  affairs  most  remote  from  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  our  age,  cannot  find  out  whom  they  ought 
to  trust.  But  we,  being  sustained  by  divine  au¬ 
thority  in  the  history  of  our  religion,  have  no 
doubt  that  whatever  is  opposed  to  it  is  most 
false,  whatever  may  be  the  case  regarding  other 
things  in  secular  books,  which,  whether  true  or 
false,  yield  nothing  of  moment  to  our  living 
rightly  and  happily. 

Chap.  41.  About  the  discord  of  philosophic 
opinion,  and  the  concord  of  the  Scriptures 
that  are  held  as  canonical  by  the  Church 
But  let  us  omit  further  examination  of  his¬ 
tory,  and  return  to  the  philosophers  from  whom 
we  digressed  to  these  things.  They  seem  to  have 
laboured  in  their  studies  for  no  other  end  than 
to  find  out  how  to  live  in  a  way  proper  for  laying 
hold  of  blessedness.  Why,  then,  have  the  disci¬ 
ples  dissented  from  their  masters,  and  the  fel¬ 
low-disciples  from  one  another,  except  because 
as  men  they  have  sought  after  these  things  by 
human  sense  and  human  reasonings?  Now,  al¬ 


though  there  might  be  among  them  a  desire  of 
glory,  so  that  each  wished  to  be  thought  wiser 
and  more  acute  than  another  and  in  no  way  ad¬ 
dicted  to  the  judgment  of  others,  but  the  in¬ 
ventor  of  his  own  dogma  and  opinion,  yet  I  may 
grant  that  there  were  some,  or  even  very  many 
of  them,  whose  love  of  truth  severed  them  from 
their  teachers  or  fellow-disciples,  that  they 
might  strive  for  what  they  thought  was  the 
truth,  whether  it  was  so  or  not.  But  what  can  hu¬ 
man  misery  do,  or  how  or  where  can  it  reach 
forth,  so  as  to  attain  blessedness,  if  divine  au¬ 
thority  does  not  lead  it?  Finally,  let  our  authors, 
among  whom  the  canon  of  the  sacred  books  is 
fixed  and  bounded,  be  far  from  disagreeing  in 
any  respect.  It  is  not  without  good  reason, 
then,  that  not  merely  a  few  people  prating  in 
the  schools  and  gymnasia  in  captious  disputa¬ 
tions,  but  so  many  and  great  people,  both 
learned  and  unlearned,  in  countries  and  cities, 
have  believed  that  God  spoke  to  them  or  by 
them,  i.e.,  the  canonical  writers,  when  they 
wrote  these  books.  There  ought,  indeed,  to  be 
but  few  of  them,  lest  on  account  of  their  mul¬ 
titude  what  ought  to  be  religiously  esteemed 
should  grow  cheap;  and  yet  not  so  few  that 
their  agreement  should  not  be  wonderful.  For 
among  the  multitude  of  philosophers,  who  in 
their  works  have  left  behind  them  the  monu¬ 
ments  of  their  dogmas,  no  one  will  easily  find 
any  who  agree  in  all  their  opinions.  But  to  show 
this  is  too  long  a  task  for  this  work. 

But  what  author  of  any  sect  is  so  approved 
in  this  demon-worshipping  city,  that  the  rest 
who  have  differed  from  or  opposed  him  in  opin¬ 
ion  have  been  disapproved?  The  Epicureans  as¬ 
serted  that  human  affairs  were  not  under  the 
providence  of  the  gods;  and  the  Stoics,  holding 
the  opposite  opinion,  agreed  that  they  were 
ruled  and  defended  by  favourable  and  tutelary 
gods.  Yet  were  not  both  sects  famous  among  the 
Athenians?  I  wonder,  then,  why  Anaxagoras 
was  accused  of  a  crime  for  saying  that  the  sun 
was  a  burning  stone,  and  denying  that  it  was  a 
god  at  all ;  while  in  the  same  city  Epicurus  flour¬ 
ished  gloriously  and  lived  securely,  although  he 
not  only  did  not  believe  that  the  sun  or  any  star 
was  a  god,  but  contended  that  neither  Jupiter 
nor  any  of  the  gods  dwelt  in  the  world  at  all,  so 
that  the  prayers  and  supplications  of  men  might 
reach  them!  Were  not  both  Aristippus  and  An- 
tisthenes  there,  two  noble  philosophers  and  both 
Socratic?  yet  they  placed  the  chief  end  of  life 
within  bounds  so  diverse  and  contradictory  that 
the  first  made  the  delight  of  the  body  the  chief 
good,  while  the  other  asserted  that  man  was 


496  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


made  happy  mainly  by  the  virtue  of  the  mind. 
The  one  also  said  that  the  wise  man  should  flee 
from  the  republic;  the  other,  that  he  should  ad¬ 
minister  its  affairs.  Yet  did  not  each  gather  dis¬ 
ciples  to  follow  his  own  sect?  Indeed,  in  the  con¬ 
spicuous  and  well-known  porch,  in  gymnasia,  in 
gardens,  in  places  public  and  private,  they  open¬ 
ly  strove  in  bands  each  for  his  own  opinion, 
some  asserting  there  was  one  world,  others  in¬ 
numerable  worlds;  some  that  this  world  had  a 
beginning,  others  that  it  had  not;  some  that  it 
would  perish,  others  that  it  would  exist  always; 
some  that  it  was  governed  by  the  divine  mind, 
others  by  chance  and  accident;  some  that  souls 
are  immortal,  others  that  they  are  mortal — and 
of  those  who  asserted  their  immortality,  some 
said  they  transmigrated  through  beasts,  others 
that  it  was  by  no  means  so;  while  of  those  who 
asserted  their  mortality,  some  said  they  perished 
immediately  after  the  body,  others  that  they 
survived  either  a  little  while  or  a  longer  time, 
but  not  always;  some  fixing  supreme  good  in 
the  body,  some  in  the  mind,  some  in  both;  oth¬ 
ers  adding  to  the  mind  and  body  external  gopd 
things;  some  thinking  that  the  bodily  senses 
ought  to  be  trusted  always,  some  not  always, 
others  never.  Now  what  people,  senate,  power, 
or  public  dignity  of  the  impious  city  has  ever 
taken  care  to  judge  between  all  these  and  other 
well-nigh  innumerable  dissensions  of  the  philos¬ 
ophers,  approving  and  accepting  some,  and  dis¬ 
approving  and  rejecting  others?  Has  it  not  held 
in  its  bosom  at  random,  without  any  judgment, 
and  confusedly,  so  many  controversies  of  men  at 
variance,  not  about  fields,  houses,  or  anything 
of  a  pecuniary  nature,  but  about  those  things 
which  make  life  either  miserable  or  happy? 
Even  if  some  true  things  were  said  in  it,  yet 
falsehoods  were  uttered  with  the  same  licence; 
so  that  such  a  city  has  not  amiss  received  the 
title  of  the  mystic  Babylon.  For  Babylon  means 
confusion,  as  we  remember  we  have  already  ex¬ 
plained.  Nor  does  it  matter  to  the  devil,  its  king, 
how  they  wrangle  among  themselves  in  contra¬ 
dictory  errors,  since  all  alike  deservedly  belong 
to  him  on  account  of  their  great  and  varied  im¬ 
piety. 

But  that  nation,  that  people,  that  city,  that 
republic,  these  Israelites,  to  whom  the  oracles 
of  God  were  entrusted,  by  no  means  confound¬ 
ed  with  similar  licence  false  prophets  with  the 
true  prophets;  but,  agreeing  together,  and  dif¬ 
fering  in  nothing,  acknowledged  and  upheld  the 
authentic  authors  of  their  sacred  books.  These 
were  their  philosophers,  these  were  their  sages, 


divines,  prophets,  and  teachers  of  probity  and 
piety.  Whoever  was  wise  and  lived  according  to 
them  was  wise  and  lived  not  according  to  men, 
but  according  to  God  Who  hath  spoken  by  them. 
If  sacrilege  is  forbidden  there,  God  hath  forbid¬ 
den  it.  If  it  is  said,  “Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
mother,”  1  God  hath  commanded  it.  If  it  is  said, 
“Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,  Thou  shalt 
not  kill,  Thou  shalt  not  steal,” 2  and  other  sim¬ 
ilar  commandments,  not  human  lips  but  the  di¬ 
vine  oracles  have  enounced  them.  Whatever 
truth  certain  philosophers,  amid  their  false  opin¬ 
ions,  were  able  to  see,  and  strove  by  laborious 
discussions  to  persuade  men  of — such  as  that 
God  had  made  this  world,  and  Himself  most 
providently  governs  it,  or  of  the  nobility  of  the 
virtues,  of  the  love  of  country,  of  fidelity  in 
friendship,  of  good  works  and  everything  per¬ 
taining  to  virtuous  manners,  although  they  knew 
not  to  what  end  and  what  rule  all  these  things 
were  to  be  referred — all  these,  by  words  pro¬ 
phetic,  that  is,  divine,  although  spoken  by  men. 
were  commended  to  the  people  in  that  city,  and 
not  inculcated  by  contention  in  arguments,  so 
that  he  who  should  know  them  might  be  afraid 
of  contemning,  not  the  wit  of  men,  but  the  ora¬ 
cle  of  God. 

Chap.  42 .  By  what  dispensation  of  God’s  provi¬ 
dence  the  Sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testa¬ 
ment  were  translated  out  of  Hebrew  into 
Greek ,  that  they  might  be  made  known  to  all 
the  nations 

One  of  the  Ptolemies,  kings  of  Egypt,  desired 
to  know  and  have  these  sacred  books.  For  after 
Alexander  of  Macedon,  who  is  also  styled  the 
Great,  had  by  his  most  wonderful,  but  by  no 
means  enduring  power,  subdued  the  whole  of 
Asia,  yea,  almost  the  whole  world,  partly  by 
force  of  arms,  partly  by  terror,  and,  among  oth¬ 
er  kingdoms  of  the  East,  had  entered  and  ob¬ 
tained  Judea  also,  on  his  death  his  generals  did 
not  peaceably  divide  that  most  ample  kingdom 
among  them  for  a  possession,  but  rather  dissi¬ 
pated  it,  wasting  all  things  by  wars.  Then  Egypt 
began  to  have  the  Ptolemies  as  her  kings.  The 
first  of  them,  the  son  of  Lagus,  carried  many 
captive  out  of  Judea  into  Egypt.  But  another 
Ptolemy,  called  Philadelphus,  who  succeeded 
him,  permitted  all  whom  he  had  brought  under 
the  yoke  to  return  free;  and,  more  than  that, 
sent  kingly  gifts  to  the  temple  of  God,  and 
begged  Eleazar,  who  was  the  high  priest,  to  give 

*Ex.  20.  12. 

2Ex.  20.  13-15,  the  order  as  in  Mark,  10.  19. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  42-43  497 


him  the  Scriptures,  which  he  had  heard  by  re¬ 
port  were  truly  divine,  and  therefore  greatly  de¬ 
sired  to  have  in  that  most  noble  library  he  had 
made.  When  the  high  priest  had  sent  them  to 
him  in  Hebrew,  he  afterwards  demanded  inter¬ 
preters  of  him,  and  there  were  given  him  seventy- 
two,  out  of  each  of  the  twelve  tribes  six  men, 
most  learned  in  both  languages,  to  wit,  the  He¬ 
brew  and  Greek ;  and  their  translation  is  now  by 
custom  called  the  Septuagint.  It  is  reported,  in¬ 
deed.  that  there  was  an  agreement  in  their  words 
so  wonderful,  stupendous,  and  plainly  divine, 
that  when  they  had  sat  at  this  work,  each  one 
apart  (for  so  it  pleased  Ptolemy  to  test  their  fi¬ 
delity),  they  differed  from  each  other  in  no 
word  which  had  the  same  meaning  and  force,  or, 
in  the  order  of  the  words ;  but,  as  if  the  transla¬ 
tors  had  been  one,  so  what  all  had  translated 
was  one,  because  in  very  deed  the  one  Spirit  had 
been  in  them  all.  And  they  received  so  wonder¬ 
ful  a  gift  of  God,  in  order  that  the  authority  of 
these  Scriptures  might  be  commended  not  as 
human  but  divine,  as  indeed  it  was,  for  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  the  nations  who  should  at  some  time  be¬ 
lieve,  as  we  now  see  them  doing. 

Chap.  43.  Of  the  authority  of  the  Septuagint 
translation,  which ,  saving  the  honour  of  the 
Hebrew  original ,  is  to  be  preferred  to  all 
translations 

For  while  there  were  other  interpreters  who 
translated  these  sacred  oracles  out  of  the  He¬ 
brew  tongue  into  Greek,  as  Aquila,  Symmachus, 
and  Theodotion,  and  also  that  translation  which, 
as  the  name  of  the  author  is  unknown,  is  quoted 
as  the  fifth  edition,  yet  the  Church  has  received 
this  Septuagint  translation  just  as  if  it  were  the 
only  one;  and  it  has  been  used  by  the  Greek 
Christian  people,  most  of  whom  are  not  aware 
that  there  is  any  other.  From  this  translation 
there  has  also  been  made  a  translation  in  the 
Latin  tongue,  which  the  Latin  churches  use.  Our 
times,  however,  have  enjoyed  the  advantage  of 
the  presbyter  Jerome,  a  man  most  learned,  and 
skilled  in  all  three  languages,  who  translated 
these  same  Scriptures  into  the  Latin  speech,  not 
from  the  Greek,  but  from  the  Hebrew.  But  al¬ 
though  the  Jews  acknowledge  this  very  learned 
labour  of  his  to  be  faithful,  while  they  contend 
that  the  Septuagint  translators  have  erred  in 
many  places,  still  the  churches  of  Christ  judge 
that  no  one  should  be  preferred  to  the  authority 
of  so  many  men,  chosen  for  this  very  great  work 
by  Eleazar,  who  was  then  high  priest ;  for  even  if 
there  had  not  appeared  in  them  one  spirit,  with¬ 


out  doubt  divine,  and  the  seventy  learned  men 
had,  after  the  manner  of  men,  compared  to¬ 
gether  the  words  of  their  translation,  that  what 
pleased  them  all  might  stand,  no  single  transla¬ 
tor  ought  to  be  preferred  to  them;  but  since  so 
great  a  sign  of  divinity  has  appeared  in  them, 
certainly,  if  any  other  translator,  of  their  Scrip¬ 
tures  from  the  Hebrew  into  any  other  tongue  is 
faithful,  in  that  case  he  agrees  with  these  seven¬ 
ty  translators,  and  if  he  is  not  found  to  agree 
with  them,  then  we  ought  to  believe  that  the 
prophetic  gift  is  with  them.  For  the  same  Spirit 
who  was  in  the  prophets  when  they  spoke  these 
things  was  also  in  the  seventy  men  when  they 
translated  them,  so  that  assuredly  they  could 
also  say  something  else,  just  as  if  the  prophet 
himself  had  said  both,  because  it  would  be  the 
same  Spirit  who  said  both;  and  could  say  the 
same  thing  differently,  so  that,  although  the 
words  were  not  the  same,  yet  the  same  meaning 
should  shine  forth  to  those  of  good  understand¬ 
ing;  and  could  omit  or  add  something,  so  that 
even  by  this  it  might  be  shown  that  there  was  in 
that  work  not  human  bondage,  which  the  trans¬ 
lator  owed  to  the  words,  but  rather  divine  pow¬ 
er,  which  filled  and  ruled  the  mind  of  the  trans¬ 
lator.  Some,  however,  have  thought  that  the 
Greek  copies  of  the  Septuagint  version  should 
be  emended  from  the  Hebrew  copies;  yet  they 
did  not  dare  to  take  away  what  the  Hebrew 
lacked  and  the  Septuagint  had,  but  only  added 
what  was  found  in  the  Hebrew  copies  and  was 
lacking  in  the  Septuagint,  and  noted  them  by 
placing  at  the  beginning  of  the  verses  certain 
marks  in  the  form  of  stars  which  they  call  as¬ 
terisks.  And  those  things  which  the  Hebrew  cop¬ 
ies  have  not,  but  the  Septuagint  have,  they  have 
in  like  manner  marked  at  the  beginning  of  the 
verses  by  horizontal  spitshaped  marks  like  those 
by  which  we  denote  ounces;  and  many  copies 
having  these  marks  are  circulated  even  in  Latin.1 
But  we  cannot,  without  inspecting  both  kinds  of 
copies,  find  out  those  things  which  are  neither 
omitted  nor  added,  but  expressed  differently, 
whether  they  yield  another  meaning  not  in  it¬ 
self  unsuitable,  or  can  be  shown  to  explain  the 
same  meaning  in  another  way.  If,  then,  as  it  be¬ 
hoves  us,  we  behold  nothing  else  in  these  Scrip¬ 
tures  than  what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  spoken 
through  men,  if  anything  is  in  the  Hebrew  cop¬ 
ies  and  is  not  in  the  version  of  the  Seventy,  the 
Spirit  of  God  did  not  choose  to  say  it  through 
them,  but  only  through  the  prophets.  But  what¬ 
ever  is  in  the  Septuagint  and  not  in  the  Hebrew 
xVariant  reading,  “both  in  Greek  and  Latin.” 


4o8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


copies,  the  same  Spirit  chose  rather  to  say 
through  the  latter,  thus  showing  that  both  were 
prophets.  For  in  that  manner  He  spoke  as  He 
chose,  some  things  through  Isaiah,  some  through 
Jeremiah,  some  through  several  prophets,  or 
else  the  same  thing  through  this  prophet  and 
through  that.  Further,  whatever  is  found  in  both 
editions,  that  one  and  the  same  Spirit  willed  to 
say  through  both,  but  so  as  that  the  former  pre¬ 
ceded  in  prophesying,  and  the  latter  followed  in 
prophetically  interpreting  them;  because,  as  the 
one  Spirit  of  peace  was  in  the  former  when  they 
spoke  true  and  concordant  words,  so  the  self¬ 
same  one  Spirit  hath  appeared  in  the  latter, 
when,  without  mutual  conference,  they  yet  in¬ 
terpreted  all  things  as  if  with  one  mouth. 

Chap.  44.  How  the  threat  of  the  destruction  of 
the  Ninevites  is  to  be  understood,  which  in 
the  Hebrew  extends  to  forty  days ,  while  in 
the  Septuagint  it  is  contracted  to  three 
But  some  one  may  say,  “How  shall  I  know 
whether  the  prophet  Jonah  said  to  the  Nine¬ 
vites,  ‘Yet  three  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  over¬ 
thrown,’  or  forty  days?”  1  For  who  does  not  see 
that  the  prophet  could  not  say  both,  when  he 
was  sent  to  terrify  the  city  by  the  threat  of  im¬ 
minent  ruin?  For  if  its  destruction  was  to  take 
place  on  the  third  day.  it  certainly  could  not  be 
on  the  fortieth;  but  if  on  the  fortieth,  then  cer¬ 
tainly  not  on  the  third.  If,  then,  I  am  asked 
which  of  these  Jonah  may  have  said,  I  rather 
think  what  is  read  in  the  Hebrew,  “Yet  forty 
days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown.”  Yet  the 
Seventy,  interpreting  long  afterward,  could  say 
what  was  different  and  yet  pertinent  to  the  mat¬ 
ter,  and  agree  in  the  self-same  meaning,  al¬ 
though  under  a  different  signification.  And  this 
may  admonish  the  reader  not  to  despise  the  au¬ 
thority  of  either,  but  to  raise  himself  above  the 
history  and  search  for  those  things  which  the 
history  itself  was  written  to  set  forth.  These 
things,  indeed,  took  place  in  the  city  of  Nineveh, 
but  they  also  signified  something  else  too  great 
to  apply  to  that  city;  just  as,  when  it  happened 
that  the  prophet  himself  was  three  days  in  the 
whale’s  belly,  it  signified  besides,  that  He  Who 
is  Lord  of  all  the  prophets  should  be  three  days 
in  the  depths  of  hell.  Wherefore,  if  that  city  is 
rightly  held  as  prophetically  representing  the 
Church  of  the  Gentiles,  to  wit,  as  brought  down 
by  penitence,  so  as  no  longer  to  be  what  it  had 
been,  since  this  was  done  by  Christ  in  the 
Church  of  the  Gentiles,  which  Nineveh  repre- 
Uon.  3-  4- 


sented.  Christ  Himself  was  signified  both  by  the 
forty  and  by  the  three  days:  by  the  forty,  be¬ 
cause  He  spent  that  number  of  days  with  His 
disciples  after  the  resurrection,  and  then  as¬ 
cended  into  heaven,  but  by  the  three  days, 
because  He  rose  on  the  third  day.  So  that,  if 
the  reader  desires  nothing  else  than  to  adhere 
to  the  history  of  events,  he  may  be  aroused  from 
his  sleep  by  the  Septuagint  interpreters,  as  well 
as  the  prophets,  to  search  into  the  depth  of  the 
prophecy,  as  if  they  had  said,  “In  the  forty  days 
seek  Him  in  whom  thou  mayest  also  find  the 
three  days — the  one  thou  wilt  find  in  His  ascen¬ 
sion,  the  other  in  His  resurrection.”  Because 
that  which  could  be  most  suitably  signified  by 
both  numbers,  of  which  one  is  used  by  Jonah  the 
prophet,  the  other  by  the  prophecy  of  the  Sep¬ 
tuagint  version,  the  one  and  self-same  Spirit 
hath  spoken.  I  dread  prolixity,  so  that  I  must 
not  demonstrate  this  by  many  instances  in  which 
the  seventy  interpreters  may  be  thought  to  dif¬ 
fer  from  the  Hebrew,  and  yet,  when  well  under¬ 
stood.  are  found  to  agree.  For  which  reason  I 
also,  according  to  my  capacity,  following  the 
footsteps  of  the  apostles,  who  themselves  have 
quoted  prophetic  testimonies  from  both,  that  is, 
from  the  Hebrew  and  the  Septuagint,  have 
thought  that  both  should  be  used  as  authorita¬ 
tive,  since  both  are  one,  and  divine.  But  let  us 
now  follow  out  as  we  can  what  remains. 

Chap.  45.  That  the  Jews  ceased  to  have  proph¬ 
ets  after  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  and 
from  that  time  until  the  birth  of  Christ  were 
afflicted  with  continual  adversity,  to  prove 
that  the  building  of  another  temple  had  been 
promised  by  prophetic  voices 
The  Jewish  nation  no  doubt  became  worse 
after  it  ceased  to  have  prophets,  just  at  the  very 
time  when,  on  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  after 
the  captivity  in  Babylon,  it  hoped  to  become 
better.  For  so,  indeed,  did  that  carnal  people  un¬ 
derstand  what  was  foretold  by  Haggai  the 
prophet,  saying,  “The  glory  of  this  latter  house 
shall  be  greater  than  that  of  the  former.”  2  Now, 
that  this  is  said  of  the  New  Testament,  he  showed 
a  little  above,  where  he  says,  evidently  promis¬ 
ing  Christ,  “And  I  will  move  all  nations,  and  the 
desired  One  shall  come  to  all  nations.”  3  In  this 
passage  the  Septuagint  translators,  giving  anoth¬ 
er  sense  more  suitable  to  the  body  than  the 
Head,  that  is,  to  the  Church  than  to  Christ, 
have  said  by  prophetic  authority,  “The  things 
shall  come  that  are  chosen  of  the  Lord  from  all 
2Hag.  2.  9.  3Hag.  2.  7. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  44~45  499 


nations,”  that  is,  men,  of  whom  Jesus  saith  in 
the  Gospel,  “Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chos¬ 
en.”  1  For  by  such  chosen  ones  of  the  nations 
there  is  built,  through  the  New  Testament,  with 
living  stones,  a  house  of  God  far  more  glorious 
than  that  temple  was  which  was  constructed  by 
king  Solomon,  and  rebuilt  after  the  captivity. 
For  this  reason,  then,  that  nation  had  no  proph¬ 
ets  from  that  time,  but  was  afflicted  with  many 
plagues  by  kings  of  alien  race,  and  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans  themselves,  lest  they  should  fancy  that 
this  prophecy  of  Haggai  was  fulfilled  by  that  re¬ 
building  of  the  temple. 

For  not  long  after,  on  the  arrival  of  Alexan¬ 
der,  it  was  subdued,  when,  although  there  was 
no  pillaging,  because  they  dared  not  resist  him, 
and  thus,  being  very  easily  subdued,  received 
him  peaceably,  yet  the  glory  of  that  house  was 
not  so  great  as  it  was  when  under  the  free  power 
of  their  own  kings.  Alexander,  indeed,  offered  up 
sacrifices  in  the  temple  of  God,  not  as  a  convert 
to  His  worship  in  true  piety,  but  thinking,  with 
impious  folly,  that  He  was  to  be  worshipped 
along  with  false  gods.  Then  Ptolemy  son  of  La- 
gus,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned,  after  Al¬ 
exander’s  death  carried  them  captive  into 
Egypt.  His  successor,  Ptolemy  Philadelphus, 
most  benevolently  dismissed  them ;  and  by  him 
it  was  brought  about,  as  I  have  narrated  a  little 
before,  that  we  should  have  the  Septuagint  ver¬ 
sion  of  the  Scriptures.  Then  they  were  crushed 
by  the  wars  which  are  explained  in  the  books  of 
the  Maccabees.  Afterward  they  were  taken  cap¬ 
tive  by  Ptolemy  king  of  Alexandria,  who  was 
called  Epiphanes.  Then  Antiochus  king  of  Syria 
compelled  them  by  many  and  most  grievous 
evils  to  worship  idols,  and  filled  the  temple  it¬ 
self  with  the  sacrilegious  superstitions  of  the 
Gentiles.  Yet  their  most  vigorous  leader  Judas, 
who  is  also  called  Maccabaeus,  after  beating  the 
generals  of  Antiochus,  cleansed  it  from  all  that 
defilement  of  idolatry. 

But  not  long  after,  one  Alcimus,  although  an 
alien  from  the  sacerdotal  tribe,  was,  through 
ambitior>,  made  pontiff,  which  was  an  impious 
thing.  After  almost  fifty  years,  during  which 
they  never  had  peace,  although  they  prospered 
in  some  affairs,  Aristobulus  first  assumed  the  di¬ 
adem  among  them,  and  was  made  both  king  and 
pontiff.  Before  that,  indeed,  from  the  time  of 
their  return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity  and 
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  they  had  not  kings, 
but  generals  or  principes.  Although  a  king  him¬ 
self  may  be  called  a  prince,  from  his  principality 

^att.  22.  14. 


in  governing,  and  a  leader,  because  he  leads  the 
army,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  all  who  are 
princes  and  leaders  may  also  be  called  kings,  as 
that  Aristobulus  was.  He  was  succeeded  by  Al¬ 
exander,  also  both  king  and  pontiff,  who  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  reigned  over  them  cruelly.  After 
him  his  wife  Alexandra  was  queen  of  the  Jews, 
and  from  her  time  downwards  more  grievous 
evils  pursued  them;  for  this  Alexandra’s  sons, 
Aristobulus  and  Hyrcanus,  when  contending 
with  each  other  for  the  kingdom,  called  in  the 
Roman  forces  against  the  nation  of  Israel.  For 
Hyrcanus  asked  assistance  from  them  against 
his  brother.  At  that  time  Rome  had  already  sub¬ 
dued  Africa  and  Greece,  and  ruled  extensively 
in  other  parts  of  the  world  also,  and  yet,  as  if 
unable  to  bear  her  own  weight,  had,  in  a  manner, 
broken  herself  by  her  own  size.  For  indeed  she 
had  come  to  grave  domestic  seditions,  and  from 
that  to  social  wars,  and  by  and  by  to  civil  wars, 
and  had  enfeebled  and  worn  herself  out  so  much, 
that  the  changed  state  of  the  republic,  in  which 
she  should  be  governed  by  kings,  was  now  im¬ 
minent.  Pompey  then,  a  most  illustrious  prince 
of  the  Roman  people,  having  entered  Judea  with 
an  army,  took  the  city,  threw  open  the  temple, 
not  with  the  devotion  of  a  suppliant,  but  with 
the  authority  of  a  conqueror,  and  went,  not  rev¬ 
erently,  but  profanely,  into  the  holy  of  holies, 
where  it  was  lawful  for  none  but  the  pontiff  to 
enter.  Having  established  Hyrcanus  in  the  pon¬ 
tificate,  and  set  Antipater  over  the  subjugated 
nation  as  guardian  or  procurator,  as  they  were 
then  called,  he  led  Aristobulus  with  him  bound. 
From  that  time  the  Jews  also  began  to  be  Ro¬ 
man  tributaries.  Afterward  Cassius  plundered 
the  very  temple.  Then  after  a  few  years  it  was 
their  desert  to  have  Herod,  a  king  of  foreign 
birth,  in  whose  reign  Christ  was  born.  For  the 
time  had  now  come  signified  by  the  prophetic 
Spirit  through  the  mouth  of  the  patriarch  Jacob, 
when  he  says,  “There  shall  not  be  lacking  a 
prince  out  of  Judah,  nor  a  teacher  from  his  loins, 
until  He  shall  come  for  Whom  it  is  reserved ;  and 
He  is  the  expectation  of  the  nations.”  2  There 
lacked  not  therefore  a  Jewish  prince  of  the  Jews 
until  that  Herod,  who  was  the  first  king  of  a  for¬ 
eign  race  received  by  them.  Therefore  it  was 
now  the  time  when  He  should  come  for  Whom 
that  was  reserved  which  is  promised  in  the  New 
Testament,  that  He  should  be  the  expectation  of 
the  nations.  But  it  was  not  possible  that  the  na¬ 
tions  should  expect  He  would  come,  as  we  see 
they  did,  to  do  judgment  in  the  splendour  of 

2Gen.  49.  10. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


power,  unless  they  should  first  believe  in  Him 
when  He  came  to  suffer  judgment  in  the  humil¬ 
ity  of  patience. 

Chap.  46.  Of  the  birth  of  our  Saviour ,  whereby 
the  Word  was  made  Flesh;  and  of  the  disper¬ 
sion  of  the  Jews  among  all  nations,  as  had 
been  prophesied 

While  Herod,  therefore,  reigned  in  Judea,  and 
Caesar  Augustus  was  emperor  at  Rome,  the  state 
of  the  republic  being  already  changed,  and  the 
world  being  set  at  peace  by  him.  Christ  was 
born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judah,  man  manifest  out 
of  a  human  virgin,  God  hidden  out  of  God  the 
Father.  For  so  had  the  prophet  foretold:  “Be¬ 
hold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive  in  the  womb,  and 
bring  forth  a  Son,  and  they  shall  call  His  name 
Immanuel,  which,  being  interpreted,  is,  God 
with  us.”  1  He  did  many  miracles  that  He  might 
commend  God  in  Himself,  some  of  which,  even 
as  many  as  seemed  sufficient  to  proclaim  Him, 
are  contained  in  the  evangelic  Scripture.  The 
first  of  these  is  that  He  was  so  wonderfully  born, 
and  the  last  that  with  His  body  raised  up  again 
from  the  dead  He  ascended  into  heaven.  But  the 
Jews  who  slew  Him  and  would  not  believe  in 
Him,  because  it  behoved  Him  to  die  and  rise 
again,  were  yet  more  miserably  wasted  by  the 
Romans,  and  utterly  rooted  out  from  their  king¬ 
dom,  where  aliens  had  already  ruled  over  them, 
and  were  dispersed  through  the  lands  (so  that 
indeed  there  is  no  place  where  they  are  not) ,  and 
are  thus  by  their  own  Scriptures  a  testimony  to 
us  that  we  have  not  forged  the  prophecies  about 
Christ.  And  very  many  of  them,  considering 
this,  even  before  His  passion,  but  chiefly  after 
His  resurrection,  believed  on  Him,  of  Whom  it 
was  predicted,  “Though  the  number  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  the  rem¬ 
nant  shall  be  saved.”  2  But  the  rest  are  blinded, 
of  whom  it  was  predicted,  “Let  their  table  be 
made  before  them  a  trap,  and  a  retribution,  and 
a  stumbling-block.  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened 
lest  they  see,  and  bow  down  their  back  alway.”3 
Therefore,  when  they  do  not  believe  our  Scrip¬ 
tures,  their  own,  which  they  blindly  read,  are 
fulfilled  in  them,  lest  perchance  any  one  should 
say  that  the  Christians  have  forged  these  proph¬ 
ecies  about  Christ  which  are  quoted  under  the 
name  of  the  sibyl,  or  of  others,  if  such  there  be, 
who  do  not  belong  to  the  Jewish  people.  For  us. 
indeed,  those  suffice  which  are  quoted  from  the 

Bsa.  7.  14,  as  in  Matt.  1.  23. 

2Isa.  10.  22,  as  in  Rom.  9.  27,  28. 

3Ps.  69.  22,  23;  Rom.  11.  9,  10. 


books  of  our  enemies,  to  whom  we  make  our  ac¬ 
knowledgment,  on  account  of  this  testimony 
which,  in  spite  of  themselves,  they  contribute 
by  their  possession  of  these  books,  while  they 
themselves  are  dispersed  among  all  nations, 
wherever  the  Church  of  Christ  is  spread  abroad. 
For  a  prophecy  about  this  thing  was  sent  before 
in  the  Psalms,  which  they  also  read,  where  it  is 
written,  “My  God.  His  mercy  shall  prevent  me. 
My  God  hath  shown  me  concerning  mine  ene¬ 
mies,  that  Thou  shalt  not  slay  them,  lest  they 
should  at  last  forget  Thy  law:  disperse  them  in 
Thy  might.”4  Therefore  God  has  shown  the 
Church  in  her  enemies  the  Jews  the  grace  of  His 
compassion,  since,  as  saith  the  apostle,  “their 
offence  is  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles.”5  And 
therefore  He  has  not  slain  them,  that  is,  He  has 
not  let  the  knowledge  that  they  are  Jews  be  lost 
in  them,  although  they  have  been  conquered  by 
the  Romans,  lest  they  should  forget  the  law  of 
God.  and  their  testimony  should  be  of  no  avail 
in  this  matter  of  which  we  treat.  But  it  was  not 
enough  that  he  should  say,  “Slay  them  not.  lest 
they  should  at  last  forget  Thy  law,”  unless  he 
had  also  added,  “Disperse  them”;  because  if 
they  had  only  been  in  their  own  land  with  that 
testimony  of  the  Scriptures,  and  not  every¬ 
where,  certainly  the  Church  which  is  every¬ 
where  could  not  have  had  them  as  witnesses 
among  all  nations  to  the  prophecies  which  were 
sent  before  concerning  Christ. 

Chap.  47.  Whether  before  Christian  times  there 
were  any  outside  of  the  Israelite  race  who  be - 
longed  to  the  fellowship  of  the  heavenly  city 
Wherefore  if  we  read  of  any  foreigner — that 
is,  one  neither  born  of  Israel  nor  received  by 
that  people  into  the  canon  of  the  sacred  books — 
having  prophesied  something  about  Christ,  if  it 
has  come  or  shall  come  to  our  knowledge,  we  can 
refer  to  it  over  and  above;  not  that  this  is  neces¬ 
sary,  even  if  wanting,  but  because  it  is  not  in¬ 
congruous  to  believe  that  even  in  other  nations 
there  may  have  been  men  to  whom  this  mystery 
was  revealed,  and  who  were  also  impelled  to  pro¬ 
claim  it,  whether  they  were  partakers  of  the 
same  grace  or  had  no  experience  of  it,  but  were 
taught  by  bad  angels,  who,  as  we  know,  even 
confessed  the  present  Christ,  Whom  the  Jews  did 
not  acknowledge.  Nor  do  I  think  the  Jews  them¬ 
selves  dare  contend  that  no  one  has  belonged  to 
God  except  the  Israelites,  since  the  increase  of 
Israel  began  on  the  rejection  of  his  elder  broth¬ 
er.  For  in  very  deed  there  was  no  other  people 
4Ps.  69.  10,  11.  5Rom.  11.  11. 


THE  CITY  OF 

who  were  specially  called  the  people  of  God ;  but 
they  cannot  deny  that  there  have  been  certain 
men  even  of  other  nations  who  belonged,  not  by 
earthly  but  heavenly  fellowship,  to  the  true  Is¬ 
raelites,  the  citizens  of  the  country  that  is  above. 
Because,  if  they  deny  this,  they  can  be  most 
easily  confuted  by  the  case  of  the  holy  and  won¬ 
derful  man  Job,  who  was  neither  a  native  nor  a 
proselyte,  that  is,  a  stranger  joining  the  people 
of  Israel,  but,  being  bred  of  the  Idumean  race, 
arose  there  and  died  there  too,  and  who  is  so 
praised  by  the  divine  oracle  that  no  man  of  his 
times  is  put  on  a  level  with  him  as  regards  jus¬ 
tice  and  piety.  And  although  we  do  not  find  his 
date  in  the  chronicles,  yet  from  his  book,  which 
for  its  merit  the  Israelites  have  received  as  of 
canonical  authority,  we  gather  that  he  was  in  the 
third  generation  after  Israel.  And  I  doubt  not  it 
was  divinely  provided,  that  from  this  one  case 
we  might  know  that  among  other  nations  also 
there  might  be  men  pertaining  to  the  spiritual 
Jerusalem  who  have  lived  according  to  God  and 
have  pleased  Him.  And  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  this  was  granted  to  any  one,  unless  the  one 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus, 1  was  divinely  revealed  to  him ;  Who 
was  pre-announced  to  the  saints  of  old  as  yet  to 
come  in  the  flesh,  even  as  He  is  announced  to  us 
as  having  come,  that  the  self-same  faith  through 
Him  may  lead  all  to  God  who  are  predestinated 
to  be  the  city  of  God,  the  house  of  God,  and  the 
temple  of  God.  But  whatever  prophecies  con¬ 
cerning  the  grace  of  God  through  Christ  Jesus 
are  quoted,  they  may  be  thought  to  have  been 
forged  by  the  Christians.  So  that  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  of  more  weight  for  confuting  all  sorts  of  ali¬ 
ens,  if  they  contend  about  this  matter,  and  for 
supporting  our  friends,  if  they  are  truly  wise, 
than  to  quote  those  divine  predictions  about 
Christ  which  are  written  in  the  books  of  the 
Jews,  who  have  been  torn  from  their  native 
abode  and  dispersed  over  the  whole  world  in  or¬ 
der  to  bear  this  testimony,  so  that  the  Church  of 
Christ  has  everywhere  increased. 

Chap.  48.  That  Haggai’s  prophecy,  in  which  he 
said  that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  God  would 
be  greater  than  that  of  the  first  had  been,  was 
really  ftilfilled,  not  in  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple,  but  in  the  Church  of  Christ 
This  house  of  God  is  more  glorious  than  that 
first  one2  which  was  constructed  of  wood  and 
stone,  metals  and  other  precious  things.  There¬ 
fore  the  prophecy  of  Haggai  was  not  fulfilled  in 
*1  Tim.  2.  5.  2Hag.  2.  9 


GOD  XVIII.  46-48  501 

the  rebuilding  of  that  temple.  For  it  can  never 
be  shown  to  have  had  so  much  glory  after  it  was 
rebuilt  as  it  had  in  the  time  of  Solomon;  yea, 
rather,  the  glory  of  that  house  is  shown  to  have 
been  diminished,  first  by  the  ceasing  of  prophe¬ 
cy,  and  then  by  the  nation  itself  suffering  so 
great  calamities,  even  to  the  final  destruction 
made  by  the  Romans,  as  the  things  above-men¬ 
tioned  prove.  But  this  house  which  pertains  to 
the  New  Testament  is  just  as  much  more  glorious 
as  the  living  stones,  even  believing,  renewed 
men,  of  which  it  is  constructed  are  better.  But  it 
was  typified  by  the  rebuilding  of  that  temple 
for  this  reason,  because  the  very  renovation  of 
that  edifice  typifies  in  the  prophetic  oracle  an¬ 
other  testament  which  is  called  the  New.  When, 
therefore,  God  said  by  the  prophet  just  named, 
“And  I  will  give  peace  in  this  place,”  3  He  is  to 
be  understood  Who  is  typified  by  that  typical 
place;  for  since  by  that  rebuilt  place  is  typified 
the  Church  which  was  to  be  built  by  Christ, 
nothing  else  can  be  accepted  as  the  meaning  of 
the  saying,  “I  will  give  peace  in  this  place,”  ex¬ 
cept  I  will  give  peace  in  the  place  which  that 
place  signifies.  For  all  typical  things  seem  in 
some  way  to  personate  those  whom  they  typify, 
as  it  is  said  by  the  apostle,  “That  Rock  was 
Christ.”4  Therefore  the  glory  of  this  New  Testa¬ 
ment  house  is  greater  than  the  glory  of  the  Old 
Testament  house ;  and  it  will  show  itself  as  great¬ 
er  when  it  shall  be  dedicated.  For  then  “shall 
come  the  desired  of  all  nations,” 5  as  we  read  in 
the  Hebrew.  For  before  His  advent  He  had  not 
yet  been  desired  by  all  nations.  For  they  knew 
not  Him  Whom  they  ought  to  desire,  in  Whom 
they  had  not  believed.  Then,  also,  according  to 
the  Septuagint  interpretation  (for  it  also  is  a 
prophetic  meaning),  “shall  come  those  who  are 
elected  of  the  Lord  out  of  all  nations.”  For  then 
indeed  there  shall  come  only  those  who  are 
elected,  whereof  the  apostle  saith,  “According  as 
He  hath  chosen  us  in  Him  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.”  6  For  the  Master  Builder  who 
said.  “Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen,”  7 
did  not  say  this  of  those  who,  on  being  called, 
came  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  cast  out  from  the 
feast,  but  would  point  out  the  house  built  up  of 
the  elect,  which  henceforth  shall  dread  no  ruin. 
Yet  because  the  churches  are  also  full  of  those 
who  shall  be  separated  by  the  winnowing  as  in 
the  threshing-floor,  the  glory  of  this  house  is  not 
so  apparent  now  as  it  shall  be  when  every  one 
who  is  there  shall  be  there  always. 

3Hag.  2.  9.  4I  Cor.  10.  4;  Ex.  17.  6. 

6Hag.  2.  7.  6Eph.  1.  4.  7Matt.  22.  11-14. 


502 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  49.  Of  the  indiscriminate  increase  of  the 
Churchy  wherein  many  reprobates  are  in  this 
world  mixed  with  the  elect 

In  this  wicked  world,  in  these  evil  days,  when 
the  Church  measures  her  future  loftiness  by  her 
present  humility,  and  is  exercised  by  goading 
fears,  tormenting  sorrows,  disquieting  labours, 
and  dangerous  temptations,  when  she  soberly  re¬ 
joices,  rejoicing  only  in  hope,  there  are  many 
reprobates  mingled  with  the  good,  and  both  are 
gathered  together  by  the  gospel  as  in  a  drag¬ 
net  ; 1  and  in  this  world,  as  in  a  sea,  both  swim  en¬ 
closed  without  distinction  in  the  net.  until  it  is 
brought  ashore,  when  the  wicked  must  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  good,  that  in  the  good,  as  in  His 
temple,  God  may  be  all  in  all.  We  acknowledge, 
indeed,  that  His  word  is  now  fulfilled  who  spake 
in  the  psalm,  and  said,  “I  have  announced  and 
spoken;  they  are  multiplied  above  number.”2 
This  takes  place  now,  since  He  has  spoken,  first 
by  the  mouth  of  His  forerunner  John,  and  after¬ 
ward  by  His  own  mouth,  saying,  “Repent :  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.”  3  He  chose 
disciples,  whom  He  also  called  apostles,4  of  low¬ 
ly  birth,  unhonoured,  and  illiterate,  so  that  what¬ 
ever  great  thing  they  might  be  or  do,  He  might 
be  and  do  it  in  them.  He  had  one  among  them 
whose  wickedness  He  could  use  well  in  order  to 
accomplish  His  appointed  passion,  and  furnish 
His  Church  an  example  of  bearing  with  the 
wicked.  Having  sown  the  Holy  Gospel  as  much 
as  that  behoved  to  be  done  by  His  bodily  pres¬ 
ence,  He  suffered,  died,  and  rose  again,  showing 
by  His  passion  what  we  ought  to  suffer  for  the 
truth,  and  by  His  resurrection  what  we  ought  to 
hope  for  in  adversity;  saving  always  the  mys¬ 
tery  of  the  sacrament,  by  which  His  blood  was 
shed  for  the  remission  of  sins.  He  held  converse 
on  the  earth  forty  days  with  His  disciples,  and 
in  their  sight  ascended  into  heaven,  and  after 
ten  days  sent  the  promised  Holy  Spirit.  It  was 
given  as  the  chief  and  most  necessary  sign  of 
His  coming  on  those  who  had  believed,  that  ev¬ 
ery  one  of  them  spoke  in  the  tongues  of  all  na¬ 
tions  ;  thus  signifying  that  the  unity  of  the  Cath¬ 
olic  Church  would  embrace  all  nations  and 
would  in  like  manner  speak  in  all  tongues. 

Chap.  50.  Of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ,  which 
is  made  more  famous  and  powerful  by  the 
sufferings  of  its  preachers 
Then  was  fulfilled  that  prophecy,  “Out  of 
Sion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of  the 

JMatt.  8.  47-50.  2Ps.  40.  5.  3Matt.  3.  2;  4.  17. 
4Luke,  6.  13. 


Lord  out  of  Jerusalem”;5  and  the  prediction  of 
the  Lord  Christ  Himself,  when,  after  the  resur¬ 
rection,  “He  opened  the  understanding”  of  His 
amazed  disciples  “that  they  might  understand 
the  Scriptures,  and  said  unto  them,  that  thus  it 
is  written,  and  thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer, 
and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day,  and  that 
repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be 
preached  in  His  name  among  all  nations,  begin¬ 
ning  at  Jerusalem.”6  And  again,  when,  in  reply 
to  their  questioning  about  the  day  of  His  last 
coming,  He  said,  “It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
times  or  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put 
in  His  own  power;  but  ye  shall  receive  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  Holy  Ghost  coming  upon  you,  and  ye 
shall  be  witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jerusalem, 
and  in  all  Judea,  and  Samaria,  and  even  unto  the 
ends  of  the  earth.”  7  First  of  all,  the  Church 
spread  herself  abroad  from  Jerusalem;  and 
when  very  many  in  Judea  and  Samaria  had  be¬ 
lieved,  she  also  went  into  other  nations  by  those 
who  announced  the  gospel,  whom,  as  lights,  He 
Himself  had  both  prepared  by  His  word  and 
kindled  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  For  He  had  said  to 
them,  “Fear  ye  not  them  which  kill  the  body, 
but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul.” 8  And  that  they 
might  not  be  frozen  with  fear,  they  burned  with 
the  fire  of  charity.  Finally,  the  gospel  of  Christ 
was  preached  in  the  whole  world,  not  only  by 
those  who  had  seen  and  heard  Him  both  before 
His  passion  and  after  His  resurrection,  but  also 
after  their  death  by  their  successors,  amid  the 
horrible  persecutions,  diverse  torments  and 
deaths  of  the  martyrs,  God  also  bearing  them 
witness,  both  with  signs  and  wonders,  and  divers 
miracles  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,9  that  the 
people  of  the  nations,  believing  in  Him  Who  was 
crucified  for  their  redemption,  might  venerate 
with  Christian  love  the  blood  of  the  martyrs 
which  they  had  poured  forth  with  devilish  fury, 
and  the  very  kings  by  whose  laws  the  Church 
had  been  laid  waste  might  become  profitably 
subject  to  that  name  they  had  cruelly  striven  to 
take  away  from  the  earth,  and  might  begin  to 
persecute  the  false  gods  for  whose  sake  the  wor¬ 
shippers  of  the  true  God  had  formerly  been  per¬ 
secuted. 

Chap.  51.  That  the  Catholic  faith  may  be  con¬ 
firmed  even  by  the  dissensions  of  the  heretics 
But  the  devil,  seeing  the  temples  of  the  de¬ 
mons  deserted,  and  the  human  race  running  to 
the  name  of  the  liberating  Mediator,  has  moved 
the  heretics  under  the  Christian  name  to  resist 

6Isa.  2.  3.  6Luke,  24.  45-47.  7Acts,  1.  7,  8. 

8Matt.  10.  28.  9Heb.  2.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  49-52  503 


the  Christian  doctrine,  as  if  they  could  be  kept 
in  the  city  of  God  indifferently  without  any  cor¬ 
rection,  just  as  the  city  of  confusion  indifferent¬ 
ly  held  the  philosophers  who  were  of  diverse  and 
adverse  opinions.  Those,  therefore,  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  who  savour  anything  morbid 
and  depraved,  and,  on  being  corrected  that  they 
may  savour  what  is  wholesome  and  right,  con¬ 
tumaciously  resist,  and  will  not  amend  their  pes¬ 
tiferous  and  deadly  dogmas,  but  persist  in  de¬ 
fending  them,  become  heretics,  and,  going  with¬ 
out,  are  to  be  reckoned  as  enemies  who  serve  for 
her  discipline.  For  even  thus  they  profit  by  their 
wickedness  those  true  Catholic  members  of 
Christ,  since  God  makes  a  good  use  even  of  the 
wicked,  and  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  Him.1  For  all  the  enemies  of  the 
Church,  whatever  error  blinds  or  malice  de¬ 
praves  them,  exercise  her  patience  if  they  re¬ 
ceive  the  power  to  afflict  her  corporally ;  and  if 
they  only  oppose  her  by  wicked  thought,  they 
exercise  her  wisdom:  but  at  the  same  time,  if 
these  enemies  are  loved,  they  exercise  her  be¬ 
nevolence.  or  even  her  beneficence,  whether  she 
deals  with  them  by  persuasive  doctrine  or  by 
terrible  discipline.  And  thus  the  devil,  the  prince 
of  the  impious  city,  when  he  stirs  up  his  own 
vessels  against  the  city  of  God  that  sojourns  in 
this  world,  is  permitted  to  do  her  no  harm.  For 
without  doubt  the  divine  providence  procures 
for  her  both  consolation  through  prosperity, 
that  she  may  not  be  broken  by  adversity,  and 
trial  through  adversity,  that  she  may  not  be  cor¬ 
rupted  by  prosperity ;  and  thus  each  is  tempered 
by  the  other,  as  we  recognize  in  the  Psalms  that 
voice  which  arises  from  no  other  cause,  “Ac¬ 
cording  to  the  multitude  of  my  griefs  in  my 
heart.  Thy  consolations  have  delighted  my 
soul.”  2  Hence  also  is  that  saying  of  the  apostle, 
“Rejoicing  in  hope,  patient  in  tribulation.”  3 
For  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  what  the  same 
teacher  says  can  at  any  time  fail,  “Whoever  will 
live  piously  in  Christ  shall  suffer  persecution.”  4 
Because  even  wThen  those  who  are  without  do 
not  rag£,  and  thus  there  seems  to  be,  and  really 
is,  tranquillity,  which  brings  very  much  consola¬ 
tion,  especially  to  the  weak,  yet  there  are  not 
wanting,  yea,  there  are  many  within  who  by 
their  abandoned  manners  torment  the  hearts  of 
those  who  live  piously,  since  by  them  the  Chris¬ 
tian  and  Catholic  name  is  blasphemed ;  and  the 
dearer  that  name  is  to  those  who  will  live  pious¬ 
ly  in  Christ,  the  more  do  they  grieve  that 
through  the  wicked,  who  have  a  place  within,  it 

lRom.  8.  28.  2Ps.  94.  19.  3Rom.  12.  12. 

4II  Tim.  3.  12. 


comes  to  be  less  loved  than  pious  minds  desire. 
The  heretics  themselves  also,  since  they  are 
thought  to  have  the  Christian  name  and  sacra¬ 
ments,  Scriptures,  and  profession,  cause  great 
grief  in  the  hearts  of  the  pious,  both  because 
many  who  wish  to  be  Christians  are  compelled 
by  their  dissensions  to  hesitate,  and  many  evil- 
speakers  also  find  in  them  matter  for  blasphem¬ 
ing  the  Christian  name,  because  they  too  are  at 
any  rate  called  Christians.  By  these  and  similar 
depraved  manners  and  errors  of  men,  those  who 
will  live  piously  in  Christ  suffer  persecution, 
even  when  no  one  molests  or  vexes  their  body ; 
for  they  suffer  this  persecution,  not  in  their  bod¬ 
ies,  but  in  their  hearts.  Whence  is  that  word, 
“According  to  the  multitude  of  my  griefs  in  my 
heart”;  for  he  does  not  say,  in  my  body.  Yet, 
on  the  other  hand,  none  of  them  can  perish,  be¬ 
cause  the  immutable  divine  promises  are 
thought  of.  And  because  the  apostle  says,  “The 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His  ;5  for  whom  He 
did  foreknow,  He  also  predestinated  to  be  con¬ 
formed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,”  6  none  of  them 
can  perish;  therefore  it  follows  in  that  psalm, 
“Thy  consolations  have  delighted  my  soul.”  7 
But  that  grief  which  arises  in  the  hearts  of  the 
pious,  who  are  persecuted  by  the  manners  of  bad 
or  false  Christians,  is  profitable  to  the  sufferers, 
because  it  proceeds  from  the  charity  in  which 
they  do  not  wish  them  either  to  perish  or  to  hin¬ 
der  the  salvation  of  others.  Finally,  great  con¬ 
solations  grow  out  of  their  chastisement,  which 
imbue  the  souls  of  the  pious  with  a  fecundity  as 
great  as  the  pains  with  which  they  were  troubled 
concerning  their  own  perdition.  Thus  in  this 
world,  in  these  evil  days,  not  only  from  the  time 
of  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  and  His  apos¬ 
tles,  but  even  from  that  of  Abel,  whom  first  his 
wicked  brother  slew  because  he  was  righteous,8 
and  thenceforth  even  to  the  end  of  this  world, 
the  Church  has  gone  forward  on  pilgrimage 
amid  the  persecutions  of  the  world  and  the  con¬ 
solations  of  God. 

Chap.  52.  Whether  we  should  believe  what  some 
think ,  that ,  as  the  ten  persecutions  which  are 
past  have  been  fulfilled,  there  remains  no  oth¬ 
er  beyond  the  eleventh,  which  must  happen  in 
the  very  time  of  Antichrist 
I  do  not  think,  indeed,  that  what  some  have 
thought  or  may  think  is  rashly  said  or  believed, 
that  until  the  time  of  Antichrist  the  Church  of 
Christ  is  not  to  suffer  any  persecutions  besides 
those  she  has  already  suffered — that  is,  ten — 

6II  Tim.  2.  19.  6Rom.  8.  29.  7Ps.  94.  19. 

8I  John,  3.  12. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  that  the  eleventh  and  last  shall  be  inflicted 
by  Antichrist.  They  reckon  as  the  first  that 
made  by  Nero,  the  second  by  Domitian,  the 
third  by  Trajan,  the  fourth  by  Antoninus, 
the  fifth  by  Severus,  the  sixth  by  Maximin,  the 
seventh  by  Decius,  the  eighth  by  Valerian,  the 
ninth  by  Aurelian.  the  tenth  by  Diocletian  and 
Maximian.  For  as  there  were  ten  plagues  in 
Egypt  before  the  people  of  God  could  begin  to 
go  out,  they  think  this  is  to  be  referred- to  as 
showing  that  the  last  persecution  by  Antichrist 
must  be  like  the  eleventh  plague,  in  which  the 
Egyptians,  while  following  the  Hebrews  with 
hostility,  perished  in  the  Red  Sea  when  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  God  passed  through  on  dry  land.  Yet  I  do 
not  think  persecutions  were  prophetically  signi¬ 
fied  by  what  was  done  in  Egypt,  however  nicely 
and  ingeniously  those  who  think  so  may  seem 
to  have  compared  the  two  in  detail,  not  by  the 
prophetic  Spirit,  but  by  the  conjecture  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind,  which  sometimes  hits  the  truth,  and 
sometimes  is  deceived.  But  what  can  those  who 
think  this  say  of  the  persecution  in  which  the 
Lord  Himself  was  crucified?  In  which  number 
will  they  put  it?  And  if  they  think  the  reckoning 
is  to  be  made  exclusive  of  this  one,  as  if  those 
must  be  counted  which  pertain  to  the  body,  and 
not  that  in  which  the  Head  Himself  was  set  up¬ 
on  and  slain,  what  can  they  make  of  that  one 
which,  after  Christ  ascended  into  heaven,  took 
place  in  Jerusalem,  when  the  blessed  Stephen 
was  stoned;  when  James  the  brother  of  John 
was  slaughtered  with  the  sword ;  when  the  Apos¬ 
tle  Peter  was  imprisoned  to  be  killed,  and  was 
set  free  by  the  angel;  when  the  brethren  were 
driven  away  and  scattered  from  Jerusalem; 
when  Saul,  who  afterward  became  the  Apostle 
Paul,  wasted  the  Church ;  and  when  he  himself, 
publishing  the  glad  tidings  of  the  faith  he  had 
persecuted,  suffered  such  things  as  he  had  in¬ 
flicted,  either  from  the  Jews  or  from  other  na¬ 
tions,  where  he  most  fervently  preached  Christ 
everywhere?  Why,  then,  do  they  think  fit  to 
start  with  Nero,  when  the  Church  in  her  growth 
had  reached  the  times  of  Nero  amid  the  most 
cruel  persecutions,  about  which  it  would  be  too 
long  to  say  anything?  But  if  they  think  that 
only  the  persecutions  made  by  kings  ought  to  be 
reckoned,  it  was  king  Herod  who  also  made  a 
most  grievous  one  after  the  ascension  of  the 
Lord.  And  what  account  do  they  give  of  Julian, 
whom  they  do  not  number  in  the  ten?  Did  not 
he  persecute  the  Church,  who  forbade  the  Chris¬ 
tians  to  teach  or  learn  liberal  letters?  Under 
him  the  elder  Valentinian,  who  was  the  third 


emperor  after  him,  stood  forth  as  a  confessor 
of  the  Christian  faith,  and  was  dismissed  from 
his  command  in  the  army.  I  shall  say  nothing  of 
what  he  did  at  Antioch,  except  to  mention  his 
being  struck  with  wonder  at  the  freedom  and 
cheerfulness  of  one  most  faithful  and  steadfast 
young  man.  who,  when  many  were  seized  to  be 
tortured,  was  tortured  during  a  whole  day,  and 
sang  under  the  instrument  of  torture,  until  the 
emperor  feared  lest  he  should  succumb  under 
the  continued  cruelties  and  put  him  to  shame  at 
last,  which  made  him  dread  and  fear  that  he 
would  be  yet  more  dishonourably  put  to  the 
blush  by  the  rest.  Lastly,  within  our  own  recollec¬ 
tion,  did  not  Valens  the  Arian,  brother  of  the 
foresaid  Valentinian,  waste  the  Catholic  Church 
by  great  persecution  throughout  the  East?  But 
how  unreasonable  it  is  not  to  consider  that  the 
Church,  which  bears  fruit  and  grows  through 
the  whole  world,  may  suffer  persecution  from 
kings  in  some  nations  even  when  she  does  not 
suffer  it  in  others !  Perhaps,  however,  it  was  not 
to  be  reckoned  a  persecution  when  the  king  of 
the  Goths,  in  Gothia  itself,  persecuted  the 
Christians  with  wonderful  cruelty,  when  there 
were  none  but  Catholics  there,  of  whom  very 
many  were  crowned  with  martyrdom,  as  we 
have  heard  from  certain  brethren  who  had  been 
there  at  that  time  as  boys,  and  unhesitatingly 
called  to  mind  that  they  had  seen  these  things? 
And  what  took  place  in  Persia  of  late?  Was  not 
persecution  so  hot  against  the  Christians  (if 
even  yet  it  is  allayed)  that  some  of  the  fugitives 
from  it  came  even  to  Roman  towns?  When  I 
think  of  these  and  the  like  things,  it  does  not 
seem  to  me  that  the  number  of  persecutions 
with  which  the  Church  is  to  be  tried  can  be  defi¬ 
nitely  stated.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  no 
less  rash  to  affirm  that  there  will  be  some  perse¬ 
cutions  by  kings  besides  that  last  one,  about 
which  no  Christian  is  in  doubt.  Therefore  we 
leave  this  undecided,  supporting  or  refuting  nei¬ 
ther  side  of  this  question,  but  only  restraining 
men  from  the  audacious  presumption  of  affirm¬ 
ing  either  of  them. 

Chap.  53.  Of  the  hidden  time  of  the  final  perse¬ 
cution 

Truly  Jesus  Himself  shall  extinguish  by  His 
presence  that  last  persecution  which  is  to  be 
made  by  Antichrist.  For  so  it  is  written,  that 
“He  shall  slay  him  with  the  breath  of  His 
mouth,  and  empty  him  with  the  brightness  of 
His  presence.”  1  It  is  customary  to  ask,  “When 
^sa.  11.  4;  II  Thess.  1.  9- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XVIII.  53-54  505 


shall  that  be?”  But  this  is  quite  unreasonable. 
For  had  it  been  profitable  for  us  to  know  this,  by 
whom  could  it  better  have  been  told  than  by 
God  Himself,  the  Master,  when  the  disciples 
questioned  Him?  For  they  were  not  silent  when 
with  Him,  but  inquired  of  Him.  saying,  “Lord, 
wilt  Thou  at  this  time  present  the  kingdom  to 
Israel,  or  when?”1  But  He  said,  “It  is  not  for 
you  to  know  the  times,  which  the  Father  hath 
put  in  His  own  power.”  When  they  got  that  an¬ 
swer,  they  had  not  at  all  questioned  Him  about 
the  hour,  or  day,  or  year,  but  about  the  time.  In 
vain,  then,  do  we  attempt  to  compute  definitely 
the  years  that  may  remain  to  this  world,  when 
we  may  hear  from  the  mouth  of  the  Truth  that 
it  is  not  for  us  to  know  this.  Yet  some  have  said 
that  four  hundred,  some  five  hundred,  others  a 
thousand  years,  may  be  completed  from  the  as¬ 
cension  of  the  Lord  up  to  His  final  coming.  But 
to  point  out  how  each  of  them  supports  his  own 
opinion  would  take  too  long,  and  is  not  neces¬ 
sary;  for  indeed  they  use  human  conjectures, 
and  bring  forward  nothing  certain  from  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  canonical  Scriptures.  But  on  this 
subject  He  puts  aside  the  figures  of  the  calcula¬ 
tors,  and  orders  silence,  Who  says,  “It  is  not  for 
you  to  know  the  times,  which  the  Father  hath 
put  in  His  own  power.” 

But  because  this  sentence  is  in  the  Gospel,  it 
is  no  wonder  that  the  worshippers  of  the  many 
and  false  gods  have  been  none  the  less  restrained 
from  feigning  that  by  the  responses  of  the  de¬ 
mons,  whom  they  worship  as  gods,  it  has  been 
fixed  how  long  the  Christian  religion  is  to  last. 
For  when  they  saw  that  it  could  not  be  con¬ 
sumed  by  so  many  and  great  persecutions,  but 
rather  drew  from  them  wonderful  enlargements, 
they  invented  I  know  not  what  Greek  verses,  as 
if  poured  forth  by  a  divine  oracle  to  some  one 
consulting  it,  in  which,  indeed,  they  make  Christ 
innocent  of  this,  as  it  were,  sacrilegious  crime, 
but  add  that  Peter  by  enchantments  brought  it 
about  that  the  name  of  Christ  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  for  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years, 
and.  af(er  the  completion  of  that  number  of 
years,  should  at  once  take  end.  Oh  the  hearts  of 
learned  men!  Oh,  learned  wits,  meet  to  believe 
such  things  about  Christ  as  you  are  not  willing 
to  believe  in  Christ,  that  His  disciple  Peter  did 
not  learn  magic  arts  from  Him,  yet  that,  al¬ 
though  He  was  innocent,  His  disciple  was  an  en¬ 
chanter,  and  chose  that  His  name  rather  than 
his  own  should  be  worshipped  through  his  magic 
arts,  his  great  labours  and  perils,  and  at  last  even 
^cts,  i.  6,  7. 


the  shedding  of  his  blood!  If  Peter  the  en¬ 
chanter  made  the  world  so  love  Christ,  what  did 
Christ  the  innocent  do  to  make  Peter  so  love 
Him?  Let  them  answer  themselves  then,  and, 
if  they  can,  let  them  understand  that  the  world, 
for  the  sake  of  eternal  life,  was  made  to  love 
Christ  by  that  same  supernal  grace  w7hich  made 
Peter  also  love  Christ  for  the  sake  of  the  eternal 
life  to  be  received  from  Him,  and  that  even  to 
the  extent  of  suffering  temporal  death  for  Him. 
And  then,  what  kind  of  gods  are  these  who  are 
able  to  predict  such  things,  yet  are  not  able  to 
avert  them,  succumbing  in  such  a  way  to  a  sin¬ 
gle  enchanter  and  wicked  magician  (who,  as 
they  say,  having  slain  a  yearling  boy  and  torn 
him  to  pieces,  buried  him  with  nefarious  rites) 
that  they  permitted  the  sect  hostile  to  them¬ 
selves  to  gain  strength  for  so  great  a  time,  and 
to  surmount  the  horrid  cruelties  of  so  many 
great  persecutions,  not  by  resisting  but  by  suf¬ 
fering,  and  to  procure  the  overthrow  of  their 
own  images,  temples,  rituals,  and  oracles?  Fi¬ 
nally,  what  god  was  it — not  ours,  certainly,  but 
one  of  their  own — who  was  either  enticed  or 
compelled  by  so  great  wickedness  to  perform 
these  things?  For  those  verses  say  that  Peter 
bound,  not  any  demon,  but  a  god  to  do  these 
things.  Such  a  god  have  they  who  have  not 
Christ. 

Chap.  54.  Of  the  very  foolish  lie  of  the  pagans, 
in  feigning  that  the  Christian  religion  was  not 
to  last  beyond  three  hundred  and  sixty-five 
years 

I  might  collect  these  and  many  similar  argu¬ 
ments,  if  that  year  had  not  already  passed  by 
which  lying  divination  has  promised,  and  de¬ 
ceived  vanity  has  believed.  But  as  a  few  years 
ago  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years  were 
completed  since  the  time  when  the  worship  of 
the  name  of  Christ  was  established  by  His  pres¬ 
ence  in  the  flesh,  and  by  the  apostles,  what  other 
proof  need  we  seek  to  refute  that  falsehood? 
For.  not  to  place  the  beginning  of  this  period  at 
the  nativity  of  Christ,  because  as  an  infant  and 
boy  He  had  no  disciples,  yet,  when  He  began  to 
have  them,  beyond  doubt  the  Christian  doctrine 
and  religion  then  became  known  through  His 
bodily  presence,  that  is,  after  He  was  baptized 
in  the  river  Jordan  by  the  ministry  of  John.  For 
on  this  account  that  prophecy  went  before  con¬ 
cerning  Him:  “He  shall  reign  from  sea  even  to 
sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.”  2  But  since,  before  He  suffered  and  rose 
2Ps.  72.  8. 


5o6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


from  the  dead,  the  faith  had  not  yet  been  de¬ 
fined  to  all,  but  was  defined  in  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  (for  so  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  to  the 
Athenians,  saying,  “But  now  He  announces  to 
men  that  all  everywhere  should  repent,  because 
He  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  to  judge  the 
world  in  equity,  by  the  Man  in  whom  He  hath 
defined  the  faith  to  all  men,  raising  Him  from 
the  dead”  l),  it  is  better  that,  in  settling  this 
question,  we  should  start  from  that  point,  es¬ 
pecially  because  the  Holy  Spirit  was  then  given, 
just  as  He  behoved  to  be  given  after  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  Christ  in  that  city  from  which  the  sec¬ 
ond  law,  that  is,  the  New  Testament,  ought  to 
begin.  For  the  first,  which  is  called  the  Old  Testa¬ 
ment,  was  given  from  Mount  Sinai  through 
Moses.  But  concerning  this  which  ,vas  to  be  giv¬ 
en  by  Christ  it  was  predicted,  “Out  of  Sion  shall 
go  forth  the  law  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of 
Jerusalem”;2  whence  He  Himself  said,  that  re¬ 
pentance  in  His  name  behoved  to  be  preached 
among  all  nations,  but  yet  beginning  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem.3  There,  therefore,  the  worship  of  this  name 
took  its  rise,  that  Jesus  should  be  believed  in. 
Who  died  and  rose  again.  There  this  faith  blazed 
up  with  such  noble  beginnings,  that  several 
thousand  men,  being  converted  to  the  name  of 
Christ  with  wonderful  alacrity,  sold  their  goods 
for  distribution  among  the  needy,  thus,  by  a 
holy  resolution  and  most  ardent  charity,  com¬ 
ing  to  voluntary  poverty,  and  prepared  them¬ 
selves,  amid  the  Jews  who  raged  and  thirsted  for 
their  blood,  to  contend  for  the  truth  even  to 
death,  not  with  armed  power,  but  with  more 
powerful  patience.  If  this  was  accomplished  by 
no  magic  arts,  why  do  they  hesitate  to  believe 
that  the  other  could  be  done  throughout  the 
whole  world  by  the  same  divine  power  by  which 
this  was  done?  But  supposing  Peter  wrought 
that  enchantment  so  that  so  great  a  multitude  of 
men  at  Jerusalem  was  thus  kindled  to  worship 
the  name  of  Christ,  who  had  either  seized  and 
fastened  Him  to  the  cross,  or  reviled  Him  when 
fastened  there,  we  must  still  inquire  when  the 
three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years  must  be  com¬ 
pleted,  counting  from  that  year.  Now  Christ 
died  when  the  Gemini  were  consuls,  on  the 
eighth  day  before  the  kalends  of  April.  He  rose 
the  third  day,  as  the  apostles  have  proved  by  the 
evidence  of  their  own  senses.  Then  forty  days 
after,  He  ascended  into  heaven.  Ten  days  after, 
that  is,  on  the  fiftieth  after  his  resurrection,  He 
sent  the  Holy  Spirit ;  then  three  thousand  men 
believed  when  the  apostles  preached  Him.  Then, 
^cts,  17.  30,  3i-  2Isa.  2.  3.  3Luke,  24.  47. 


therefore,  arose  the  worship  of  that  name,  as  we 
believe,  and  according  to  the  real  truth,  by  the 
efficacy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but,  as  impious  van¬ 
ity  has  feigned  or  thought,  by  the  magic  arts  of 
Peter.  A  little  afterward,  too,  on  a  wonderful 
sign  being  wrought,  when  at  Peter’s  own  word  a 
certain  beggar,  so  lame  from  his  mother’s  womb 
that  he  was  carried  by  others  and  laid  down  at 
the  gate  of  the  temple,  where  he  begged  alms, 
was  made  whole  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  leaped  up,  five  thousand  men  believed,  and 
thenceforth  the  Church  grew  by  sundry  acces¬ 
sions  of  believers.  Thus  we  gather  the  very  day 
with  which  that  year  began,  namely,  that  on 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  was  sent,  that  is,  during 
the  ides  of  May.  And,  on  counting  the  consuls, 
the  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years  are  found 
completed  on  the  same  ides  in  the  consulate  of 
Honorius  and  Eutychianus.  Now,  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  year,  in  the  consulate  of  Mallius  Theodorus, 
when,  according  to  that  oracle  of  the  demons  or 
figment  of  men,  there  ought  already  to  have 
been  no  Christian  religion,  it  was  not  necessary 
to  inquire,  what  perchance  was  done  in  other 
parts  of  the  earth.  But,  as  we  know,  in  the  most 
noted  and  eminent  city,  Carthage,  in  Africa, 
Gaudentius  and  Jovius,  officers  of  the  Emperor 
Honorius,  on  the  fourteenth  day  before  the  ka¬ 
lends  of  April,  overthrew  the  temples  and  broke 
the  images  of  the  false  gods.  And  from  that  time 
to  the  present,  during  almost  thirty  years,  who 
does  not  see  how  much  the  worship  of  the  name 
of  Christ  has  increased,  especially  after  many 
of  those  became  Christians  who  had  been  kept 
back  from  the  faith  by  thinking  that  divination 
true,  but  saw  when  that  same  number  of  years 
was  completed  that  it  was  empty  and  ridicu¬ 
lous?  We,  therefore,  who  are  called  and  are 
Christians,  do  not  believe  in  Peter,  but  in  Him 
Whom  Peter  believed — being  edified  by  Peter’s 
sermons  about  Christ,  not  poisoned  by  his  in¬ 
cantations;  and  not  deceived  by  his  enchant¬ 
ments,  but  aided  by  his  good  deeds.  Christ 
Himself,  who  was  Peter’s  Master  in  the 
doctrine  which  leads  to  eternal  life,  is  our 
Master  too. 

But  let  us  now  at  last  finish  this  book,  after 
thus  far  treating  of,  and  showing  as  far  as 
seemed  sufficient,  what  is  the  mortal  course  of 
the  two  cities,  the  heavenly  and  the  earthly, 
which  are  mingled  together  from  the  beginning 
down  to  the  end.  Of  these,  the  earthly  one  has 
made  to  herself  of  whom  she  would,  either  from 
any  other  quarter,  or  even  from  among  men, 
false  gods  whom  she  might  serve  by  sacrifice; 


THE  CITY  OF 


but  she  which  is  heavenly  and  is  a  pilgrim  on  the 
earth  does  not  make  false  gods,  but  is  herself 
made  by  the  true  God  of  Whom  she  herself  must 
be  the  true  sacrifice.  Yet  both  alike  either  enjoy 
temporal  good  things,  or  are  afflicted  with  tem- 


GOD  XIX.  i  507 

poral  evils,  but  with  diverse  faith,  diverse  hope, 
and  diverse  love,  until  they  must  be  separated 
by  the  last  judgment,  and  each  must  receive  her 
own  end,  of  which  there  is  no  end.  About  these 
ends  of  both  we  must  next  treat. 


BOOK  XIX 

ARGUMENT.  In  this  book  the  end  of  the  two  cities,  the  earthly  and  the 

HEAVENLY,  IS  DISCUSSED.  AUGUSTINE  REVIEWS  THE  OPINIONS  OF  THE  PHILOSO¬ 
PHERS  REGARDING  THE  SUPREME  GOOD,  AND  THEIR  VAIN  EFFORTS  TO  MAKE  FOR 
THEMSELVES  A  HAPPINESS  IN  THIS  LIFE;  AND,  WHILE  HE  REFUTES  THESE,  HE  TAKES 
OCCASION  TO  SHOW  WHAT  THE  PEACE  AND  HAPPINESS  BELONGING  TO  THE  HEAVENLY 
CITY,  OR  THE  PEOPLE  OF  CHRIST,  ARE  BOTH  NOW  AND  HEREAFTER. 


Chap.  1.  That  Varro  has  made  out  that  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  eighty-eight  different  sects  of  philos¬ 
ophy  might  be  formed  by  the  various  opinions 
regarding  the  supreme  good 
As  I  see  that  I  have  still  to  discuss  the  fit  des¬ 
tinies  of  the  two  cities,  the  earthly  and  the  heav¬ 
enly,  I  must  first  explain,  so  far  as  the  limits  of 
this  work  allow  me,  the  reasonings  by  which 
men  have  attempted  to  make  for  themselves  a 
happiness  in  this  unhappy  life,  in  order  that  it 
may  be  evident,  not  only  from  divine  authority, 
but  also  from  such  reasons  as  can  be  adduced  to 
unbelievers,  how  the  empty' dreams  of  the  phi¬ 
losophers  differ  from  the  hope  which  God  gives 
to  us,  and  from  the  substantial  fulfillment  of  it 
which  He  will  give  us  as  our  blessedness.  Philos¬ 
ophers  have  expressed  a  great  variety  of  diverse 
opinions  regarding  the  end  of  goods  and  of  evils, 
and  this  question  they  have  eagerly  canvassed, 
that  they  might,  if  possible,  discover  what  makes 
a  man  happy.  For  the  end  of  our  good  is  that  for 
the  sake  of  which  other  things  are  to  be  desired, 
while  it  is  to  be  desired  for  its  own  sake:  and  the 
end  of  evil  is  that  on  account  of  which  other 
things  are  to  be  shunned,  while  it  is  avoided  on 
its  own  account.  Thus,  by  the  end  of  good,  we  at 
present  mean,  not  that  by  which  good  is  de¬ 
stroyed,  so  that  it  no  longer  exists,  but  that  by 
which  it  is  finished,  so  that  it  becomes  complete ; 
and  by  the  end  of  evil  we  mean,  not  that  which 
abolishes  it,  but  that  which  completes  its  devel¬ 
opment.  These  two  ends,  therefore,  are  the  su¬ 
preme  good  and  the  supreme  evil;  and,  as  I 
have  said,  those  who  have  in  this  vain  life  pro¬ 
fessed  the  study  of  wisdom  have  been  at  great 
pains  to  discover  these  ends,  and  to  obtain  the 
supreme  good  and  avoid  the  supreme  evil  in  this 
life.  And  although  they  erred  in  a  variety  of 
ways,  yet  natural  insight  has  prevented  them 


from  wandering  from  the  truth  so  far  that  they 
have  not  placed  the  supreme  good  and  evil, 
some  in  the  soul,  some  in  the  body,  and  some  in 
both.  From  this  tripartite  distribution  of  the 
sects  of  philosophy,  Marcus  Varro,  in  his  book 
De  Philosophia,  has  drawn  so  large  a  variety  of 
opinions,  that,  by  a  subtle  and  minute  analysis 
of  distinctions,  he  numbers  without  difficulty  as 
many  as  288  sects — not  that  these  have  actual¬ 
ly  existed,  but  sects  which  are  possible. 

To  illustrate  briefly  what  he  means,  I  must  be¬ 
gin  with  his  own  introductory  statement  in  the 
above-mentioned  book,  that  there  are  four 
things  which  men  desire,  as  it  were  by  nature 
without  a  master,  without  the  help  of  any  in¬ 
struction,  without  industry  or  the  art  of  living 
which  is  called  virtue,  and  which  is  certainly 
learned :  either  pleasure,  which  is  an  agreeable 
stirring  of  the  bodily  sense;  or  repose,  which 
excludes  every  bodily  inconvenience;  or  both 
these,  which  Epicurus  calls  by  the  one  name, 
pleasure;  or  the  primary  objects  of  nature, 
which  comprehend  the  things  already  named 
and  other  things,  either  bodily,  such  as  health, 
and  safety,  and  integrity  of  the  members,  or 
spiritual,  such  as  the  greater  and  less  mental 
gifts  that  are  found  in  men.  Now  these  four 
things — pleasure,  repose,  the  two  combined,  and 
the  primary  objects  of  nature — exist  in  us  in 
such  sort  that  we  must  either  desire  virtue  on 
their  account,  or  them  for  the  sake  of  virtue,  or 
both  for  their  own  sake;  and  consequently  there 
arise  from  this  distinction  twelve  sects,  for  each 
is  by  this  consideration  tripled.  I  will  illustrate 
this  in  one  instance,  and,  having  done  so,  it  will 
not  be  difficult  to  understand  the  others.  Ac¬ 
cording,  then,  as  bodily  pleasure  is  subjected, 
preferred,  or  united  to  virtue,  there  are  three 
sects.  It  is  subjected  to  virtue  when  it  is  chosen 
as  subservient  to  virtue.  Thus  it  is  a  duty  of  vir- 


5o8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tue  to  live  for  one’s  country,  and  for  its  sake  to 
beget  children,  neither  of  which  can  be  done 
without  bodily  pleasure.  For  there  is  pleasure  in 
eating  and  drinking,  pleasure  also  in  sexual  in¬ 
tercourse.  But  when  it  is  preferred  to  virtue,  it 
is  desired  for  its  own  sake,  and  virtue  is  chosen 
only  for  its  sake,  and  to  effect  nothing  else  than 
the  attainment  or  preservation  of  bodily  pleas¬ 
ure.  And  this,  indeed,  is  to  make  life  hideous; 
for  where  virtue  is  the  slave  of  pleasure  it  no 
longer  deserves  the  name  of  virtue.  Yet  even 
this  disgraceful  distortion  has  found  some  phi¬ 
losophers  to  patronize  and  defend  it.  Then  vir¬ 
tue  is  united  to  pleasure  when  neither  is  desired 
for  the  other’s  sake,  but  both  for  their  own.  And 
therefore,  as  pleasure,  according  as  it  is  subject¬ 
ed,  preferred,  or  united  to  virtue,  makes  three 
sects,  so  also  do  repose,  pleasure  and  repose 
combined,  and  the  prime  natural  blessings,  make 
their  three  sects  each.  For  as  men’s  opinions 
vary,  and  these  four  things  are  sometimes  sub¬ 
jected,  sometimes  preferred,  and  sometimes 
united  to  virtue,  there  are  produced  twelve 
sects.  But  this  number  again  is  doubled  by  the 
addition  of  one  difference,  viz.,  the  social  life; 
for  whoever  attaches  himself  to  any  of  these 
sects  does  so  either  for  his  own  sake  alone,  or  for 
the  sake  of  a  companion,  for  whom  he  ought  to 
wish  what  he  desires  for  himself.  And  thus 
there  will  be  twelve  of  those  who  think  some 
one  of  these  opinions  should  be  held  for  their 
own  sakes,  and  other  twelve  who  decide  that 
they  ought  to  follow  this  or  that  philosophy  not 
for  their  own  sakes  only,  but  also  for  the  sake  of 
others  whose  good  they  desire  as  their  own. 
These  twenty-four  sects  again  are  doubled,  and 
become  forty-eight  by  adding  a  difference  taken 
from  the  New  Academy.  For  each  of  these  four 
and  twenty  sects  can  hold  and  defend  their  opin¬ 
ion  as  certain,  as  the  Stoics  defended  the  posi¬ 
tion  that  the  supreme  good  of  man  consisted 
solely  in  virtue ;  or  they  can  be  held  as  probable, 
but  not  certain,  as  the  New  Academics  did. 
There  are,  therefore,  twenty-four  who  hold  their 
philosophy  as  certain  true,  other  twenty-four 
who  hold  their  opinions  as  probable,  but  not  cer¬ 
tain.  Again,  as  each  person  who  attaches  himself 
to  any  of  these  sects  may  adopt  the  mode  of  life 
either  of  the  Cynics  or  of  the  other  philoso¬ 
phers,  this  distinction  will  double  the  number, 
and  so  make  ninety-six  sects.  Then,  lastly,  as 
each  of  these  sects  may  be  adhered  to  either  by 
men  who  love  a  life  of  ease,  as  those  who  have 
through  choice  or  necessity  addicted  them¬ 
selves  to  study,  or  by  men  who  love  a  busy  life, 
as  those  who,  while  philosophizing,  have  been 


much  occupied  with  state  affairs  and  public 
business,  or  by  men  who  choose  a  mixed  life, 
in  imitation  of  those  who  have  apportioned  their 
time  partly  to  erudite  leisure,  partly  to  neces¬ 
sary  business :  by  these  differences  the  number 
of  the  sects  is  tripled,  and  becomes  288. 

I  have  thus,  as  briefly  and  lucidly  as  I  could, 
given  in  my  own  words  the  opinions  which  Var- 
ro  expresses  in  his  book.  But  how  he  refutes  all 
the  rest  of  these  sects,  and  chooses  one,  the  Old 
Academy,  instituted  by  Plato,  and  continuing  to 
Polemo,  the  fourth  teacher  of  that  school  of 
philosophy  which  held  that  their  system  was 
certain ;  and  how  on  this  ground  he  distinguishes 
it  from  the  New  Academy,  which  began  with 
Polemo’s  successor  Arcesilaus,  and  held  that  all 
things  are  uncertain;  and  how  he  seeks  to  es¬ 
tablish  that  the  Old  Academy  was  as  free  from 
error  as  from  doubt — all  this,  I  say,  were  too 
long  to  enter  upon  in  detail,  and  yet  I  must  not 
altogether  pass  it  by  in  silence.  Varro  then  re¬ 
jects,  as  a  first  step,  all  those  differences  which 
have  multiplied  the  number  of  sects;  and  the 
ground  on  which  he  does  so  is  that  they  are  not 
differences  about  the  supreme  good.  He  main¬ 
tains  that  in  philosophy  a  sect  is  created  only  by 
its  having  an  opinion  of  its  own  different  from 
other  schools  on  the  point  of  the  ends-in-chief. 
For  man  has  no  other  reason  for  philosophiz¬ 
ing  than  that  he  may  be  happy ;  but  that  which 
makes  him  happy  is  itself  the  supreme  good.  In 
other  words,  the  supreme  good  is  the  reason  of 
philosophizing;  and  therefore  that  cannot  be 
called  a  sect  of  philosophy  which  pursues  no 
way  of  its  own  towards  the  supreme  good.  Thus, 
when  it  is  asked  whether  a  wise  man  will  adopt 
the  social  life,  and  desire  and  be  interested  in 
the  supreme  good  of  his  friend  as  in  his  own,  or 
will,  on  the  contrary,  do  all  that  he  does  merely 
for  his  own  sake,  there  is  no  question  here  about 
the  supreme  good,  but  only  about  the  propriety 
of  associating  or  not  associating  a  friend  in  its 
participation;  whether  the  wise  man  will  do  this 
not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  his 
friend  in  whose  good  he  delights  as  in  his  own. 
So,  too,  when  it  is  asked  whether  all  things 
about  which  philosophy  is  concerned  are  to  be 
considered  uncertain,  as  by  the  New  Academy, 
or  certain,  as  the  other  philosophers  maintain, 
the  question  here  is  not  what  end  should  be  pur¬ 
sued,  but  whether  or  not  we  are  to  believe  in  the 
substantial  existence  of  that  end;  or,  to  put  it 
more  plainly,  whether  he  who  pursues  the  su¬ 
preme  good  must  maintain  that  it  is  a  true  good, 
or  only  that  it  appears  to  him  to  be  true,  though 
possibly  it  may  be  delusive — both  pursuing  one 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIX.  2 


and  the  same  good.  The  distinction,  too,  which 
is  founded  on  the  dress  and  manners  of  the  Cyn¬ 
ics,  does  not  touch  the  question  of  the  chief 
good,  but  only  the  question  whether  he  who 
pursues  that  good  which  seems  to  himself  true 
should  live  as  do  the  Cynics.  There  were,  in  fact, 
men  who,  though  they  pursued  different  things  as 
the  supreme  good,  some  choosing  pleasure,  others 
virtue,  yet  adopted  that  mode  of  life  which  gave 
the  Cynics  their  name.  Thus,  whatever  it  is  which 
distinguishes  the  Cynics  from  other  philoso¬ 
phers.  this  has  no  bearing  on  the  choice  and 
pursuit  of  that  good  which  constitutes  happi¬ 
ness.  For  if  it  had  any  such  bearing,  then  the  same 
habits  of  life  would  necessitate  the  pursuit  of 
the  same  chief  good,  and  diverse  habits  would 
necessitate  the  pursuit  of  different  ends. 

Chap.  2.  How  Varro ,  by  removing  all  the  differ¬ 
ences  which  do  not  form  sects ,  but  are  mere¬ 
ly  secondary  questions,  reaches  three  defini¬ 
tions  of  the  chief  good,  of  which  we  must 
choose  one 

The  same  may  be  said  of  those  three  kinds  of 
life,  the  life  of  studious  leisure  and  search  after 
truth,  the  life  of  easy  engagement  in  affairs, 
and  the  life  in  which  both  these  are  mingled. 
When  it  is  asked,  which  of  these  should  be 
adopted,  this  involves  no  controversy  about  the 
end  of  good,  but  inquires  which  of  these  three 
puts  a  man  in  the  best  position  for  finding  and 
retaining  the  supreme  good.  For  this  good,  as 
soon  as  a  man  finds  it,  makes  him  happy;  but 
lettered  leisure,  or  public  business,  or  the  alter¬ 
nation  of  these,  do  not  necessarily  constitute 
happiness.  Many,  in  fact,  find  it  possible  to 
adopt  one  or  other  of  these  modes  of  life,  and 
yet  to  miss  what  makes  a  man  happy.  The  ques¬ 
tion.  therefore,  regarding  the  supreme  good  and 
the  supreme  evil,  and  which  distinguishes  sects 
of  philosophy,  is  one;  and  these  questions  con¬ 
cerning  the  social  life,  the  doubt  of  the  Acade¬ 
my,  the  dress  and  food  of  the  Cynics,  the  three 
modes  of  life — the  active,  the  contemplative, 
and  the  mixed — these  are  different  questions, 
into  none  of  which  the  question  of  the  chief 
good  enters.  And  therefore,  as  Marcus  Varro 
multiplied  the  sects  to  the  number  of  288  (or 
whatever  larger  number  he  chose)  by  introduc¬ 
ing  these  four  differences  derived  from  the  so¬ 
cial  life,  the  New  Academy,  the  Cynics,  and  the 
threefold  form  of  life,  so,  by  removing  these 
differences  as  having  no  bearing  on  the  supreme 
good,  and  as  therefore  not  constituting  what 
can  properly  be  called  sects,  he  returns  to  those 
twelve  schools  which  concern  themselves  with 


509 

inquiring  what  that  good  is  which  makes  man 
happy,  and  he  shows  that  one  of  these  is  true, 
the  rest  false.  In  other  words,  he  dismisses  the 
distinction  founded  on  the  threefold  mode  of 
life,  and  so  decreases  the  whole  number  by  two- 
thirds,  reducing  the  sects  to  ninety-six.  Then, 
putting  aside  the  Cynic  peculiarities,  the  num¬ 
ber  decreases  by  a  half,  to  forty-eight.  Taking 
away  next  the  distinction  occasioned  by  the  hes¬ 
itancy  of  the  New  Academy,  the  number  is  again 
halved,  and  reduced  to  twenty-four.  Treating 
in  a  similar  way  the  diversity  introduced  by  the 
consideration  of  the  social  life,  there  are  left  but 
twelve,  which  this  difference  had  doubled  to 
twenty-four.  Regarding  these  twelve,  no  reason 
can  be  assigned  why  they  should  not  be  called 
sects.  For  in  them  the  sole  inquiry  is  regarding 
the  supreme  good  and  the  ultimate  evil — that  is 
to  say,  regarding  the  supreme  good,  for  this  be¬ 
ing  found,  the  opposite  evil  is  thereby  found. 
Now,  to  make  these  twelve  sects,  he  multiplies 
by  three  these  four  things — pleasure,  repose, 
pleasure  and  repose  combined,  and  the  primary 
objects  of  nature  which  Varro  calls  primigenia. 
For  as  these  four  things  are  sometimes  subordi¬ 
nated  to  virtue,  so  that  they  seem  to  be  desired 
not  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  virtue’s  sake; 
sometimes  preferred  to  it,  so  that  virtue  seems 
to  be  necessary  not  on  its  own  account,  but  in 
order  to  attain  these  things;  sometimes  joined 
with  it,  so  that  both  they  and  virtue  are  desired 
for  their  own  sakes — we  must  multiply  the  four 
by  three,  and  thus  we  get  twelve  sects.  But  from 
those  four  things  Varro  eliminates  three — 
pleasure,  repose,  pleasure  and  repose  combined 
— not  because  he  thinks  these  are  not  worthy  of 
the  place  assigned  them,  but  because  they  are 
included  in  the  primary  objects  of  nature.  And 
what  need  is  there,  at  any  rate,  to  make  a  three¬ 
fold  division  out  of  these  two  ends,  pleasure  and 
repose,  taking  them  first  severally  and  then  con- 
junctly,  since  both  they,  and  many  other  things 
besides,  are  comprehended  in  the  primary  ob¬ 
jects  of  nature?  Which  of  the  three  remaining 
sects  must  be  chosen?  This  is  the  question  that 
Varro  dwells  upon.  For  whether  one  of  these 
three  or  some  other  be  chosen,  reason  forbids 
that  more  than  one  be  true.  This  we  shall  after¬ 
wards  see;  but  meanwhile  let  us  explain  as  brief¬ 
ly  and  distinctly  as  we  can  how  Varro  makes 
his  selection  from  these  three,  that  is,  from  the 
sects  which  severally  hold  that  the  primary  ob¬ 
jects  of  nature  are  to  be  desired  for  virtue’s 
sake,  that  virtue  is  to  be  desired  for  their  sake, 
and  that  virtue  and  these  objects  are  to  be  de¬ 
sired  each  for  their  own  sake. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  3.  Which  of  the  three  leading  opinions  re¬ 
garding  the  chief  good  should  be  preferred , 
according  to  Varro,  who  follows  Antiochus 
and  the  Old  Academy 

Which  of  these  three  is  true  and  to  be  adopt¬ 
ed  he  attempts  to  show  in  the  following  man¬ 
ner.  As  it  is  the  supreme  good,  not  of  a  tree,  or 
of  a  beast,  or  of  a  god,  but  of  man,  that  philoso¬ 
phy  is  in  quest  of,  he  thinks  that,  first  of  all.  we 
must  define  man.  He  is  of  opinion  that  there  are 
two  parts  in  human  nature,  body  and  soul,  and 
makes  no  doubt  that  of  these  two  the  soul  is  the 
better  and  by  far  the  more  worthy  part.  But 
whether  the  soul  alone  is  the  man,  so  that  the 
body  holds  the  same  relation  to  it  as  a  horse  to 
the  horseman,  this  he  thinks  has  to  be  ascer¬ 
tained.  The  horseman  is  not  a  horse  and  a  man. 
but  only  a  man,  yet  he  is  called  a  horseman,  be¬ 
cause  he  is  in  some  relation  to  the  horse.  Again, 
is  the  body  alone  the  man,  having  a  relation  to 
the  soul  such  as  the  cup  has  to  the  drink?  For  it 
is  not  the  cup  and  the  drink  it  contains  which 
are  called  the  cup,  but  the  cup  alone;  yet  it  is  so 
called  because  it  is  made  to  hold  the  drink".  Or. 
lastly,  is  it  neither  the  soul  alone  nor  the  body 
alone,  but  both  together,  which  are  man,  the 
body  and  the  soul  being  each  a  part,  but  the 
whole  man  being  both  together,  as  we  call  two 
horses  yoked  together  a  pair,  of  which  pair  the 
near  and  the  off  horse  is  each  a  part,  but  we  do 
not  call  either  of  them,  no  matter  how  connect¬ 
ed  with  the  other,  a  pair,  but  only  both  togeth¬ 
er?  Of  these  three  alternatives,  then,  Varro 
chooses  the  third,  that  man  is  neither  the  body 
alone,  nor  the  soul  alone,  but  both  together.  And 
therefore  the  highest  good,  in  which  lies  the 
happiness  of  man,  is  composed  of  goods  of  both 
kinds,  both  bodily  and  spiritual.  And  conse¬ 
quently  he  thinks  that  the  primary  objects  of 
nature  are  to  be  sought  for  their  own  sake,  and 
that  virtue,  which  is  the  art  of  living,  and  can 
be  communicated  by  instruction,  is  the  most 
excellent  of  spiritual  goods.  This  virtue,  then, 
or  art  of  regulating  life,  when  it  has  received 
these  primary  objects  of  nature  which  existed 
independently  of  it,  and  prior  to  any  instruc¬ 
tion,  seeks  them  all,  and  itself  also,  for  its  own 
sake;  and  it  uses  them,  as  it  also  uses  itself,  that 
from  them  all  it  may  derive  profit  and  enjoy¬ 
ment,  greater  or  less,  according  as  they  are 
themselves  greater  or  less;  and  while  it  takes 
pleasure  in  all  of  them,  it  despises  the  less  that 
it  may  obtain  or  retain  the  greater  when  occa¬ 
sion  demands.  Now,  of  all  goods,  spiritual  or 
bodily,  there  is  none  at  all  to  compare  with  vir¬ 


tue.  For  virtue  makes  a  good  use  both  of  itself 
and  of  all  other  goods  in  which  lies  man’s  hap¬ 
piness;  and  where  it  is  absent,  no  matter  how 
many  good  things  a  man  has,  they  are  not  for 
his  good,  and  consequently  should  not  be  called 
good  things  while  they  belong  to  one  who  makes 
them  useless  by  using  them  badly.  The  life  of 
man,  then,  is  called  happy  when  it  enjoys  virtue 
and  these  other  spiritual  and  bodily  good  things 
without  which  virtue  is  impossible.  It  is  called 
happier  if  it  enjoys  some  or  many  other  good 
things  which  are  not  essential  to  virtue;  and 
happiest  of  all,  if  it  lacks  not  one  of  the  good 
things  which  pertain  to  the  body  and  the  soul. 
For  life  is  not  the  same  thing  as  virtue,  since 
not  every  life,  but  a  wisely  regulated  life,  is  vir¬ 
tue;  and  yet,  while  there  can  be  life  of  some 
kind  without  virtue,  there  cannot  be  virtue 
without  life.  This  I  might  apply  to  memory  and 
reason,  and  such  mental  faculties;  for  these  ex¬ 
ist  prior  to  instruction,  and  without  them  there 
cannot  be  any  instruction,  and  consequently  no 
virtue,  since  virtue  is  learned.  But  bodily  ad¬ 
vantages,  such  as  swiftness  of  foot,  beauty,  or 
strength,  are  not  essential  to  virtue,  neither  is 
virtue  essential  to  them,  and  yet  they  are  good 
things ;  and,  according  to  our  philosophers,  even 
these  advantages  are  desired  by  virtue  for  its 
own  sake,  and  are  used  and  enjoyed  by  it  in  a 
becoming  manner. 

They  say  that  this  happy  life  is  also  social, 
and  loves  the  advantages  of  its  friends  as  its 
own,  and  for  their  sake  wishes  for  them  what 
it  desires  for  itself,  whether  these  friends  live 
in  the  same  family,  as  a  wife,  children,  domes¬ 
tics;  or  in  the  locality  where  one’s  home  is,  as 
the  citizens  of  the  same  town ;  or  in  the  world  at 
large,  as  the  nations  bound  in  common  human 
brotherhood ;  or  in  the  universe  itself,  compre¬ 
hended  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  as  those 
whom  they  call  gods,  and  provide  as  friends 
for  the  wise  man,  and  whom  we  more  familiarly 
call  angels.  Moreover,  they  say  that,  regarding 
the  supreme  good  and  evil,  there  is  no  room  for 
doubt,  and  that  they  therefore  differ  from  the 
New  Academy  in  this  respect,  and  they  are  not 
concerned  whether  a  philosopher  pursues  those 
ends  which  they  think  true  in  the  Cynic  dress 
and  manner  of  life  or  in  some  other.  And,  lastly, 
in  regard  to  the  three  modes  of  life,  the  con¬ 
templative,  the  active,  and  the  composite,  they 
declare  in  favour  of  the  third.  That  these  were 
the  opinions  and  doctrines  of  the  Old  Academy, 
Varro  asserts  on  the  authority  of  Antiochus, 
Cicero’s  master  and  his  own,  though  Cicero 
makes  him  out  to  have  been  more  frequently  in 


THE  CITY  OF 

accordance  with  the  Stoics  than  with  the  Old 
Academy.  But  of  what  importance  is  this  to  us, 
who  ought  to  judge  the  matter  on  its  own  mer¬ 
its,  rather  than  to  understand  accurately  what 
different  men  have  thought  about  it? 

Chap.  4.  What  the  Christians  believe  regarding 
the  supreme  good  and  evil,  in  opposition  to 
the  philosophers,  who  have  maintained  that 
the  supreme  good  is  in  themselves 
If,  then,  we  be  asked  what  the  city  of  God 
has  to  say  upon  these  points,  and,  in  the  first 
place,  what  its  opinion  regarding  the  supreme 
good  and  evil  is,  it  will  reply  that  life  eternal  is 
the  supreme  good,  death  eternal  the  supreme 
evil,  and  that  to  obtain  the  one  and  escape  the 
other  we  must  live  rightly.  And  thus  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “The  just  lives  by  faith,”  1  for  we  do  not 
as  yet  see  our  good,  and  must  therefore  live  by 
faith;  neither  have  we  in  ourselves  power  to 
live  rightly,  but  can  do  so  only  if  He  Who  has 
given  us  faith  to  believe  in  His  help  do  help  us 
when  we  believe  and  pray.  As  for  those  who 
have  supposed  that  the  sovereign  good  and  evil 
are  to  be  found  in  this  life,  and  have  placed  it 
either  in  the  soul  or  the  body,  or  in  both,  or,  to 
speak  more  explicitly,  either  in  pleasure  or  in 
virtue,  or  in  both;  in  repose  or  in  virtue,  or  in 
both;  in  pleasure  and  repose,  or  in  virtue,  or  in 
all  combined;  in  the  primary  objects  of  nature, 
or  in  virtue,  or  in  both — all  these  have,  with  a 
marvelous  shallowness,  sought  to  find  their 
blessedness  in  this  life  and  in  themselves.  Con¬ 
tempt  has  been  poured  upon  such  ideas  by  the 
Truth,  saying  by  the  prophet,  “The  Lord  know- 
eth  the  thoughts  of  men”  (or,  as  the  Apostle 
Paul  cites  the  passage,  “The  Lord  knoweth  the 
thoughts  of  the  wise”)  “that  they  are  vain.”  2 
For  what  flood  of  eloquence  can  suffice  to  de¬ 
tail  the  miseries  of  this  life?  Cicero,  in  the  Con¬ 
solation  on  the  death  of  his  daughter,  has  spent 
all  his  ability  in  lamentation;  but  how  inade¬ 
quate  was  even  his  ability  here?  For  when, 
where,  how,  in  this  life  can  these  primary  ob¬ 
jects  of  nature  be  possessed  so  that  they  may 
not  be  assailed  by  unforeseen  accidents?  Is  the 
body  of  the  wise  man  exempt  from  any  pain 
which  may  dispel  pleasure,  from  any  disquie¬ 
tude  which  may  banish  repose?  The  amputation 
or  decay  of  the  members  of  the  body  puts  an 
end  to  its  integrity,  deformity  blights  its  beau¬ 
ty,  weakness  its  health,  lassitude  its  vigour, 
sleepiness  or  sluggishness  its  activity — and 
which  of  these  is  it  that  may  not  assail  the  flesh 
of  the  wise  man?  Comely  and  fitting  attitudes 
^ab.  2.  4.  2Ps.  94.  11,  and  I  Cor.  3.  20. 


GOD  XIX.  3-4  51 1 

and  movements  of  the  body  are  numbered 
among  the  prime  natural  blessings ;  but  what  if 
some  sickness  makes  the  members  tremble? 
what  if  a  man  suffers  from  curvature  of  the 
spine  to  such  an  extent  that  his  hands  reach  the 
ground,  and  he  goes  upon  all-fours  like  a  quad¬ 
ruped?  Does  not  this  destroy  all  beauty  and 
grace  in  the  body,  whether  at  rest  or  in  motion? 
What  shall  I  say  of  the  fundamental  blessings 
of  the  soul,  sense  and  intellect,  of  which  the  one 
is  given  for  the  perception,  and  the  other  for 
the  comprehension  of  truth?  But  what  kind  of 
sense  is  it  that  remains  when  a  man  becomes 
deaf  and  blind?  where  are  reason  and  intellect 
when  disease  makes  a  man  delirious?  We  can 
scarcely,  or  not  at  all,  refrain  from  tears,  when 
we  think  of  or  see  the  actions  and  words  of  such 
frantic  persons,  and  consider  how  different  from 
and  even  opposed  to  their  own  sober  judgment 
and  ordinary  conduct  their  present  demeanour 
is.  And  what  shall  I  say  of  those  who  suffer 
from  demoniacal  possession?  Where  is  their 
own  intelligence  hidden  and  buried  while  the 
malignant  spirit  is  using  their  body  and  soul  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  own  will?  And  who  is  quite  sure 
that  no  such  thing  can  happen  to  the  wise  man 
in  this  life?  Then,  as  to  the  perception  of  truth, 
what  can  we  hope  for  even  in  this  way  while  in 
the  body,  as  we  read  in  the  true  book  of  Wis¬ 
dom,  “The  corruptible  body  weigheth  down  the 
soul,  and  the  earthly  tabernacle  presseth  down 
the  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things”?3  And 
eagerness,  or  desire  of  action,  if  this  is  the  right 
meaning  to  put  upon  the  Greek  opp?/,  is  also 
reckoned  among  the  primary  advantages  of  na¬ 
ture;  and  yet  is  it  not  this  which  produces  those 
pitiable  movements  of  the  insane,  and  those  ac¬ 
tions  which  we  shudder  to  see,  when  sense  is  de¬ 
ceived  and  reason  deranged? 

In  fine,  virtue  itself,  which  is  not  among  the 
primary  objects  of  nature,  but  succeeds  to  them 
as  the  result  of  learning,  though  it  holds  the 
highest  place  among  human  good  things,  what 
is  its  occupation  save  to  wage  perpetual  war 
with  vices — not  those  that  are  outside  of  us,  but 
within;  not  other  men’s,  but  our  own — a  war 
which  is  waged  especially  by  that  virtue  which 
the  Greeks  call  (jwfppoavvr]',  and  we  temper¬ 
ance,  and  which  bridles  carnal  lusts,  and  pre¬ 
vents  them  from  winning  the  consent  of  the 
spirit  to  wicked  deeds?  For  we  must  not  fancy 
that  there  is  no  vice  in  us,  when,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “The  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit”;4  for 
to  this  vice  there  is  a  contrary  virtue,  when,  as 
the  same  writer  says,  “The  spirit  lusteth  against 
^isd.  9.  15.  4Gal.  5.  17. 


512  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  flesh.”  “For  these  two,”  he  says,  “are  con¬ 
trary  one  to  the  other,  so  that  you  cannot  do  the 
things  which  you  would.”  But  what  is  it  we  wish 
to  do  when  we  seek  to  attain  the  supreme  good, 
unless  that  the  flesh  should  cease  to  lust  against 
the  spirit,  and  that  there  be  no  vice  in  us  against 
which  the  spirit  may  lust?  And  as  we  cannot  at¬ 
tain  to  this  in  the  present  life,  however  ardently 
we  desire  it,  let  us  by  God’s  help  accomplish  at 
least  this,  to  preserve  the  soul  from  succumbing 
and  yielding  to  the  flesh  that  lusts  against  it,  and 
to  refuse  our  consent  to  the  perpetration  of  sin. 
Far  be  it  from  us,  then,  to  fancy  that  w7hile  we 
are  still  engaged  in  this  intestine  war,  we  have 
already  found  the  happiness  which  we  seek  to 
reach  by  victory.  And  who  is  there  so  wise  that 
he  has  no  conflict  at  all  to  maintain  against  his 
vices? 

What  shall  I  say  of  that  virtue  which  is  called 
prudence?  Is  not  all  its  vigilance  spent  in  the 
discernment  of  good  from  evil  things,  so  that  no 
mistake  may  be  admitted  about  what  we  should 
desire  and  what  avoid?  And  thus  it  is  itself  a 
proof  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  evils,  or  that 
evils  are  in  us;  for  it  teaches  us  that  it  is  an  evil 
to  consent  to  sin,  and  a  good  to  refuse  this  con¬ 
sent.  And  yet  this  evil,  to  which  prudence  teach¬ 
es  and  temperance  enables  us  not  to  consent,  is 
removed  from  this  life  neither  by  prudence  nor 
by  temperance.  And  justice,  whose  office  it  is  to 
render  to  every  man  his  due,  whereby  there  is 
in  man  himself  a  certain  just  order  of  nature,  so 
that  the  soul  is  subjected  to  God,  and  the  flesh 
to  the  soul,  and  consequently  both  soul  and 
flesh  to  God — does  not  this  virtue  demonstrate 
that  it  is  as  yet  rather  labouring  towards  its  end 
than  resting  in  its  finished  work?  For  the  soul  is 
so  much  the  less  subjected  to  God  as  it  is  less 
occupied  with  the  thought  of  God;  and  the  flesh 
is  so  much  the  less  subjected  to  the  spirit  as  it 
lusts  more  vehemently  against  the  spirit.  So 
long,  therefore,  as  wre  are  beset  by  this  weak¬ 
ness,  this  plague,  this  disease,  how  shall  we  dare 
to  say  that  we  are  safe?  and  if  not  safe,  then 
how  can  we  be  already  enjoying  our  final  beati¬ 
tude?  Then  that  virtue  which  goes  by  the  name 
of  fortitude  is  the  plainest  proof  of  the  ills  of 
life,  for  it  is  these  ills  which  it  is  compelled  to 
bear  patiently.  And  this  holds  good,  no  matter 
though  the  ripest  wisdom  co-exists  with  it.  And 
I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  the  Stoic  phi¬ 
losophers  can  presume  to  say  that  these  are  no 
ills,  though  at  the  same  time  they  allow  the  wise 
man  to  commit  suicide  and  pass  out  of  this  life 
if  they  become  so  grievous  that  he  cannot  or 
ought  not  to  endure  them.  But  such  is  the  stupid 


pride  of  these  men  who  fancy  that  the  supreme 
good  can  be  found  in  this  life,  and  that  they  can 
become  happy  by  their  own  resources,  that  their 
wise  man,  or  at  least  the  man  whom  they  fanci¬ 
fully  depict  as  such,  is  always  happy,  even 
though  he  become  blind,  deaf,  dumb,  mutilated, 
racked  with  pains,  or  suffer  any  conceivable  ca¬ 
lamity  such  as  may  compel  him  to  make  away 
with  himself ;  and  they  are  not  ashamed  to  call 
the  life  that  is  beset  with  these  evils  happy.  O 
happy  life,  which  seeks  the  aid  of  death  to  end 
it?  If  it  is  happy,  let  the  wise  man  remain  in  it; 
but  if  these  ills  drive  him  out  of  it,  in  what  sense 
is  it  happy?  Or  how  can  they  say  that  these  are 
not  evils  which  conquer  the  virtue  of  fortitude, 
and  force  it  not  only  to  yield,  but  so  to  rave  that 
it  in  one  breath  calls  life  happy  and  recommends 
it  to  be  given  up?  For  who  is  so  blind  as  not  to 
see  that  if  it  were  happy  it  would  not  be  fled 
from?  And  if  they  say  we  should  flee  from  it  on 
account  of  the  infirmities  that  beset  it,  why 
then  do  they  not  lower  their  pride  and  acknowl¬ 
edge  that  it  is  miserable?  Was  it,  I  would  ask, 
fortitude  or  weakness  which  prompted  Cato  to 
kill  himself?  for  he  wrould  not  have  done  so  had 
he  not  been  too  wreak  to  endure  Caesar’s  victory. 
Where,  then,  is  his  fortitude?  It  has  yielded,  it 
has  succumbed,  it  has  been  so  thoroughly  over¬ 
come  as  to  abandon,  forsake,  flee  this  happy 
life.  Or  was  it  no  longer  happy?  Then  it  was 
miserable.  How,  then,  were  these  not  evils 
which  made  life  miserable,  and  a  thing  to  be  es¬ 
caped  from? 

And  therefore  those  who  admit  that  these  are 
evils,  as  the  Peripatetics  do,  and  the  Old  Acad¬ 
emy,  the  sect  which  Varro  advocates,  express  a 
more  intelligible  doctrine;  but  theirs  also  is  a 
surprising  mistake,  for  they  contend  that  this  is 
a  happy  life  which  is  beset  by  these  evils,  even 
though  they  be  so  great  that  he  who  endures 
them  should  commit  suicide  to  escape  them. 
“Pains  and  anguish  of  body,”  says  Varro,  “are 
evils,  and  so  much  the  worse  in  proportion  to 
their  severity;  and  to  escape  them  you  must 
quit  this  life.”  What  life,  I  pray?  This  life,  he 
says,  which  is  oppressed  by  such  evils.  Then  it 
is  happy  in  the  midst  of  these  very  evils  on  ac¬ 
count  of  which  you  say  we  must  quit  it?  Or  do 
you  call  it  happy  because  you  are  at  liberty  to 
escape  these  evils  by  death?  What,  then,  if  by 
some  secret  judgment  of  God  you  were  held 
fast  and  not  permitted  to  die,  nor  suffered  to 
live  without  these  evils?  In  that  case,  at  least 
you  would  say  that  such  a  life  was  miserable.  It 
is  soon  relinquished,  no  doubt,  but  this  does  not 
make  it  not  miserable;  for  were  it  eternal,  you 


THE  CITY  OF 

yourself  would  pronounce  it  miserable.  Its  brev¬ 
ity.  therefore,  does  not  clear  it  of  misery;  nei¬ 
ther  ought  it  to  be  called  happiness  because  it  is 
a  brief  misery.  Certainly  there  is  a  mighty  force 
in  these  evils  which  compel  a  man — according 
to  them,  even  a  wise  man — to  cease  to  be  a  man 
that  he  may  escape  them,  though  they  say,  and 
say  truly,  that  it  is  as  it  were  the  first  and 
strongest  demand  of  nature  that  a  man  cherish 
himself,  and  naturally  therefore  avoid  death, 
and  should  so  stand  his  own  friend  as  to  wish 
and  vehemently  aim  at  continuing  to  exist  as  a 
living  creature,  and  subsisting  in  this  union  of 
soul  and  body.  There  is  a  mighty  force  in  these 
evils  to  overcome  this  natural  instinct  by  which 
death  is  by  every  means  and  with  all  a  man’s 
efforts  avoided,  and  to  overcome  it  so  complete¬ 
ly  that  what  was  avoided  is  desired,  sought  aft¬ 
er,  and  if  it  cannot  in  any  other  way  be  ob¬ 
tained,  is  inflicted  by  the  man  on  himself.  There 
is  a  mighty  force  in  these  evils  which  make  for¬ 
titude  a  homicide — if,  indeed,  that  is  to  be 
called  fortitude  which  is  so  thoroughly  over¬ 
come  by  these  evils,  that  it  not  only  cannot  pre¬ 
serve  by  patience  the  man  whom  it  undertook 
to  govern  and  defend,  but  is  itself  obliged  to 
kill  him.  The  wise  man,  I  admit,  ought  to  bear 
death  with  patience,  but  when  it  is  inflicted  by 
another.  If,  then,  as  these  men  maintain,  he  is 
obliged  to  inflict  it  on  himself,  certainly  it  must 
be  owned  that  the  ills  which  compel  him  to  this 
are  not  only  evils,  but  intolerable  evils.  The 
life,  then,  which  is  either  subject  to  accidents, 
or  environed  with  evils  so  considerable  and 
grievous,  could  never  have  been  called  happy,  if 
the  men  who  give  it  this  name  had  condescend¬ 
ed  to  yield  to  the  truth,  and  to  be  conquered  by 
valid  arguments,  when  they  inquired  after  the 
happy  life,  as  they  yield  to  unhappiness,  and  are 
overcome  by  overwhelming  evils,  when  they  put 
themselves  to  death,  and  if  they  had  not  fancied 
that  the  supreme  good  was  to  be  found  in  this 
mortal  life;  for  the  very  virtues  of  this  life, 
which  are  certainly  its  best  and  most  useful  pos¬ 
sessions,  are  all  the  more  telling  proofs  of  its 
miseries  in  proportion  as  they  are  helpful 
against  the  violence  of  its  dangers,  toils,  and 
woes.  For  if  these  are  true  virtues — and  such 
cannot  exist  save  in  those  who  have  true  piety — 
they  do  not  profess  to  be  able  to  deliver  the  men 
who  possess  them  from  all  miseries;  for  true 
virtues  tell  no  such  lies,  but  they  profess  that 
by  the  hope  of  the  future  world  this  life,  which 
is  miserably  involved  in  the  many  and  great 
evils  of  this  world,  is  happy  as  it  is  also  safe. 
For  if  not  yet  safe,  how  could  it  be  happy?  And 


GOD  XIX.  5  513 

therefore  the  Apostle  Paul,  speaking  not  of  men 
without  prudence,  temperance,  fortitude,  and 
justice,  but  of  those  whose  lives  were  regulated 
by  true  piety,  and  whose  virtues  were  therefore 
true,  says,  “For  we  are  saved  by  hope :  now  hope 
which  is  seen  is  not  hope;  for  what  a  man  seeth. 
why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  But  if  we  hope  for 
that  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait 
for  it.”  1  As,  therefore,  we  are  saved,  so  we  are 
made  happy  by  hope.  And  as  we  do  not  as  yet 
possess  a  present,  but  look  for  a  future  salva¬ 
tion,  so  is  it  with  our  happiness,  and  this  “with 
patience”;  for  we  are  encompassed  with  evils, 
which  we  ought  patiently  to  endure,  until  we 
come  to  the  ineffable  enjoyment  of  unmixed 
good;  for  there  shall  be  no  longer  anything  to 
endure.  Salvation,  such  as  it  shall  be  in  the 
world  to  come,  shall  itself  be  our  final  happi¬ 
ness.  And  this  happiness  these  philosophers  re¬ 
fuse  to  believe  in,  because  they  do  not  see  it, 
and  attempt  to  fabricate  for  themselves  a  hap¬ 
piness  in  this  life,  based  upon  a  virtue  which  is 
as  deceitful  as  it  is  proud. 

Chap.  5.  Of  the  social  life,  which ,  though  most 
desirable,  is  frequently  disturbed  by  many 
distresses 

We  give  a  much  more  unlimited  approval  to 
their  idea  that  the  life  of  the  wise  man  must  be 
social.  For  how  could  the  city  of  God  (concern¬ 
ing  which  we  are  already  writing  no  less  than 
the  nineteenth  book  of  this  work)  either  take  a 
beginning  or  be  developed,  or  attain  its  proper 
destiny,  if  the  life  of  the  saints  were  not  a  so¬ 
cial  life?  But  who  can  enumerate  all  the  great 
grievances  with  which  human  society  abounds 
in  the  misery  of  this  mortal  state?  Who  can 
weigh  them?  Hear  how  one  of  their  comic  writ¬ 
ers  makes  one  of  his  characters  express  the  com¬ 
mon  feelings  of  all  men  in  this  matter:  “I  am 
married;  this  is  one  misery.  Children  are  born 
to  me;  they  are  additional  cares.”  What  shall  I 
say  of  the  miseries  of  love  which  Terence  also 
recounts — “slights,  suspicions,  quarrels,  war  to¬ 
day,  peace  to-morrow?”  Is  not  human  life  full 
of  such  things?  Do  they  not  often  occur  even  in 
honourable  friendships?  On  all  hands  we  experi¬ 
ence  these  slights,  suspicions,  quarrels,  war,  all 
of  which  are  undoubted  evils;  while,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  peace  is  a  doubtful  good,  because  we 
do  not  know  the  heart  of  our  friend,  and  though 
we  did  know  it  to-day,  we  should  be  as  ignorant 
of  what  it  might  be  to-morrow.  Who  ought  to 
be,  or  who  are  more  friendly  than  those  who 
live  in  the  same  family?  And  yet  who  can  rely 
^om.  8.  24. 


5i4  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


even  upon  this  friendship,  seeing  that  secret 
treachery  has  often  broken  it  up,  and  produced 
enmity  as  bitter  as  the  amity  was  sweet,  or 
seemed  sweet  by  the  most  perfect  dissimula¬ 
tion?  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  words  of 
Cicero  so  move  the  heart  of  every  one,  and  pro¬ 
voke  a  sigh :  “There  are  no  snares  more  danger¬ 
ous  than  those  which  lurk  under  the  guise  of 
duty  or  the  name  of  relationship.  For  the  man 
who  is  your  declared  foe  you  can  easily  baffle 
by  precaution;  but  this  hidden,  intestine,  and 
domestic  danger  not  merely  exists,  but  over¬ 
whelms  you  before  you  can  foresee  and  examine 
it.”  It  is  also  to  this  that  allusion  is  made  by  the 
divine  saying,  “A  man’s  foes  are  those  of  his 
own  household” 1 — words  which  one  cannot 
hear  without  pain;  for  though  a  man  have  suf¬ 
ficient  fortitude  to  endure  it  with  equanimity, 
and  sufficient  sagacity  to  baffle  the  malice  of  a 
pretended  friend,  yet  if  he  himself  is  a  good 
man,  he  cannot  but  be  greatly  pained  at  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  perfidy  of  wicked  men,  whether 
they  have  always  been  wicked  and  merely 
feigned  goodness,  or  have  fallen  from  a  better 
to  a  malicious  disposition.  If,  then,  home';  the 
natural  refuge  from  the  ills  of  life,  is  itself  not 
safe,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  city,  which,  as  it 
is  larger,  is  so  much  the  more  filled  with  law¬ 
suits  civil  and  criminal,  and  is  never  free  from 
the  fear,  if  sometimes  from  the  actual  outbreak, 
of  disturbing  and  bloody  insurrections  and  civil 
wars? 

Chap.  6.  Of  the  error  of  human  judgments 
when  the  truth  is  hidden 
What  shall  I  say  of  these  judgments  which 
men  pronounce  on  men,  and  which  are  necessary 
in  communities,  whatever  outward  peace  they 
enjoy?  Melancholy  and  lamentable  judgments 
they  are,  since  the  judges  are  men  who  cannot 
discern  the  consciences  of  those  at  their  bar, 
and  are  therefore  frequently  compelled  to  put 
innocent  witnesses  to  the  torture  to  ascertain 
the  truth  regarding  the  crimes  of  other  men. 
What  shall  I  say  of  torture  applied  to  the  ac¬ 
cused  himself?  He  is  tortured  to  discover 
whether  he  is  guilty,  so  that,  though  innocent, 
he  suffers  most  undoubted  punishment  for 
crime  that  is  still  doubtful,  not  because  it  is 
proved  that  he  committed  it,  but  because  it  is 
not  ascertained  that  he  did  not  commit  it.  Thus 
the  ignorance  of  the  judge  frequently  involves 
an  innocent  person  in  suffering.  And  what  is 
still  more  unendurable — a  thing,  indeed,  to  be 
bewailed,  and,  if  that  were  possible,  watered 
^att.  io.  36. 


with  fountains  of  tears — is  this,  that  when  the 
judge  puts  the  accused  to  the  question,  that  he 
may  not  unwittingly  put  an  innocent  man  to 
death,  the  result  of  this  lamentable  ignorance  is 
that  this  very  person,  whom  he  tortured  that  he 
might  not  condemn  him  if  innocent,  is  con¬ 
demned  to  death  both  tortured  and  innocent. 
For  if  he  has  chosen,  in  obedience  to  the  phil¬ 
osophical  instructions  to  the  wise  man,  to  quit 
this  life  rather  than  endure  any  longer  such  tor¬ 
tures,  he  declares  that  he  has  committed  the 
crime  which  in  fact  he  has  not  committed.  And 
when  he  has  been  condemned  and  put  to  death, 
the  judge  is  still  in  ignorance  whether  he  has 
put  to  death  an  innocent  or  a  guilty  person, 
though  he  put  the  accused  to  the  torture  for  the 
very  purpose  of  saving  himself  from  condemn¬ 
ing  the  innocent ;  and  consequently  he  has  both 
tortured  an  innocent  man  to  discover  his  inno¬ 
cence  and  has  put  him  to  death  without  discov¬ 
ering  it.  If  such  darkness  shrouds  social  life,  will 
a  wise  judge  take  his  seat  on  the  bench  or  no? 
Beyond  question  he  will.  For  human  society, 
which  he  thinks  it  a  wickedness  to  abandon,  con¬ 
strains  him  and  compels  him  to  this  duty.  And 
he  thinks  it  no  wickedness  that  innocent  wit¬ 
nesses  are  tortured  regarding  the  crimes  of 
which  other  men  are  accused;  or  that  the  ac¬ 
cused  are  put  to  the  torture,  so  that  they  are 
often  overcome  with  anguish,  and,  though  in¬ 
nocent,  make  false  confessions  regarding  them¬ 
selves,  and  are  punished;  or  that,  though  they 
be  not  condemned  to  die,  they  often  die  during, 
or  in  consequence  of,  the  torture;  or  that  some¬ 
times  the  accusers,  who  perhaps  have  been 
prompted  by  a  desire  to  benefit  society  by  bring¬ 
ing  criminals  to  justice,  are  themselves  con¬ 
demned  through  the  ignorance  of  the  judge,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  unable  to  prove  the  truth  of  their 
accusations  though  they  are  true,  and  because 
the  witnesses  lie,  and  the  accused  endures  the 
torture  without  being  moved  to  confession. 
These  numerous  and  important  evils  he  does 
not  consider  sins;  for  the  wise  judge  does  these 
things,  not  with  any  intention  of  doing  harm, 
but  because  his  ignorance  compels  him,  and  be¬ 
cause  human  society  claims  him  as  a  judge.  But 
though  we  therefore  acquit  the  judge  of  malice, 
we  must  none  the  less  condemn  human  life  as 
miserable.  And  if  he  is  compelled  to  torture  and 
punish  the  innocent  because  his  office  and  his 
ignorance  constrain  him,  is  he  a  happy  as  well 
as  guiltless  man?  Surely  it  were  proof  of  more 
profound  considerateness  and  finer  feeling  were 
he  to  recognize  the  misery  of  these  necessities, 
and  shrink  from  his  own  implication  in  that  mis- 


THE  CITY  OF 

ery ;  and  had  he  any  piety  about  him,  he  would 
cry  to  God  “From  my  necessities  deliver  Thou 
me.”  1 

Chap.  7  .Of  the  diversity  of  languages ,  by  which 
the  intercourse  of  men  is  prevented;  and 
of  the  misery  of  wars ,  even  of  those  called 
just 

After  the  state  or  city  comes  the  world,  the 
third  circle  of  human  society — the  first  being 
the  house,  and  the  second  the  city.  And  the 
world,  as  it  is  larger,  so  it  is  fuller  of  dangers,  as 
the  greater  sea  is  the  more  dangerous.  And  here, 
in  the  first  place,  man  is  separated  from  man  by 
the  difference  of  languages.  For  if  two  men,  each 
ignorant  of  the  other’s  language,  meet,  and  are 
not  compelled  to  pass,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to 
remain  in  company,  dumb  animals,  though  of 
different  species,  would  more  easily  hold  inter¬ 
course  than  they,  human  beings  though  they  be. 
For  their  common  nature  is  no  help  to  friendli¬ 
ness  when  they  are  prevented  by  diversity  of 
language  from  conveying  their  sentiments  to 
one  another;  so  that  a  man  would  more  readily 
hold  intercourse  with  his  dog  than  with  a  for¬ 
eigner.  But  the  imperial  city  has  endeavoured 
to  impose  on  subject  nations  not  only  her  yoke, 
but  her  language,  as  a  bond  of  peace,  so  that  in¬ 
terpreters,  far  from  being  scarce,  are  number¬ 
less.  This  is  true;  but  how  many  great  wars, 
how  much  slaughter  and  bloodshed,  have  pro¬ 
vided  this  unity!  And  though  these  are  past,  the 
end  of  these  miseries  has  not  yet  come.  For 
though  there  have  never  been  wanting,  nor  are 
yet  wanting,  hostile  nations  beyond  the  empire, 
against  whom  wars  have  been  and  are  waged, 
yet,  supposing  there  were  no  such  nations,  the 
very  extent  of  the  empire  itself  has  produced 
wars  of  a  more  obnoxious  description — social 
and  civil  wars — and  with  these  the  whole  race 
has  been  agitated  either  by  the  actual  conflict 
or  the  fear  of  a  renewed  outbreak.  If  I  attempt¬ 
ed  to  give  an  adequate  description  of  these  man¬ 
ifold  disasters,  these  stern  and  lasting  necessi¬ 
ties,  though  I  am  quite  unequal  to  the  task,  what 
limit  cotild  I  set?  But,  say  they,  the  wise  man 
will  wage  just  wars.  As  if  he  would  not  all  the 
rather  lament  the  necessity  of  just  wars,  if  he 
remembers  that  he  is  a  man;  for  if  they  were 
not  just  he  would  not  wage  them,  and  would 
therefore  be  delivered  from  all  wars.  For  it  is 
the  wrongdoing  of  the  opposing  party  which 
compels  the  wise  man  to  wage  just  wars;  and 
this  wrong-doing,  even  though  it  gave  rise  to  no 
war,  would  still  be  matter  of  grief  to  man  be- 
Ts.  25.  17. 


GOD  XIX.  6-8  515 

cause  it  is  man’s  wrong-doing.  Let  every  one, 
then,  who  thinks  with  pain  on  all  these  great 
evils,  so  horrible,  so  ruthless,  acknowledge  that 
this  is  misery.  And  if  any  one  either  endures  or 
thinks  of  them  without  mental  pain,  this  is  a 
more  miserable  plight  still,  for  he  thinks  himself 
happy  because  he  has  lost  human  feeling. 

Chap.  8.  That  the  friendship  of  good  men  can¬ 
not  be  securely  rested  in,  so  long  as  the  dan¬ 
gers  of  this  life  force  us  to  be  anxious 
In  our  present  wretched  condition  we  fre¬ 
quently  mistake  a  friend  for  an  enemy,  and  an 
enemy  for  a  friend.  And  if  we  escape  this  pitia¬ 
ble  blindness,  is  not  the  unfeigned  confidence 
and  mutual  love  of  true  and  good  friends  our 
one  solace  in  human  society,  filled  as  it  is  with 
misunderstandings  and  calamities?  And  yet  the 
more  friends  we  have,  and  the  more  widely  they 
are  scattered,  the  more  numerous  are  our  fears 
that  some  portion  of  the  vast  masses  of  the  dis¬ 
asters  of  life  may  light  upon  them.  For  we  are 
not  only  anxious  lest  they  suffer  from  famine, 
war,  disease,  captivity,  or  the  inconceivable  hor¬ 
rors  of  slavery,  but  we  are  also  affected  with  the 
much  more  painful  dread  that  their  friendship 
may  be  changed  into  perfidy,  malice,  and  injus¬ 
tice.  And  when  these  contingencies  actually  oc¬ 
cur — as  they  do  the  more  frequently  the  more 
friends  we  have  and  the  more  widely  they  are 
scattered — and  when  they  come  to  our  knowl¬ 
edge,  who  but  the  man  who  has  experienced  it 
can  tell  with  what  pangs  the  heart  is  torn?  We 
would,  in  fact,  prefer  to  hear  that  they  were 
dead,  although  we  could  not  without  anguish 
hear  of  even  this.  For  if  their  life  has  solaced  us 
with  the  charms  of  friendship,  can  it  be  that 
their  death  should  affect  us  with  no  sadness?  He 
who  will  have  none  of  this  sadness  must,  if  pos¬ 
sible,  have  no  friendly  intercourse.  Let  him  in¬ 
terdict  or  extinguish  friendly  affection;  let  him 
burst  with  ruthless  insensibility  the  bonds  of 
every  human  relationship;  or  let  him  contrive 
so  to  use  them  that  no  sweetness  shall  distil  into 
his  spirit.  But  if  this  is  utterly  impossible,  how 
shall  we  contrive  to  feel  no  bitterness  in  the 
death  of  those  whose  life  has  been  sweet  to  us? 
Hence  arises  that  grief  which  affects  the  tender 
heart  like  a  wound  or  a  bruise  and  which  is 
healed  by  the  application  of  kindly  consolation. 
For  though  the  cure  is  affected  all  the  more  eas¬ 
ily  and  rapidly  the  better  condition  the  soul  is 
in,  we  must  not  on  this  account  suppose  that 
there  is  nothing  at  all  to  heal.  Although,  then, 
our  present  life  is  afflicted,  sometimes  in  a  mild¬ 
er,  sometimes  in  a  more  painful  degree,  by  the 


1 6  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


death  of  those  very  dear  to  us,  and  especially  of 
useful  public  men,  yet  we  would  prefer  to  hear 
that  such  men  were  dead  rather  than  to  hear  or 
perceive  that  they  had  fallen  from  the  faith,  or 
from  virtue — in  other  words,  that  they  were 
spiritually  dead.  Of  this  vast  material  for  mis¬ 
ery  the  earth  is  full,  and  therefore  it  is  written, 
“Is  not  human  life  upon  earth  a  trial?”1  And 
with  the  same  reference  the  Lord  says,  “Woe  to 
the  world  because  of  offenses!”2  and  again,  “Be¬ 
cause  iniquity  abounded,  the  love  of  many  shall 
wax  cold.” 3  And  hence  we  enjoy  some  gratifica¬ 
tion  when  our  good  friends  die;  for  though  their 
death  leaves  us  in  sorrow,  we  have  the  consola¬ 
tory  assurance  that  they  are  beyond  the  ills  by 
which  in  this  life  even  the  best  of  men  are  brok¬ 
en  down  or  corrupted,  or  are  in  danger  of  both 
results. 

Chap.  9.  Of  the  friendship  of  the  holy  angels , 
which  men  cannot  be  sure  of  in  this  life,  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  deceit  of  the  demons  who  hold  in 
bondage  the  worshippers  of  a  plurality  of 
gods 

The  philosophers  who  wished  us  to  have"  the 
gods  for  our  friends  rank  the  friendship  of  the 
holy  angels  in  the  fourth  circle  of  society,  ad¬ 
vancing  now  from  the  three  circles  of  society  on 
earth  to  the  universe,  and  embracing  heaven  it¬ 
self.  And  in  this  friendship  we  have  indeed  no 
fear  that  the  angels  will  grieve  us  by  their  death 
or  deterioration.  But  as  we  cannot  mingle  with 
them  as  familiarly  as  with  men  (which  itself  is 
one  of  the  grievances  of  this  life),  and  as  Satan, 
as  we  read,4  sometimes  transforms  himself  into 
an  angel  of  light,  to  tempt  those  whom  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  discipline,  or  just  to  deceive,  there  is 
great  need  of  God’s  mercy  to  preserve  us  from 
making  friends  of  demons  in  disguise,  while  we 
fancy  we  have  good  angels  for  our  friends;  for 
the  astuteness  and  deceitfulness  of  these  wicked 
spirits  is  equalled  by  their  hurtfulness.  And  is 
this  not  a  great  misery  of  human  life,  that  we 
are  involved  in  such  ignorance  as.  but  for  God’s 
mercy,  makes  us  a  prey  to  these  demons?  And 
it  is  very  certain  that  the  philosophers  of  the 
godless  city,  who  have  maintained  that  the  gods 
were  their  friends,  had  fallen  a  prey  to  the  ma¬ 
lignant  demons  who  rule  that  city,  and  whose 
eternal  punishment  is  to  be  shared  by  it.  For 
the  nature  of  these  beings  is  sufficiently  evinced 
by  the  sacred  or  rather  sacrilegious  observances 
which  form  their  worship,  and  by  the  filthy 
games  in  which  their  crimes  are  celebrated,  and 

Bob,  7.  1.  2Matt.  17.  7.  3Matt.  24.  12. 

4II  Cor.  11.  14. 


which  they  themselves  originated  and  exacted 
from  their  worshippers  as  a  fit  propitiation. 

Chap.  10.  The  reward  prepared  for  the  saints 
after  they  have  endured  the  trial  of  this  life 
But  not  even  the  saints  and  faithful  worship¬ 
pers  of  the  one  true  and  most  high  God  are  safe 
from  the  manifold  temptations  and  deceits  of 
the  demons.  For  in  this  abode  of  weakness,  and 
in  these  wicked  days,  this  state  of  anxiety  has 
also  its  use,  stimulating  us  to  seek  with  keener 
longing  for  that  security  where  peace  is  com¬ 
plete  and  unassailable.  There  we  shall  enjoy  the 
gifts  of  nature,  that  is  to  say,  all  that  God  the 
Creator  of  all  natures  has  bestowed  upon  ours 
— gifts  not  only  good,  but  eternal,  not  only  of 
the  spirit,  healed  now  by  wisdom,  but  also  of  the 
body  renewed  by  the  resurrection.  There  the 
virtues  shall  no  longer  be  struggling  against  any 
vice  or  evil,  but  shall  enjoy  the  reward  of  vic¬ 
tory,  the  eternal  peace  which  no  adversary  shall 
disturb.  This  is  the  final  blessedness,  this  the  ul¬ 
timate  consummation,  the  unending  end.  Here, 
indeed,  we  are  said  to  be  blessed  when  we  have 
such  peace  as  can  be  enjoyed  in  a  good  life;  but 
such  blessedness  is  mere  misery  compared  to 
that  final  felicity.  When  we  mortals  possess 
such  peace  as  this  mortal  life  can  afford,  virtue, 
if  we  are  living  rightly,  makes  a  right  use  of  the 
advantages  of  this  peaceful  condition;  and 
when  we  have  it  not,  virtue  makes  a  good  use 
even  of  the  evils  a  man  suffers.  But  this  is  true 
virtue,  when  it  refers  all  the  advantages  it 
makes  a  good  use  of,  and  all  that  it  does  in  mak¬ 
ing  good  use  of  good  and  evil  things,  and  itself 
also,  to  that  end  in  which  we  shall  enjoy  the 
best  and  greatest  peace  possible. 

Chap,  ii  .Of  the  happiness  of  the  eternal  peace, 
which  constitutes  the  end  or  true  perfection 
of  the  saints 

And  thus  we  may  say  of  peace,  as  we  have 
said  of  eternal  life,  that  it  is  the  end  of  our 
good;  and  the  rather  because  the  Psalmist  says 
of  the  city  of  God,  the  subject  of  this  laborious 
work,  “Praise  the  Lord.  0  Jerusalem;  praise 
thy  God,  0  Zion :  for  He  hath  strengthened  the 
bars  of  thy  gates;  He  hath  blessed  thy  children 
within  thee;  who  hath  made  thy  borders 
peace.” 5  For  when  the  bars  of  her  gates  shall  be 
strengthened,  none  shall  go  in  or  come  out  from 
her;  consequently  we  ought  to  understand  the 
peace  of  her  borders  as  that  final  peace  we  are 
wishing  to  declare.  For  even  the  mystical  name 
of  the  city  itself,  that  is,  Jerusalem,  means,  as  I 
6Ps.  147.  12-14. 


THE  CITY  OF 

have  already  said,  Vision  of  Peace.  But  as  the 
word  peace  is  employed  in  connection  with 
things  in  this  world  in  which  certainly  life  eter¬ 
nal  has  no  place,  we  have  preferred  to  call  the 
end  or  supreme  good  of  this  city  life  eternal 
rather  than  peace.  Of  this  end  the  apostle  says, 
“But  now,  being  freed  from  sin,  and  become 
servants  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holi¬ 
ness,  and  the  end  life  eternal.”  1  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  as  those  who  are  not  familiar  with 
Scripture  may  suppose  that  the  life  of  the  wick¬ 
ed  is  eternal  life,  either  because  of  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  the  soul,  which  some  of  the  philoso¬ 
phers  even  have  recognized,  or  because  of  the 
endless  punishment  of  the  wicked,  which  forms 
a  part  of  our  faith,  and  which  seems  impossible 
unless  the  wicked  live  for  ever,  it  may  therefore 
be  advisable,  in  order  that  every  one  may  read¬ 
ily  understand  what  we  mean,  to  say  that  the 
end  or  supreme  good  of  this  city  is  either  peace 
in  eternal  life,  or  eternal  life  in  peace.  For  peace 
is  a  good  so  great,  that  even  in  this  earthly  and 
mortal  life  there  is  no  word  we  hear  with  such 
pleasure,  nothing  we  desire  with  such  zest,  or 
find  to  be  more  thoroughly  gratifying.  So  that 
if  we  dwell  for  a  little  longer  on  this  subject,  we 
shall  not,  in  my  opinion,  be  wearisome  to  our 
readers,  who  will  attend  both  for  the  sake  of  un¬ 
derstanding  what  is  the  end  of  this  city  of  which 
we  speak,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  sweetness  of 
peace  which  is  dear  to  all. 

Chap.  12.  That  even  the  fierceness  of  war  and 
all  the  disquietude  of  men  make  towards  this 
one  end  of  peace,  which  every  nature  desires 
Whoever  gives  even  moderate  attention  to 
human  affairs  and  to  our  common  nature,  will 
recognize  that  if  there  is  no  man  who  does  not 
wish  to  be  joyful,  neither  is  there  any  one  who 
does  not  wish  to  have  peace.  For  even  they  who 
make  war  desire  nothing  but  victory — desire, 
that  is  to  say,  to  attain  to  peace  with  glory.  For 
what  else  is  victory  than  the  conquest  of  those 
who  resist  us?  and  when  this  is  done  there  is 
peace.  It  is  therefore  with  the  desire  for  peace 
that  war^  are  waged,  even  by  those  who  take 
pleasure  in  exercising  their  warlike  nature  in 
command  and  battle.  And  hence  it  is  obvious 
that  peace  is  the  end  sought  for  by  war.  For  ev¬ 
ery  man  seeks  peace  by  waging  war,  but  no  man 
seeks  war  by  making  peace.  For  even  they  who 
intentionally  interrupt  the  peace  in  which  they 
are  living  have  no  hatred  of  peace,  but  only  wish 
it  changed  into  a  peace  that  suits  them  better. 
They  do  not,  therefore,  wish  to  have  no  peace, 

^om.  6.  22. 


GOD  XIX.  9-12  517 

but  only  one  more  to  their  mind.  And  in  the 
case  of  sedition,  when  men  have  separated  them¬ 
selves  from  the  community,  they  yet  do  not 
effect  what  they  wish,  unless  they  maintain 
some  kind  of  peace  with  their  fellow-conspira¬ 
tors.  And  therefore  even  robbers  take  care  to 
maintain  peace  with  their  comrades,  that  they 
may  with  greater  effect  and  greater  safety  in¬ 
vade  the  peace  of  other  men.  And  if  an  individu¬ 
al  happen  to  be  of  such  unrivalled  strength,  and 
to  be  so  jealous  of  partnership,  that  he  trusts 
himself  with  no  comrades,  but  makes  his  own 
plots,  and  commits  depredations  and  murders 
on  his  own  account,  yet  he  maintains  some 
shadow  of  peace  with  such  persons  as  he  is  un¬ 
able  to  kill,  and  from  whom  he  wishes  to  con¬ 
ceal  his  deeds.  In  his  own  home,  too,  he  makes 
it  his  aim  to  be  at  peace  with  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren,  and  any  other  members  of  his  household; 
for  unquestionably  their  prompt  obedience  to 
his  every  look  is  a  source  of  pleasure  to  him. 
And  if  this  be  not  rendered,  he  is  angry,  he 
chides  and  punishes ;  and  even  by  this  storm  he 
secures  the  calm  peace  of  his  own  home,  as  oc¬ 
casion  demands.  For  he  sees  that  peace  cannot 
be  maintained  unless  all  the  members  of  the 
same  domestic  circle  be  subject  to  one  head, 
such  as  he  himself  is  in  his  own  house.  And 
therefore  if  a  city  or  nation  offered  to  submit 
itself  to  him,  to  serve  him  in  the  same  style  as 
he  had  made  his  household  serve  him,  he  would 
no  longer  lurk  in  a  brigand’s  hiding-places,  but 
lift  his  head  in  open  day  as  a  king,  though  the 
same  coveteousness  and  wickedness  should  re¬ 
main  in  him.  And  thus  all  men  desire  to  have 
peace  with  their  own  circle  whom  they  wish  to 
govern  as  suits  themselves.  For  even  those 
whom  they  make  war  against  they  wish  to  make 
their  own,  and  impose  on  them  the  laws  of  their 
own  peace. 

But  let  us  suppose  a  man  such  as  poetry  and 
mythology  speak  of — a  man  so  insociable  and 
savage  as  to  be  called  rather  a  semi-man  than  a 
man.  Although,  then,  his  kingdom  was  the  soli¬ 
tude  of  a  dreary  cave,  and  he  himself  was  so 
singularly  bad-hearted  that  he  was  named  Ka- 
kos,  which  is  the  Greek  word  for  bad ;  though 
he  had  no  wife  to  soothe  him  with  endearing 
talk,  no  children  to  play  with,  no  sons  to  do  his 
bidding,  no  friend  to  enliven  him  with  inter¬ 
course,  not  even  his  father  Vulcan  (though  in 
one  respect  he  was  happier  than  his  father,  not 
having  begotten  a  monster  like  himself) ;  al¬ 
though  he  gave  to  no  man,  but  took  as  he  wished 
whatever  he  could,  from  whomsoever  he  could, 
when  he  could;  yet  in  that  solitary  den,  the  floor 


518  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  which,  as  Virgil 1  says,  was  always  reeking 
with  recent  slaughter,  there  was  nothing  else 
than  peace  sought,  a  peace  in  which  no  one 
should  molest  him,  or  disquiet  him  with  any  as¬ 
sault  or  alarm.  With  his  own  body  he  desired  to 
be  at  peace,  and  he  was  satisfied  only  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  he  had  this  peace.  For  he  ruled  his  mem¬ 
bers,  and  they  obeyed  him;  and  for  the  sake  of 
pacifying  his  mortal  nature,  which  rebelled 
when  it  needed  anything,  and  of  allaying  the  se¬ 
dition  of  hunger  which  threatened  to  banish  the 
soul  from  the  body,  he  made  forays,  slew,  and 
devoured,  but  used  the  ferocity  and  savageness 
he  displayed  in  these  actions  only  for  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  his  own  life’s  peace.  So  that,  had  he 
been  willing  to  make  with  other  men  the  same 
peace  which  he  made  with  himself  in  his  own 
cave,  he  would  neither  have  been  called  bad,  nor 
a  monster,  nor  a  semi-man.  Or  if  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  his  body  and  his  vomiting  smoky  fires 
frightened  men  from  having  any  dealings  with 
him,  perhaps  his  fierce  ways  arose  not  from  a 
desire  to  do  mischief,  but  from  the  necessity  of 
finding  a  living.  But  he  may  have  had  no  exist¬ 
ence,  or,  at  least,  he  was  not  such  as  the  ^poets 
fancifully  describe  him,  for  they  had  to  exalt 
Hercules,  and  did  so  at  the  expense  of  Cacus. 
It  is  better,  then,  to  believe  that  such  a  man  or 
semi-man  never  existed,  and  that  this,  in  com¬ 
mon  with  many  other  fancies  of  the  poets,  is 
mere  fiction.  For  the  most  savage  animals  (and 
he  is  said  to  have  been  almost  a  wild  beast)  en¬ 
compass  their  own  species  with  a  ring  of  pro¬ 
tecting  peace.  They  cohabit,  beget,  produce, 
suckle,  and  bring  up  their  young,  though  very 
many  of  them  are  not  gregarious,  but  solitary — 
not  like  sheep,  deer,  pigeons,  starlings,  bees,  but 
such  as  lions,  foxes,  eagles,  bats.  For  what  ti¬ 
gress  does  not  gently  purr  over  her  cubs,  and 
lay  aside  her  ferocity  to  fondle  them?  What 
kite,  solitary  as  he  is  when  circling  over  his 
prey,  does  not  seek  a  mate,  build  a  nest,  hatch 
the  eggs,  bring  up  the  young  birds,  and  main¬ 
tain  with  the  mother  of  his  family  as  peaceful 
a  domestic  alliance  as  he  can?  How  much  more 
powerfully  do  the  laws  of  man’s  nature  move 
him  to  hold  fellowship  and  maintain  peace  with 
all  men  so  far  as  in  him  lies,  since  even  wicked 
men  wage  war  to  maintain  the  peace  of  their 
own  circle,  and  wish  that,  if  possible,  all  men 
belonged  to  them,  that  all  men  and  things  might 
serve  but  one  head,  and  might,  either  through 
love  or  fear,  yield  themselves  to  peace  with 
him !  It  is  thus  that  pride  in  its  perversity  apes 
1&neid,  bk.  vni.  195. 


God.  It  abhors  equality  with  other  men  under 
Him;  but,  instead  of  His  rule,  it  seeks  to  im¬ 
pose  a  rule  of  its  own  upon  its  equals.  It  abhors, 
that  is  to  say,  the  just  peace  of  God,  and  loves 
its  own  unjust  peace ;  but  it  cannot  help  loving 
peace  of  one  kind  or  other.  For  there  is  no  vice 
so  clean  contrary  to  nature  that  it  obliterates 
even  the  faintest  traces  of  nature. 

He,  then,  who  prefers  what  is  right  to  what  is 
wrong,  and  what  is  well-ordered  to  what  is  per¬ 
verted,  sees  that  the  peace  of  unjust  men  is  not 
worthy  to  be  called  peace  in  comparison  with 
the  peace  of  the  just.  And  yet  even  what  is  per¬ 
verted  must  of  necessity  be  in  harmony  with, 
and  in  dependence  on,  and  in  some  part  of  the 
order  of  things,  for  otherwise  it  would  have  no 
existence  at  all.  Suppose  a  man  hangs  with  his 
head  downwards,  this  is  certainly  a  perverted 
attitude  of  body  and  arrangement  of  its  mem¬ 
bers  ;  for  that  which  nature  requires  to  be  above 
is  beneath,  and  vice  versa.  This  perversity  dis¬ 
turbs  the  peace  of  the  body,  and  is  therefore 
painful.  Nevertheless  the  spirit  is  at  peace  with 
its  body,  and  labours  for  its  preservation,  and 
hence  the  suffering;  but  if  it  is  banished  from 
the  body  by  its  pains,  then,  so  long  as  the  bodily 
framework  holds  together,  there  is  in  the  re¬ 
mains  a  kind  of  peace  among  the  members,  and 
hence  the  body  remains  suspended.  And  inas¬ 
much  as  the  earthly  body  tends  towards  the 
earth,  and  rests  on  the  bond  by  which  it  is  sus¬ 
pended,  it  tends  thus  to  its  natural  peace,  and 
the  voice  of  its  own  weight  demands  a  place  for 
it  to  rest;  and  though  now  lifeless  and  without 
feeling,  it  does  not  fall  from  the  peace  that  is 
natural  to  its  place  in  creation,  whether  it  al¬ 
ready  has  it,  or  is  tending  towards  it.  For  if  you 
apply  embalming  preparations  to  prevent  the 
bodily  frame  from  mouldering  and  dissolving, 
a  kind  of  peace  still  unites  part  to  part,  and 
keeps  the  whole  body  in  a  suitable  place  on  the 
earth — in  other  words,  in  a  place  that  is  at  peace 
with  the  body.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body 
receive  no  such  care,  but  be  left  to  the  natural 
course,  it  is  disturbed  by  exhalations  that  do  not 
harmonize  with  one  another,  and  that  offend 
our  senses;  for  it  is  this  which  is  perceived  in 
putrefaction  until  it  is  assimilated  to  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  world,  and  particle  by  particle  en¬ 
ters  into  peace  with  them.  Yet  throughout  this 
process  the  laws  of  the  most  high  Creator  and 
Governor  are  strictly  observed,  for  it  is  by  Him 
the  peace  of  the  universe  is  administered.  For 
although  minute  animals  are  produced  from  the 
carcass  of  a  larger  animal,  all  these  little  atoms, 


THE  CITY  OF 

by  the  law  of  the  same  Creator,  serve  the  ani¬ 
mals  they  belong  to  in  peace.  And  although  the 
flesh  of  dead  animals  be  eaten  by  others,  no 
matter  where  it  be  carried,  nor  what  it  be 
brought  into  contact  with,  nor  what  it  be  con¬ 
verted  and  changed  into,  it  still  is  ruled  by  the 
same  laws  which  pervade  all  things  for  the  con¬ 
servation  of  every  mortal  race,  and  which  bring 
things  that  fit  one  another  into  harmony. 

Chap.  13.  Of  the  universal  peace  which  the  law 
of  nature  preserves  through  all  disturbances, 
and  by  which  every  one  reaches  his  desert  in 
a  way  regulated  by  the  just  judge 
The  peace  of  the  body  then  consists  in  the 
duly  proportioned  arrangement  of  its  parts.  The 
peace  of  the  irrational  soul  is  the  harmonious 
repose  of  the  appetites,  and  that  of  the  rational 
soul  the  harmony  of  knowledge  and  action.  The 
peace  of  body  and  soul  is  the  well-ordered  and 
harmonious  life  and  health  of  the  living  crea¬ 
ture.  Peace  between  man  and  God  is  the  well- 
ordered  obedience  of  faith  to  eternal  law.  Peace 
between  man  and  man  is  well-ordered  concord. 
Domestic  peace  is  the  well-ordered  concord  be¬ 
tween  those  of  the  family  who  rule  and  those 
who  obey.  Civil  peace  is  a  similar  concord 
among  the  citizens.  The  peace  of  the  celestial 
city  is  the  perfectly  ordered  and  harmonious  en¬ 
joyment  of  God,  and  of  one  another  in  God.  The 
peace  of  all  things  is  the  tranquillity  of  order. 
Order  is  the  distribution  which  allots  things 
equal  and  unequal,  each  to  its  own  place.  And 
hence,  though  the  miserable,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  such,  do  certainly  not  enjoy  peace,  but  are 
severed  from  that  tranquillity  of  order  in  which 
there  is  no  disturbance,  nevertheless,  inasmuch 
as  they  are  deservedly  and  justly  miserable, 
they  are  by  their  very  misery  connected  with 
order.  They  are  not,  indeed,  conjoined  with  the 
blessed,  but  they  are  disjoined  from  them  by 
the  law  of  order.  And  though  they  are  disquieted, 
their  circumstances  are  notwithstanding  adjust¬ 
ed  to  them,  and  consequently  they  have  some 
tranquillity  of  order,  and  therefore  some  peace. 
But  the^  are  wretched  because,  although  not 
wholly  miserable,  they  are  not  in  that  place 
where  any  mixture  of  misery  is  impossible.  They 
would,  however,  be  more  wretched  if  they  had 
not  that  peace  which  arises  from  being  in  har¬ 
mony  with  the  natural  order  of  things.  When 
they  suffer,  their  peace  is  in  so  far  disturbed; 
but  their  peace  continues  in  so  far  as  they  do 
not  suffer,  and  in  so  far  as  their  nature  continues 
to  exist.  As,  then,  there  may  be  life  without 


GOD  XIX.  13  519 

pain,  while  there  cannot  be  pain  without  some 
kind  of  life,  so  there  may  be  peace  without  war, 
but  there  cannot  be  war  without  some  kind  of 
peace,  because  war  supposes  the  existence  of 
some  natures  to  wage  it,  and  these  natures  can¬ 
not  exist  without  peace  of  one  kind  or  other. 

And  therefore  there  is  a  nature  in  which  evil 
does  not  or  even  cannot  exist;  but  there  cannot 
be  a  nature  in  which  there  is  no  good.  Hence  not 
even  the  nature  of  the  devil  himself  is  evil,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  nature,  but  it  was  made  evil  by  being 
perverted.  Thus  he  did  not  abide  in  the  truth,1 
but  could  not  escape  the  judgment  of  the 
Truth ;  he  did  not  abide  in  the  tranquillity  of  or¬ 
der,  but  did  not  therefore  escape  the  power  of 
the  Ordainer.  The  good  imparted  by  God  to  his 
nature  did  not  screen  him  from  the  justice  of 
God  by  which  order  was  preserved  in  his  pun¬ 
ishment  ;  neither  did  God  punish  the  good  which 
He  had  created,  but  the  evil  which  the  devil  had 
committed.  God  did  not  take  back  all  He  had 
imparted  to  his  nature,  but  something  He  took 
and  something  He  left,  that  there  might  remain 
enough  to  be  sensible  of  the  loss  of  what  was 
taken.  And  this  very  sensibility  to  pain  is  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  good  which  has  been  taken  away 
and  the  good  which  has  been  left.  For,  were 
nothing  good  left,  there  could  be  no  pain  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  good  which  had  been  lost.  For  he 
who  sins  is  still  worse  if  he  rejoices  in  his  loss  of 
righteousness.  But  he  who  is  in  pain,  if  he  de¬ 
rives  no  benefit  from  it,  mourns  at  least  the  loss 
of  health.  And  as  righteousness  and  health  are 
both  good  things,  and  as  the  loss  of  any  good 
thing  is  matter  of  grief,  not  of  joy — if,  at  least, 
there  is  no  compensation,  as  spiritual  righteous¬ 
ness  may  compensate  for  the  loss  of  bodily 
health — certainly  it  is  more  suitable  for  a  wick¬ 
ed  man  to  grieve  in  punishment  than  to  rejoice 
in  his  fault.  As,  then,  the  joy  of  a  sinner  who  has 
abandoned  what  is  good  is  evidence  of  a  bad 
will,  so  his  grief  for  the  good  he  has  lost  when 
he  is  punished  is  evidence  of  a  good  nature.  For 
he  who  laments  the  peace  his  nature  has  lost  is 
stirred  to  do  so  by  some  relics  of  peace  which 
make  his  nature  friendly  to  itself.  And  it  is  very 
just  that  in  the  final  punishment  the  wicked  and 
godless  should  in  anguish  bewail  the  loss  of  the 
natural  advantages  they  enjoyed,  and  should 
perceive  that  they  were  most  justly  taken  from 
them  by  that  God  whose  benign  liberality  they 
had  despised.  God,  then,  the  most  wise  Creator 
and  most  just  Ordainer  of  all  natures,  who 
placed  the  human  race  upon  earth  as  its  great- 

^ohn,  8.  44. 


520  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


est  ornament,  imparted  to  men  some  good 
things  adapted  to  this  life,  to  wit.  temporal 
peace,  such  as  we  can  enjoy  in  this  life  from 
health  and  safety  and  human  fellowship,  and  all 
things  needful  for  the  preservation  and  recov¬ 
ery  of  this  peace,  such  as  the  objects  which  are 
accommodated  to  our  outward  senses,  light, 
night,  the  air,  and  waters  suitable  for  us,  and 
everything  the  body  requires  to  sustain,  shelter, 
heal,  or  beautify  it:  and  all  under  this  most 
equitable  condition,  that  every  man  who  made 
a  good  use  of  these  advantages  suited  to  the 
peace  of  this  mortal  condition,  should  receive 
ampler  and  better  blessings,  namely,  the  peace 
of  immortality,  accompanied  by  glory  and  hon¬ 
our  in  an  endless  life  made  fit  for  the  enjoyment 
of  God  and  of  one  another  in  God;  but  that  he 
who  used  the  present  blessings  badly  should 
both  lose  them  and  should  not  receive  the  oth¬ 
ers. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  order  and  law  which  obtain  in 
heaven  and  earth ,  whereby  it  comes  to  pass 
that  human  society  is  served  by  those  who 
ride  it 

The  whole  use,  then,  of  things  temporal  has 
a  reference  to  this  result  of  earthly  peace  in  the 
earthly  community,  while  in  the  city  of  God  it 
is  connected  with  eternal  peace.  And  therefore, 
if  we  were  irrational  animals,  we  should  desire 
nothing  beyond  the  proper  arrangement  of  the 
parts  of  the  body  and  the  satisfaction  of  the  ap¬ 
petites — nothing,  therefore,  but  bodily  comfort 
and  abundance  of  pleasures,  that  the  peace  of 
the  body  might  contribute  to  the  peace  of  the 
soul.  For  if  bodily  peace  be  awanting,  a  bar  is 
put  to  the  peace  even  of  the  irrational  soul, 
since  it  cannot  obtain  the  gratification  of  its  ap¬ 
petites.  And  these  two  together  help  out  the  mu¬ 
tual  peace  of  soul  and  body,  the  peace  of  har¬ 
monious  life  and  health.  For  as  animals,  by 
shunning  pain,  show  that  they  love  bodily  peace, 
and,  by  pursuing  pleasure  to  gratify  their  appe¬ 
tites,  show  that  they  love  peace  of  soul,  so  their 
shrinking  from  death  is  a  sufficient  indication  of 
their  intense  love  of  that  peace  which  binds  soul 
and  body  in  close  alliance.  But,  as  man  has  a 
rational  soul,  he  subordinates  all  this  which  he 
has  in  common  with  the  beasts  to  the  peace  of 
his  rational  soul,  that  his  intellect  may  have 
free  play  and  may  regulate  his  actions  and  that 
he  may  thus  enjoy  the  well-ordered  harmony  of 
knowledge  and  action  which  constitutes,  as  we 
have  said,  the  peace  of  the  rational  soul.  And 
for  this  purpose  he  must  desire  to  be  neither 


molested  by  pain,  nor  disturbed  by  desire,  nor 
extinguished  by  death,  that  he  may  arrive  at 
some  useful  knowledge  by  which  he  may  regu¬ 
late  his  life  and  manners.  But,  owing  to  the  lia¬ 
bility  of  the  human  mind  to  fall  into  mistakes, 
this  very  pursuit  of  knowledge  may  be  a  snare 
to  him  unless  he  has  a  divine  Master,  whom  he 
may  obey  without  misgiving,  and  who  may  at 
the  same  time  give  him  such  help  as  to  preserve 
his  own  freedom.  And  because,  so  long  as  he  is 
in  this  mortal  body,  he  is  a  stranger  to  God,  he 
walks  by  faith,  not  by  sight;  and  he  therefore 
refers  all  peace,  bodily  or  spiritual  or  both,  to 
that  peace  which  mortal  man  has  with  the  im¬ 
mortal  God,  so  that  he  exhibits  the  well-ordered 
obedience  of  faith  to  eternal  law.  But  as  this  di¬ 
vine  Master  inculcates  two  precepts — the  love 
of  God  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour — and  as 
in  these  precepts  a  man  finds  three  things  he  has 
to  love — God,  himself,  and  his  neighbour — and 
that  he  who  loves  God  loves  himself  thereby,  it 
follows  that  he  must  endeavour  to  get  his  neigh¬ 
bour  to  love  God,  since  he  is  ordered  to  love  his 
neighbour  as  himself.  He  ought  to  make  this  en¬ 
deavour  in  behalf  of  his  wife,  his  children,  his 
household,  all  within  his  reach,  even  as  he  would 
wish  his  neighbour  to  do  the  same  for  him  if  he 
needed  it ;  and  consequently  he  will  be  at  peace, 
or  in  well-ordered  concord,  with  all  men,  as  far 
as  in  him  lies.  And  this  is  the  order  of  this  con¬ 
cord,  that  a  man,  in  the  first  place,  injure  no 
one,  and,  in  the  second,  do  good  to  every  one  he 
can  reach.  Primarily,  therefore,  his  own  house¬ 
hold  are  his  care,  for  the  law  of  nature  and  of 
society  gives  him  readier  access  to  them  and 
greater  opportunity  of  serving  them.  And  hence 
the  apostle  says,  “Now,  if  any  provide  not  for 
his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own 
house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse 
than  an  infidel.”  1  This  is  the  origin  of  domestic 
peace,  or  the  well-ordered  concord  of  those  in 
the  family  who  rule  and  those  who  obey.  For 
they  who  care  for  the  rest  rule — the  husband 
the  wife,  the  parents  the  children,  the  masters 
the  servants;  and  they  who  are  cared  for  obey — 
the  women  their  husbands,  the  children  their 
parents,  the  servants  their  masters.  But  in  the 
family  of  the  just  man  who  lives  by  faith  and  is 
as  yet  a  pilgrim  journeying  on  to  the  celestial 
city,  even  those  who  rule  serve  those  whom 
they  seem  to  command;  for  they  rule  not  from 
a  love  of  power,  but  from  a  sense  of  the  duty 
they  owe  to  others — not  because  they  are  proud 
of  authority,  but  because  they  love  mercy. 

*1  Tim.  5.  8. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIX.  14-16  521 


Chap.  15.  Of  the  liberty  proper  to  man’s  nature , 
and  the  servitude  introduced  by  sin — a  servi¬ 
tude  in  which  the  man  whose  will  is  wicked  is 
the  slave  of  his  own  lust ,  though  he  is  free  so 
far  as  regards  other  men 

This  is  prescribed  by  the  order  of  nature:  it 
is  thus  that  God  has  created  man.  For  “let 
them,”  He  says,  “have  dominion  over  the  fish  of 
the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over 
every  creeping  thing  which  creepeth  on  the 
earth.”  1  He  did  not  intend  that  His  rational 
creature,  who  was  made  in  His  image,  should 
have  dominion  over  anything  but  the  irrational 
creation — not  man  over  man,  but  man  over  the 
beasts.  And  hence  the  righteous  men  in  primi¬ 
tive  times  were  made  shepherds  of  cattle  rather 
than  kings  of  men,  God  intending  thus  to  teach 
us  what  the  relative  position  of  the  creatures  is, 
and  what  the  desert  of  sin ;  for  it  is  with  justice, 
we  believe,  that  the  condition  of  slavery  is  the 
result  of  sin.  And  this  is  why  we  do  not  find  the 
word  “slave”  in  any  part  of  Scripture  until 
righteous  Noah  branded  the  sin  of  his  son  with 
this  name.  It  is  a  name,  therefore,  introduced 
by  sin  and  not  by  nature.  The  origin  of  the  Lat¬ 
in  word  for  slave  is  supposed  to  be  found  in  the 
circumstance  that  those  who  by  the  law  of  war 
were  liable  to  be  killed  were  sometimes  pre¬ 
served  by  their  victors,  and  were  hence  called 
servants.  And  these  circumstances  could  never 
have  arisen  save  through  sin.  For  even  when  we 
wage  a  just  wrar,  our  adversaries  must  be  sin¬ 
ning  ;  and  every  victory,  even  though  gained  by 
wicked  men,  is  a  result  of  the  first  judgment  of 
God,  who  humbles  the  vanquished  either  for  the 
sake  of  removing  or  of  punishing  their  sins. 
Witness  that  man  of  God.  Daniel,  who,  when  he 
was  in  captivity,  confessed  to  God  his  own  sins 
and  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  declares  with  pi¬ 
ous  grief  that  these  were  the  cause  of  the  cap¬ 
tivity.2  The  prime  cause,  then,  of  slavery  is  sin, 
which  brings  man  under  the  dominion  of  his 
fellow — that  which  does  not  happen  save  by  the 
judgment  of  God,  with  Whom  is  no  unright¬ 
eousness,  and  Who  knows  how  to  award  fit  pun¬ 
ishments  to  every  variety  of  offence.  But  our 
Master  in  heaven  says,  “Every  one  who  doeth 
sin  is  the  servant  of  sin.”  3  And  thus  there  are 
many  wicked  masters  who  have  religious  men  as 
their  slaves,  and  who  are  yet  themselves  in 
bondage;  “for  of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of 
the  same  is  he  brought  in  bondage.”  4  And  be¬ 
yond  question  it  is  a  happier  thing  to  be  the 
1Gen.  1.  26.  2Dan.  9.  3John,  8.  34.  4II  Pet.  2. 19. 


slave  of  a  man  than  of  a  lust ;  for  even  this  very 
lust  of  ruling,  to  mention  no  others,  lays  waste 
men’s  hearts  with  the  most  ruthless  dominion. 
Moreover,  when  men  are  subjected  to  one  an¬ 
other  in  a  peaceful  order,  the  lowly  position 
does  as  much  good  to  the  servant  as  the  proud 
position  does  harm  to  the  master.  But  by  na¬ 
ture,  as  God  first  created  us,  no  one  is  the  slave 
either  of  man  or  of  sin.  This  servitude  is,  how¬ 
ever,  penal,  and  is  appointed  by  that  law  which 
enjoins  the  preservation  of  the  natural  order 
and  forbids  its  disturbance;  for  if  nothing  had 
been  done  in  violation  of  that  law,  there  would 
have  been  nothing  to  restrain  by  penal  servi¬ 
tude.  And  therefore  the  apostle  admonishes 
slaves  to  be  subject  to  their  masters,  and  to 
serve  them  heartily  and  with  good-will,  so  that, 
if  they  cannot  be  freed  by  their  masters,  they 
may  themselves  make  their  slavery  in  some  sort 
free,  by  serving  not  in  crafty  fear,  but  in  faith¬ 
ful  love,  until  all  unrighteousness  pass  away, 
and  all  principality  and  every  human  power  be 
brought  to  nothing,  and  God  be  all  in  all. 

Chap.  16  .Of  equitable  rule 
And  therefore,  although  our  righteous  fa¬ 
thers5  had  slaves,  and  administered  their  domes¬ 
tic  affairs  so  as  to  distinguish  between  the  con¬ 
dition  of  slaves  and  the  heirship  of  sons  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  blessings  of  this  life,  yet  in  regard 
to  the  worship  of  God,  in  whom  we  hope  for 
eternal  blessings,  they  took  an  equally  loving 
oversight  of  all  the  members  of  their  household. 
And  this  is  so  much  in  accordance  with  the  nat¬ 
ural  order,  that  the  head  of  the  household  was 
called  paterfamilias ;  and  this  name  has  been  so 
generally  accepted,  that  even  those  whose  rule 
is  unrighteous  are  glad  to  apply  it  to  themselves. 
But  those  who  are  true  fathers  of  their  house¬ 
holds  desire  and  endeavour  that  all  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  their  household,  equally  with  their  own 
children,  should  worship  and  win  God,  and 
should  come  to  that  heavenly  home  in  which  the 
duty  of  ruling  men  is  no  longer  necessary,  be¬ 
cause  the  duty  of  caring  for  their  everlasting 
happiness  has  also  ceased;  but,  until  they  reach 
that  home,  masters  ought  to  feel  their  position 
of  authority  a  greater  burden  than  servants 
their  service.  And  if  any  member  of  the  family 
interrupts  the  domestic  peace  by  disobedience, 
he  is  corrected  either  by  word  or  blow,  or  some 
kind  of  just  and  legitimate  punishment,  such  as 
society  permits,  that  he  may  himself  be  the  bet¬ 
ter  for  it,  and  be  readjusted  to  the  family  har- 
6The  patriarchs. 


522  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


mony  from  which  he  had  dislocated  himself. 
For  as  it  is  not  benevolent  to  give  a  man  help  at 
the  expense  of  some  greater  benefit  he  might  re¬ 
ceive,  so  it  is  not  innocent  to  spare  a  man  at  the 
risk  of  his  falling  into  graver  sin.  To  be  inno¬ 
cent,  we  must  not  only  do  harm  to  no  man,  but 
also  restrain  him  from  sin  or  punish  his  sin,  so 
that  either  the  man  himself  who  is  punished  may 
profit  by  his  experience,  or  others  be  warned  by 
his  example.  Since,  then,  the  house  ought  to  be 
the  beginning  or  element  of  the  city,  and  every 
beginning  bears  reference  to  some  end  of  its 
own  kind,  and  every  element  to  the  integrity  of 
the  whole  of  which  it  is  an  element,  it  follows 
plainly  enough  that  domestic  peace  has  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  civic  peace — in  other  words,  that  the 
well-ordered  concord  of  domestic  obedience  and 
domestic  rule  has  a  relation  to  the  well-ordered 
concord  of  civic  obedience  and  civic  rule.  And 
therefore  it  follows,  further,  that  the  father  of 
the  family  ought  to  frame  his  domestic  rule  in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  the  city,  so  that  the 
household  may  be  in  harmony  with  the  civic  or¬ 
der. 

Chap.  17.  What  produces  peace,  and  what  dis¬ 
cord,  between  the  heavenly  and  earthly  cities 
But  the  families  which  do  not  live  by  faith 
seek  their  peace  in  the  earthly  advantages  of 
this  life;  while  the  families  which  live  by  faith 
look  for  those  eternal  blessings  which  are  prom¬ 
ised,  and  use  as  pilgrims  such  advantages  of 
time  and  of  earth  as  do  not  fascinate  and  divert 
them  from  God,  but  rather  aid  them  to  endure 
with  greater  ease,  and  to  keep  down  the  number 
of  those  burdens  of  the  corruptible  body  which 
weigh  upon  the  soul.  Thus  the  things  necessary 
for  this  mortal  life  are  used  by  both  kinds  of 
men  and  families  alike,  but  each  has  its  own  pe¬ 
culiar  and  widely  different  aim  in  using  them. 
The  earthly  city,  which  does  not  live  by  faith, 
seeks  an  earthly  peace,  and  the  end  it  pro¬ 
poses,  in  the  well-ordered  concord  of  civic  obe¬ 
dience  and  rule,  is  the  combination  of  men’s 
wills  to  attain  the  things  which  are  helpful  to 
this  life.  The  heavenly  city,  or  rather  the  part 
of  it  which  sojourns  on  earth  and  lives  by  faith, 
makes  use  of  this  peace  only  because  it  must, 
until  this  mortal  condition  which  necessitates  it 
shall  pass  away.  Consequently,  so  long  as  it  lives 
like  a  captive  and  a  stranger  in  the  earthly  city, 
though  it  has  already  received  the  promise  of  re¬ 
demption,  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  as  the  ear¬ 
nest  of  it,  it  makes  no  scruple  to  obey  the  laws  of 
the  earthly  city,  whereby  the  things  necessary 
for  the  maintenance  of  this  mortal  life  are  ad¬ 


ministered;  and  thus,  as  this  life  is  common  to 
both  cities,  so  there  is  a  harmony  between  them 
in  regard  to  what  belongs  to  it.  But,  as  the 
earthly  city  has  had  some  philosophers  whose 
doctrine  is  condemned  by  the  divine  teaching, 
and  who,  being  deceived  either  by  their  own 
conjectures  or  by  demons,  supposed  that  many 
gods  must  be  invited  to  take  an  interest  in  hu¬ 
man  affairs,  and  assigned  to  each  a  separate 
function  and  a  separate  department — to  one  the 
body,  to  another  the  soul;  and  in  the  body  it¬ 
self,  to  one  the  head,  to  another  the  neck,  and 
each  of  the  other  members  to  one  of  the  gods ; 
and  in  like  manner,  in  the  soul,  to  one  god  the 
natural  capacity  was  assigned,  to  another  edu¬ 
cation,  to  another  anger,  to  another  lust;  and  so 
the  various  affairs  of  life  were  assigned — cattle 
to  one,  corn  to  another,  wine  to  another,  oil  to 
another,  the  woods  to  another,  money  to  anoth¬ 
er,  navigation  to  another,  wars  and  victories  to 
another,  marriages  to  another,  births  and  fe¬ 
cundity  to  another,  and  other  things  to  other 
gods:  and  as  the  celestial  city,  on  the  other 
hand,  knew  that  one  God  only  was  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped,  and  that  to  Him  alone  was  due  that 
service  which  the  Greeks  call  Xarpeia,  and 
which  can  be  given  only  to  a  god,  it  has  come  to 
pass  that  the  two  cities  could  not  have  common 
laws  of  religion,  and  that  the  heavenly  city  has 
been  compelled  in  this  matter  to  dissent,  and  to 
become  obnoxious  to  those  who  think  different¬ 
ly,  and  to  stand  the  brunt  of  their  anger  and  ha¬ 
tred  and  persecutions,  except  in  so  far  as  the 
minds  of  their  enemies  have  been  alarmed  by 
the  multitude  of  the  Christians  and  quelled  by 
the  manifest  protection  of  God  accorded  to 
them.  This  heavenly  city,  then,  while  it  sojourns 
on  earth,  calls  citizens  out  of  all  nations  and 
gathers  together  a  society  of  pilgrims  of  all  lan¬ 
guages,  not  scrupling  about  diversities  in  the 
manners,  laws,  and  institutions  whereby  earthly 
peace  is  secured  and  maintained,  but  recogniz¬ 
ing  that,  however  various  these  are,  they  all 
tend  to  one  and  the  same  end  of  earthly  peace. 
It  therefore  is  so  far  from  rescinding  and  abol¬ 
ishing  these  diversities,  that  it  even  preserves 
and  adopts  them,  so  long  only  as  no  hindrance 
to  the  worship  of  the  one  supreme  and  true  God 
is  thus  introduced.  Even  the  heavenly  city, 
therefore,  while  in  its  state  of  pilgrimage,  avails 
itself  of  the  peace  of  earth,  and,  so  far  as  it  can 
without  injuring  faith  and  godliness,  desires  and 
maintains  a  common  agreement  among  men  re¬ 
garding  the  acquisition  of  the  necessaries  of  life, 
and  makes  this  earthly  peace  bear  upon  the 
peace  of  heaven;  for  this  alone  can  be  truly 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIX.  17-20  523 


called  and  esteemed  the  peace  of  the  reasonable 
creatures,  consisting  as  it  does  in  the  perfectly 
ordered  and  harmonious  enjoyment  of  God  and 
of  one  another  in  God.  When  we  shall  have 
reached  that  peace,  this  mortal  life  shall  give 
place  to  one  that  is  eternal,  and  our  body  shall 
be  no  more  this  animal  body  which  by  its  cor¬ 
ruption  weighs  down  the  soul,  but  a  spiritual 
body  feeling  no  want,  and  in  all  its  members 
subjected  to  the  will.  In  its  pilgrim  state  the 
heavenly  city  possesses  this  peace  by  faith ;  and 
by  this  faith  it  lives  righteously  when  it  refers 
to  the  attainment  of  that  peace  every  good  ac¬ 
tion  towards  God  and  man;  for  the  life  of  the 
city  is  a  social  life. 

Chap.  18.  How  different  the  uncertainty  of  the 

New  Academy  is  from  the  certainty  of  the 

Christian  faith 

As  regards  the  uncertainty  about  everything 
which  Varro  alleges  to  be  the  differentiating 
characteristic  of  the  New  Academy,  the  city  of 
God  thoroughly  detests  such  doubt  as  madness. 
Regarding  matters  which  it  apprehends  by  the 
mind  and  reason  it  has  most  absolute  certainty, 
although  its  knowledge  is  limited  because  of  the 
corruptible  body  pressing  down  the  mind,  for, 
as  the  apostle  says,  “We  know  in  part.”  1  It  be¬ 
lieves  also  the  evidence  of  the  senses  which  the 
mind  uses  by  aid  of  the  body;  for  he  is  more 
wretchedly  deceived  who  fancies  he  should  nev¬ 
er  trust  them.  It  believes  also  the  Holy  Scrip¬ 
tures,  old  and  new,  which  we  call  canonical,  and 
which  are  the  source  of  the  faith  by  which  the 
just  lives2  and  by  which  we  walk  without  doubt¬ 
ing  whilst  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord.3  So 
long  as  this  faith  remains  inviolate  and  firm,  we 
may  without  blame  entertain  doubts  regarding 
some  things  which  we  have  neither  perceived  by 
sense  nor  by  reason,  and  which  have  not  been 
revealed  to  us  by  the  canonical  Scriptures,  nor 
come  to  our  knowledge  through  witnesses  whom 
it  is  absurd  to  disbelieve. 

Chap.  ig.  Of  the  dress  and  habits  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  people 

It  is  a  matter  of  no  moment  in  the  city  of 
God  whether  he  who  adopts  the  faith  that  brings 
men  to  God  adopts  it  in  one  dress  and  manner 
of  life  or  another,  so  long  only  as  he  lives  in 
conformity  with  the  commandments  of  God. 
And  hence,  when  philosophers  themselves  be¬ 
come  Christians,  they  are  compelled,  indeed,  to 
abandon  their  erroneous  doctrines,  but  not  their 
dress  and  mode  of  living,  which  are  no  obstacle 

*1  Cor.  13.  9.  2Hab.  2.  4.  3II  Cor.  5.  6. 


to  religion.  So  that  we  make  no  account  of  that 
distinction  of  sects  which  Varro  adduced  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  Cynic  school,  provided  always 
nothing  indecent  or  self-indulgent  is  retained. 
As  to  these  three  modes  of  life,  the  contempla¬ 
tive,  the  active,  and  the  composite,  although,  so 
long  as  a  man’s  faith  is  preserved,  he  may 
choose  any  of  them  without  detriment  to  his 
eternal  interests,  yet  he  must  never  overlook 
the  claims  of  truth  and  duty.  No  man  has  a  right 
to  lead  such  a  life  of  contemplation  as  to  forget 
in  his  own  ease  the  service  due  to  his  neigh¬ 
bour  ;  nor  has  any  man  a  right  to  be  so  immersed 
in  active  life  as  to  neglect  the  contemplation  of 
God.  The  charm  of  leisure  must  not  be  indolent 
vacancy  of  mind,  but  the  investigation  or  dis¬ 
covery  of  truth,  that  thus  every  man  may  make 
solid  attainments  without  grudging  that  others 
do  the  same.  And,  in  active  life,  it  is  not  the 
honours  or  power  of  this  life  we  should  covet, 
since  all  things  under  the  sun  are  vanity,  but  we 
should  aim  at  using  our  position  and  influence, 
if  these  have  been  honourably  attained,  for  the 
welfare  of  those  who  are  under  us,  in  the  way 
we  have  already  explained.4  It  is  to  this  the 
apostle  refers  when  he  says,  “He  that  desireth 
the  episcopate  desireth  a  good  work.”5  He 
wished  to  show  that  the  episcopate  is  the  title 
of  a  work,  not  of  an  honour.  It  is  a  Greek  word, 
and  signifies  that  he  who  governs  superintends 
or  takes  care  of  those  whom  he  governs:  for 
C7T L  means  over ,  and  aKoweiv,  to  see;  there¬ 
fore  emoKoireiv  means  to  oversee.  So  that 
he  who  loves  to  govern  rather  than  to  do  good 
is  no  bishop.  Accordingly  no  one  is  prohibited 
from  the  search  after  truth,  for  in  this  leisure 
may  most  laudably  be  spent ;  but  it  is  unseemly 
to  covet  the  high  position  requisite  for  govern¬ 
ing  the  people,  even  though  that  position  be  held 
and  that  government  be  administered  in  a  seem¬ 
ly  manner.  And  therefore  holy  leisure  is  longed 
for  by  the  love  of  truth;  but  it  is  the  necessity 
of  love  to  undertake  requisite  business.  If  no 
one  imposes  this  burden  upon  us,  we  are  free  to 
sift  and  contemplate  truth ;  but  if  it  be  laid  up¬ 
on  us,  we  are  necessitated  for  love’s  sake  to  un¬ 
dertake  it.  And  yet  not  even  in  this  case  are  we 
obliged  wholly  to  relinquish  the  sweets  of  con¬ 
templation  ;  for  were  these  to  be  withdrawn,  the 
burden  might  prove  more  than  we  could  bear. 

Chap.  20.  That  the  saints  are  in  this  life  blessed 

in  hope 

Since,  then,  the  supreme  good  of  the  city  of 
God  is  perfect  and  eternal  peace,  not  such  as 
4Chap.  6.  5I  Tim.  3.  1. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


524 

mortals  pass  into  and  out  of  by  birth  and  death, 
but  the  peace  of  freedom  from  all  evil,  in  which 
the  immortals  ever  abide,  who  can  deny  that 
that  future  life  is  most  blessed,  or  that,  in  com¬ 
parison  with  it,  this  life  which  now  we  live  is 
most  wretched,  be  it  filled  with  all  blessings  of 
body  and  soul  and  external  things?  And  yet,  if 
any  man  uses  this  life  with  a  reference  to  that 
other  which  he  ardently  loves  and  confidently 
hopes  for,  he  may  well  be  called  even  now  bless¬ 
ed,  though  not  in  reality  so  much  as  in  hope. 
But  the  actual  possession  of  the  happiness  of 
this  life,  without  the  hope  of  what  is  beyond,  is 
but  a  false  happiness  and  profound  misery.  For 
the  true  blessings  of  the  soul  are  not  now  en¬ 
joyed;  for  that  is  no  true  wisdom  which  does 
not  direct  all  its  prudent  observations,  man¬ 
ly  actions,  virtuous  self-restraint,  and  just 
arrangements,  to  that  end  in  which  God  shall 
be  all  and  all  in  a  secure  eternity  and  perfect 
peace. 

Chap.  21.  Whether  there  ever  was  a  Roman  re¬ 
public  answering  to  the  definitions  of  Scipio 

in  Cicerofs  dialogue 

This,  then,  is  the  place  where  I  should  fulfill 
the  promise  given  in  the  second  book  of  this 
work,1  and  explain,  as  briefly  and  clearly  as  pos¬ 
sible  that,  if  we  are  to  accept  the  definitions  laid 
down  by  Scipio  in  Cicero’s  De  Republican  there 
never  was  a  Roman  republic;  for  he  briefly  de¬ 
fines  a  republic  as  the  weal  of  the  people.  And  if 
this  definition  be  true,  there  never  was  a  Roman 
republic,  for  the  people’s  weal  was  never  at¬ 
tained  among  the  Romans.  For  the  people,  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  definition,  is  an  assemblage  asso¬ 
ciated  by  a  common  acknowledgment  of  right 
and  by  a  community  of  interests.  And  what  he 
means  by  a  common  acknowledgment  of  right 
he  explains  at  large,  showing  that  a  republic  can¬ 
not  be  administered  without  justice.  Where, 
therefore,  there  is  no  true  justice  there  can  be 
no  right.  For  that  which  is  done  by  right  is  justly 
done,  and  what  is  unjustly  done  cannot  be  done 
by  right.  For  the  unjust  inventions  of  men  are 
neither  to  be  considered  nor  spoken  of  as  rights ; 
for  even  they  themselves  say  that  right  is  that 
which  flows  from  the  fountain  of  justice,  and 
deny  the  definition  which  is  commonly  given  by 
those  who  misconceive  the  matter,  that  right  is 
that  which  is  useful  to  the  stronger  party.  Thus, 
where  there  is  not  true  justice  there  can  be  no¬ 
assemblage  of  men  associated  by  a  common  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  right,  and  therefore  there  can 
be  no  people,  as  defined  by  Scipio  or  Cicero; 

1Chap.  2i. 


and  if  no  people,  then  no  weal  of  the  people,  but 
only  of  some  promiscuous  multitude  unworthy 
of  the  name  of  people.  Consequently,  if  the  re¬ 
public  is  the  weal  of  the  people,  and  there  is  no 
people  if  it  be  not  associated  by  a  common  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  right,  and  if  there  is  no 
right  where  there  is  no  justice,  then  most  cer¬ 
tainly  it  follows  that  there  is  no  republic  where 
there  is  no  justice.  Further,  justice  is  that  vir¬ 
tue  which  gives  every  one  his  due.  Where,  then, 
is  the  justice  of  man,  when  he  deserts  the  true 
God  and  yields  himself  to  impure  demons?  Is 
this  to  give  every  one  his  due?  Or  is  he  who 
keeps  back  a  piece  of  ground  from  the  purchas¬ 
er,  and  gives  it  to  a  man  who  has  no  right  to  it, 
unjust,  while  he  who  keeps  back  himself  from 
the  God  who  made  him,  and  serves  wicked  spir¬ 
its,  is  just? 

This  same  book,  De  Republica ,  advocates  the 
cause  of  justice  against  injustice  with  great 
force  and  keenness.  The  pleading  for  injustice 
against  justice  was  first  heard,  and  it  was  as¬ 
serted  that  without  injustice  a  republic  could 
neither  increase  nor  even  subsist,  for  it  was  laid 
down  as  an  absolutely  unassailable  position  that 
it  is  unjust  for  some  men  to  rule  and  some  to 
serve;  and  yet  the  imperial  city  to  which  the 
republic  belongs  cannot  rule  her  provinces  with¬ 
out  having  recourse  to  this  injustice.  It  was  re¬ 
plied  in  behalf  of  justice,  that  this  ruling  of  the 
provinces  is  just,  because  servitude  may  be  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  provincials,  and  is  so  when 
rightly  administered — that  is  to  say,  when  law¬ 
less  men  are  prevented  from  doing  harm.  And 
further,  as  they  became  worse  and  worse  so  long 
as  they  were  free,  they  will  improve  by  subjec¬ 
tion.  To  confirm  this  reasoning,  there  is  added 
an  eminent  example  drawn  from  nature:  for 
“why,”  it  is  asked,  “does  God  rule  man,  the  soul 
the  body,  the  reason  the  passions  and  other  vi¬ 
cious  parts  of  the  soul?”  This  example  leaves  no 
doubt  that,  to  some,  servitude  is  useful;  and,  in¬ 
deed,  to  serve  God  is  useful  to  all.  And  it  is 
when  the  soul  serves  God  that  it  exercises  a 
right  control  over  the  body;  and  in  the  soul  it¬ 
self  the  reason  must  be  subject  to  God  if  it  is  to 
govern  as  it  ought  the  passions  and  other  vices. 
Hence,  when  a  man  does  not  serve  God,  what 
justice  can  we  ascribe  to  him,  since  in  this  case 
his  soul  cannot  exercise  a  just  control  over  the 
body,  nor  his  reason  over  his  vices?  And  if  there 
is  no  justice  in  such  an  individual,  certainly 
there  can  be  none  in  a  community  composed  of 
such  persons.  Here,  therefore,  there  is  not  that 
common  acknowledgment  of  right  which  makes 
an  assemblage  of  men  a  people  whose  affairs  we 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIX.  21-23  525 


call  a  republic.  And  why  need  I  speak  of  the  ad¬ 
vantageousness,  the  common  participation  in 
which,  according  to  the  definition,  makes  a  peo¬ 
ple?  For  although,  if  you  choose  to  regard  the 
matter  attentively,  you  will  see  that  there  is 
nothing  advantageous  to  those  who  live  godless- 
ly,  as  every  one  lives  who  does  not  serve  God 
but  demons,  whose  wickedness  you  may  meas¬ 
ure  by  their  desire  to  receive  the  worship  of  men 
though  they  are  most  impure  spirits,  yet  what  I 
have  said  of  the  common  acknowledgment  of 
right  is  enough  to  demonstrate  that,  according 
to  the  above  definition,  there  can 'be  no  people, 
and  therefore  no  republic,  where  there  is  no  jus¬ 
tice.  For  if  they  assert  that  in  their  republic  the 
Romans  did  not  serve  unclean  spirits,  but  good 
and  holy  gods,  must  we  therefore  again  reply  to 
this  evasion,  though  already  we  have  said 
enough,  and  more  than  enough,  to  expose  it?  He 
must  be  an  uncommonly  stupid  or  a  shamelessly 
contentious  person,  who  has  read  through  the 
foregoing  books  to  this  point,  and  can  yet  ques¬ 
tion  whether  the  Romans  served  wicked  and  im¬ 
pure  demons.  But,  not  to  speak  of  their  charac¬ 
ter.  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  true  God,  “He 
that  sacrificeth  unto  any  god  save  unto  the  Lord 
only,  he  shall  be  utterly  destroyed.”1  He,  there¬ 
fore,  Who  uttered  so  menacing  a  commandment 
decreed  that  no  worship  should  be  given  either 
to  good  or  bad  gods. 

Chap.  22.  Whether  the  God  Whom  the  Chris¬ 
tians  serve  is  the  true  God  to  Whom  alone 
sacrifice  ought  to  he  paid 
But  it  may  be  replied,  “Who  is  this  God,  or 
what  proof  is  there  that  He  alone  is  worthy  to 
receive  sacrifice  from  the  Romans?”  One  must 
be  very  blind  to  be  still  asking  Who  this  God  is. 
He  is  the  God  Whose  prophets  predicted  the 
things  we  see  accomplished.  He  is  the  God  from 
Whom  Abraham  received  the  assurance,  “In  thy 
seed  shall  all  nations  be  blessed,”2  That  this  was 
fulfilled  in  Christ,  Who  according  to  the  flesh 
sprang  from  that  seed,  is  recognized,  whether 
they  wjll  or  no,  even  by  those  who  have  con¬ 
tinued  to  be  the  enemies  of  this  name.  He  is  the 
God  Whose  divine  Spirit  spake  by  the  men  whose 
predictions  I  cited  in  the  preceding  books,  and 
which  are  fulfilled  in  the  Church  which  has  ex¬ 
tended  over  all  the  world.  This  is  the  God  whom 
Varro,  the  most  learned  of  the  Romans,  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  Jupiter,  though  he  knows  not  what 
he  says ;  yet  I  think  it  right  to  note  the  circum¬ 
stance  that  a  man  of  such  learning  was  unable 
to  suppose  that  this  God  had  no  existence  or 
1Ex.  22.  20.  2Gen.  22.  18. 


was  contemptible,  but  believed  Him  to  be  the 
same  as  the  supreme  God.  In  fine,  He  is  the  God 
whom  Porphyry,  the  most  learned  of  the  phi¬ 
losophers,  though  the  bitterest  enemy  of  the 
Christians,  confesses  to  be  a  great  God,  even  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  oracles  of  those  whom  he  esteems 
gods. 

Chap.  23.  Porphyry’s  account  of  the  responses 

given  by  the  oracles  of  the  gods  concerning 

Christ 

For  in  his  book  called  e/c  \oyiccv  (pikooopias, 
in  which  he  collects  and  comments  upon  the  re¬ 
sponses  which  he  pretends  were  uttered  by  the 
gods  concerning  divine  things,  he  says — I  give 
his  own  words  as  they  have  been  translated 
from  the  Greek:  “To  one  who  inquired  what 
god  he  should  propitiate  in  order  to  recall  his 
wife  from  Christianity,  Apollo  replied  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  verses.”  Then  the  following  words  are 
given  as  those  of  Apollo:  “You  will  probably 
find  it  easier  to  write  lasting  characters  on  the 
water,  or  lightly  fly  like  a  bird  through  the  air, 
than  to  restore  right  feeling  in  your  impious 
wife  once  she  has  polluted  herself.  Let  her  re¬ 
main  as  she  pleases  in  her  foolish  deception,  and 
sing  false  laments  to  her  dead  God,  who  was 
condemned  by  right-minded  judges,  and  per¬ 
ished  ignominiously  by  a  violent  death.”  Then 
after  these  verses  of  Apollo  (which  we  have 
given  in  a  Latin  version  that  does  not  preserve 
the  metrical  form),  he  goes  on  to  say:  “In  these 
verses  Apollo  exposed  the  incurable  corruption 
of  the  Christians,  saying  that  the  Jews,  rather 
than  the  Christians,  recognized  God.”  See  how 
he  misrepresents  Christ,  giving  the  Jews  the 
preference  to  the  Christians  in  the  recognition 
of  God.  This  was  his  explanation  of  Apollo’s 
verses,  in  which  he  says  that  Christ  was  put  to 
death  by  right-minded  or  just  judges — in  other 
words,  that  He  deserved  to  die.  I  leave  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  of  this  oracle  regarding  Christ  on 
the  lying  interpreter  of  Apollo,  or  on  this  philos¬ 
opher  who  believed  it  or  possibly  himself  in¬ 
vented  it;  as  to  its  agreement  with  Porphyry’s 
opinions  or  with  other  oracles,  we  shall  in  a  lit¬ 
tle  have  something  to  say.  In  this  passage,  how¬ 
ever,  he  says  that  the  Jews,  as  the  interpreters 
of  God,  judged  justly  in  pronouncing  Christ  to 
be  worthy  of  the  most  shameful  death.  He 
should  have  listened,  then,  to  this  God  of  the 
Jews  to  whom  he  bears  this  testimony,  when 
that  God  says,  “He  that  sacrificeth  to  any  other 
god  save  to  the  Lord  alone  shall  be  utterly  de¬ 
stroyed.”  But  let  us  come  to  still  plainer  expres¬ 
sions,  and  hear  how  great  a  God  Porphyry 


526  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


thinks  the  God  of  the  Jews  is.  Apollo,  he  says, 
when  asked  whether  word,  i.e.,  reason,  or  law 
is  the  better  thing,  replied  in  the  following  vers¬ 
es.  Then  he  gives  the  verses  of  Apollo,  from 
which  I  select  the  following  as  sufficient:  “God, 
the  Generator,  and  the  King  prior  to  all  things, 
before  Whom  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 
the  hidden  places  of  hell  tremble,  and  the  deities 
themselves  are  afraid,  for  their  law  is  the  Fa¬ 
ther  whom  the  holy  Hebrews  honour.”  In  this 
oracle  of  his  god  Apollo,  Porphyry  avowed  that 
the  God  of  the  Hebrews  is  so  great  that  the 
deities  themselves  are  afraid  before  Him.  I  am 
surprised,  therefore,  that  when  God  said.  “He 
that  sacrifketh  to  other  gods  shall  be  utterly  de¬ 
stroyed.”  Porphyry  himself  was  not  afraid  lest 
he  should  be  destroyed  for  sacrificing  to  other 
gods. 

This  philosopher,  however,  has  also  some  good 
to  say  of  Christ,  oblivious,  as  it  were,  of  that 
contumely  of  his  of  which  we  have  just  been 
speaking;  or  as  if  his  gods  spoke  evil  of  Christ 
only  while  asleep,  and  recognized  Him  to  be 
good,  and  gave  Him  His  deserved  praise,  wjien 
they  awoke.  For,  as  if  he  were  about  to  proclaim 
some  marvellous  thing  passing  belief,  he  says. 
“What  we  are  going  to  say  will  certainly  take 
some  by  surprise.  For  the  gods  have  declared 
that  Christ  was  very  pious,  and  has  become  im¬ 
mortal,  and  that  they  cherish  his  memory:  that 
the  Christians,  however,  are  polluted,  contami¬ 
nated,  and  involved  in  error.  And  many  other 
such  things,”  he  says,  “do  the  gods  say  against 
the  Christians.”  Then  he  gives  specimens  of 
the  accusations  made,  as  he  says,  by  the  gods 
against  them,  and  then  goes  on:  “But  to  some 
who  asked  Hecate  whether  Christ  were  a  God, 
she  replied.  You  know  the  condition  of  the  dis¬ 
embodied  immortal  soul,  and  that  if  it  has  been 
severed  from  wisdom  it  always  errs.  The  soul 
you  refer  to  is  that  of  a  man  foremost  in  piety: 
they  worship  it  because  they  mistake  the  truth.” 
To  this  so-called  oracular  response  he  adds  the 
following  words  of  his  own:  “Of  this  very  pious 
man,  then,  Hecate  said  that  the  soul,  like  the 
souls  of  other  good  men,  was  after  death  dow¬ 
ered  with  immortality,  and  that  the  Christians 
through  ignorance  worship  it.  And  to  those  who 
ask  why  he  was  condemned  to  die,  the  oracle  of 
the  goddess  replied,  The  body,  indeed,  is  always 
exposed  to  torments,  but  the  souls  of  the  pious 
abide  in  heaven.  And  the  soul  you  inquire  about 
has  been  the  fatal  cause  of  error  to  other  souls 
which  were  not  fated  to  receive  the  gifts  of  the 
gods,  and  to  have  the  knowledge  of  immortal 
Jove.  Such  souls  are  therefore  hated  by  the 


gods;  for  they  who  were  fated  not  to  receive  the 
gifts  of  the  gods,  and  not  to  know  God,  were 
fated  to  be  involved  in  error  by  means  of  him 
you  speak  of.  He  himself,  however,  was  good, 
and  heaven  has  been  opened  to  him  as  to  other 
good  men.  You  are  not,  then,  to  speak  evil  of 
him.  but  to  pity  the  folly  of  men:  and  through 
him  men’s  danger  is  imminent.” 

Who  is  so  foolish  as  not  to  see  that  these  ora¬ 
cles  were  either  composed  by  a  clever  man  with 
a  strong  animus  against  the  Christians,  or  were 
uttered  as  responses  by  impure  demons  with  a 
similar  design — that  is  to  say,  in  order  that  their 
praise  of  Christ  may  win  credence  for  their  vitu¬ 
peration  of  Christians ;  and  that  thus  they  may, 
if  possible,  close  the  way  of  eternal  salvation, 
which  is  identical  with  Christianity?  For  they 
believe  that  they  are  by  no  means  counterwork¬ 
ing  their  own  hurtful  craft  by  promoting  belief 
in  Christ,  so  long  as  their  calumniation  of  Chris¬ 
tians  is  also  accepted;  for  they  thus  secure  that 
even  the  man  who  thinks  well  of  Christ  declines 
to  become  a  Christian,  and  is  therefore  not  de¬ 
livered  from  their  own  rule  by  the  Christ  he 
praises.  Besides,  their  praise  of  Christ  is  so  con¬ 
trived  that  whosoever  believes  in  Him  as  thus 
represented  will  not  be  a  true  Christian  but  a 
Photinian  heretic,  recognizing  only  the  human¬ 
ity,  and  not  also  the  divinity  of  Christ,  and  will 
thus  be  precluded  from  salvation  and  from  de¬ 
liverance  out  of  the  meshes  of  these  devilish 
lies.  For  our  part,  we  are  no  better  pleased  with 
Hecate’s  praises  of  Christ  than  with  Apollo’s 
calumniation  of  Him.  Apollo  says  that  Christ 
was  put  to  death  by  right-minded  judges,  im¬ 
plying  that  He  was  unrighteous.  Hecate  says 
that  He  was  a  most  pious  man,  but  no  more. 
The  intention  of  both  is  the  same,  to  prevent 
men  from  becoming  Christians,  because  if  this 
be  secured,  men  shall  never  be  rescued  from 
their  power.  But  it  is  incumbent  on  our  philoso¬ 
pher,  or  rather  on  those  who  believe  in  these 
pretended  oracles  against  the  Christians,  first  of 
all.  if  they  can,  to  bring  Apollo  and  Hecate  to 
the  same  mind  regarding  Christ,  so  that  either 
both  may  condemn  or  both  praise  Him.  And 
even  if  they  succeeded  in  this,  we  for  our  part 
would  not  withstanding  repudiate  the  testimony 
of  demons,  whether  favourable  or  adverse  to 
Christ.  But  when  our  adversaries  find  a  god  and 
goddess  of  their  own  at  variance  about  Christ 
the  one  praising,  the  other  vituperating  Him, 
they  can  certainly  give  no  credence,  if  they  have 
any  judgment,  to  mere  men  who  blaspheme 
the  Christians. 

When  Porphyry  or  Hecate  praises  Christ, 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XIX.  23  527 


and  adds  that  He  gave  Himself  to  the  Chris¬ 
tians  as  a  fatal  gift,  that  they  might  be  involved 
in  error,  he  exposes,  as  he  thinks,  the  causes  of 
this  error.  But  before  I  cite  his  words  to  that 
purpose,  I  would  ask,  “If  Christ  did  thus  give 
Himself  to  the  Christians  to  involve  them  in 
error,  did  He  do  so  willingly,  or  against  His 
will?”  If  willingly,  how  is  He  righteous?  If 
against  His  will,  how  is  He  blessed?  However, 
let  us  hear  the  causes  of  this  error.  “There  are,” 
he  says,  “in  a  certain  place  very  small  earthly 
spirits,  subject  to  the  power  of  evil  demons. 
The  wise  men  of  the  Hebrews,  among  whom  was 
this  Jesus,  as  you  have  heard  from  the  oracles 
of  Apollo  cited  above,  turned  religious  persons 
from  these  very  wicked  demons  and  minor  spir¬ 
its,  and  taught  them  rather  to  worship  the  celes¬ 
tial  gods,  and  especially  to  adore  God  the  Fa¬ 
ther.  This,”  he  said,  “the  gods  enjoin;  and  we 
have  already  shown  how  they  admonish  the 
soul  to  turn  to  God,  and  command  it  to  worship 
Him.  But  the  ignorant  and  the  ungodly,  who  are 
not  destined  to  receive  favours  from  the  gods, 
nor  to  know  the  immortal  Jupiter,  not  listening 
to  the  gods  and  their  messages,  have  turned 
away  from  all  gods,  and  have  not  only  refused 
to  hate,  but  have  venerated  the  prohibited  de¬ 
mons.  Professing  to  worship  God,  they  refuse 
to  do  those  things  by  which  alone  God  is  wor¬ 
shipped.  For  God,  indeed,  being  the  Father  of 
all,  is  in  need  of  nothing;  but  for  us  it  is  good 
to  adore  Him  by  means  of  justice,  chastity,  and 
other  virtues,  and  thus  to  make  life  itself  a 
prayer  to  Him,  by  inquiring  into  and  imitating 
His  nature.  For  inquiry,”  says  he,  “purifies  and 
imitation  deifies  us,  by  moving  us  nearer  to 
Him.”  He  is  right  in  so  far  as  he  proclaims  God 
the  Father,  and  the  conduct  by  which  we  should 
worship  Him.  Of  such  precepts  the  prophetic 
books  of  the  Hebrews  are  full,  when  they  praise 
or  blame  the  life  of  the  saints.  But  in  speaking 
of  the  Christians  he  is  in  error,  and  caluminates 
them  as  much  as  is  desired  by  the  demons 
whom  he  takes  for  gods,  as  if  it  were  difficult  for 
any  man  to  recollect  the  disgraceful  and  shame¬ 
ful  actions  which  used  to  be  done  in  the  theatres 
and  temples  to  please  the  gods,  and  to  compare 
with  these  things  what  is  heard  in  our  churches, 
and  what  is  offered  to  the  true  God,  and  from 
this  comparison  to  conclude  where  character  is 
edified,  and  where  it  is  ruined.  But  who  but  a 
diabolical  spirit  has  told  or  suggested  to  this 
man  so  manifest  and  vain  a  lie,  as  that  the 
Christians  reverenced  rather  than  hated  the  de¬ 
mons,  whose  worship  the  Hebrews  prohibited? 
But  that  God,  whom  the  Hebrew  sages  wor¬ 


shipped,  forbids  sacrifice  to  be  offered  even  to 
the  holy  angels  of  heaven  and  divine  powers, 
whom  we,  in  this  our  pilgrimage,  venerate  and 
love  as  our  most  blessed  fellow-citizens.  For  in 
the  law  which  God  gave  to  His  Hebrew  people 
He  utters  this  menace,  as  in  a  voice  of  thunder: 
“He  that  sacrificeth  unto  any  god,  save  unto  the 
Lord  only,  he  shall  be  utterly  destroyed.”1  And 
that  no  one  might  suppose  that  this  prohibition 
extends  only  to  the  very  wicked  demons  and 
earthly  spirits,  whom  this  philosopher  calls  very 
small  and  inferior — for  even  these  are  in  the 
Scripture  called  gods,  not  of  the  Hebrews,  but 
of  the  nations,  as  the  Septuagint  translators 
have  shown  in  the  psalm  where  it  is  said,  “For 
all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  demons”2 — that 
no  one  might  suppose,  I  say,  that  sacrifice  to 
these  demons  was  prohibited,  but  that  sacrifice 
might  be  offered  to  all  or  some  of  the  celestials, 
it  was  immediately  added,  “save  unto  the  Lord 
alone.” 3  The  God  of  the  Hebrews,  then,  to  Whom 
this  renowned  philosopher  bears  this  signal  testi¬ 
mony,  gave  to  His  Hebrew  people  a  law,  com¬ 
posed  in  the  Hebrew  language,  and  not  obscure 
and  unknown,  but  published  now  in  every  na¬ 
tion,  and  in  this  law  it  is  written,  “He  that  sac¬ 
rificeth  unto  any  god,  save  unto  the  Lord  alone, 
he  shall  be  utterly  destroyed.”  What  need  is 
there  to  seek  further  proofs  in  the  law  or  the 
prophets  of  this  same  thing?  Seek ,  we  need  not 
say.  for  the  passages  are  neither  few  nor  difficult 
to  find;  but  what  need  to  collect  and  apply  to 
my  argument  the  proofs  which  are  thickly  sown 
and  obvious,  and  by  which  it  appears  clear  as 
day  that  sacrifice  may  be  paid  to  none  but  the 
supreme  and  true  God?  Here  is  one  brief  but  de¬ 
cided,  even  menacing,  and  certainly  true  utter¬ 
ance  of  that  God  whom  the  wisest  of  our  ad¬ 
versaries  so  highly  extol.  Let  this  be  listened  to, 
feared,  fulfilled,  that  there  may  be  no  disobedi¬ 
ent  soul  cut  off.  “He  that  sacrifices,”  He  says, 
not  because  He  needs  anything,  but  because  it 
behoves  us  to  be  His  possession.  Hence  the 
Psalmist  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  sings,  “I 
have  said  to  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  God,  for 
Thou  needest  not  my  good.”  4  For  we  ourselves, 
who  are  His  own  city,  are  His  most  noble  and 
worthy  sacrifice,  and  it  is  this  mystery  we  cele¬ 
brate  in  our  sacrifices,  which  are  well  known  to 
the  faithful,  as  we  have  explained  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  books.  For  through  the  prophets  the  oracles 

*Ex.  22.  20.  2Ps.  96.  5. 

3Augustine  here  warns  his  readers  against  a  possible 
misunderstanding  of  the  Latin  word  for  alone  (soli), 
which  might  be  rendered  “the  sun.” 

4Ps.  16.  2. 


528  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  God  declared  that  the  sacrifices  which  the 
Jews  offered  as  a  shadow  of  that  which  was  to 
be  would  cease,  and  that  the  nations,  from  the 
rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  would  offer  one 
sacrifice.  From  these  oracles,  which  we  now  see 
accomplished,  we  have  made  such  selections  as 
seemed  suitable  to  our  purpose  in  this  work. 
And  therefore,  where  there  is  not  this  righteous¬ 
ness  whereby  the  one  supreme  God  rules  the 
obedient  city  according  to  His  grace,  so  that  it 
sacrifices  to  none  but  Him,  and  whereby,  in  all 
the  citizens  of  this  obedient  city,  the  soul  con¬ 
sequently  rules  the  body  and  reason  the  vices 
in  the  rightful  order,  so  that,  as  the  individual 
just  man,  so  also  the  community  and  people  of 
the  just,  live  by  faith,  which  works  by  love,  that 
love  whereby  man  loves  God  as  He  ought  to  be 
loved,  and  his  neighbour  as  himself — there, 
I  say,  there  is  not  an  assemblage  associated 
by  a  common  acknowledgement  of  right,  and 
by  a  community  of  interests.  But  if  there  is 
not  this,  there  is  not  a  people,  if  our  definition 
be  true,  and  therefore  there  is  no  republic; 
for  where  there  is  no  people  there  can  be.  no 
republic. 

Chap.  24.  The  definition  which  must  he  given 
of  a  people  and  a  republic,  in  order  to  vindi¬ 
cate  the  assumption  of  these  titles  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  by  other  kingdoms 
But  if  we  discard  this  definition  of  a  people, 
and,  assuming  another,  say  that  a  people  is  an 
assemblage  of  reasonable  beings  bound  together 
by  a  common  agreement  as  to  the  objects  of 
their  love,  then,  in  order  to  discover  the  char¬ 
acter  of  any  people,  we  have  only  to  observe 
what  they  love.  Yet  whatever  it  loves,  if  only  it 
is  an  assemblage  of  reasonable  beings  and  not 
of  beasts,  and  is  bound  together  by  an  agree¬ 
ment  as  to  the  objects  of  love,  it  is  reasonably 
called  a  people ;  and  it  will  be  a  superior  people 
in  proportion  as  it  is  bound  together  by  higher 
interests,  inferior  in  proportion  as  it  is  bound 
together  by  lower.  According  to  this  definition 
of  ours,  the  Roman  people  is  a  people,  and  its 
weal  is  without  doubt  a  commonwealth  or  re¬ 
public.  But  what  its  tastes  were  in  its  early  and 
subsequent  days,  and  how  it  declined  into  san¬ 
guinary  seditions  and  then  to  social  and  civil 
wars,  and  so  burst  asunder  or  rotted  off  the 
bond  of  concord  in  which  the  health  of  a  people 
consists,  history  shows,  and  in  the  preceding 
books  I  have  related  at  large.  And  yet  I  would 
not  on  this  account  say  either  that  it  was  not  a 
people,  or  that  its  administration  was  not  a  re¬ 
public,  so  long  as  there  remains  an  assemblage 


of  reasonable  beings  bound  together  by  a  com¬ 
mon  agreement  as  to  the  objects  of  love.  But 
what  I  say  of  this  people  and  of  this  republic  I 
must  be  understood  to  think  and  say  of  the 
Athenians  or  any  Greek  state,  of  the  Egyptians, 
of  the  early  Assyrian  Babylon,  and  of  every 
other  nation,  great  or  small,  which  had  a  public 
government.  For,  in  general,  the  city  of  the  un¬ 
godly,  which  did  not  obey  the  command  of  God 
that  it  should  offer  no  sacrifice  save  to  Him 
alone  and  which,  therefore,  could  not  give  to  the 
soul  its  proper  command  over  the  body,  nor  to 
the  reason  its  just  authority  over  the  vices,  is 
void  of  true  justice. 

Chap.  25.  That  where  there  is  no  true  religion 
there  are  no  true  virtues 
For  though  the  soul  may  seem  to  rule  the 
body  admirably,  and  the  reason  the  vices,  if  the 
soul  and  reason  do  not  themselves  obey  God,  as 
God  has  commanded  them  to  serve  Him,  they 
have  no  proper  authority  over  the  body  and  the 
vices.  For  what  kind  of  mistress  of  the  body 
and  the  vices  can  that  mind  be  which  is  ignorant 
of  the  true  God,  and  which,  instead  of  being 
subject  to  His  authority,  is  prostituted  to  the 
corrupting  influences  of  the  most  vicious  de¬ 
mons?  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  virtues 
which  it  seems  to  itself  to  possess,  and  by  which 
it  restrains  the  body  and  the  vices  that  it  may 
obtain  and  keep  what  it  desires,  are  rather  vices 
than  virtues  so  long  as  there  is  no  reference  to 
God  in  the  matter.  For  although  some  suppose 
that  virtues  which  have  a  reference  only  to 
themselves  and  are  desired  only  on  their  own 
account,  are  yet  true  and  genuine  virtues,  the 
fact  is  that  even  then  they  are  inflated  with 
pride  and  are  therefore  to  be  reckoned  vices 
rather  than  virtues.  For  as  that  which  gives  life 
to  the  flesh  is  not  derived  from  flesh,  but  is 
above  it,  so  that  which  gives  blessed  life  to  man 
is  not  derived  from  man,  but  is  something  above 
him;  and  what  I  say  of  man  is  true  of  every  ce¬ 
lestial  power  and  virtue  whatsoever. 

Chap.  26.  Of  the  peace  which  is  enjoyed  by  the 
people  that  are  alienated  from  God ,  and  the 
use  made  of  it  by  the  people  of  God  in  the 
time  of  its  pilgrimage 

Wherefore,  as  the  life  of  the  flesh  is  the  soul, 
so  the  blessed  life  of  man  is  God,  of  whom  the 
sacred  writings  of  the  Hebrews  say,  “Blessed  is 
the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord.”1  Miserable, 
therefore,  is  the  people  which  is  alienated  from 
God.  Yet  even  this  people  has  a  peace  of  its 
^s.  144.  15- 


THE  CITY  OF 

own  which  is  not  to  be  lightly  esteemed,  though, 
indeed,  it  shall  not  in  the  end  enjoy  it,  because 
it  makes  no  good  use  of  it  before  the  end.  But 
it  is  our  interest  that  it  enjoy  this  peace  mean¬ 
while  in  this  life;  for  as  long  as  the  two  cities 
are  commingled,  we  also  enjoy  the  peace  of 
Babylon.  For  from  Babylon  the  people  of  God 
is  so  freed  that  it  meanwhile  sojourns  in  its 
company.  And  therefore  the  apostle  also  ad¬ 
monished  the  Church  to  pray  for  kings  and 
those  in  authority,  assigning  as  the  reason,  “that 
we  may  live  a  quiet  and  tranquil  life  in  all  god¬ 
liness  and  love/’ 1  And  the  prophet  Jeremiah, 
when  predicting  the  captivity  that  was  to  befall 
the  ancient  people  of  God.  and  giving  them  the 
divine  command  to  go  obediently  to  Babylonia, 
and  thus  serve  their  God,  counselled  them  also 
to  pray  for  Babylonia,  saying,  “In  the  peace 
thereof  shall  ye  have  peace” 2 — the  temporal 
peace  which  the  good  and  the  wicked  together 
enjoy. 

Chap.  27.  That  the  peace  of  those  who  serve 

God  cannot  in  this  mortal  life  be  apprehend¬ 
ed  in  its  perfection 

But  the  peace  which  is  peculiar  to  ourselves 
we  enjoy  now  with  God  by  faith,  and  shall  here¬ 
after  enjoy  eternally  with  Him  by  sight.  But 
the  peace  which  we  enjoy  in  this  life,  whether 
common  to  all  or  peculiar  to  ourselves,  is  rath¬ 
er  the  solace  of  our  misery  than  the  positive 
enjoyment  of  felicity.  Our  very  righteousness, 
too,  though  true  in  so  far  as  it  has  respect  to  the 
true  good,  is  yet  in  this  life  of  such  a  kind  that 
it  consists  rather  in  the  remission  of  sins  than  in 
the  perfecting  of  virtues.  Witness  the  prayer  of 
the  whole  city  of  God  in  its  pilgrim  state,  for  it 
cries  to  God  by  the  mouth  of  all  its  members, 
“Forgive  us  our  debts  as  we  forgive  our  debt¬ 
ors.”3  And  this  prayer  is  efficacious  not  for  those 
whose  faith  is  “without  works  and  dead,” 4  but 
for  those  whose  faith  “worketh  by  love.”5  For 
as  reason,  though  subjected  to  God,  is  yet 
“pressed  down  by  the  corruptible  body,”6  so 
long  as  it  is  in  this  mortal  condition,  it  has  not 
perfect  authority  over  vice,  and  therefore  this 
prayer  is  needed  by  the  righteous.  For  though 
it  exercises  authority,  the  vices  do  not  submit 
without  a  struggle.  For  however  well  one  main¬ 
tains  the  conflict,  and  however  thoroughly  he 
has  subdued  these  enemies,  there  steals  in  some 
evil  thing,  which,  if  it  do  not  find  ready  expres¬ 
sion  in  act,  slips  out  by  the  lips,  or  insinuates 

*1  Tim.  2.  2;  variant  reading:  “purity.”  2Jer.  29.  7. 

3Matt.  6.  12.  4Jas.  2.  17.  6Gal.  5.  6. 

6Wisd.  9.  15. 


GOD  XIX.  24-28  529 

itself  into  the  thought;  and  therefore  his  peace 
is  not  full  so  long  as  he  is  at  war  with  his  vices. 
For  it  is  a  doubtful  conflict  he  wages  with  those 
that  resist,  and  his  victory  over  those  that  are 
defeated  is  not  secure,  but  full  of  anxiety  and 
effort.  Amidst  these  temptations,  therefore,  of 
all  which  it  has  been  summarily  said  in  the  di¬ 
vine  oracles,  “Is  not  human  life  upon  earth  a 
temptation?” 7  who  but  a  proud  man  can  pre¬ 
sume  that  he  so  lives  that  he  has  no  need  to  say 
to  God,  “Forgive  us  our  debts”?  And  such  a 
man  is  not  great,  but  swollen  and  puffed  up  with 
vanity,  and  is  justly  resisted  by  Him  who  abun¬ 
dantly  gives  grace  to  the  humble.  Whence  it  is 
said,  “God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace 
to  the  humble.” 8  In  this,  then,  consists  the 
righteousness  of  a  man,  that  he  submit  himself 
to  God,  his  body  to  his  soul,  and  his  vices,  even 
when  they  rebel,  to  his  reason,  which  either  de¬ 
feats  or  at  least  resists  them ;  and  also  that  he 
beg  from  God  grace  to  do  his  duty,  and  the  par¬ 
don  of  his  sins,  and  that  he  render  to  God 
thanks  for  all  the  blessings  he  receives.  But,  in 
that  final  peace  to  which  all  our  righteousness 
has  reference,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  it  is 
maintained,  as  our  nature  shall  enjoy  a  sound 
immortality  and  incorruption,  and  shall  have 
no  more  vices,  and  as  we  shall  experience  no 
resistance  either  from  ourselves  or  from  others, 
it  will  not  be  necessary  that  reason  should  rule 
vices  which  no  longer  exist,  but  God  shall  rule 
the  man,  and  the  soul  shall  rule  the  body,  with 
a  sweetness  and  facility  suitable  to  the  felicity 
of  a  life  which  is  done  with  bondage.  And  this 
condition  shall  there  be  eternal,  and  we  shall  be 
assured  of  its  eternity;  and  thus  the  peace  of 
this  blessedness  and  the  blessedness  of  this 
peace  shall  be  the  supreme  good. 

Chap.  28.  The  end  of  the  wicked 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  who  do  not  be¬ 
long  to  this  city  of  God  shall  inherit  eternal  mis¬ 
ery,  which  is  also  called  the  second  death,  be¬ 
cause  the  soul  shall  then  be  separated  from  God 
its  life,  and  therefore  cannot  be  said  to  live, 
and  the  body  shall  be  subjected  to  eternal  pains. 
And  consequently  this  second  death  shall  be  the 
more  severe,  because  no  death  shall  terminate 
it.  But  war  being  contrary  to  peace,  as  misery 
to  happiness,  and  life  to  death,  it  is  not  without 
reason  asked  what  kind  of  war  can  be  found  in 
the  end  of  the  wicked  answering  to  the  peace 
which  is  declared  to  be  the  end  of  the  righteous? 
The  person  who  puts  this  question  has  only  to 
observe  what  it  is  in  war  that  is  hurtful  and  de- 
7Job,  7.  1.  8Jas.  4.  6;  I  Pet.  5.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


53° 

structive,  and  he  shall  see  that  it  is  nothing  else 
than  the  mutual  opposition  and  conflict  of 
things.  And  can  he  conceive  a  more  grievous  and 
bitter  war  than  that  in  which  the  will  is  so  op¬ 
posed  to  passion,  and  passion  to  the  will,  that 
their  hostility  can  never  be  terminated  by  the 
victory  of  either,  and  in  which  the  violence  of 
pain  so  conflicts  with  the  nature  of  the  body 
that  neither  yields  to  the  other?  For  in  this  life, 
when  this  conflict  has  arisen,  either  pain  con¬ 


quers  and  death  expels  the  feeling  of  it,  or  na¬ 
ture  conquers  and  health  expels  the  pain.  But 
in  the  world  to  come  the  pain  continues  that  it 
may  torment,  and  the  nature  endures  that  it 
may  be  sensible  of  it ;  and  neither  ceases  to  ex¬ 
ist,  lest  punishment  also  should  cease.  Now,  as 
it  is  through  the  last  judgment  that  men  pass 
to  these  ends,  the  good  to  the  supreme  good,  the 
evil  to  the  supreme  evil,  I  will  treat  of  this 
judgment  in  the  following  book. 


BOOK  XX 

ARGUMENT.  Concerning  the  last  judgment,  and  the  declarations  re¬ 
garding  IT  IN  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 


Chap.  i.  That  although  God  is  always  judging , 
it  is  nevertheless  reasonable  to  confine  our  at¬ 
tention  in  this  book  to  his  last  judgment 
Intending  to  speak,  in  dependence  on  God’s 
grace,  of  the  day  of  His  final  judgment,  and  to 
affirm  it  against  the  ungodly  and  incredulous  we 
must  first  of  all  lay,  as  it  were,  in  the  foundation 
of  the  edifice  the  divine  declarations.  Those 
persons  who  do  not  believe  such  declarations  do 
their  best  to  oppose  to  them  false  and  illusive 
sophisms  of  their  own,  either  contending  that 
what  is  adduced  from  Scripture  has  another 
meaning,  or  altogether  denying  that  it  is  an  ut¬ 
terance  of  God’s.  For  I  suppose  no  man  who  un¬ 
derstands  what  is  written,  and  believes  it  to  be 
communicated  by  the  supreme  and  true  God 
through  holy  men,  refuses  to  yield  and  consent 
to  these  declarations, whether  he  orally  confesses 
his  consent,  or  is  from  some  evil  influence 
ashamed  or  afraid  to  do  so;  or  even,  with  an 
opinionativeness  closely  resembling  madness, 
makes  strenuous  efforts  to  defend  what  he 
knows  and  believes  to  be  false  against  what  he 
knows  and  believes  to  be  true. 

That,  therefore,  which  the  whole  Church  of 
the  true  God  holds  and  professes  as  its  creed, 
that  Christ  shall  come  from  heaven  to  judge 
quick  and  dead,  this  we  call  the  last  day,  or  last 
time,  of  the  divine  judgment.  For  we  do  not 
know  how  many  days  this  judgment  may  oc¬ 
cupy;  but  no  one  who  reads  the  Scriptures,  how¬ 
ever  negligently,  need  be  told  that  in  them 
“day”  is  customarily  used  for  “time.”  And  when 
we  speak  of  the  day  of  God’s  judgment,  we  add 
the  word  last  or  final  for  this  reason,  because 
even  now  God  judges,  and  has  judged  from  the 
beginning  of  human  history,  banishing  from  Par¬ 
adise,  and  excluding  from  the  tree  of  life,  those 


first  men  who  perpetrated  so  great  a  sin.  Yea, 
He  was  certainly  exercising  judgment  also 
when  He  did  not  spare  the  angels  who  sinned, 
whose  prince,  overcome  by  envy,  seduced  men 
after  being  himself  seduced.  Neither  is  it  with¬ 
out  God’s  profound  and  just  judgment  that  the 
life  of  demons  and  men,  the  one  in  the  air,  the 
other  on  earth,  is  filled  with  misery,  calamities, 
and  mistakes.  And  even  though  no  one  had 
sinned,  it  could  only  have  been  by  the  good  and 
right  judgment  of  God  that  the  whole  rational 
creation  could  have  been  maintained  in  eternal 
blessedness  by  a  persevering  adherence  to  its 
Lord.  He  judges,  too,  not  only  in  the  mass,  con¬ 
demning  the  race  of  devils  and  the  race  of  men 
to  be  miserable  on  account  of  the  original  sin  of 
these  races,  but  He  also  judges  the  voluntary 
and  personal  acts  of  individuals.  For  even  the 
devils  pray  that  they  may  not  be  tormented,1 
which  proves  that  without  injustice  they  might 
either  be  spared  or  tormented  according  to  their 
deserts.  And  men  are  punished  by  God  for  their 
sins  often  visibly,  always  secretly,  either  in  this 
life  or  after  death,  although  no  man  acts  rightly 
save  by  the  assistance  of  divine  aid;  and  no  man 
or  devil  acts  unrighteously  save  by  the  permis¬ 
sion  of  the  divine  and  most  just  judgment.  For, 
as  the  apostle  says,  “There  is  no  unrighteousness 
with  God”;2  and  as  he  elsewhere  says,  “His 
judgments  are  inscrutable,  and  His  ways  past 
finding  out.” 3  In  this  book,  then,  I  shall  speak, 
as  God  permits,  not  of  those  first  judgments, 
nor  of  these  intervening  judgments  of  God, 
but  of  the  last  judgment,  when  Christ  is  to 
come  from  heaven  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead.  For  that  day  is  properly  called  the  day  of 
judgment,  because  in  it  there  shall  be  no  room 
left  for  the  ignorant  questioning  why  this  wick- 
1Matt.  8.  29.  2Rom.  9.  14.  3Rom.  11.  33. 


THE  CITY  OF 

ed  person  is  happy  and  that  righteous  man  un¬ 
happy.  In  that  day  true  and  full  happiness  shall 
be  the  lot  of  none  but  the  good,  while  deserved 
and  supreme  misery  shall  be  the  portion  of  the 
wicked,  and  of  them  only. 

Chap.  2.  That  in  the  mingled  web  of  human  af¬ 
fairs  God’s  judgment  is  present,  though  it 
cannot  be  discerned 

In  this  present  time  we  learn  to  bear  with 
equanimity  the  ills  to  which  even  good  men  are 
subject,  and  to  hold  cheap  the  blessings  which 
even  the  wicked  enjoy.  And  consequently,  even 
in  those  conditions  of  life  in  which  the  justice 
of  God  is  not  apparent,  His  teaching  is  salutary. 
For  we  do  not  know  by  what  judgment  of  God 
this  good  man  is  poor  and  that  bad  man  rich; 
why  he  who,  in  our  opinion,  ought  to  suffer 
acutely  for  his  abandoned  life  enjoys  himself, 
while  sorrow  pursues  him  whose  praiseworthy 
life  leads  us  to  suppose  he  should  be  happy; 
why  the  innocent  man  is  dismissed  from  the  bar 
not  only  unavenged,  but  even  condemned,  be¬ 
ing  either  wronged  by  the  iniquity  of  the  judge, 
or  overwhelmed  by  false  evidence,  while  his 
guilty  adversary,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  only 
discharged  with  impunity,  but  even  has  his 
claims  admitted;  why  the  ungodly  enjoys  good 
health,  while  the  godly  pines  in  sickness;  why 
ruffians  are  of  the  soundest  constitution,  while 
they  who  could  not  hurt  any  one  even  with  a 
word  are  from  infancy  afflicted  with  complicat¬ 
ed  disorders;  why  he  who  is  useful  to  society  is 
cut  off  by  premature  death,  while  those  who,  as 
it  might  seem,  ought  never  to  have  been  so 
much  as  born  have  lives  of  unusual  length;  why 
he  who  is  full  of  crimes  is  crowned  with  hon¬ 
ours,  while  the  blameless  man  is  buried  in  the 
darkness  of  neglect.  But  who  can  collect  or  enu¬ 
merate  all  the  contrasts  of  this  kind?  But  if  this 
anomalous  state  of  things  were  uniform  in  this 
life,  in  which,  as  the  sacred  Psalmist  says,  “Man 
is  like  to  vanity,  his  days  as  a  shadow  that  pass- 
eth  away”1 — so  uniform  that  none  but  wicked 
men  wpn  the  transitory  prosperity  of  earth, 
while  only  the  good  suffered  its  ills — this  could 
be  referred  to  the  just  and  even  benign  judg¬ 
ment  of  God.  We  might  suppose  that  they  who 
were  not  destined  to  obtain  those  everlasting 
benefits  which  constitute  human  blessedness 
were  either  deluded  by  transitory  blessings  as 
the  just  reward  of  their  wickedness,  or  were,  in 
God’s  mercy,  consoled  by  them,  and  that  they 
who  were  not  destined  to  suffer  eternal  torments 
were  afflicted  with  temporal  chastisement  for 
JPs.  144.  4- 


GOD  XX.  1-3  531 

their  sins,  or  were  stimulated  to  greater  attain¬ 
ment  in  virtue.  But  now,  as  it  is,  since  we  not 
only  see  good  men  involved  in  the  ills  of  life,  and 
bad  men  enjoying  the  good  of  it,  which  seems 
unjust,  but  also  that  evil  often  overtakes  evil 
men,  and  good  surprises  the  good,  the  rather  on 
this  account  are  God’s  judgments  unsearcha¬ 
ble,  and  His  ways  past  finding  out.  Although, 
therefore,  we  do  not  know  by  what  judgment 
these  things  are  done  or  permitted  to  be  done  by 
God,  with  Whom  is  the  highest  virtue,  the  high¬ 
est  wisdom,  the  highest  justice,  no  infirmity,  no 
rashness,  no  unrighteousness,  yet  it  is  salutary 
for  us  to  learn  to  hold  cheap  such  things,  be  they 
good  or  evil,  as  attach  indifferently  to  good  men 
and  bad,  and  to  covet  those  good  things  which 
belong  only  to  good  men,  and  flee  those  evils 
which  belong  only  to  evil  men.  But  when  we 
shall  have  come  to  that  judgment,  the  date  of 
which  is  called  peculiarly  the  day  of  judgment 
and  sometimes  the  day  of  the  Lord,  we  shall 
then  recognize  the  justice  of  all  God’s  judg¬ 
ments,  not  only  of  such  as  shall  then  be  pro¬ 
nounced,  but  of  all  which  take  effect  from  the 
beginning,  or  may  take  effect  before  that  time. 
And  in  that  day  we  shall  also  recognize  with 
what  justice  so  many,  or  almost  all,  the  just 
judgments  of  God  in  the  present  life  defy  the 
scrutiny  of  human  sense  or  insight,  though  in 
this  matter  it  is  not  concealed  from  pious  minds 
that  what  is  concealed  is  just. 

Chap.  3.  What  Solomon,  in  the  book  of  Ecclesi¬ 
astes,  says  regarding  the  things  which  hap¬ 
pen  alike  to  good  and  wicked  men 
Solomon,  the  wisest  king  of  Israel,  who 
reigned  in  Jerusalem,  thus  commences  the  book 
called  Ecclesiastes,  which  the  Jews  number 
among  their  canonical  Scriptures:  “Vanity  of 
vanities,  said  Ecclesiastes,  vanity  of  vanities; 
all  is  vanity.  What  profit  hath  a  man  of  all  his 
labour  which  he  hath  taken  under  the  sun?”2 
And  after  going  on  to  enumerate,  with  this  as 
his  text,  the  calamities  and  delusions  of  this  life, 
and  the  shifting  nature  of  the  present  time,  in 
which  there  is  nothing  substantial,  nothing  last¬ 
ing,  he  bewails,  among  the  other  vanities  that 
are  under  the  sun,  this  also,  that  though  wisdom 
excelleth  folly  as  light  excelleth  darkness,  and 
though  the  eyes  of  the  wise  man  are  in  his  head, 
while  the  fool  walketh  in  darkness,3  yet  one 
event  happeneth  to  them  all,  that  is  to  say,  in 
this  life  under  the  sun,  unquestionably  alluding 
to  those  evils  which  we  see  befall  good  and  bad 
men  alike.  He  says,  further,  that  the  good  suf- 
2Eccles.  1.  2,  3.  3Eccles.  2.  13,  14. 


532  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


fer  the  ills  of  life  as  if  they  were  evil  doers,  and 
the  bad  enjoy  the  good  of  life  as  if  they  were 
good.  “There  is  a  vanity  which  is  done  upon  the 
earth ;  that  there  be  just  men  unto  whom  it  hap- 
peneth  according  to  the  work  of  the  wicked: 
again,  there  be  wicked  men.  to  whom  it  hap- 
peneth  according  to  the  work  of  the  righteous. 
I  said,  that  this  also  is  vanity.”  1  This  wisest 
man  devoted  this  whole  book  to  a  full  exposure 
of  this  vanity,  evidently  with  no  other  object 
than  that  we  might  long  for  that  life  in  which 
there  is  no  vanity  under  the  sun,  but  verity  un¬ 
der  Him  Who  made  the  sun.  In  this  vanity,  then, 
was  it  not  by  the  just  and  righteous  judgment 
of  God  that  man.  made  like  to  vanity,  was  des¬ 
tined  to  pass  away?  But  in  these  days  of  vanity 
it  makes  an  important  difference  whether  he  re¬ 
sists  or  yields  to  the  truth,  and  whether  he  is 
destitute  of  true  piety  or  a  partaker  of  it — im¬ 
portant  not  so  far  as  regards  the  acquirement  of 
the  blessings  or  the  evasion  of  the  calamities  of 
this  transitory  and  vain  life,  but  in  connection 
with  the  future  judgment  which  shall  make 
over  to  good  men  good  things,  and  to  bad  gien 
bad  things,  in  permanent,  inalienable  possession. 
In  fine,  this  wise  man  concludes  this  book  of  his 
by  saying,  “Fear  God,  and  keep  His  command¬ 
ments:  for  this  is  every  man.  For  God  shall 
bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every 
despised  person,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether 
it  be  evil.” 2  What  truer,  terser,  more  salutary 
enouncement  could  be  made?  “Fear  God,”  he 
says,  “and  keep  His  commandments:  for  this  is 
every  man.”  For  whosoever  has  real  existence, 
is  this,  is  a  keeper  of  God’s  commandments ;  and 
he  who  is  not  this,  is  nothing.  For  so  long  as  he 
remains  in  the  likeness  of  vanity,  he  is  not  re¬ 
newed  in  the  image  of  the  truth.  “For  God  shall 
bring  into  judgment  every  work” — that  is,  what¬ 
ever  man  does  in  this  life — “whether  it  be  good 
or  whether  it  be  evil,  with  every  despised  per¬ 
son” — that  is,  with  every  man  who  here  seems 
despicable  and  is  therefore  not  considered;  for 
God  sees  even  him,  and  does  not  despise  him 
nor  pass  him  over  in  His  judgment. 

Chap.  4.  That  proofs  of  the  last  judgment  will 
be  adduced,  first  from  the  New  Testament, 
and  then  from  the  Old 

The  proofs,  then,  of  this  last  judgment  of 
God  which  I  propose  to  adduce  shall  be  drawn 
first  from  the  New  Testament,  and  then  from 
the  Old.  For  although  the  Old  Testament  is  pri¬ 
or  in  point  of  time,  the  New  has  the  precedence 
in  intrinsic  value;  for  the  Old  acts  the  part  of 
Neeles.  8.  14.  2Eccles.  12.  13,  14. 


herald  to  the  New.  We  shall  therefore  first  cite 
passages  from  the  New  Testament,  and  confirm 
them  by  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament. 
The  Old  contains  the  law  and  the  prophets,  the 
New  the  gospel  and  the  apostolic  epistles.  Now 
the  apostle  says  “By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of 
sin.  But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  without 
the  law  is  manifested,  being  witnessed  by  the 
law  and  the  prophets;  now  the  righteousness  of 
God  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  all  them 
that  believe.”  3  This  righteousness  of  God  be¬ 
longs  to  the  New  Testament,  and  evidence  for 
it  exists  in  the  old  books,  that  is  to  say,  in  the 
law  and  the  prophets.  I  shall  first,  then,  state  the 
case,  and  then  call  the  witnesses.  This  order 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  directs  us  to  observe,  say¬ 
ing,  “The  scribe  instructed  in  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  like  a  good  householder,  bringing  out  of 
his  treasure  things  new  and  old.” 4  He  did  not 
say  “old  and  new,”  which  He  certainly  would 
have  said  had  He  not  wished  to  follow  the  order 
of  merit  rather  than  that  of  time. 

Chap.  5.  The  passages  in  which  the  Saviour  de¬ 
clares  that  there  shall  be  a  divine  judgment 
in  the  end  of  the  world 
The  Saviour  Himself,  while  reproving  the  cit¬ 
ies  in  which  He  had  done  great  works,  but  which 
had  not  believed,  and  while  setting  them  in  un¬ 
favourable  comparison  with  foreign  cities,  says, 
“But  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall  be  more  tolerable 
for  Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment 
than  for  you.” 5  And  a  little  after  He  says, 
“Verily,  I  say  unto  you.  It  shall  be  more  toler¬ 
able  for  the  land  of  Sodom  in  the  day  of  judg¬ 
ment  than  for  thee.”6  Here  He  most  plainly 
predicts  that  a  day  of  judgment  is  to  come. 
And  in  another  place  He  says,  “The  men  of 
Nineveh  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this  gen¬ 
eration,  and  shall  condemn  it :  because  they  re¬ 
pented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas;  and,  behold, 
a  greater  than  Jonas  is  here.  The  queen  of  the 
south  shall  rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  this 
generation,  and  shall  condemn  it:  for  she  came 
from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  to  hear 
the  words  of  Solomon;  and  behold,  a  greater 
than  Solomon  is  here.”  7  Two  things  we  learn 
from  this  passage,  that  a  judgment  is  to  take 
place,  and  that  it  is  to  take  place  at  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  dead.  For  when  He  spoke  of  the 
Ninevites  and  the  queen  of  the  south,  He  cer¬ 
tainly  spoke  of  dead  persons,  and  yet  He  said 
that  they  should  rise  up  in  the  day  of  judg¬ 
ment.  He  did  not  say,  “They  shall  condemn,”  as 

3Rom.  3.  20-22.  4Matt.  13.  52.  6Matt.  11.  22. 

6Matt.  11.  24.  7Matt.  12.  41,  42. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  4-5  533 


if  they  themselves  were  to  be  the  judges,  but 
because,  in  comparison  with  them,  the  others 
shall  be  justly  condemned. 

Again,  in  another  passage,  in  which  He  was 
speaking  of  the  present  intermingling  and  fu¬ 
ture  separation  of  the  good  and  bad — the  sep¬ 
aration  which  shall  be  made  in  the  day  of  judg¬ 
ment — He  adduced  a  comparison  drawn  from 
the  sown  wheat  and  the  tares  sown  among  them, 
and  gave  this  explanation  of  it  to  His  disciples : 
“He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son  of 
man,”  etc. 1  Here,  indeed,  He  did  not  name  the 
judgment  or  the  day  of  judgment,  but  indicated 
it  much  more  clearly  by  describing  the  circum¬ 
stances,  and  foretold  that  it  should  take  place  in 
the  end  of  the  world. 

In  like  manner  He  says  to  His  disciples,  “Ver¬ 
ily  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  which  have  followed 
me,  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man 
shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall 
sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel.”  2  Here  we  learn  that  Jesus  shall 
judge  with  His  disciples.  And  therefore  He  said 
elsewhere  to  the  Jews,  “If  I  by  Beelzebub  cast 
out  devils,  by  whom  do  your  sons  cast  them 
out?  Therefore  they  shall  be  your  judges.”3 
Neither  ought  we  to  suppose  that  only  twelve 
men  shall  judge  along  with  Him,  though  He  says 
that  they  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones;  for  by 
the  number  twelve  is  signified  the  completeness 
of  the  multitude  of  those  who  shall  judge.  For 
the  two  parts  of  the  number  seven  (which  com¬ 
monly  symbolizes  totality),  that  is  to  say  four 
and  three,  multiplied  into  one  another,  give 
twelve.  For  four  times  three,  or  three  times 
four,  are  twelve.  There  are  other  meanings,  too, 
in  this  number  twelve.  Were  not  this  the  right 
interpretation  of  the  twelve  thrones,  then  since 
we  read  that  Matthias  was  ordained  an  apostle 
in  the  room  of  Judas  the  traitor,  the  Apostle 
Paul,  though  he  laboured  more  than  them  all,4 
should  have  no  throne  of  judgment ;  but  he  un- 
mistakeably  considers  himself  to  be  included  in 
the  number  of  the  judges  when  he  says,  “Know 
ye  notithat  we  shall  judge  angels?”  5  The  same 
rule  is  to  be  observed  in  applying  the  number 
twelve  to  those  who  are  to  be  judged.  For 
though  it  was  said,  “judging  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel,”  the  tribe  of  Levi,  which  is  the  thir¬ 
teenth,  shall  not  on  this  account  be  exempt  from 
judgment,  neither  shall  judgment  be  passed 
only  on  Israel  and  not  on  the  other  nations.  And 
by  the  words  “in  the  regeneration,”  He  certain¬ 
ly  meant  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  to  be  un- 

!Matt.  13.  37-43-  2Matt.  19.  28.  3Matt.  12.  27. 

4I  Cor.  15.  10.  6I  Cor.  6.  3. 


derstood;  for  our  flesh  shall  be  regenerated  by 
incorruption,  as  our  soul  is  regenerated  by  faith. 

Many  passages  I  omit,  because,  though  they 
seem  to  refer  to  the  last  judgment,  yet  on  a 
closer  examination  they  are  found  to  be  ambigu¬ 
ous,  or  to  allude  rather  to  some  other  event — 
whether  to  that  coming  of  the  Saviour  which 
continually  occurs  in  His  Church,  that  is,  in  His 
members,  in  which  He  comes  little  by  little,  and 
piece  by  piece,  since  the  whole  Church  is  His 
Body,  or  to  the  destruction  of  the  earthly  Jeru¬ 
salem.  For  when  He  speaks  even  of  this,  He 
often  uses  language  which  is  applicable  to  the 
end  of  the  world  and  that  last  and  great  day  of 
judgment,  so  that  these  two  events  cannot  be 
distinguished  unless  all  the  corresponding  pas¬ 
sages  bearing  on  the  subject  in  the  three  evange¬ 
lists,  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  are  compared 
with  one  another — for  some  things  are  put  more 
obscurely  by  one  evangelist  and  more  plainly  by 
another — so  that  it  becomes  apparent  what 
things  are  meant  to  be  referred  to  one  event. 
It  is  this  which  I  have  been  at  pains  to  do  in  a 
letter  which  I  wrote  to  Hesychius  of  blessed 
memory,  bishop  of  Salon,  and  entitled,  “Of  the 
End  of  the  World.” 

I  shall  now  cite  from  the  Gospel  according  to 
Matthew  the  passage  which  speaks  of  the  sepa¬ 
ration  of  the  good  from  the  wicked  by  the  most 
efficacious  and  final  judgment  of  Christ :  “When 
the  Son  of  man,”  he  says,  “shall  come  in  His 
glory,  .  .  .  then  shall  He  say  also  unto  them 
on  His  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels.”  6  Then  He  in  like  manner  recounts 
to  the  wicked  the  things  they  had  not  done,  but 
which  He  had  said  those  on  the  right  hand  had 
done.  And  when  they  ask  when  they  had  seen 
Him  in  need  of  these  things,  He  replies  that,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  they  had  not  done  it  to  the  least  of 
His  brethren,  they  had  not  done  it  unto  Him, 
and  concludes  His  address  in  the  words,  “And 
these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment, 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal.”  Moreover, 
the  evangelist  John  most  distinctly  states  that 
He  had  predicted  that  the  judgment  should  be 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  after  saying, 
“The  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  commit¬ 
ted  all  judgment  unto  the  Son;  that  all  men 
should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the 
Father :  he  that  honoureth  not  the  Son,  honour- 
eth  not  the  Father  which  hath  sent  Him”;  He 
immediately  adds,  “Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  He  that  heareth  my  word  and  believeth  on 
Him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and 
6Matt.  25.  34-41- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


534 

shall  not  come  into  judgment;  but  is  passed 
from  death  to  life.”  1  Here  He  said  that  believ¬ 
ers  on  Him  should  not  come  into  judgment. 
How,  then,  shall  they  be  separated  from  the 
wicked  by  judgment,  and  be  set  at  His  right 
hand,  unless  judgment  be  in  this  passage  used 
for  condemnation?  For  into  judgment,  in  this 
sense,  they  shall  not  come  who  hear  His  word, 
and  believe  on  Him  that  sent  Him. 

Chap.  6.  What  is  the  first  resurrection ,  and 

what  the  second 

After  that  He  adds  the  words,  “Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you.  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is, 
when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God;  and  they  that  hear  shall  live.  For  as  the 
Father  hath  life  in  Himself ;  so  hath  He  given  to 
the  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself.” 2  As  yet  He 
does  not  speak  of  the  second  resurrection,  that 
is,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  which  shall  be 
in  the  end,  but  of  the  first,  which  now  is.  It  is 
for  the  sake  of  making  this  distinction  that  He 
says,  “The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is.”  Now 
this  resurrection  regards  not  the  body,  but  J;he 
soul.  For  souls,  too,  have  a  death  of  their  own 
in  wickedness  and  sins,  whereby  they  are  the 
dead  of  whom  the  same  lips  say,  “Suffer  the 
dead  to  bury  their  dead”  3 — that  is,  let  those 
who  are  dead  in  soul  bury  them  that  are  dead  in 
body.  It  is  of  these  dead,  then — the  dead  in  un¬ 
godliness  and  wickedness — that  He  says,  “The 
hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  they  that 
hear  shall  live.”  “They  that  hear,”  that  is,  they 
who  obey,  believe,  and  persevere  to  the  end. 
Here  no  difference  is  made  between  the  good 
and  the  bad.  For  it  is  good  for  all  men  to  hear 
His  voice  and  live,  by  passing  to  the  life  of  god¬ 
liness  from  the  death  of  ungodliness.  Of  this 
death  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  “Therefore  all  are 
dead,  and  He  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live 
should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but 
unto  Him  which  died  for  them  and  rose  again.”4 
Thus  all,  without  one  exception,  were  dead  in 
sins,  whether  original  or  voluntary  sins,  sins  of 
ignorance,  or  sins  committed  against  knowl¬ 
edge;  and  for  all  the  dead  there  died  the  one 
only  person  who  lived,  that  is,  Who  had  no  sin 
whatever,  in  order  that  they  who  live  by  the  re¬ 
mission  of  their  sins  should  live,  not  to  them¬ 
selves,  but  to  Him  Who  died  for  all,  for  our  sins, 
and  rose  again  for  our  justification,  that  we,  be¬ 
lieving  in  Him  Who  justifies  the  ungodly,  and 
being  justified  from  ungodliness  or  quickened 

^John,  5.  22-24.  2John,  5.  25,  26.  3Matt.  8.  22. 

4II  Cor.  5.  14,  15. 


from  death,  may  be  able  to  attain  to  the  first 
resurrection  which  now  is.  For  in  this  first  res¬ 
urrection  none  have  a  part  save  those  who  shall 
be  eternally  blessed;  but  in  the  second,  of  which 
He  goes  on  to  speak,  all,  as  we  shall  learn,  have 
a  part,  both  the  blessed  and  the  wretched.  The 
one  is  the  resurrection  of  mercy,  the  other  of 
judgment.  And  therefore  it  is  written  in  the 
psalm,  “I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  of  judgment: 
unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  will  I  sing.” 5 

And  of  this  judgment  He  went  on  to  say, 
“And  hath  given  Him  authority  to  execute 
judgment  also,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man.” 
Here  He  shows  that  He  will  come  to  judge  in 
that  flesh  in  which  He  had  come  to  be  judged. 
For  it  is  to  show  this  He  says,  “because  He  is 
the  Son  of  man.”  And  then  follow  the  words  for 
our  purpose:  “Marvel  not  at  this:  for  the  hour 
is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  His  voice,  and  shall  come  forth;  they 
that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of 
life;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  res¬ 
urrection  of  judgment.”6  This  judgment  He 
uses  here  in  the  same  sense  as  a  little  before, 
when  He  says,  “He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
believeth  on  Him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting 
life,  and  shall  not  come  into  judgment ,  but  is 
passed  from  death  to  life” ;  i.e.,  by  having  a  part 
in  the  first  resurrection,  by  which  a  transition 
from  death  to  life  is  made  in  this  present  time, 
he  shall  not  come  into  damnation,  which  He 
mentions  by  the  name  of  judgment,  as  also  in 
the  place  where  He  says,  “but  they  that  have 
done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of  judgment,” 
i.e.,  of  damnation.  He,  therefore,  who  would  not 
be  damned  in  the  second  resurrection,  let  him 
rise  in  the  first.  For  “the  hour  is  coming,  and 
now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the 
Son  of  God;  and  they  that  hear  shall  live,”  i.e., 
shall  not  come  into  damnation,  which  is  called 
the  second  death;  into  which  death,  after  the 
second  or  bodily  resurrection,  they  shall  be 
hurled  who  do  not  rise  in  the  first  or  spiritual 
resurrection.  For  “the  hour  is  coming”  (but 
here  He  does  not  say,  “and  now  is,”  because  it 
shall  come  in  the  end  of  the  world  in  the  last 
and  greatest  judgment  of  God)  “when  all  that 
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  His  voice  and  shall 
come  forth.”  He  does  not  say,  as  in  the  first  res¬ 
urrection,  “And  they  that  hear  shall  live.”  For 
all  shall  not  live,  at  least  with  such  life  as  ought 
alone  to  be  called  life  because  it  alone  is  blessed. 
For  some  kind  of  life  they  must  have  in  order 
to  hear,  and  come  forth  from  the  graves  in  their 
rising  bodies.  And  why  all  shall  not  live  He 
6Ps.  101.  1.  6John,  5.  28,  29. 


THE  CITY  OF 

teaches  in  the  words  that  follow:  “They  that 
have  done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of  life” — 
these  are  they  who  shall  live;  “but  they  that 
have  done  evil,  to  the  resurrection  of  judg¬ 
ment” — these  are  they  who  shall  not  live,  for 
they  shall  die  in  the  second  death.  They  have 
done  evil  because  their  life  has  been  evil;  and 
their  life  has  been  evil  because  it  has  not  been 
renewed  in  the  first  or  spiritual  resurrection 
which  now  is,  or  because  they  have  not  perse¬ 
vered  to  the  end  in  their  renewed  life.  As,  then, 
there  are  two  regenerations,  of  which  I  have  al¬ 
ready  made  mention — the  one  according  to 
faith,  and  which  takes  place  in  the  present  life 
by  means  of  baptism ;  the  other  according  to  the 
flesh,  and  which  shall  be  accomplished  in  its  in¬ 
corruption  and  immortality  by  means  of  the 
great  and  final  judgment — so  are  there  also  two 
resurrections — the  one  the  first  and  spiritual 
resurrection,  which  has  place  in  this  life,  and 
preserves  us  from  coming  into  the  second 
death;  the  other  the  second,  which  does  not  oc¬ 
cur  now,  but  in  the  end  of  the  world,  and  which 
is  of  the  body,  not  of  the  soul,  and  which  by  the 
last  judgment  shall  dismiss  some  into  the  second 
death,  others  into  that  life  which  has  no  death. 

Chap.  7.  What  is  written  in  the  revelation  of 
John  regarding  the  two  resurrections ,  and  the 
thousand  years ,  and  what  may  reasonably  be 
held  on  these  points 

The  evangelist  John  has  spoken  of  these  two 
resurrections  in  the  book  which  is  called  the 
Apocalypse,  but  in  such  a  way  that  some  Chris¬ 
tians  do  not  understand  the  first  of  the  two,  and 
so  construe  the  passage  into  ridiculous  fancies. 
For  the  Apostle  John  says  in  the  foresaid  book, 
“And  I  saw  an  angel  come  down  from  heaven. 

.  .  .  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the 
first  resurrection :  on  such  the  second  death  hath 
no  power;  but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and 
of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  Him  a  thousand 
years.”  1  Those  who,  on  the  strength  of  this 
passage,  have  suspected  that  the  first  resurrec¬ 
tion  is /future  and  bodily,  have  been  moved, 
among  other  things,  specially  by  the  number  of 
a  thousand  years,  as  if  it  were  a  fit  thing  that 
the  saints  should  thus  enjoy  a  kind  of  Sabbath- 
rest  during  that  period,  a  holy  leisure  after  the 
labours  of  the  six  thousand  years  since  man  was 
created,  and  was  on  account  of  his  great  sin  dis¬ 
missed  from  the  blessedness  of  Paradise  into  the 
woes  of  this  mortal  life,  so  that  thus,  as  it  is 
written,  “One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 
years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day,”  2  there 
'Rev.  20.  1-6. 


GOD  XX.  6-7  535 

should  follow  on  the  completion  of  six  thousand 
years,  as  of  six  days,  a  kind  of  seventh-day  Sab¬ 
bath  in  the  succeeding  thousand  years ;  and  that 
it  is  for  this  purpose  the  saints  rise,  viz.,  to  cele¬ 
brate  this  Sabbath.  And  this  opinion  would  not 
be  objectionable,  if  it  were  believed  that  the 
joys  of  the  saints  in  that  Sabbath  shall  be  spir¬ 
itual,  and  consequent  on  the  presence  of  God; 
for  I  myself,  too,  once  held  this  opinion.  But, 
as  they  assert  that  those  who  then  rise  again  shall 
enjoy  the  leisure  of  immoderate  carnal  ban¬ 
quets,  furnished  with  an  amount  of  meat  and 
drink  such  as  not  only  to  shock  the  feeling  of 
the  temperate,  but  even  to  surpass  the  measure 
of  credulity  itself,  such  assertions  can  be  be¬ 
lieved  only  by  the  carnal.  They  who  do  believe 
them  are  called  by  the  spiritual  Chiliasts ,  which 
we  may  literally  reproduce  by  the  name  Mille- 
narians?  It  were  a  tedious  process  to  refute 
these  opinions  point  by  point:  we  prefer  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  show  how  that  passage  of  Scripture 
should  be  understood. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  says,  “No 
man  can  enter  into  a  strong  man’s  house,  and 
spoil  his  goods,  except  he  first  bind  the  strong 
man”  4 — meaning  by  the  strong  man  the  devil, 
because  he  had  power  to  take  captive  the  hu¬ 
man  race;  and  meaning  by  his  goods  which  he 
was  to  take,  those  who  had  been  held  by  the 
devil  in  divers  sins  and  iniquities,  but  were  to 
become  believers  in  Himself.  It  was  then  for  the 
binding  of  this  strong  one  that  the  apostle  saw 
in  the  Apocalypse  “an  angel  coming  down  from 
heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  abyss,  and  a  chain 
in  his  hand.  And  he  laid  hold,”  he  says,  “on  the 
dragon,  that  old  serpent,  which  is  called  the 
devil  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a  thousand 
years” — that  is,  bridled  and  restrained  his  pow¬ 
er  so  that  he  could  not  seduce  and  gain  posses¬ 
sion  of  those  who  were  to  be  freed.  Now  the 
thousand  years  may  be  understood  in  two  ways, 
so  far  as  occurs  to  me:  either  because  these 
things  happen  in  the  sixth  thousand  of  years  or 
sixth  millennium  (the  latter  part  of  which  is 
now  passing) ,  as  if  during  the  sixth  day,  which 
is  to  be  followed  by  a  Sabbath  which  has  no  eve¬ 
ning,  the  endless  rest  of  the  saints,  so  that, 
speaking  of  a  part  under  the  name  of  the  whole, 
he  calls  the  last  part  of  the  millennium — the 
part,  that  is,  which  had  yet  to  expire  before  the 
end  of  the  world — a  thousand  years ;  or  he  used 
the  thousand  years  as  an  equivalent  for  the 
whole  duration  of  this  world,  employing  the 
number  of  perfection  to  mark  the  fullness  of 

2II  Pet.  3.  8.  3Milliarii. 

4Mark  3.  27;  Vasa  for  goods. 


536  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


time.  For  a  thousand  is  the  cube  of  ten.  For  ten 
times  ten  makes  a  hundred,  that  is,  the  square 
on  a  plane  superficies.  But  to  give  this  super- 
fices  height,  and  make  it  a  cube,  the  hundred  is 
again  multiplied  by  ten,  which  gives  a  thousand. 
Besides,  if  a  hundred  is  sometimes  used  for  to¬ 
tality,  as  when  the  Lord  said  by  way  of  promise 
to  him  that  left  all  and  followed  Him,  “He  shall 
receive  in  this  world  an  hundredfold”  ;*  of  which 
the  apostle  gives,  as  it  were,  an  explanation 
when  he  says,  “As  having  nothing,  yet  possess¬ 
ing  all  things”  2 — for  even  of  old  it  had  been 
said,  “The  whole  world  is  the  wealth  of  a  be¬ 
liever” — with  how  much  greater  reason  is  a 
thousand  put  for  totality  since  it  is  the  cube, 
while  the  other  is  only  the  square?  And  for  the 
same  reason  we  cannot  better  interpret  the 
words  of  the  psalm,  “He  hath  been  mindful  of 
His  covenant  for  ever,  the  word  which  He  com¬ 
manded  to  a  thousand  generations,” 3  than  by 
understanding  it  to  mean  “to  all  generations.” 

“And  he  cast  him  into  the  abyss” — i.e.,  cast 
the  devil  into  the  abyss.  By  the  abyss  is  meant 
the  countless  multitude  of  the  wficked  whose 
hearts  are  unfathomably  deep  in  malignity 
against  the  Church  of  God;  not  that  the  devil 
was  not  there  before,  but  he  is  said  to  be  cast  in 
thither,  because,  when  prevented  from  harming 
believers,  he  takes  more  complete  possession  of 
the  ungodly.  For  that  man  is  more  abundantly 
possessed  by  the  devil  who  is  not  only  alienated 
from  God,  but  also  gratuitously  hates  those  who 
serve  God.  “And  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  seal 
upon  him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no 
more  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  ful¬ 
filled.”  “Shut  him  up” — i.e.,  prohibited  him 
from  going  out,  from  doing  what  was  forbidden. 
And  the  addition  of  “set  a  seal  upon  him”  seems 
to  me  to  mean  that  it  was  designed  to  keep  it  a 
secret  who  belonged  to  the  devil’s  party  and 
who  did  not.  For  in  this  world  this  is  a  secret,  for 
we  cannot  tell  whether  even  the  man  who  seems 
to  stand  shall  fall,  or  whether  he  who  seems  to 
lie  shall  rise  again.  But  by  the  chain  and  prison- 
house  of  this  interdict  the  devil  is  prohibited 
and  restrained  from  seducing  those  nations 
which  belong  to  Christ,  but  which  he  formerly 
seduced  or  held  in  subjection.  For  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world  God  chose  to  rescue 
these  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  to  trans¬ 
late  them  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His 
love,  as  the  apostle  says.4  For  what  Christian  is 
not  aware  that  he  seduces  nations  even  now,  and 
draws  them  with  himself  to  eternal  punishment, 

JMatt.  19.  29.  2II  Cor.  6.  10.  3Ps.  105.  8. 

4Col.  1.  13. 


but  not  those  predestined  to  eternal  life?  And 
let  no  one  be  dismayed  by  the  circumstance  that 
the  devil  often  seduces  even  those  who  have 
been  regenerated  in  Christ,  and  begun  to  walk 
in  God’s  way.  For  “the  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  His,”5  and  of  these  the  devil  seduces  none 
to  eternal  damnation.  For  it  is  as  God,  from 
Whom  nothing  is  hid  even  of  things  future,  that 
the  Lord  knows  them;  not  as  a  man,  who  sees 
a  man  at  the  present  time  (if  he  can  be  said 
to  see  one  whose  heart  he  does  not  see),  but 
does  not  see  even  himself  so  far  as  to  be  able  to 
know  what  kind  of  person  he  is  to  be.  The  devil, 
then,  is  bound  and  shut  up  in  the  abyss  that  he 
may  not  seduce  the  nations  from  which  the 
Church  is  gathered,  and  which  he  formerly  se¬ 
duced  before  the  Church  existed.  For  it  is  not 
said  “that  he  should  not  seduce  any  man,”  but 
“that  he  should  not  seduce  the  nations” — mean¬ 
ing,  no  doubt,  those  among  which  the  Church 
exists — “till  the  thousand  years  should  be  ful¬ 
filled” — i.e.,  either  what  remains  of  the  sixth 
day  which  consists  of  a  thousand  years,  or  all 
the  years  which  are  to  elapse  till  the  end  of  the 
world. 

The  words,  “that  he  should  not  seduce  the  na¬ 
tions  till  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled,” 
are  not  to  be  understood  as  indicating  that  af¬ 
terwards  he  is  to  seduce  only  those  nations  from 
which  the  predestined  Church  is  composed,  and 
from  seducing  whom  he  is  restrained  by  that 
chain  and  imprisonment;  but  they  are  used  in 
conformity  with  that  usage  frequently  employed 
in  Scripture  and  exemplified  in  the  psalm,  “So 
our  eyes  wait  upon  the  Lord  our  God,  until  He 
have  mercy  upon  us”  6 — not  as  if  the  eyes  of 
His  servants  would  no  longer  wait  upon  the 
Lord  their  God  when  He  had  mercy  upon  them. 
Or  the  order  of  the  words  is  unquestionably  this, 
“And  he  shut  him  up  and  set  a  seal  upon  him, 
till  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled”;  and 
the  interposed  clause,  “that  he  should  seduce 
the  nations  no  more,”  is  not  to  be  understood  in 
the  connexion  in  which  it  stands,  but  separate¬ 
ly,  and  as  if  added  afterwards,  so  that  the  whole 
sentence  might  be  read,  “And  He  shut  him  up 
and  set  a  seal  upon  him  till  the  thousand  years 
should  be  fulfilled,  that  he  should  seduce  the  na¬ 
tions  no  more” — i.e.,  he  is  shut  up  till  the  thou¬ 
sand  years  be  fulfilled,  on  this  account,  that  he 
may  no  more  deceive  the  nations. 

Chap.  8.  Of  the  binding  and  loosing  of  the  devil 

“After  that,”  says  John,  “he  must  be  loosed 
a  little  season.”  If  the  binding  and  shutting  up 
6II  Tim.  2.  19.  6Ps.  123.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  8  537 


of  the  devil  means  his  being  made  unable  to  se¬ 
duce  the  Church,  must  his  loosing  be  the  recov¬ 
ery  of  this  ability?  By  no  means.  For  the 
Church  predestined  and  elected  before  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  world,  the  Church  of  which  it  is 
said,  “The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His,” 
shall  never  be  seduced  by  him.  And  yet  there 
shall  be  a  Church  in  this  world  even  when  the 
devil  shall  be  loosed,  as  there  has  been  since  the 
beginning,  and  shall  be  always,  the  places  of 
the  dying  being  filled  by  new  believers.  For  a 
little  after  John  says  that  the  devil,  being 
loosed,  shall  draw  the  nations  whom  he  has  se¬ 
duced  in  the  whole  world  to  make  war  against 
the  Church,  and  that  the  number  of  these  ene¬ 
mies  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea.  “And  they 
went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  and  com¬ 
passed  the  camp  of  the  saints  about,  and  the  be¬ 
loved  city :  and  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven  and  devoured  them.  And  the  devil  who 
seduced  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and 
brimstone,  where  the  beast  and  the  false  proph¬ 
et  are,  and  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for 
ever  and  ever.”1  This  relates  to  the  last  judg¬ 
ment,  but  I  have  thought  fit  to  mention  it  now, 
lest  any  one  might  suppose  that  in  that  short 
time  during  which  the  devil  shall  be  loose  there 
shall  be  no  Church  upon  earth,  whether  because 
the  devil  finds  no  Church,  or  destroys  it  by  man¬ 
ifold  persecutions.  The  devil,  then,  is  not  bound 
during  the  whole  time  which  this  book  embraces 
— that  is,  from  the  first  coming  of  Christ  to  the 
end  of  the  world,  when  He  shall  come  the  sec¬ 
ond  time — not  bound  in  this  sense,  that  during 
this  interval,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  a  thou¬ 
sand  years,  he  shall  not  seduce  the  Church,  for 
not  even  when  loosed  shall  he  seduce  it.  For  cer¬ 
tainly  if  his  being  bound  means  that  he  is  not 
able  or  not  permitted  to  seduce  the  Church, 
what  can  the  loosing  of  him  mean  but  his  being 
able  or  permitted  to  do  so?  But  God  forbid  that 
such  should  be  the  case!  But  the  binding  of  the 
devil  is  his  being  prevented  from  the  exercise  of 
his  whole  power  to  seduce  men,  either  by  vio¬ 
lently  forcing  or  fraudulently  deceiving  them 
into  taking  part  with  him.  If  he  were  during  so 
long  a  period  permitted  to  assail  the  weakness 
of  men,  very  many  persons,  such  as  God  would 
not  wish  to  expose  to  such  temptation,  would 
have  their  faith  overthrown,  or  would  be  pre¬ 
vented  from  believing;  and  that  this  might  not 
happen,  he  is  bound. 

But  when  the  short  time  comes  he  shall  be 
loosed.  For  he  shall  rage  with  the  whole  force 
of  himself  and  his  angels  for  three  years  and  six 

^ev.  20.  9,  10. 


months;  and  those  with  whom  he  makes  war 
shall  have  power  to  withstand  all  his  violence 
and  stratagems.  And  if  he  were  never  loosed,  his 
malicious  power  would  be  less  patent,  and  less 
proof  would  be  given  of  the  steadfast  fortitude 
of  the  holy  city:  it  would,  in  short,  be  less  maai- 
fest  what  good  use  the  Almighty  makes  of  his 
great  evil.  For  the  Almighty  does  not  absolute¬ 
ly  seclude  the  saints  from  his  temptation,  but 
shelters  only  their  inner  man,  where  faith  re¬ 
sides,  that  by  outward  temptation  they  may 
grow  in  grace.  And  He  binds  him  that  he  may 
not,  in  the  free  and  eager  exercise  of  his  malice, 
hinder  or  destroy  the  faith  of  those  countless 
weak  persons,  already  believing  or  yet  to  be¬ 
lieve,  from  whom  the  Church  must  be  increased 
and  completed;  and  he  will  in  the  end  loose  him, 
that  the  city  of  God  may  see  how  mighty  an  ad¬ 
versary  it  has  conquered,  to  the  great  glory  of 
its  Redeemer,  Helper,  Deliverer.  And  what  are 
we  in  comparison  with  those  believers  and  saints 
who  shall  then  exist,  seeing  that  they  shall  be 
tested  by  the  loosing  of  an  enemy  with  whom 
we  make  war  at  the  greatest  peril  even  when  he 
is  bound?  Although  it  is  also  certain  that  even 
in  this  intervening  period  there  have  been  and 
are  some  soldiers  of  Christ  so  wise  and  strong, 
that  if  they  were  to  be  alive  in  this  mortal  con¬ 
dition  at  the  time  of  his  loosing,  they  would 
both  most  wisely  guard  against,  and  most  pa¬ 
tiently  endure,  all  his  snares  and  assaults. 

Now  the  devil  was  thus  bound  not  only  when 
the  Church  began  to  be  more  and  more  widely 
extended  among  the  nations  beyond  Judea,  but 
is  now  and  shall  be  bound  till  the  end  of  the 
world,  when  he  is  to  be  loosed.  Because  even 
now  men  are,  and  doubtless  to  the  end  of  the 
world  shall  be,  converted  to  the  faith  from  the 
unbelief  in  which  he  held  them.  And  this  strong 
one  is  bound  in  each  instance  in  which  he  is 
spoiled  of  one  of  his  goods;  and  the  abyss  in 
which  he  is  shut  up  is  not  at  an  end  when  those 
die  who  were  alive  when  first  he  was  shut  up  in 
it,  but  these  have  been  succeeded,  and  shall  to 
the  end  of  the  world  be  succeeded,  by  others 
born  after  them  with  a  like  hate  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  and  in  the  depth  of  whose  blind  hearts  he 
is  continually  shut  up  as  in  an  abyss.  But  it  is  a 
question  whether,  during  these  three  years  and 
six  months  when  he  shall  be  loose,  and  raging 
with  all  his  force,  any  one  who  has  not  previous¬ 
ly  believed  shall  attach  himself  to  the  faith.  For 
how  in  that  case  would  the  words  hold  good, 
“Who  entereth  into  the  house  of  a  strong  one  to 
spoil  his  goods,  unless  first  he  shall  have  bound 
the  strong  one?”  Consequently  this  verse  seems 


538  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  compel  us  to  believe  that  during  that  time, 
short  as  it  is,  no  one  will  be  added  to  the  Chris¬ 
tian  community,  but  that  the  devil  will  make 
war  with  those  who  have  previously  become 
Christians,  and  that,  though  some  of  these  may 
be  conquered  and  desert  to  the  devil,  these  do 
not  belong  to  the  predestinated  number  of  the 
sons  of  God.  For  it  is  not  without  reason  that 
John,  the  same  apostle  as  wrote  this  Apoca¬ 
lypse,  says  in  his  epistle  regarding  certain  per¬ 
sons,  “They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were 
not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would 
no  doubt  have  remained  with  us.”  1  But  what 
shall  become  of  the  little  ones?  For  it  is  beyond 
all  belief  that  in  these  days  there  shall  not  be 
found  some  Christian  children  born,  but  not  yet 
baptized,  and  that  there  shall  not  also  be  some 
born  during  that  very  period;  and  if  there  be 
such,  we  cannot  believe  that  their  parents  shall 
not  find  some  way  of  bringing  them  to  the  laver 
of  regeneration.  But  if  this  shall  be  the  case, 
how  shall  these  goods  be  snatched  from  the  dev¬ 
il  when  he  is  loose,  since  into  his  house  no  man 
enters  to  spoil  his  goods  unless  he  has  first 
bound  him?  On  the  contrary,  we  are  rather  to 
believe  that  in  these  days  there  shall  be  no  lack 
either  of  those  who  fall  away  from,  or  of  those 
who  attach  themselves  to  the  Church ;  but  there 
shall  be  such  resoluteness,  both  in  parents  to 
seek  baptism  for  their  little  ones,  and  in  those 
who  shall  then  first  believe,  that  they  shall  con¬ 
quer  that  strong  one,  even  though  unbound — 
that  is,  shall  both  vigilantly  comprehend,  and 
patiently  bear  up  against  him.  though  employ¬ 
ing  such  wiles  and  putting  forth  such  force  as 
he  never  before  used;  and  thus  they  shall  be 
snatched  from  him  even  though  unbound.  And 
yet  the  verse  of  the  Gospel  will  not  be  untrue, 
“Who  entereth  into  the  house  of  the  strong  one 
to  spoil  his  goods,  unless  he  shall  first  have 
bound  the  strong  one?”  For  in  accordance  with 
this  true  saying  that  order  is  observed — the 
strong  one  first  bound,  and  then  his  goods 
spoiled;  for  the  Church  is  so  increased  by  the 
weak  and  strong  from  all  nations  far  and  near, 
that  by  its  most  robust  faith  in  things  divinely 
predicted  and  accomplished,  it  shall  be  able  to 
spoil  the  goods  of  even  the  unbound  devil.  For 
as  we  must  own  that,  “when  iniquity  abounds, 
the  love  of  many  waxes  cold,”  2  and  that  those 
who  have  not  been  written  in  the  book  of  life 
shall  in  large  numbers  yield  to  the  severe  and 
unprecedented  persecutions  and  stratagems  of 
the  devil  now  loosed,  so  w7e  cannot  but  think 
that  not  only  those  whom  that  time  shall  find 
4I  John,  2.  19.  2Matt.  24.  12. 


sound  in  the  faith,  but  also  some  who  till  then 
shall  be  without,  shall  become  firm  in  the  faith 
they  have  hitherto  rejected  and  mighty  to  con¬ 
quer  the  devil  even  though  unbound,  God’s 
grace  aiding  them  to  understand  the  Scriptures, 
in  which,  among  other  things,  there  is  foretold 
that  very  end  which  they  themselves  see  to  be 
arriving.  And  if  this  shall  be  so.  his  binding  is  to 
be  spoken  of  as  preceding,  that  there  might  fol¬ 
low  a  spoiling  of  him  both  bound  and  loosed ;  for 
it  is  of  this  it  is  said,  “Who  shall  enter  into  the 
house  of  the  strong  one  to  spoil  his  goods,  unless 
he  shall  first  have  bound  the  strong  one?” 

Chap.  9.  What  the  reign  of  the  saints  with 
Christ  for  a  thousand  years  is,  and  how  it  dif¬ 
fers  from  the  eternal  kingdom 
But  while  the  devil  is  bound,  the  saints  reign 
with  Christ  during  the  same  thousand  years,  un¬ 
derstood  in  the  same  way,  that  is,  of  the  time 
of  His  first  coming.  For,  leaving  out  of  account 
that  kingdom  concerning  which  He  shall  say  in 
the  end,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  take 
possession  of  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you,” 3 
the  Church  could  not  now  be  called  His  king¬ 
dom  or  the  kingdom  of  heaven  unless  His  saints 
were  even  now  reigning  with  Him,  though  in  an¬ 
other  and  far  different  way;  for  to  His  saints 
He  says,  “Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  world.”  4  Certainly  it  is  in  this  present 
time  that  the  scribe  well  instructed  in  the  king¬ 
dom  of  God,  and  of  whom  we  have  already 
spoken,  brings  forth  from  his  treasure  things 
new  and  old.  And  from  the  Church  those  reap¬ 
ers  shall  gather  out  the  tares  which  He  suffered 
to  grow  with  the  wheat  till  the  harvest,  as  He 
explains  in  the  words,  “The  harvest  is  the  end  of 
the  world;  and  the  reapers  are  the  angels.  As 
therefore  the  tares  are  gathered  together  and 
burned  with  fire,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  the 
world.  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  His  angels, 
and  they  shall  gather  out  of  His  kingdom  all  of¬ 
fenses.”  5  Can  He  mean  out  of  that  kingdom  in 
which  are  no  offenses?  Then  it  must  be  out  of 
His  present  kingdom,  the  Church,  that  they  are 
gathered.  So  He  says,  “He  that  breaketh  one  of 
the  least  of  these  commandments,  and  teacheth 
men  so,  shall  be  called  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven:  but  he  that  doeth  and  teacheth  thus 
shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.”6 
He  speaks  of  both  as  being  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  both  the  man  wrho  does  not  perform  the 
commandments  which  He  teaches — for  to  break 
means  not  to  keep,  not  to  perform — and  the 

3Matt.  25.  34  4Matt.  28.  20.  5Matt.  13.  39- 41* 
6Matt.  5.  19. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  o  539 


man  who  does  and  teaches  as  He  did;  but  the 
one  He  calls  least,  the  other  great.  And  He  im¬ 
mediately  adds,  “For  I  say  unto  you,  that  except 
your  righteousness  exceed  that  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees” — that  is,  the  righteousness  of 
those  who  break  what  they  teach;  for  of  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees  H 2  elsewhere  says,  “For 
they  say  and  do  not”  1 — unless,  therefore,  your 
righteousness  exceed  theirs,  that  is,  so  that  you 
do  not  break  but  rather  do  what  you  teach,  “ye 
shall  not  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.”  2  We 
must  understand  in  one  sense  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  in  which  exist  together  both  he  who 
breaks  what  he  teaches  and  he  who  does  it,  the 
one  being  least,  the  other  great,  and  in  another 
sense  the  kingdom  of  heaven  into  which  only  he 
who  does  what  he  teaches  shall  enter.  Conse¬ 
quently,  where  both  classes  exist,  it  is  the 
Church  as  it  now  is,  but  where  only  the  one  shall 
exist,  it  is  the  Church  as  it  is  destined  to  be 
when  no  wicked  person  shall  be  in  her.  There¬ 
fore  the  Church  even  now  is  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  According¬ 
ly.  even  now  His  saints  reign  with  Him,  though 
otherwise  than  as  they  shall  reign  hereafter; 
and  yet,  though  the  tares  grow  in  the  Church 
along  with  the  wheat,  they  do  not  reign  with 
Him.  For  they  reign  with  Him  who  do  what  the 
apostle  says,  “If  ye  be  risen  with  Christ,  mind 
the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Seek  those  things 
which  are  above,  not  the  things  which  are  on  the 
earth.”  3  Of  such  persons  he  also  says  that  their 
conversation  is  in  heaven.4  In  fine,  they  reign 
with  Him  who  are  so  in  His  kingdom  that  they 
themselves  are  His  kingdom.  But  in  what  sense 
are  those  the  kingdom  of  Christ  who,  to  say  no 
more,  though  they  are  in  it  until  all  offenses  are 
gathered  out  of  it  at  the  end  of  the  world,  yet 
seek  their  own  things  in  it  and  not  the  things 
that  are  Christ’s?  5 

It  is  then  of  this  kingdom  militant,  in  which 
conflict  with  the  enemy  is  still  maintained,  and 
war  carried  on  with  warring  lusts,  or  govern¬ 
ment  Md  upon  them  as  they  yield,  until  we 
come  to  that  most  peaceful  kingdom  in  which 
we  shall  reign  without  an  enemy,  and  it  is  of 
this  first  resurrection  in  the  present  life  that  the 
Apocalypse  speaks  in  the  words  just  quoted. 
For,  after  saying  that  the  devil  is  bound  a  thou¬ 
sand  years  and  is  afterwards  loosed  for  a  short 
season,  it  goes  on  to  give  a  sketch  of  what  the 
Church  does  or  of  what  is  done  in  the  Church 
in  those  days,  in  the  words,  “And  I  saw  seats 

xMatt.  23.  3.  2Matt.  5.  20.  3Col.  3.  1,  2. 

4Phil.  3.  20.  6Phil.  2.  21. 


and  them  that  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment 
was  given.”  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  re¬ 
fers  to  the  last  judgment,  but  to  the  seats  of 
the  rulers  and  to  the  rulers  themselves  by  whom 
the  Church  is  now  governed.  And  no  better  in¬ 
terpretation  of  judgment  being  given  can  be 
produced  than  that  which  we  have  in  the  words, 
“What  ye  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heav¬ 
en;  and  what  ye  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed 
in  heaven.”6  Whence  the  apostle  says,  “What 
have  I  to  do  with  judging  them  that  are  with¬ 
out?  do  not  ye  judge  them  that  are  within?”7 
“And  the  souls,”  says  John,  “of  those  who  were 
slain  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  for  the 
word  of  God” — understanding  what  he  after¬ 
wards  says  “reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand 
years”8 — that  is,  the  souls  of  the  martyrs  not 
yet  restored  to  their  bodies.  For  the  souls  of  the 
pious  dead  are  not  separated  from  the  Church, 
which  even  now  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  other¬ 
wise  there  would  be  no  remembrance  made  of 
them  at  the  altar  of  God  in  the  partaking  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  nor  would  it  do  any  good  in  dan¬ 
ger  to  run  to  His  baptism,  that  we  might  not 
pass  from  this  life  without  it;  nor  to  reconcilia¬ 
tion,  if  by  penitence  or  a  bad  conscience  any  one 
may  be  severed  from  His  body.  For  why  are 
these  things  practised,  if  not  because  the  faith¬ 
ful,  even  though  dead,  are  His  members?  There¬ 
fore,  while  these  thousand  years  run  on,  their 
souls  reign  with  Him,  though  not  as  yet  in  con¬ 
junction  with  their  bodies.  And  therefore  in  an¬ 
other  part  of  this  same  book  we  read,  “Blessed 
are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord  from  hence¬ 
forth:  and  now,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may 
rest  from  their  labours;  for  their  works  do  fol¬ 
low  them.”9  The  Church,  then,  begins  its  reign 
with  Christ  now  in  the  living  and  in  the  dead. 
For,  as  the  apostle  says,  “Christ  died  that  He 
might  be  Lord  both  of  the  living  and  of  the 
dead.”  10  But  he  mentioned  the  souls  of  the  mar¬ 
tyrs  only,  because  they  who  have  contended 
even  to  death  for  the  truth,  themselves  princi¬ 
pally  reign  after  death:  but,  taking  the  part  for 
the  whole,  we  understand  the  words  of  all  oth¬ 
ers  who  belong  to  the  Church,  which  is  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Christ. 

As  to  the  words  following,  “And  if  any  have 
not  worshipped  the  beast  nor  his  image,  nor 
have  received  his  inscription  on  their  forehead, 
or  on  their  hand,”  we  must  take  them  of  both 
the  living  and  the  dead.  And  what  this  beast  is, 
though  it  requires  a  more  careful  investigation, 
yet  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  true  faith  to 

6Matt.  18.  18.  7I  Cor.  5.  12.  8Rev.  20.  4. 

9Rev.  14.  13.  10Rom.  14.  9. 


540  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


understand  it  of  the  ungodly  city  itself  and  the 
community  of  unbelievers  set  in  opposition  to 
the  faithful  people  and  the  city  of  God.  “His 
image”  seems  to  me  to  mean  his  simulation,  to 
wit,  in  those  men  who  profess  to  believe,  but 
live  as  unbelievers.  For  they  pretend  to  be  what 
they  are  not,  and  are  called  Christians,  not  from 
a  true  likeness,  but  from  a  deceitful  image.  For 
to  this  beast  belong  not  only  the  avowed  ene¬ 
mies  of  the  name  of  Christ  and  His  most  glori¬ 
ous  city,  but  also  the  tares  which  are  to  be  gath¬ 
ered  out  of  His  kingdom,  the  Church,  in  the  end 
of  the  world.  And  who  are  they  who  do  not  wor¬ 
ship  the  beast  and  his  image,  if  not  those  who 
do  what  the  apostle  says,  “Be  not  yoked  with 
unbelievers”?1  For  such  do  not  worship,  i.e..  do 
not  consent,  are  not  subjected;  neither  do  they 
receive  the  inscription,  the  brand  of  crime,  on 
their  forehead  by  their  profession,  on  their  hand 
by  their  practice.  They,  then,  who  are  free  from 
these  pollutions,  whether  they  still  live  in  this 
mortal  flesh,  or  are  dead,  reign  with  Christ  even 
now,  through  this  whole  interval  which  is  indi¬ 
cated  by  the  thousand  years,  in  a  fashion  suited 
to  this  time. 

“The  rest  of  them,”  he  says,  “did  not  live.” 
For  now  is  the  hour  when  the  dead  shall  hear 
the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear 
shall  live;  and  the  rest  of  them  shall  not  live. 
The  words  added,  “until  the  thousand  years  are 
finished,”  mean  that  they  did  not  live  in  the 
time  in  which  they  ought  to  have  lived  by  pass¬ 
ing  from  death  to  life.  And  therefore,  when  the 
day  of  the  bodily  resurrection  arrives,  they  shall 
come  out  of  their  graves,  not  to  life,  but  to 
judgment,  namely,  to  damnation,  which  is  called 
the  second  death.  For  whosoever  has  not  lived 
until  the  thousand  years  be  finished,  i.e.,  dur¬ 
ing  this  whole  time  in  which  the  first  resur¬ 
rection  is  going  on — whosoever  has  not  heard 
the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  passed  from 
death  to  life,  that  man  shall  certainly  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  resurrection,  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh, 
pass  with  his  flesh  into  the  second  death.  For  he 
goes  on  to  say,  “This  is  the  first  resurrection. 
Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first 
resurrection,”  or  who  experiences  it.  Now  he  ex¬ 
periences  it  who  not  only  revives  from  the  death 
of  sin,  but  continues  in  this  renewed  life.  “In 
these  the  second  death  hath  no  power.”  There¬ 
fore  it  has  power  in  the  rest,  of  whom  he  said 
above,  “The  rest  of  them  did  not  live  until  the 
thousand  years  were  finished” ;  for  in  this  whole 
intervening  time  called  a  thousand  years,  how¬ 
ever  lustily  they  lived  in  the  body,  they  were 

lII  Cor.  6.  14. 


not  quickened  to  life  out  of  that  death  in  which 
their  wickedness  held  them,  so  that  by  this  re¬ 
vived  life  they  should  become  partakers  of  the 
first  resurrection,  and  so  the  second  death 
should  have  no  power  over  them. 

Chap.  10.  What  is  to  be  replied  to  those  who 

think  that  resurrection  pertains  only  to  bodies 

and  not  to  souls 

There  are  some  who  suppose  that  resurrec¬ 
tion  can  be  predicated  only  of  the  body,  and 
therefore  they  contend  that  this  first  resurrec¬ 
tion  (of  the  Apocalypse)  is  a  bodily  resurrec¬ 
tion.  For,  say  they,  “to  rise  again”  can  only  be 
said  of  things  that  fall.  Now,  bodies  fall  in 
death.2  There  cannot,  therefore,  be  a  resurrec¬ 
tion  of  souls,  but  of  bodies.  But  what  do  they 
say  to  the  apostle  who  speaks  of  a  resurrection 
of  souls?  For  certainly  it  was  in  the  inner  and 
not  the  outer  man  that  those  had  risen  again  to 
whom  he  says,  “If  ye  have  risen  with  Christ, 
mind  the  things  that  are  above.”  3  The  same 
sense  he  elsewhere  conveyed  in  other  words, 
saying,  “That  as  Christ  has  risen  from  the  dead 
by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  so  we  also  may  walk 
in  newness  of  life.”  4  So,  too,  “Awake  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light.”  5  As  to  what  they  say 
about  nothing  being  able  to  rise  again  but  what 
falls,  whence  they  conclude  that  resurrection 
pertains  to  bodies  only,  and  not  to  souls,  be¬ 
cause  bodies  fall,  why  do  they  make  nothing  of 
the  words,  “Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  wait  for  His 
mercy;  and  go  not  aside  lest  ye  fall”;6  and  “To 
his  own  Master  he  stands  or  falls”;7  and  “He 
that  thinketh  he  standeth,  let  him  take  heed  lest 
he  fall”?  8  For  I  fancy  this  fall  that  we  are  to 
take  heed  against  is  a  fall  of  the  soul,  not  of  the 
body.  If,  then,  rising  again  belongs  to  things 
that  fall,  and  souls  fall,  it  must  be  owned  that 
souls  also  rise  again.  To  the  words,  “In  them 
the  second  death  hath  no  power,”  are  added  the 
words,  “but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and 
Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  Him  a  thousand 
years”;  and  this  refers  not  to  the  bishops  alone, 
and  presbyters,  who  are  now  specially  called 
priests  in  the  Church;  but  as  we  call  all  believ¬ 
ers  Christians  on  account  of  the  mystical 
chrism,  so  we  call  all  priests  because  they  are 
members  of  the  one  Priest.  Of  them  the  Apostle 
Peter  says,  “A  holy  people,  a  royal  priesthood.”9 
Certainly  he  implied,  though  in  a  passing  and  in¬ 
cidental  way,  that  Christ  is  God,  saying  priests 

2Cadavera,  from  cadere ,  “to  fall.”  3Col.  3.  1. 

4Rom.  6.  4.  6Eph.  5.  14.  6Ecclus.  2.  7. 

7Rom.  14.  4.  8I  Cor.  10.  12.  9I  Peter,  2.  9. 


THE  CITY  OF 

of  God  and  Christ,  that  is,  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  though  it  was  in  His  servant-form  and 
as  Son  of  man  that  Christ  was  made  a  Priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  But  this  we 
have  already  explained  more  than  once. 

Chap,  ii  .Of  Gog  and  Magog ,  who  are  to  be 
roused  by  the  devil  to  persecute  the  Church, 
when  he  is  loosed  in  the  end  of  the  world 
“And  when  the  thousand  years  are  finished, 
Satan  shall  be  loosed  from  his  prison,  and  shall 
go  out  to  seduce  the  nations  which  are  in  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog,  and 
shall  draw  them  to  battle,  whose  number  is  as 
the  sand  of  the  sea.”  This,  then,  is  his  purpose 
in  seducing  them,  to  draw  them  to  this  battle. 
For  even  before  this  he  was  wont  to  use  as  many 
and  various  seductions  as  he  could  continue. 
And  the  words  “he  shall  go  out”  mean,  he  shall 
burst  forth  from  lurking  hatred  into  open  perse¬ 
cution.  For  this  persecution,  occurring  while  the 
final  judgment  is  imminent,  shall  be  the  last 
which  shall  be  endured  by  the  holy  Church 
throughout  the  world,  the  whole  city  of  Christ 
being  assailed  by  the  whole  city  of  the  devil,  as 
each  exists  on  earth.  For  these  nations  which  he 
names  Gog  and  Magog  are  not  to  be  understood 
of  some  barbarous  nations  in  some  part  of  the 
world,  whether  the  Getae.  and  Massagetae,  as 
some  conclude  from  the  initial  letters,  or  some 
other  foreign  nations  not  under  the  Roman  gov¬ 
ernment.  For  John  marks  that  they  are  spread 
over  the  whole  earth,  when  he  says,  “The  na¬ 
tions  which  are  in  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,” 
and  he  added  that  these  are  Gog  and  Magog. 
The  meaning  of  these  names  we  find  to  be,  Gog, 
a  roof,  Magog,  from  a  roof — a  house,  as  it  were, 
and  he  who  comes  out  of  the  house.  They  are 
therefore  the  nations  in  which  we  found  that  the 
devil  was  shut  up  as  in  an  abyss,  and  the  devil 
himself  coming  out  from  them  and  going  forth, 
so  that  they  are  the  roof,  he  from  the  roof.  Or  if 
we  refer  both  words  to  the  nations,  not  one  to 
them  and  one  to  the  devil,  then  they  are  both 
the  roof,  because  in  them  the  old  enemy  is  at 
present  shut  up,  and  as  it  were  roofed  in;  and 
they  shall  be  from  the  roof  when  they  break 
forth  from  concealed  to  open  hatred.  The 
words,  “And  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the 
earth,  and  encompassed  the  camp  of  the  saints 
and  the  beloved  city,”  do  not  mean  that  they 
have  come,  or  shall  come,  to  one  place,  as  if  the 
camp  of  the  saints  and  the  beloved  city  should 
be  in  some  one  place;  for  this  camp  is  nothing 
else  than  the  Church  of  Christ  extending  over 
the  whole  world.  And  consequently  wherever 


GOD  XX.  10-13  54i 

the  Church  shall  be — and  it  shall  be  in  all  na¬ 
tions,  as  is  signified  by  “the  breadth  of  the  earth” 
— there  also  shall  be  the  camp  of  the  saints  and 
the  beloved  city,  and  there  it  shall  be  encom¬ 
passed  by  the  savage  persecution  of  all  its  ene¬ 
mies  ;  for  they  too  shall  exist  along  with  it  in  all 
nations — that  is,  it  shall  be  straitened,  and  hard 
pressed,  and  shut  up  in  the  straits  of  tribulation, 
but  shall  not  desert  its  military  duty,  which  is 
signified  by  the  world  “camp.” 

Chap.  12.  Whether  the  fire  that  came  down  out 
of  heaven  and  devoured  them  refers  to  the 
last  punishment  of  the  wicked 
The  words,  “And  fire  came  down  out  of  heav¬ 
en  and  devoured  them,”  are  not  to  be  under¬ 
stood  of  the  final  punishment  which  shall  be  in¬ 
flicted  when  it  is  said,  “Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire”;1  for  then  they 
shall  be  cast  into  the  fire,  not  fire  come  down 
out  of  heaven  upon  them.  In  this  place  “fire  out 
of  heaven”  is  well  understood  of  the  firmness  of 
the  saints,  wherewith  they  refuse  to  yield  obedi¬ 
ence  to  those  who  rage  against  them.  For  the 
firmament  is  “heaven,”  by  whose  firmness  these 
assailants  shall  be  pained  with  blazing  zeal,  for 
they  shall  be  impotent  to  draw  away  the  saints 
to  the  party  of  Antichrist.  This  is  the  fire  which 
shall  devour  them,  and  this  is  “from  God”;  for 
it  is  by  God’s  grace  the  saints  become  uncon¬ 
querable,  and  so  torment  their  enemies.  For  as 
in  a  good  sense  it  is  said,  “The  zeal  of  Thine 
house  hath  consumed  me,”  2  so  in  a  bad  sense  it 
is  said,  “Zeal  hath  possessed  the  uninstructed 
people,  and  now  fire  shall  consume  the  ene¬ 
mies.”3  “And  now,”  that  is  to  say,  not  the  fire 
of  the  last  judgment.  Or  if  by  this  fire  coming 
down  out  of  heaven  and  consuming  them,  John 
meant  that  blow  wherewith  Christ  in  His  com¬ 
ing  is  to  strike  those  persecutors  of  the  Church 
whom  He  shall  then  find  alive  upon  earth,  when 
He  shall  kill  Antichrist  with  the  breath  of  His 
mouth,4  then  even  this  is  not  the  last  judgment 
of  the  wicked;  but  the  last  judgment  is  that 
which  they  shall  suffer  when  the  bodily  resurrec¬ 
tion  has  taken  place. 

Chap.  13.  Whether  the  time  of  the  persecution 
of  Antichrist  should  be  reckoned  in  the  thou¬ 
sand  years 

This  last  persecution  by  Antichrist  shall  last 
for  three  years  and  six  months,  as  we  have  al¬ 
ready  said,  and  as  is  affirmed  both  in  the  Book 
of  Revelation  and  by  Daniel  the  prophet. 

^latt.  25.  41.  2Ps.  69.  9.  3Isa.  26.  n. 

4II  Thess.  2.  8. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Though  this  time  is  brief,  yet  not  without  rea¬ 
son  is  it  questioned  whether  it  is  comprehend¬ 
ed  in  the  thousand  years  in  which  the  devil  is 
bound  and  the  saints  reign  with  Christ,  or 
whether  this  little  season  should  be  added  over 
and  above  to  these  years.  For  if  we  say  that  they 
are  included  in  the  thousand  years,  then  the 
saints  reign  with  Christ  during  a  more  protract¬ 
ed  period  than  the  devil  is  bound.  For  they  shall 
reign  with  their  King  and  Conqueror  mightily 
even  in  that  crowning  persecution  when  the  dev¬ 
il  shall  now  be  unbound  and  shall  rage  against 
them  with  all  his  might.  How  then  does  Scrip¬ 
ture  define  both  the  binding  of  the  devil  and 
the  reign  of  the  saints  by  the  same  thousand 
years,  if  the  binding  of  the  devil  ceases  three 
years  and  six  months  before  this  reign  of  the 
saints  with  Christ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  say 
that  the  brief  space  of  this  persecution  is  not  to 
be  reckoned  as  a  part  of  the  thousand  years,  but 
rather  as  an  additional  period,  we  shall  indeed 
be  able  to  interpret  the  words,  “The  priests  of 
God  and  of  Christ  shall  reign  with  Him  a  thou¬ 
sand  years;  and  when  the  thousand  years  shall 
be  finished,  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  pris¬ 
on”;  for  thus  they  signify  that  the  reign  of  the 
saints  and  the  bondage  of  the  devil  shall  cease 
simultaneously,  so  that  the  time  of  the  persecu¬ 
tion  we  speak  of  should  be  contemporaneous 
neither  with  the  reign  of  the  saints  nor  with  the 
imprisonment  of  Satan,  but  should  be  reckoned 
over  and  above  as  a  superadded  portion  of  time. 
But  then  in  this  case  we  are  forced  to  admit 
that  the  saints  shall  not  reign  with  Christ  dur¬ 
ing  that  persecution.  But  who  can  dare  to  say 
that  His  members  shall  not  reign  with  Him  at 
that  very  juncture  when  they  shall  most  of  all, 
and  with  the  greatest  fortitude,  cleave  to  Him, 
and  when  the  glory  of  resistance  and  the  crown 
of  martyrdom  shall  be  more  conspicuous  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  hotness  of  the  battle?  Or  if  it  is 
suggested  that  they  may  be  said  not  to  reign, 
because  of  the  tribulations  which  they  shall  suf¬ 
fer,  it  will  follow  that  all  the  saints  who  have 
formerly,  during  the  thousand  years,  suffered 
tribulation,  shall  not  be  said  to  have  reigned 
with  Christ  during  the  period  of  their  tribula¬ 
tion,  and  consequently  even  those  whose  souls 
the  author  of  this  book  says  that  he  saw,  and 
who  were  slain  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  and 
the  word  of  God,  did  not  reign  with  Christ  when 
they  were  suffering  persecution,  and  they  were 
not  themselves  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  though 
Christ  was  then  pre-eminently  possessing  them. 
This  is  indeed  perfectly  absurd,  and  to  be  scout¬ 
ed.  But  assuredly  the  victorious  souls  of  the 


glorious  martyrs  having  overcome  and  finished 
all  griefs  and  toils,  and  having  laid  down  their 
mortal  members,  have  reigned  and  do  reign  with 
Christ  till  the  thousand  years  are  finished,  that 
they  may  afterwards  reign  with  Him  when  they 
have  received  their  immortal  bodies.  And  there¬ 
fore  during  these  three  years  and  a  half  the 
souls  of  those  who  were  slain  for  His  testimony, 
both  those  which  formerly  passed  from  the 
body  and  those  which  shall  pass  in  that  last  per¬ 
secution,  shall  reign  with  Him  till  the  mortal 
world  come  to  an  end,  and  pass  into  that  king¬ 
dom  in  which  there  shall  be  no  death.  And  thus 
the  reign  of  the  saints  with  Christ  shall  last 
longer  than  the  bonds  and  imprisonment  of  the 
devil,  because  they  shall  reign  with  their  King 
the  Son  of  God  for  these  three  years  and  a  half 
during  which  the  devil  is  no  longer  bound.  It  re¬ 
mains,  therefore,  that  when  we  read  that  “the 
priests  of  God  and  of  Christ  shall  reign  with 
Him  a  thousand  years ;  and  when  the  thousand 
years  are  finished,  the  devil  shall  be  loosed  from 
his  imprisonment,”  that  we  understand  either 
that  the  thousand  years  of  the  reign  of  the  saints 
does  not  terminate,  though  the  imprisonment  of 
the  devil  does — so  that  both  parties  have  their 
thousand  years,  that  is,  their  complete  time,  yet 
each  with  a  different  actual  duration  appropriate 
to  itself,  the  kingdom  of  the  saints  being  longer, 
the  imprisonment  of  the  devil  shorter — or  at 
least  that,  as  three  years  and  six  months  is  a 
very  short  time,  it  is  not  reckoned  as  either  de¬ 
ducted  from  the  whole  time  of  Satan’s  imprison¬ 
ment,  or  as  added  to  the  whole  duration  of  the 
reign  of  the  saints,  as  we  have  shown  above  in 
the  sixteenth  book1  regarding  the  round  number 
of  four  hundred  years,  which  were  specified  as 
four  hundred,  though  actually  somewhat  more; 
and  similar  expressions  are  often  found  in  the 
sacred  writings,  if  one  will  mark  them. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  damnation  of  the  devil  and  his 

adherents;  and  a  sketch  of  the  bodily  resur¬ 
rection  of  all  the  dead,  and  of  the  final  retrib¬ 
utive  judgment. 

After  this  mention  of  the  closing  persecution, 
he  summarily  indicates  all  that  the  devil,  and 
the  city  of  which  he  is  the  prince,  shall  suffer  in 
the  last  judgment.  For  he  says,  “And  the  devil 
who  seduced  them  is  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone,  in  which  are  the  beast  and  the 
false  prophet,  and  they  shall  be  tormented  day 
and  night  for  ever  and  ever.”  We  have  already 
said  that  by  the  beast  is  well  understood  the 
wicked  city.  His  false  prophet  is  either  Anti- 

^hap.  24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Christ  or  that  image  or  figment  of  which  we 
have  spoken  in  the  same  place.  After  this  he 
gives  a  brief  narrative  of  the  last  judgment  it¬ 
self,  which  shall  take  place  at  the  second  or  bod¬ 
ily  resurrection  of  the  dead,  as  it  had  been  re-  • 
vealed  to  him:  “I  saw  a  throne  great  and  white, 
and  One  sitting  on  it  from  Whose  face  the  heav¬ 
en  and  the  earth  fled  away,  and  their  place  was 
not  found.”  He  does  not  say,  “I  saw  a  throne 
great  and  white,  and  One  sitting  on  it,  and  from 
His  face  the  heaven  and  the  earth  fled  away,” 
for  it  had  not  happened  then,  i.e.,  before  the 
living  and  the  dead  were  judged;  but  he  says 
that  he  saw  Him  sitting  on  the  throne  from 
Whose  face  heaven  and  earth  fled  away,  but  af¬ 
terwards.  For  when  the  judgment  is  finished, 
this  heaven  and  earth  shall  cease  to  be,  and 
there  will  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  For 
this  world  shall  pass  away  by  transmutation, 
not  by  absolute  destruction.  And  therefore  the 
apostle  says,  “For  the  figure  of  this  world  pass- 
eth  away.  I  would  have  you  be  without  anxie¬ 
ty.”  1  The  figure,  therefore,  passes  away,  not  the 
nature.  After  John  had  said  that  he  had  seen 
One  sitting  on  the  throne  from  Whose  face  heav¬ 
en  and  earth  fled,  though  not  till  afterwards,  he 
said,  “And  I  saw  the  dead,  great  and  small :  and 
the  books  were  opened;  and  another  book  was 
opened,  which  is  the  book  of  the  life  of  each 
man:  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those 
things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  deeds.”  He  said  that  the  books  were 
opened,  and  a  book;  but  he  left  us  at  a  loss  as 
to  the  nature  of  this  book,  “which  is,”  he  says, 
“the  book  of  the  life  of  each  man.”  By  those 
books,  then,  which  he  first  mentioned,  we  are  to 
understand  the  sacred  books  old  and  new,  that 
out  of  them  it  might  be  shown  what  command¬ 
ments  God  had  enjoined;  and  that  book  of  the 
life  of  each  man  is  to  show  what  commandments 
each  man  has  done  or  omitted  to  do.  If  this 
book  be  materially  considered,  who  can  reckon 
its  size  or  length,  or  the  time  it  would  take  to 
read  a  book  in  which  the  whole  life  of  every 
man  is  recorded?  Shall  there  be  present  as  many 
angels  as  men,  and  shall  each  man  hear  his  life 
recited  by  the  angel  assigned  to  him?  In  that 
case  there  will  be  not  one  book  containing  all 
the  lives,  but  a  separate  book  for  every  life.  But 
our  passage  requires  us  to  think  of  one  only. 
“And  another  book  was  opened,”  it  says.  We 
must  therefore  understand  it  of  a  certain  divine 
power,  by  which  it  shall  be  brought  about  that 
every  one  shall  recall  to  memory  all  his  own 
works,  whether  good  or  evil,  and  shall  mentally 
*1  Cor.  7.  31,  32. 


GOD  XX.  14-15  543 

survey  them  with  a  marvellous  rapidity,  so  that 
this  knowledge  will  either  accuse  or  excuse  con¬ 
science,  and  thus  all  and  each  shall  be  simultan¬ 
eously  judged.  And  this  divine  power  is  called 
a  book,  because  in  it  we  shall  as  it  were  read  all 
that  it  causes  us  to  remember.  That  he  may 
show  who  the  dead,  small  and  great,  are  who 
are  to  be  judged,  he  recurs  to  this  which  he  had 
omitted  or  rather  deferred,  and  says,  “And  the 
sea  presented  the  dead  which  were  in  it;  and 
death  and  hell  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in 
them.”  This  of  course  took  place  before  the 
dead  were  judged,  yet  it  is  mentioned  after.  And 
so,  I  say,  he  returns  again  to  what  he  had  omit¬ 
ted.  But  now  he  preserves  the  order  of  events, 
and  for  the  sake  of  exhibiting  it  repeats  in  its 
own  proper  place  what  he  had  already  said  re¬ 
garding  the  dead  who  were  judged.  For  after  he 
had  said,  “And  the  sea  presented  the  dead  which 
were  in  it,  and  death  and  hell  gave  up  the  dead 
which  were  in  them,”  he  immediately  subjoined 
what  he  had  already  said,  “and  they  were 
judged  every  man  according  to  their  works.” 
For  this  is  just  what  he  had  said  before,  “And 
the  dead  were  judged  according  to  their  works.” 

Chap.  15.  Who  the  dead  are  who  are  given  up 
to  judgment  by  the  sea,  and  by  death  and  hell 
But  who  are  the  dead  which  were  in  the  sea, 
and  which  the  sea  presented?  For  we  cannot 
suppose  that  those  who  die  in  the  sea  are  not  in 
hell,  nor  that  their  bodies  are  preserved  in  the 
sea ;  nor  yet,  which  is  still  more  absurd,  that  the 
sea  retained  the  good,  while  hell  received  the 
bad.  Who  could  believe  this?  But  some  very 
sensibly  suppose  that  in  this  place  the  sea  is  put 
for  this  world.  When  John  then  wished  to  signi¬ 
fy  that  those  whom  Christ  should  find  still  alive 
in  the  body  were  to  be  judged  along  with  those 
who  should  rise  again,  he  called  them  dead,  both 
the  good  to  whom  it  is  said,  “For  ye  are  dead, 
and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,”  2  and 
the  wicked  of  whom  it  is  said,  “Let  the  dead 
bury  their  dead.”3  They  may  also  be  called  dead, 
because  they  wear  mortal  bodies,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “The  body  indeed  is  dead  because  of  sin; 
but  the  spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness”;4 
proving  that  in  a  living  man  in  the  body  there  is 
both  a  body  which  is  dead,  and  a  spirit  which  is 
life.  Yet  he  did  not  say  that  the  body  was  mor¬ 
tal,  but  dead,  although  immediately  after  he 
speaks  in  the  more  usual  way  of  mortal  bodies. 
These,  then,  are  the  dead  which  were  in  the  sea, 
and  which  the  sea  presented,  to  wit,  the  men 
who  were  in  this  world,  because  they  had  not 
2Col.  3.  3.  3Matt.  8.  22.  4Rom.  8.  10. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


yet  died,  and  whom  the  world  presented  for 
judgment.  “And  death  and  hell,”  he  says,  “gave 
up  the  dead  which  were  in  them.”  The  sea  pre¬ 
sented  them  because  they  had  merely  to  be 
found  in  the  place  where  they  were;  but  death 
and  hell  gave  them  up  or  restored  them,  because 
they  called  them  back  to  life,  which  they  had  al¬ 
ready  quitted.  And  perhaps  it  was  not  without 
reason  that  neither  death  nor  hell  were  judged 
sufficient  alone,  and  both  were  mentioned — 
death  to  indicate  the  good,  who  have  suffered 
only  death  and  not  hell;  hell  to  indicate  the 
wicked,  who  suffer  also  the  punishment  of  hell. 
For  if  it  does  not  seem  absurd  to  believe  that 
the  ancient  saints  who  believed  in  Christ  and 
His  then  future  coming,  were  kept  in  places  far 
removed  indeed  from  the  torments  of  the  wick¬ 
ed,  but  yet  in  hell,  until  Christ’s  blood  and  His 
descent  into  these  places  delivered  them,  cer¬ 
tainly  good  Christians,  redeemed  by  that  pre¬ 
cious  price  already  paid,  are  quite  unacquainted 
with  hell  while  they  wait  for  their  restoration  to 
the  body,  and  the  reception  of  their  reward.  Af¬ 
ter  saying,  “They  were  judged  every  man- ac¬ 
cording  to  their  works,”  he  briefly  added  what 
the  judgment  was:  “Death  and  hell  were  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire”;  by  these  names  designat¬ 
ing  the  devil  and  the  whole  company  of  his  an¬ 
gels,  for  he  is  the  author  of  death  and  the  pains 
of  hell.  For  this  is  what  he  had  already,  by  an¬ 
ticipation,  said  in  clearer  language :  “The  devil 
who  seduced  them  was  cast  into  a  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone.”  The  obscure  addition  he  had 
made  in  the  words,  “in  which  were  also  the 
beast  and  the  false  prophet,”  he  here  explains, 
“They  who  were  not  found  written  in  the  book 
of  life  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.”  This  book 
is  not  for  reminding  God,  as  if  things  might  es¬ 
cape  Him  by  forgetfulness,  but  it  symbolizes 
His  predestination  of  those  to  whom  eternal  life 
shall  be  given.  For  it  is  not  that  God  is  ignorant, 
and  reads  in  the  book  to  inform  Himself,  but 
rather  His  infallible  prescience  is  the  book  of 
life  in  which  they  are  written,  that  is  to  say, 
known  beforehand. 

Chap.  16.  Of  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth 
Having  finished  the  prophecy  of  judgment, 
so  far  as  the  wicked  are  concerned,  it  remains 
that  he  speak  also  of  the  good.  Having  briefly 
explained  the  Lord’s  words,  “These  will  go  away 
into  everlasting  punishment,”  it  remains  that  he 
explain  the  connected  words,  “but  the  righteous 
into  life  eternal.”1  “And  I  saw,”  he  says,  “a  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth:  for  the  first  heaven 
JMatt.  25.  46. 


and  the  first  earth  have  passed  away;  and  there 
is  no  more  sea.”2  This  will  take  place  in  the  or¬ 
der  which  he  has  by  anticipation  declared  in  the 
words,  “I  saw  One  sitting  on  the  throne,  from 
Whose  face  heaven  and  earth  fled.”  For  as  soon 
as  those  who  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life 
have  been  judged  and  cast  into  eternal  fire — 
the  nature  of  which  fire,  or  its  position  in  the 
world  or  universe,  I  suppose  is  known  to  no 
man,  unless  perhaps  the  divine  Spirit  reveal  it 
to  some  one — then  shall  the  figure  of  this  world 
pass  away  in  a  conflagration  of  universal  fire,  as 
once  before  the  world  was  flooded  with  a  deluge 
of  universal  water.  And  by  this  universal  con¬ 
flagration  the  qualities  of  the  corruptible  ele¬ 
ments  which  suited  our  corruptible  bodies  shall 
utterly  perish,  and  our  substance  shall  receive 
such  qualities  as  shall,  by  a  wonderful  transmu¬ 
tation,  harmonize  with  our  immortal  bodies,  so 
that,  as  the  world  itself  is  renewed  to  some  bet¬ 
ter  thing,  it  is  fitly  accommodated  to  men, 
themselves  renewed  in  their  flesh  to  some  better 
thing.  As  for  the  statement,  “And  there  shall  be 
no  more  sea,”  I  would  not  lightly  say  whether 
it  is  dried  up  with  that  excessive  heat,  or  is  it¬ 
self  also  turned  into  some  better  thing.  For  we 
read  that  there  shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth,  but  I  do  not  remember  to  have  anywhere 
read  anything  of  a  new  sea,  unless  what  I  find 
in  this  same  book,  “As  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  like 
crystal.”  3  But  he  was  not  then  speaking  of  this 
end  of  the  world,  neither  does  he  seem  to  speak 
of  a  literal  sea,  but  “as  it  were  a  sea.”  It  is  pos¬ 
sible  that,  as  prophetic  diction  delights  in  min¬ 
gling  figurative  and  real  language,  and  thus  in 
some  sort  veiling  the  sense,  so  the  wrords  “And 
there  is  no  more  sea”  may  be  taken  in  the  same 
sense  as  the  previous  phrase,  “And  the  sea  pre¬ 
sented  the  dead  which  were  in  it.”  For  then 
there  shall  be  no  more  of  this  world,  no  more  of 
the  surgings  and  restlessness  of  human  life,  and 
it  is  this  which  is  symbolized  by  the  sea. 

Chap.  17.  Of  the  endless  glory  of  the  Church 
“And  I  saw,”  he  says,  “a  great  city,  new  Jeru¬ 
salem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband. 
And  I  heard  a  great  voice  from  the  throne,  say¬ 
ing,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men, 
and  He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be 
His  people,  and  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them. 
And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes ;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither 
sorrow,  nor  crying,  but  neither  shall  there  be 
any  more  pain:  because  the  former  things  have 
2Rev.  21.  1.  3Rev.  15.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF 

passed  away.  And  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne 
said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new.”1  This  city 
is  said  to  come  down  out  of  heaven,  because  the 
grace  with  which  God  formed  it  is  of  heaven. 
Wherefore  He  says  to  it  by  Isaiah,  “I  am  the 
Lord  that  formed  thee.”  2  It  is  indeed  descend¬ 
ed  from  heaven  from  its  commencement,  since 
its  citizens  during  the  course  of  this  world  grow 
by  the  grace  of  God,  which  cometh  down  from 
above  through  the  layer  of  regeneration  in  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  But  by 
God’s  final  judgment,  which  shall  be  adminis¬ 
tered  by  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  there  shall  by 
God’s  grace  be  manifested  a  glory  so  pervading 
and  so  new,  that  no  vestige  of  what  is  old  shall 
remain;  for  even  our  bodies  shall  pass  from 
their  old  corruption  and  mortality  to  new  in¬ 
corruption  and  immortality.  For  to  refer  this 
promise  to  the  present  time,  in  which  the  saints 
are  reigning  with  their  King  a  thousand  years, 
seems  to  me  excessively  barefaced,  when  it  is 
most  distinctly  said,  “God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  their  eyes;  and  there  shall  be  no 
more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  but 
there  shall  be  no  more  pain.”  And  who  is  so  ab¬ 
surd,  and  blinded  by  contentious  opinionative- 
ness,  as  to  be  audacious  enough  to  affirm  that,  in 
the  midst  of  the  calamities  of  this  mortal  state, 
God’s  people,  or  even  one  single  saint,  does  live, 
or  has  ever  lived,  or  shall  ever  live,  without 
tears  or  pain — the  fact  being  that  the  holier  a 
man  is,  and  the  fuller  of  holy  desire,  so  much 
the  more  abundant  is  the  tearfulness  of  his  sup¬ 
plication?  Are  not  these  the  utterances  of  a  cit¬ 
izen  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem:  “My  tears  have 
been  my  meat  day  and  night”;3  and  “Every 
night  shall  I  make  my  bed  to  swim;  with  my 
tears  shall  I  water  my  couch”;4  and  “My  groan¬ 
ing  is  not  hid  from  Thee”;5  and  “My  sorrow 
was  renewed”?  6  Or  are  not  those  God’s  children 
who  groan,  being  burdened,  not  that  they  wish 
to  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon,  that  mortali¬ 
ty  may  be  swallowed  up  of  life?  7  Do  not  they 
even  who  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  groan 
within  themselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  the 
redemption  of  their  body?  8  Was  not  the  Apos¬ 
tle  Paul  himself  a  citizen  of  the  heavenly  Jeru¬ 
salem,  and  was  he  not  so  all  the  more  when  he 
had  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  of  heart  for 
his  Israelitish  brethren?9  But  when  shall  there 
be  no  more  death  in  that  city,  except  when  it 
shall  be  said,  “0  death,  where  is  thy  conten¬ 
tion?  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  The  sting  of 

xRev.  2i.  2-5.  2Isa.  45.  8.  3Ps.  42.  3.  4Ps.  6.  6. 

6Ps.  38.  9.  6Ps.  39.  2.  7II  Cor.  5.  4.  8Rom.  8.  23. 

9Rom.  9.  2. 


GOD  XX.  16-18  545 

death  is  sin.”  10  Obviously  there  shall  be  no  sin 
when  it  can  be  said,  “Where  is” —  But  as  for  the 
present  it  is  not  some  poor  weak  citizen  of  this 
city,  but  this  same  Apostle  John  himself  who 
says,  “If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 
ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.”  11  No 
doubt,  though  this  book  is  called  the  Apoca¬ 
lypse,  there  are  in  it  many  obscure  passages  to 
exercise  the  mind  of  the  reader,  and  there  are 
few  passages  so  plain  as  to  assist  us  in  the  in¬ 
terpretation  of  the  others,  even  though  we  take 
pains;  and  this  difficulty  is  increased  by  the 
repetition  of  the  same  things,  in  forms  so  dif¬ 
ferent,  that  the  things  referred  to  seem  to  be 
different,  although  in  fact  they  are  only  differ¬ 
ently  stated.  But  in  the  words,  “God  shall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes ;  and  there  shall 
be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying, 
but  there  shall  be  no  more  pain,”  there  is  so 
manifest  a  reference  to  the  future  world  and 
the  immortality  and  eternity  of  the  saints — for 
only  then  and  only  there  shall  such  a  condition 
be  realized — that  if  we  think  this  obscure,  we 
need  not  expect  to  find  anything  plain  in  any 
part  of  Scripture. 

Chap.  18.  What  the  Apostle  Peter  predicted  re¬ 
garding  the  last  judgment 
Let  us  now  see  what  the  Apostle  Peter  pre¬ 
dicted  concerning  this  judgment.  “There  shall 
come,”  he  says,  “in  the  last  days  scoffers.  .  .  . 
Nevertheless  we,  according  to  His  promise,  look 
for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness.”  12  There  is  nothing  said 
here  about  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  but 
enough  certainly  regarding  the  destruction  of 
this  world.  And  by  his  reference  to  the  deluge 
he  seems  as  it  were  to  suggest  to  us  how  far  we 
should  believe  the  ruin  of  the  world  will  extend 
in  the  end  of  the  world.  For  he  says  that  the 
world  which  then  was  perished,  and  not  only  the 
earth  itself,  but  also  the  heavens,  by  which  we 
understand  the  air,  the  place  and  room  of  which 
was  occupied  by  the  water.  Therefore  the  whole, 
or  almost  the  whole,  of  the  gusty  atmosphere 
(which  he  calls  heaven,  or  rather  the  heavens, 
meaning  the  earth’s  atmosphere,  and  not  the 
upper  air  in  which  sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  set) 
was  turned  into  moisture,  and  in  this  way  per¬ 
ished  together  with  the  earth,  whose  former  ap¬ 
pearance  had  been  destroyed  by  the  deluge. 
“But  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  are  now, 
by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  reserved 
unto  fire  against  the  day  of  judgment  and  per¬ 
dition  of  ungodly  men.”  Therefore  the  heavens 
10I  Cor.  15.  55.  UI  John,  1.  8.  ^II  Pet.  3.  3-13. 


546  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


and  the  earth,  or  the  world  which  was  preserved 
from  the  water  to  stand  in  place  of  that  world 
which  perished  in  the  flood,  is  itself  reserved  to 
fire  at  last  in  the  day  of  the  judgment  and  per¬ 
dition  of  ungodly  men.  He  does  not  hesitate  to 
affirm  that  in  this  great  change  men  also  shall 
perish:  their  nature,  however,  shall  notwith¬ 
standing  continue,  though  in  eternal  punish¬ 
ments.  Some  one  will  perhaps  put  the  question, 
“If  after  judgment  is  pronounced  the  world  it¬ 
self  is  to  burn,  where  shall  the  saints  be  during 
the  conflagration,  and  before  it  is  replaced  by  a 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  since  somewhere 
they  must  be,  because  they  have  material  bod¬ 
ies?”  We  may  reply  that  they  shall  be  in  the 
upper  regions  into  which  the  flame  of  that  con¬ 
flagration  shall  not  ascend,  as  neither  did  the 
water  of  the  flood;  for  they  shall  have  such  bod¬ 
ies  that  they  shall  be  wherever  they  wish.  More¬ 
over,  when  they  have  become  immortal  and  in¬ 
corruptible,  they  shall  not  greatly  dread  the 
blaze  of  that  conflagration,  as  the  corruptible 
and  mortal  bodies  of  the  three  men  were  able  to 
live  unhurt  in  the  blazing  furnace. 

Chap.  19.  What  the  Apostle  Paul  wrote  to  the 

Thessalonians  about  the  manifestatio?i  of  An¬ 
tichrist,  which  shall  precede  the  day  of  the 

Lord 

I  see  that  I  must  omit  many  of  the  state¬ 
ments  of  the  gospels  and  epistles  about  this  last 
judgment,  that  this  volume  may  not  become 
unduly  long;  but  I  can  on  no  account  omit  what 
the  Apostle  Paul  says,  in  writing  to  the  Thes¬ 
salonians,  “We  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,”  etc.1 

No  one  can  doubt  that  he  wrote  this  of  Anti¬ 
christ  and  of  the  day  of  judgment,  which  he 
here  calls  the  day  of  the  Lord,  nor  that  he  de¬ 
clared  that  this  day  should  not  come  unless  he 
first  came  who  is  called  the  apostate — apostate, 
to  wit,  from  the  Lord  God.  And  if  this  may 
justly  be  said  of  all  the  ungodly,  how  much  more 
of  him?  But  it  is  uncertain  in  what  temple  he 
shall  sit,  whether  in  that  ruin  of  the  temple 
which  was  built  by  Solomon,  or  in  the  Church; 
for  the  apostle  would  not  call  the  temple  of  any 
idol  or  demon  the  temple  of  God.  And  on  this 
account  some  think  that  in  this  passage  Anti¬ 
christ  means  not  the  prince  himself  alone,  but 
his  whole  body,  that  is,  the  mass  of  men  who 
adhere  to  him,  along  with  him  their  prince;  and 
they  also  think  that  we  should  render  the  Greek 
more  exactly  were  we  to  read,  not  “in  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  God,”  but  “for”  or  “as  the  temple  of 
1II  Thess.  2.  i-ii. 


God,”  as  if  he  himself  were  the  temple  of  God, 
the  Church.2  Then  as  for  the  words.  “And  now 
ye  know  what  withholdeth,”  i.e.,  ye  know  what 
hindrance  or  cause  of  delay  there  is,  “that  he 
might  be  revealed  in  his  own  time” ;  they  show 
that  he  was  unwilling  to  make  an  explicit  state¬ 
ment,  because  he  said  that  they  knew.  And  thus 
we  who  have  not  their  knowledge  wish  and  are 
not  able  even  with  pains  to  understand  what  the 
apostle  referred  to,  especially  as  his  meaning  is 
made  still  more  obscure  by  what  he  adds.  For 
what  does  he  mean  by  “For  the  mystery  of  in¬ 
iquity  doth  already  work:  only  he  who  now 
holdeth,  let  him  hold  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the 
way:  and  then  shall  the  wicked  be  revealed”? 
I  frankly  confess  I  do  not  know  what  he  means. 
I  will  nevertheless  mention  such  conjectures  as 
I  have  heard  or  read. 

Some  think  that  the  Apostle  Paul  referred  to 
the  Roman  empire,  and  that  he  was  unwilling 
to  use  language  more  explicit,  lest  he  should  in¬ 
cur  the  calumnious  charge  of  wishing  ill  to  the 
empire  which  it  was  hoped  would  be  eternal; 
so  that  in  saying,  “For  the  mystery  of  iniquity 
doth  already  work,”  he  alluded  to  Nero,  whose 
deeds  already  seemed  to  be  as  the  deeds  of  An¬ 
tichrist.  And  hence  some  suppose  that  he  shall 
rise  again  and  be  Antichrist.  Others,  again,  sup¬ 
pose  that  he  is  not  even  dead,  but  that  he  was 
concealed  that  he  might  be  supposed  to  have 
been  killed,  and  that  he  now  lives  in  conceal¬ 
ment  in  the  vigour  of  that  same  age  which  he  had 
reached  when  he  was  believed  to  have  perished, 
and  will  live  until  he  is  revealed  in  his  own  time 
and  restored  to  his  kingdom.  But  I  wonder  that 
men  can  be  so  audacious  in  their  conjectures. 
However,  it  is  not  absurd  to  believe  that  these 
words  of  the  apostle,  “Only  he  who  now  holdeth, 
let  him  hold  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way,” 
refer  to  the  Roman  empire,  as  if  it  were  said, 
“Only  he  who  now  reigneth,  let  him  reign  until 
he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.”  “And  then  shall 
the  wicked  be  revealed”:  no  one  doubts  that 
this  means  Antichrist.  But  others  think  that  the 
words,  “Ye  know  what  withholdeth,”  and  “The 
mystery  of  iniquity  worketh,”  refer  only  to  the 
wicked  and  the  hypocrites  who  are  in  the 
Church,  until  they  reach  a  number  so  great  as  to 
furnish  Antichrist  with  a  great  people,  and  that 
this  is  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  because  it  seems 
hidden;  also  that  the  apostle  is  exhorting  the 
faithful  tenaciously  to  hold  the  faith  they  hold 
when  he  says,  “Only  he  who  now  holdeth,  let 

2  Augustine  adds  the  words:  “Sicut  dicimus,  Sedet  in 
amicum,  id  est,  velut  amicus;  vel  si  quid  aliud  isto  locutionis 
genere  did  solet .” 


THE  CITY  OF 

him  hold  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way,” 
that  is,  until  the  mystery  of  iniquity  which  now 
is  hidden  departs  from  the  Church.  For  they 
suppose  that  it  is  to  this  same  mystery  John  al¬ 
ludes  when  in  his  epistle  he  says,  “Little  chil¬ 
dren,  it  is  the  last  time:  and  as  ye  have  heard 
that  Antichrist  shall  come,  even  now  are  there 
many  antichrists;  whereby  we  know  that  it  is 
the  last  time.  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they 
were  not  of  us;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they 
would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us.”  1  As 
therefore  there  went  out  from  the  Church  many 
heretics,  whom  John  calls  “many  antichrists,” 
at  that  time  prior  to  the  end,  and  which  John 
calls  “the  last  time,”  so  in  the  end  they  shall  go 
out  who  do  not  belong  to  Christ,  but  to  that  last 
Antichrist,  and  then  he  shall  be  revealed. 

Thus  various,  then,  are  the  conjectural  ex¬ 
planations  of  the  obscure  words  of  the  apostle. 
That  which  there  is  no  doubt  he  said  is  this, 
that  Christ  will  not  come  to  judge  quick  and 
dead  unless  Antichrist,  His  adversary,  first  come 
to  seduce  those  who  are  dead  in  soul;  although 
their  seduction  is  a  result  of  God’s  secret  judg¬ 
ment  already  passed.  For,  as  it  is  said  “his  pres¬ 
ence  shall  be  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with 
all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying  wonders,  and 
with  all  seduction  of  unrighteousness  in  them 
that  perish.”  For  then  shall  Satan  be  loosed, 
and  by  means  of  that  Antichrist  shall  work  with 
all  power  in  a  lying  though  a  wonderful  man¬ 
ner.  It  is  commonly  questioned  whether  these 
works  are  called  “signs  and  lying  wonders”  be¬ 
cause  he  is  to  deceive  men’s  senses  by  false  ap¬ 
pearances,  or  because  the  things  he  does,  though 
they  be  true  prodigies,  shall  be  a  lie  to  those 
who  shall  believe  that  such  things  could  be  done 
only  by  God,  being  ignorant  of  the  devil’s  pow¬ 
er,  and  especially  of  such  unexampled  power  as 
he  shall  then  for  the  first  time  put  forth.  For 
when  he  fell  from  heaven  as  fire,  and  at  a  stroke 
swept  away  from  the  holy  Job  his  numerous 
household  and  his  vast  flocks,  and  then  as  a 
whirlwind  rushed  upon  and  smote  the  house  and 
killed  his  children,  these  were  not  deceitful  ap¬ 
pearances,  and  yet  they  were  the  works  of  Satan 
to  whom  God  had  given  this  power.  Why  they 
are  called  signs  and  lying  wonders,  we  shall  then 
be  more  likely  to  know  when  the  time  itself  ar¬ 
rives.  But  whatever  be  the  reason  of  the  name, 
they  shall  be  such  signs  and  wonders  as  shall  se¬ 
duce  those  who  shall  deserve  to  be  seduced,  “be¬ 
cause  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth 
that  they  might  be  saved.”  Neither  did  the  apos¬ 
tle  scruple  to  go  on  to  say,  “For  this  cause  God 
*1  John,  2.  18,  19. 


GOD  XX.  19-20  547 

shall  send  upon  them  the  working  of  error  that 
they  should  believe  a  lie.”  For  God  shall  send, 
because  God  shall  permit  the  devil  to  do  these 
things,  the  permission  being  by  His  own  just 
judgment,  though  the  doing  of  them  is  in  pur¬ 
suance  of  the  devil’s  unrighteous  and  malignant 
purpose,  “that  they  all  might  be  judged  who  be¬ 
lieved  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  un¬ 
righteousness.”  Therefore,  being  judged,  they 
shall  be  seduced,  and,  being  seduced,  they  shall 
be  judged.  But,  being  judged,  they  shall  be  se¬ 
duced  by  those  secretly  just  and  justly  secret 
judgments  of  God,  with  which  He  has  never 
ceased  to  judge  since  the  first  sin  of  the  rational 
creatures;  and,  being  seduced,  they  shall  be 
judged  in  that  last  and  manifest  judgment  ad¬ 
ministered  by  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  Himself 
most  unjustly  judged  and  shall  most  justly 
judge. 

Chap.  20.  What  the  same  apostle  taught  in  the 
first  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  regarding 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
But  the  apostle  has  said  nothing  here  regard¬ 
ing  the  resurrection  of  the  dead;  but  in  his  first 
Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  he  says,  “We  would 
not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concern¬ 
ing  them  which  are  asleep,”  etc.2  These  words  of 
the  apostle  most  distinctly  proclaim  the  future 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  when  the  Lord  Christ 
shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

But  it  is  commonly  asked  whether  those 
whom  our  Lord  shall  find  alive  upon  earth,  per¬ 
sonated  in  this  passage  by  the  apostle  and  those 
who  were  alive  with  him,  shall  never  die  at  all, 
or  shall  pass  with  incomprehensible  swiftness 
through  death  to  immortality  in  the  very  mo¬ 
ment  during  which  they  shall  be  caught  up  along 
with  those  who  rise  again  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air?  For  we  cannot  say  that  it  is  impossible 
that  they  should  both  die  and  revive  again  while 
they  are  carried  aloft  through  the  air.  For  the 
words,  “And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord,” 
are  not  to  be  understood  as  if  he  meant  that  we 
shall  always  remain  in  the  air  with  the  Lord; 
for  He  Himself  shall  not  remain  there,  but  shall 
only  pass  through  it  as  He  comes.  For  we  shall 
go  to  meet  Him  as  He  comes,  not  where  He  re¬ 
mains;  but  “so  shall  we  be  with  the  Lord,”  that 
is,  we  shall  be  with  Him  possessed  of  immortal 
bodies  wherever  we  shall  be  with  Him.  We  seem 
compelled  to  take  the  words  in  this  sense,  and 
to  suppose  that  those  whom  the  Lord  shall  find 
alive  upon  earth  shall  in  that  brief  space  both 
suffer  death  and  receive  immortality;  for  this 
2I  Thess.  4.  13-16. 


548  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


same  apostle  says,  “In  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive”;1  while,  speaking  of  the  same  resurrec¬ 
tion  of  the  body,  he  elsewhere  says,  “That 
which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it 
die.”  2  How,  then,  shall  those  whom  Christ  shall 
find  alive  upon  earth  be  made  alive  to  immor¬ 
tality  in  Him  if  they  die  not,  since  on  this  very 
account  it  is  said,  “That  which  thou  sowest  is 
not  quickened,  except  it  die”?  Or  if  we  cannot 
properly  speak  of  human  bodies  as  sown,  unless 
in  so  far  as  by  dying  they  do  in  some  sort  re¬ 
turn  to  the  earth,  as  also  the  sentence  pro¬ 
nounced  by  God  against  the  sinning  father  of 
the  human  race  runs,  “Earth  thou  art,  and  unto 
earth  shalt  thou  return.”  3  we  must  acknowledge 
that  those  whom  Christ  at  His  coming  shall  find 
still  in  the  body  are  not  included  in  these  words 
of  the  apostle  nor  in  those  of  Genesis;  for,  be¬ 
ing  caught  up  into  the  clouds,  they  are  certainly 
not  sown,  neither  going  nor  returning  to  the 
earth,  whether  they  experience  no  death  at  all 
or  die  for  a  moment  in  the  air. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  meets  us  the 
saying  of  the  same  apostle  when  he  was  speak¬ 
ing  to  the  Corinthians  about  the  resurrection  of 
the  body,  “We  shall  all  rise,”  or,  as  other  mss. 
read,  “We  shall  all  sleep.”  4  Since,  then,  there 
can  be  no  resurrection  unless  death  has  preced¬ 
ed,  and  since  we  can  in  this  passage  understand 
by  sleep  nothing  else  than  death,  how  shall  all 
either  sleep  or  rise  again  if  so  many  persons 
whom  Christ  shall  find  in  the  body  shall  neither 
sleep  nor  rise  again?  If.  then,  we  believe  that 
the  saints  who  shall  be  found  alive  at  Christ’s 
coming,  and  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet  Him, 
shall  in  that  same  ascent  pass  from  mortal  to 
immortal  bodies,  we  shall  find  no  difficulty  in 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  either  when  he  says, 
“That  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  ex¬ 
cept  it  die,”  or  when  he  says,  “We  shall  all  rise,” 
or  “all  sleep,”  for  not  even  the  saints  shall  be 
quickened  to  immortality  unless  they  first  die, 
however  briefly;  and  consequently  they  shall 
not  be  exempt  from  resurrection  which  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  sleep,  however  brief.  And  why  should 
it  seem  to  us  incredible  that  that  multitude  of 
bodies  should  be,  as  it  were,  sown  in  the  air,  and 
should  in  the  air  forthwith  revive  immortal  and 
incorruptible,  when  we  believe,  on  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  the  same  apostle,  that  the  resurrection 
shall  take  place  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and 
that  the  dust  of  bodies  long  dead  shall  return 
with  incomprehensible  facility  and  swiftness  to 
those  members  that  are  now  to  live  endlessly? 

*1  Cor.  15.  22.  2I  Cor.  15.  36.  3Gen.  3.  19. 

4I  Cor.  15.  51. 


Neither  do  we  suppose  that  in  the  case  of  these 
saints  the  sentence,  “Earth  thou  art,  and  unto 
earth  shalt  thou  return,”  is  null,  though  their 
bodies  do  not,  on  dying,  fall  to  earth,  but  both 
die  and  rise  again  at  once  while  caught  up  into 
the  air.  For  “Thou  shalt  return  to  earth”  means, 
“Thou  shalt  at  death  return  to  that  which  thou 
wert  before  life  began.  Thou  shalt,  when  ex¬ 
animate,  be  that  which  thou  wert  before  thou 
wast  animate.”  For  it  was  into  a  face  of  earth 
that  God  breathed  the  breath  of  life  when  man 
was  made  a  living  soul;  as  if  it  were  said,  “Thou 
art  earth  with  a  soul,  which  thou  wast  not;  thou 
shalt  be  earth  without  a  soul,  as  thou  wast.” 
And  this  is  what  all  bodies  of  the  dead  are  be¬ 
fore  they  rot;  and  w?hat  the  bodies  of  those 
saints  shall  be  if  they  die,  no  matter  where  they 
die,  as  soon  as  they  shall  give  up  that  life  which 
they  are  immediately  to  receive  back  again.  In 
this  way,  then,  they  return  or  go  to  earth,  inas¬ 
much  as  from  being  living  men  they  shall  be 
earth,  as  that  which  becomes  cinder  is  said  to 
go  to  cinder;  that  which  decays,  to  go  to  decay; 
and  so  of  six  hundred  other  things.  But  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  this  shall  take  place  we  can  now 
only  feebly  conjecture,  and  shall  understand  it 
only  when  it  comes  to  pass.  For  that  there  shall 
be  a  bodily  resurrection  of  the  dead  when  Christ 
comes  to  judge  quick  and  dead,  we  must  believe 
if  we  would  be  Christians.  But  if  we  are  unable 
perfectly  to  comprehend  the  manner  in  which 
it  shall  take  place,  our  faith  is  not  on  this  ac¬ 
count  vain.  Now,  however,  we  ought,  as  we  for¬ 
merly  promised,  to  show,  as  far  as  seems  neces¬ 
sary,  what  the  ancient  prophetic  books  predict¬ 
ed  concerning  this  final  judgment  of  God;  and 
I  fancy  no  great  time  need  be  spent  in  discussing 
and  explaining  these  predictions,  if  the  reader 
has  been  careful  to  avail  himself  of  the  help  we 
have  already  furnished. 

Chap.  21.  Utterances  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  re¬ 
garding  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the 
retributive  judgment 

The  prophet  Isaiah  says,  “The  dead  shall  rise 
again,  and  all  who  were  in  the  graves  shall  rise 
again ;  and  all  who  are  in  the  earth  shall  rejoice : 
for  the  dew  which  is  from  Thee  is  their  health, 
and  the  earth  of  the  wicked  shall  fall.”  5  All  the 
former  part  of  this  passage  relates  to  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  blessed;  but  the  words,  “the  earth 
of  the  wicked  shall  fall,”  is  rightly  understood 
as  meaning  that  the  bodies  of  the  wicked  shall 
fall  into  the  ruin  of  damnation.  And  if  we  would 
more  exactly  and  carefully  scrutinize  the  words 
5Isa.  26.  19. 


THE  CITY  OF 

which  refer  to  the  resurrection  of  the  good,  we 
may  refer  to  the  first  resurrection  the  words, 
“the  dead  shall  rise  again,”  and  to  the  second 
the  following  words,  “and  all  who  were  in  the 
graves  shall  rise  again.”  And  if  we  ask  what  re¬ 
lates  to  those  saints  whom  the  Lord  at  His  com¬ 
ing  shall  find  alive  upon  earth,  the  following 
clause  may  suitably  be  referred  to  them;  “All 
who  are  in  the  earth  shall  rejoice:  for  the  dew 
which  is  from  Thee  is  their  health.”  By  “health” 
in  this  place  it  is  best  to  understand  immortali¬ 
ty.  For  that  is  the  most  perfect  health  which  is 
not  repaired  by  nourishment  as  by  a  daily  rem¬ 
edy.  In  like  manner  the  same  prophet,  affording 
hope  to  the  good  and  terrifying  the  wicked  re¬ 
garding  the  day  of  judgment,  says,  “Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  flow  down  upon  them  as 
a  river  of  peace,  and  upon  the  glory  of  the  Gen¬ 
tiles  as  a  rushing  torrent;  their  sons  shall  be 
carried  on  the  shoulders,  and  shall  be  comforted 
on  the  knees.  As  one  whom  his  mother  comfort- 
eth,  so  shall  I  comfort  you;  and  ye  shall  be 
comforted  in  Jerusalem.  And  ye  shall  see,  and 
your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  bones  shall 
rise  up  like  a  herb;  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  known  by  His  worshippers,  and  He  shall 
threaten  the  contumacious.  For,  behold,  the 
Lord  shall  come  as  a  fire,  and  as  a  whirlwind 
His  chariots,  to  execute  vengeance  with  indig¬ 
nation,  and  wasting  with  a  flame  of  fire.  For 
with  fire  of  the  Lord  shall  all  the  earth  be 
judged,  and  all  flesh  with  His  sword :  many  shall 
be  wounded  by  the  Lord.”  1  In  His  promise  to 
the  good  he  says  that  He  will  flow  down  as  a 
river  of  peace,  that  is  to  say.  in  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  abundance  of  peace.  With  this  peace  we 
shall  in  the  end  be  refreshed;  but  of  this  we 
have  spoken  abundantly  in  the  preceding  book. 

It  is  this  river  in  which  he  says  He  shall  flow 
down  upon  those  to  whom  He  promises  so  great 
happiness,  that  we  may  understand  that  in  the 
region  of  that  felicity,  which  is  in  heaven,  all 
things  are  satisfied  from  this  river.  But  because 
there  shall  thence  flow,  even  upon  earthly  bod¬ 
ies,  the  peace  of  incorruption  and  immortality, 
therefore  he  says  that  He  shall  flow  down  as 
this  river,  that  He  may  as  it  were  pour  Himself 
from  things  above  to  things  beneath,  and  make 
men  the  equals  of  the  angels.  By  “Jerusalem,” 
too,  we  should  understand  not  that  which  serves 
with  her  children,  but  that  which,  according  to 
the  apostle,  is  our  free  mother,  eternal  in  the 
heavens.2  In  her  we  shall  be  comforted  as  we 
pass  toilworn  from  earth’s  cares  and  calamities, 
and  be  taken  up  as  her  children  on  her  knees 
^sa.  66.  12,  1 6.  2Gal.  4.  26. 


GOD  XX.  21  549 

and  shoulders.  Inexperienced  and  new  to  such 
blandishments,  we  shall  be  received  into  un¬ 
wonted  bliss.  There  we  shall  see,  and  our  heart 
shall  rejoice.  He  does  not  say  what  we  shall  see; 
but  what  but  God,  that  the  promise  in  the  Gos¬ 
pel  may  be  fulfilled  in  us,  “Blessed  are  the  pure 
in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God”?  3  What  shall 
we  see  but  all  those  things  which  now  we  see 
not,  but  believe  in,  and  of  which  the  idea  we 
form,  according  to  our  feeble  capacity,  is  in¬ 
comparably  less  than  the  reality?  “And  ye  shall 
see,”  he  says,  “and  your  heart  shall  rejoice.” 
Here  ye  believe,  there  ye  shall  see. 

But  because  he  said,  “Your  heart  shall  re¬ 
joice,”  lest  we  should  suppose  that  the  bless¬ 
ings  of  that  Jerusalem  are  only  spiritual,  he 
adds,  “And  your  bones  shall  rise  up  like  a  herb,” 
alluding  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  as 
it  were  supplying  an  omission  he  had  made.  For 
it  will  not  take  place  when  we  have  seen ;  but  we 
shall  see  when  it  has  taken  place.  For  he  had  al¬ 
ready  spoken  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth,  speaking  repeatedly,  and  under  many  fig¬ 
ures,  of  the  things  promised  to  the  saints,  and 
saying,  “There  shall  be  new  heavens,  and  a  new 
earth :  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered 
nor  come  into  mind;  but  they  shall  find  in  it 
gladness  and  exultation.  Behold,  I  will  make  Je¬ 
rusalem  an  exultation,  and  my  people  a  joy. 
And  I  will  exult  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my 
people;  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no 
more  heard  in  her”;4  and  other  promises, 
which  some  endeavour  to  refer  to  carnal  enjoy¬ 
ment  during  the  thousand  years.  For,  in  the 
manner  of  prophecy,  figurative  and  literal  ex¬ 
pressions  are  mingled,  so  that  a  serious  mind 
may,  by  useful  and  salutary  effort,  reach  the 
spiritual  sense;  but  carnal  sluggishness,  or  the 
slowness  of  an  uneducated  and  undisciplined 
mind,  rests  in  the  superficial  letter,  and  thinks 
there  is  nothing  beneath  to  be  looked  for.  But 
let  this  be  enough  regarding  the  style  of  those 
prophetic  expressions  just  quoted.  And  now,  to 
return  to  their  interpretation.  When  he  had  said, 
“And  your  bones  shall  rise  up  like  a  herb,”  in 
order  to  show  that  it  was  the  resurrection  of  the 
good,  though  a  bodily  resurrection,  to  which  he 
alluded,  he  added,  “And  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  known  by  His  worshippers.”  What  is 
this  but  the  hand  of  Him  who  distinguishes 
those  who  worship  from  those  who  despise 
Him?  Regarding  these  the  context  immediately 
adds,  “And  He  shall  threaten  the  contumaci¬ 
ous,”  or,  as  another  translator  has  it,  “the  un¬ 
believing.”  He  shall  not  actually  threaten  then, 

3Matt.  5.  8.  4Isa.  65.  17-19. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


but  the  threats  which  are  now  uttered  shall  then 
be  fulfilled  in  effect.  “For  behold,”  he  says,  “the 
Lord  shall  come  as  a  fire,  and  as  a  whirlwind 
His  chariots,  to  execute  vengeance  with  indig¬ 
nation,  and  wasting  with  a  flame  of  fire.  For 
with  fire  of  the  Lord  shall  all  the  earth  be 
judged,  and  all  flesh  with  His  sword:  many  shall 
be  wounded  by  the  Lord.”  By  fire ,  whirlwind, 
sword ,  he  means  the  judicial  punishment  of 
God.  For  he  says  that  the  Lord  Himself  shall 
come  as  a  fire,  to  those,  that  is  to  say,  to  whom 
His  coming  shall  be  penal.  By  His  chariots  (for 
the  word  is  plural)  we  suitably  understand  the 
ministration  of  angels.  And  when  he  says  that 
all  flesh  and  all  the  earth  shall  be  judged  with 
His  fire  and  sword,  we  do  not  understand  the 
spiritual  and  holy  to  be  included,  but  the  earth¬ 
ly  and  carnal,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  they  “mind 
earthly  things,”1  and  “to  be  carnally  minded  is 
death,” 2  and  whom  the  Lord  calls  simply  flesh 
when  He  says,  “My  Spirit  shall  not  always  re¬ 
main  in  these  men,  for  they  are  flesh.”  3  As  to 
the  words,  “Many  shall  be  wounded  by  the 
Lord.”  this  wounding  shall  produce  the  second 
death.  It  is  possible,  indeed,  to  understand  fire , 
sword ,  and  wound  in  a  good  sense.  For  the  Lord 
said  that  He  wished  to  send  fire  on  the  earth.4 
And  the  cloven  tongues  appeared  to  them  as  fire 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  came.5  And  our  Lord  says, 
“I  am  not  come  to  send  peace  on  earth,  but  a 
sword.”6  And  Scripture  says  that  the  word  of 
God  is  a  doubly  sharp  sword.7  on  account  of 
the  two  edges,  the  two  Testaments.  And  in  the 
Song  of  Songs  the  holy  Church  says  that  she  is 
wounded  with  love8 — pierced,  as  it  were,  with 
the  arrow  of  love.  But  here,  where  we  read  or 
hear  that  the  Lord  shall  come  to  execute  venge¬ 
ance,  it  is  obvious  in  what  sense  we  are  to  un¬ 
derstand  these  expressions. 

After  briefly  mentioning  those  who  shall  be 
consumed  in  this  judgment,  speaking  of  the 
wicked  and  sinners  under  the  figure  of  the  meats 
forbidden  by  the  old  law,  from  which  they  had 
not  abstained,  he  summarily  recounts  the  grace 
of  the  New  Testament,  from  the  first  coming  of 
the  Saviour  to  the  last  judgment,  of  which  we 
now  speak;  and  herewith  he  concludes  his 
prophecy.  For  he  relates  that  the  Lord  declares 
that  He  is  coming  to  gather  all  nations,  that 
they  may  come  and  witness  His  glory.9  For,  as 
the  apostle  says,  “All  have  sinned  and  are  in 
want  of  the  glory  of  God.”  10  And  he  says  that 

1Phil.  3.  19.  2Rom.  8.  6.  3Gen.  6.  3. 

4Luke,  12.  49.  6Acts,  2.  3.  6Matt.  10.  34. 

7Heb.  4.  12.  8Song  of  Sol.  2.  5.  9Isa.  66.  18. 

10Rom.  3.  23. 


He  will  do  wonders  among  them,  at  which  they 
shall  marvel  and  believe  in  Him ;  and  that  from 
them  He  will  send  forth  those  that  are  saved 
into  various  nations,  and  distant  islands  which 
have  not  heard  His  name  nor  seen  His  glory, 
and  that  they  shall  declare  His  glory  among  the 
nations,  and  shall  bring  the  brethren  of  those 
to  whom  the  prophet  was  speaking,  i.e.,  shall 
bring  to  the  faith  under  God  the  Father  the 
brethren  of  the  elect  Israelites;  and  that  they 
shall  bring  from  all  nations  an  offering  to  the 
Lord  on  beasts  of  burden  and  waggons  (which 
are  understood  to  mean  the  aids  furnished  by 
God  in  the  shape  of  angelic  or  human  ministry), 
to  the  holy  city  Jerusalem,  which  at  present  is 
scattered  over  the  earth,  in  the  faithful  saints. 
For  where  divine  aid  is  given,  men  believe,  and 
where  they  believe,  they  come.  And  the  Lord 
compared  them,  in  a  figure,  to  the  children  of 
Israel  offering  sacrifice  to  Him  in  His  house  with 
psalms,  which  is  already  everywhere  done  by 
the  Church;  and  He  promised  that  from  among 
them  He  would  choose  for  Himself  priests  and 
Levites,  which  also  we  see  already  accom¬ 
plished.  For  we  see  that  priests  and  Levites  are 
now  chosen,  not  from  a  certain  family  and 
blood,  as  was  originally  the  rule  in  the  priest¬ 
hood  according  to  the  order  of  Aaron,  but  as 
befits  the  new  testament,  under  which  Christ  is 
the  High  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek, 
in  consideration  of  the  merit  which  is  bestowed 
upon  each  man  by  divine  grace.  And  these 
priests  are  not  to  be  judged  by  their  mere  title, 
which  is  often  borne  by  unworthy  men,  but  by 
that  holiness  which  is  not  common  to  good  men 
and  bad. 

After  having  thus  spoken  of  this  mercy  of 
God  which  is  now  experienced  by  the  Church, 
and  is  very  evident  and  familiar  to  us,  he  fore¬ 
tells  also  the  ends  to  which  men  shall  come  when 
the  last  judgment  has  separated  the  good  and 
the  bad,  saying  by  the  prophet,  or  the  prophet 
himself  speaking  for  God,  “For  as  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth  shall  remain  before 
me,  said  the  Lord,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your 
name  remain,  and  there  shall  be  to  them  month 
after  month,  and  Sabbath  after  Sabbath.  All 
flesh  shall  come  to  worship  before  me  in  Jeru¬ 
salem,  said  the  Lord.  And  they  shall  go  out,  and 
shall  see  the  members  of  the  men  who  have 
sinned  against  me:  their  worm  shall  not  die, 
neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched;  and  they 
shall  be  for  a  spectacle  to  all  flesh.”  11  At  this 
point  the  prophet  closed  his  book,  as  at  this 
point  the  world  shall  come  to  an  end.  Some,  in- 

11Isa.  66.  22-24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

deed,  have  translated  ‘‘carcasses”  1  instead  of 
“members  of  the  men,”  meaning  by  carcasses 
the  manifest  punishment  of  the  body,  although 
carcass  is  commonly  used  only  of  dead  flesh, 
while  the  bodies  here  spoken  of  shall  be  ani¬ 
mated,  else  they  could  not  be  sensible  of  any 
pain ;  but  perhaps  they  may,  without  absurdity, 
be  called  carcasses,  as  being  the  bodies  of  those 
who  are  to  fall  into  the  second  death.  And  for 
the  same  reason  it  is  said,  as  I  have  already 
quoted,  by  this  same  prophet,  “The  earth  of  the 
wicked  shall  fall.” 2  It  is  obvious  that  those 
translators  who  use  a  different  word  for  men  do 
not  mean  to  include  only  males,  for  no  one  will 
say  that  the  women  who  sinned  shall  not  appear 
in  that  judgment;  but  the  male  sex,  being  the 
more  worthy,  and  that  from  which  the  woman 
was  derived,  is  intended  to  include  both  sexes. 
But  that  which  is  especially  pertinent  to  our 
subject  is  this,  that  since  the  words  “All  flesh 
shall  come,”  apply  to  the  good,  for  the  people 
of  God  shall  be  composed  of  every  race  of  men 
— for  all  men  shall  not  be  present,  since  the 
greater  part  shall  be  in  punishment — but,  as  I 
was  saying,  since  flesh  is  used  of  the  good,  and 
members  or  carcasses  of  the  bad,  certainly  it  is 
thus  put  beyond  a  doubt  that  that  judgment  in 
which  the  good  and  the  bad  shall  be  allotted  to 
their  destinies  shall  take  place  after  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  body,  our  faith  in  which  is  thor¬ 
oughly  established  by  the  use  of  these  words. 

Chap.  22.  What  is  meant  by  the  good  going  out 

to  see  the  punishment  of  the  wicked 

But  in  what  way  shall  the  good  go  out  to  see 
the  punishment  of  the  wicked?  Are  they  to 
leave  their  happy  abodes  by  a  bodily  movement, 
and  proceed  to  the  places  of  punishment,  so  as 
to  witness  the  torments  of  the  wicked  in  their 
bodily  presence?  Certainly  not;  but  they  shall 
go  out  by  knowledge.  For  this  expression,  go 
out,  signifies  that  those  who  shall  be  punished 
shall  be  without.  And  thus  the  Lord  also  calls 
these  places  “the  outer  darkness,”  3  to  which  is 
opposed  that  entrance  concerning  which  it  is 
said  to  the  good  servant,  “Enter  into  the  joy  of 
thy  Lord,”  that  it  may  not  be  supposed  that  the 
wicked  can  enter  thither  and  be  known,  but 
rather  that  the  good  by  their  knowledge  go  out 
to  them,  because  the  good  are  to  know  that 
which  is  without.  For  those  who  shall  be  in  tor¬ 
ment  shall  not  know  what  is  going  on  within  in 

*As  the  Vulgate:  cadaver  a  vivorum. 

2Here  Augustine  inserts  the  remark,  “Who  does  not  see 
that  cadavera  (carcasses)  are  so  called  from  cadendo  (fall¬ 
ing)?”  3Matt.  25.  30. 


GOD  XX.  22-23  551 

the  joy  of  the  Lord;  but  they  who  shall  enter 
into  that  joy  shall  know  what  is  going  on  out¬ 
side  in  the  outer  darkness.  Therefore  it  is  said, 
“They  shall  go  out,”  because  they  shall  know 
what  is  done  by  those  who  are  without.  For  if 
the  prophets  were  able  to  know  things  that  had 
not  yet  happened,  by  means  of  that  indwelling 
of  God  in  their  minds,  limited  though  it  was, 
shall  not  the  immortal  saints  know  things  that 
have  already  happened,  when  God  shall  be  all 
in  all?4  The  seed,  then,  and  the  name  of  the 
saints  shall  remain  in  that  blessedness — the 
seed  to  wit,  of  which  John  says,  “And  his 
seed  remaineth  in  him”;5  and  the  name,  of 
which  it  was  said  through  Isaiah  himself,  “I 
will  give  them  an  everlasting  name.”6  “And 
there  shall  be  to  them  month  after  month,  and 
Sabbath  after  Sabbath,”  as  if  it  were  said.  Moon 
after  moon,  and  rest  upon  rest,  both  of  which 
they  shall  themselves  be  when  they  shall  pass 
from  the  old  shadows  of  time  into  the  new  lights 
of  eternity.  The  worm  that  dieth  not,  and  the 
fire  that  is  not  quenched,  which  constitute  the 
punishment  of  the  wicked,  are  differently  inter¬ 
preted  by  different  people.  For  some  refer  both 
to  the  body,  others  refer  both  to  the  soul;  while 
others  again  refer  the  fire  literally  to  the  body, 
and  the  worm  figuratively  to  the  soul,  which 
seems  the  more  credible  idea.  But  the  present  is 
not  the  time  to  discuss  this  difference,  for  we 
have  undertaken  to  occupy  this  book  with  the 
last  judgment,  in  which  the  good  and  the  bad 
are  separated:  their  rewards  and  punishments 
we  shall  more  carefully  discuss  elsewhere. 

Chap.  23.  What  Daniel  predicted  regarding  the 

persecution  of  Antichrist,  the  judgment  of 

God,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  saints 

Daniel  prophesies  of  the  last  judgment  in 
such  a  way  as  to  indicate  that  Antichrist  shall 
first  come,  and  to  carry  on  his  description  to  the 
eternal  reign  of  the  saints.  For  when  in  pro¬ 
phetic  vision  he  had  seen  four  beasts,  signifying 
four  kingdoms,  and  the  fourth  conquered  by  a 
certain  king,  who  is  recognized  as  Antichrist, 
and  after  this  the  eternal  kingdom  of  the  Son 
of  Man,  that  is  to  say,  of  Christ,  he  says,  “My 
spirit  was  terrified,  I  Daniel  in  the  midst  of  my 
body,  and  the  visions  of  my  head  troubled  me,” 
etc.7  Some  have  interpreted  these  four  king¬ 
doms  as  signifying  those  of  the  Assyrians,  Per¬ 
sians,  Macedonians,  and  Romans.  They  who  de¬ 
sire  to  understand  the  fitness  of  this  interpreta¬ 
tion  may  read  Jerome’s  book  on  Daniel,  which 

4I  Cor.  15.  28.  6I  John,  3.  9.  6Isa.  56.  5. 

7Dan.  7.  15-28. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


is  written  with  a  sufficiency  of  care  and  erudi¬ 
tion.  But  he  who  reads  this  passage,  even  half 
asleep,  cannot  fail  to  see  that  the  kingdom  of 
Antichrist  shall  fiercely,  though  for  a  short 
time,  assail  the  Church  before  the  last  judg¬ 
ment  of  God  shall  introduce  the  eternal  reign  of 
the  saints.  For  it  is  patent  from  the  context  that 
the  time,  times,  and  half  a  time,  means  a  year, 
and  two  years,  and  half  a  year,  that  is  to  say. 
three  years  and  a  half.  Sometimes  in  Scripture 
the  same  thing  is  indicated  by  months.  For 
though  the  word  times  seems  to  be  used  here  in 
the  Latin  indefinitely,  that  is  only  because  the 
Latins  have  no  dual,  as  the  Greeks  have,  and  as 
the  Hebrews  also  are  said  to  have.  Times,  there¬ 
fore,  is  used  for  two  times.  As  for  the  ten  kings, 
whom,  as  it  seems,  Antichrist  is  to  find  in  the 
person  of  ten  individuals  when  he  comes,  I 
own  I  am  afraid  we  may  be  deceived  in  this, 
and  that  he  may  come  unexpectedly  while 
there  are  not  ten  kings  living  in  the  Roman 
world.  For  what  if  this  number  ten  signifies 
the  whole  number  of  kings  who  are  to  pre¬ 
cede  his  coming,  as  totality  is  frequently  sym¬ 
bolized  by  a  thousand,  or  a  hundred,  or  seven, 
or  other  numbers,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to 
recount? 

In  another  place  the  same  Daniel  says,  “And 
there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  was  not 
since  there  was  born  a  nation  upon  earth  until 
that  time :  and  in  that  time  all  Thy  people  which 
shall  be  found  written  in  the  book  shall  be  de¬ 
livered.  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the 
mound  of  earth  shall  arise,  some  to  everlasting 
life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  confu¬ 
sion.  And  they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  firmament;  and  many  of  the 
just  as  the  stars  for  ever.”  1  This  passage  is  very 
similar  to  the  one  we  have  quoted  from  the 
Gospel.2  at  least  so  far  as  regards  the  resurrec¬ 
tion  of  dead  bodies.  For  those  who  are  there 
said  to  be  “in  the  graves”  are  here  spoken  of  as 
“sleeping  in  the  mound  of  earth,”  or,  as  others 
translate,  “in  the  dust  of  earth.”  There  it  is 
said,  “They  shall  come  forth”;  so  here,  “They 
shall  arise.”  There,  “They  that  have  done  good, 
to  the  resurrection  of  life;  and  they  that  have 
done  evil,  to  the  resurrection  of  judgment”; 
here,  “Some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to 
shame  and  everlasting  confusion.”  Neither  is  it 
to  be  supposed  a  difference,  though  in  place  of 
the  expression  in  the  Gospel,  “All  who  are  in 
their  graves,”  the  prophet  does  not  say  “all,” 
but  “many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  mound  of 

*Dan.  12.  1-3.  2John,  5.  28. 


earth.”  For  many  is  sometimes  used  in  Scrip¬ 
ture  for  all.  Thus  it  was  said  to  Abraham,  “1 
have  set  thee  as  the  father  of  many  nations,” 
though  in  another  place  it  was  said  to  him,  “In 
thy  seed  shall  all  nations  be  blessed.”  3  Of  such 
a  resurrection  it  is  said  a  little  afterwards  to  the 
prophet  himself,  “And  come  thou  and  rest:  for 
there  is  yet  a  day  till  the  completion  of  the  con¬ 
summation  ;  and  thou  shalt  rest,  and  rise  in  thy 
lot  in  the  end  of  the  days.” 4 

Chap.  24.  Passages  from  the  Psalms  of  David 

which  predict  the  end  of  the  world  and  the 

last  judgment 

There  are  many  allusions  to  the  last  judg¬ 
ment  in  the  Psalms,  but  for  the  most  part  only 
casual  and  slight.  I  cannot,  however,  omit  to 
mention  what  is  said  there  in  express  terms  of 
the  end  of  this  world:  “In  the  beginning  hast 
Thou  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  0  Lord; 
and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  Thy  hands. 
They  shall  perish,  but  Thou  shalt  endure;  yea, 
all  of  them  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment;  and  as 
a  vesture  Thou  shalt  change  them,  and  they 
shall  be  changed:  but  Thou  art  the  same,  and 
Thy  years  shall  not  fail.” 5  Why  is  it  that  Por¬ 
phyry,  while  he  lauds  the  piety  of  the  Hebrews 
in  worshipping  a  God  great  and  true,  and  terri¬ 
ble  to  the  gods  themselves,  follows  the  oracles 
of  these  gods  in  accusing  the  Christians  of  ex¬ 
treme  folly  because  they  say  that  this  world 
shall  perish?  For  here  we  find  it  said  in  the  sa¬ 
cred  books  of  the  Hebrews,  to  that  God  Whom 
this  great  philosopher  acknowledges  to  be  terri¬ 
ble  even  to  the  gods  themselves,  “The  heavens 
are  the  work  of  Thy  hands;  they  shall  perish.” 
When  the  heavens,  the  higher  and  more  secure 
part  of  the  world,  perish,  shall  the  world  itself 
be  preserved?  If  this  idea  is  not  relished  by  Ju¬ 
piter,  whose  oracle  is  quoted  by  this  philosopher 
as  an  unquestionable  authority  in  rebuke  of  the 
credulity  of  the  Christians,  why  does  he  not 
similarly  rebuke  the  wisdom  of  the  Hebrews  as 
folly,  seeing  that  the  prediction  is  found  in  their 
most  holy  books?  But  if  this  Hebrew  wisdom, 
with  which  Porphyry  is  so  captivated  that  he 
extols  it  through  the  utterances  of  his  own  gods, 
proclaims  that  the  heavens  are  to  perish,  how  is 
he  so  infatuated  as  to  detest  the  faith  of  the 
Christians  partly,  if  not  chiefly,  on  this  account, 
that  they  believe  the  world  is  to  perish? — 
though  how  the  heavens  are  to  perish  if  the 
world  does  not  is  not  easy  to  see.  And,  indeed, 

3Gen.  17.  5,  and  22.  18.  4Dan.  12.  13. 

6Ps.  102.  25-27. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  24  553 


in  the  sacred  writings  which  are  peculiar  to  our¬ 
selves,  and  not  common  to  the  Hebrews  and  us 
— I  mean  the  evangelic  and  apostolic  books — 
the  following  expressions  are  used:  “The  figure 
of  this  world  passeth  away”;1  “The  world  pass- 
eth  away”;2  “Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away”  3 — expressions  which  are,  I  fancy,  some¬ 
what  milder  than  “They  shall  perish”  In  the 
Epistle  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  too,  where  the 
world  which  then  was  is  said  to  have  perished, 
being  overflowed  with  water,  it  is  sufficiently 
obvious  what  part  of  the  world  is  signified  by 
the  whole,  and  in  what  sense  the  word  perished 
is  to  be  taken,  and  what  heavens  were  kept  in 
store,  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of 
judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men.4  And 
when  he  says  a  little  afterwards,  “The  day  of  the 
Lord  will  come  as  a  thief ;  in  the  which  the  heav¬ 
ens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  rush ;  and  the  el¬ 
ements  shall  melt  with  burning  heat,  and  the 
earth  and  the  works  which  are  in  it  shall  be 
burned  up,”  and  then  adds,  “Seeing,  then,  that 
all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  man¬ 
ner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be?”5 — these  heav¬ 
ens  which  are  to  perish  may  be  understood  to  be 
the  same  which  he  said  were  kept  in  store  re¬ 
served  for  fire;  and  the  elements  which  are  to 
be  burned  are  those  which  are  full  of  storm  and 
disturbance  in  this  lowest  part  of  the  world  in 
which  he  said  that  these  heavens  were  kept  in 
store;  for  the  higher  heavens  in  whose  firma¬ 
ment  are  set  the  stars  are  safe,  and  remain  in 
their  integrity.  For  even  the  expression  of  Scrip¬ 
ture,  that  “the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,”6 
not  to  mention  that  a  different  interpretation  is 
much  preferable,  rather  shows  that  the  heavens 
themselves  shall  remain,  if  the  stars  are  to  fall 
from  them.  This  expression,  then,  is  either  fig¬ 
urative.  as  is  more  credible,  or  this  phenome¬ 
non  will  take  place  in  this  lowest  heaven,  like 
that  mentioned  by  Virgil — 

A  meteor  with  a  train  of  light 

Athwart  the  sky  gleamed  dazzling  bright , 

Then  in  Idoean  woods  was  lost.7 

But  the  passage  I  have  quoted  from  the  psalm 
seems  to  except  none  of  the  heavens  from  the 
destiny  of  destruction;  for  he  says,  “The  heav¬ 
ens  are  the  works  of  Thy  hands:  they  shall  per¬ 
ish”;  so  that,  as  none  of  them  are  excepted  from 
the  category  of  God’s  works,  none  of  them  are 
excepted  from  destruction.  For  our  opponents 

JI  Cor.  7.  31.  2I  John,  2.  17.  3Matt.  24.  35. 

4II  Pet.  3.  6.  5II  Pet.  3.  10,  11.  6Matt.  24.  29. 

7Alneid,  bk.  n.  694. 


will  not  condescend  to  defend  the  Hebrew  piety, 
which  has  won  the  approbation  of  their  gods,  by 
the  words  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  whom  they  ve¬ 
hemently  detest;  nor  will  they  argue  that,  as 
the  apostle  in  his  epistle  understands  a  part 
when  he  speaks  of  the  whole  world  perishing  in 
the  flood,  though  only  the  lowest  part  of  it,  and 
the  corresponding  heavens  were  destroyed,  so 
in  the  psalm  the  whole  is  used  for  a  part,  and  it 
is  said  “They  shall  perish,”  though  only  the 
lowest  heavens  are  to  perish.  But  since,  as  I 
said,  they  will  not  condescend  to  reason  thus, 
lest  they  should  seem  to  approve  of  Peter’s 
meaning,  or  ascribe  as  much  importance  to  the 
final  conflagration  as  we  ascribe  to  the  deluge, 
whereas  they  contend  that  no  waters  or  flames 
could  destroy  the  whole  human  race,  it  only  re¬ 
mains  to  them  to  maintain  that  their  gods  laud¬ 
ed  the  wisdom  of  the  Hebrews  because  they  had 
not  read  this  psalm. 

It  is  the  last  judgment  of  God  which  is  re¬ 
ferred  to  also  in  the  50th  Psalm  in  the  words, 
“God  shall  come  manifestly,  our  God,  and  shall 
not  keep  silence:  fire  shall  devour  before  Him, 
and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about 
Him.  He  shall  call  the  heaven  above,  and  the 
earth,  to  judge  His  people.  Gather  His  saints  to¬ 
gether  to  Him ;  they  who  make  a  covenant  with 
Him  over  sacrifices.” 8  This  we  understand  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Whom  we  look  for  from 
heaven  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  For  He 
shall  come  manifestly  to  judge  justly  the  just 
and  the  unjust,  who  before  came  hiddenly  to  be 
unjustly  judged  by  the  unjust.  He,  I  say,  shall 
come  manifestly,  and  shall  not  keep  silence,  that 
is,  shall  make  Himself  known  by  His  voice  of 
judgment,  who  before,  when  he  came  hiddenly, 
was  silent  before  His  judge  when  He  was  led  as 
a  sheep  to  the  slaughter,  and,  as  a  lamb  before 
the  shearer,  opened  not  His  mouth,  as  we  read 
that  it  was  prophesied  of  Him  by  Isaiah,9  and 
as  we  see  it  fulfilled  in  the  Gospel.10  As  for  the 
fire  and  tempest ,  we  have  already  said  how 
these  are  to  be  interpreted  when  we  were  ex¬ 
plaining  a  similar  passage  in  Isaiah.11  As  to  the 
expression,  “He  shall  call  the  heaven  above,” 
as  the  saints  and  the  righteous  are  rightly  called 
heaven,  no  doubt  this  means  what  the  apostle 
says,  “We  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them 
in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.”12  For 
if  we  take  the  bare  literal  sense,  how  is  it  possi¬ 
ble  to  call  the  heaven  above,  as  if  the  heaven 
could  be  anywhere  else  than  above?  And  the 

8Ps.  50.  3-5.  9Isa.  53.  7.  10Matt.  26.  63. 

uChap.  21.  12I  Thess.  4.  17. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


554 

following  expression,  “And  the  earth  to  judge 
His  people,”  if  we  supply  only  the  wTords.  “He 
shall  call.”  that  is  to  say,  “He  shall  call  the 
earth  also,”  and  do  not  supply  “above,”  seems 
to  give  us  a  meaning  in  accordance  with  sound 
doctrine,  the  heaven  symbolizing  those  who  will 
judge  along  with  Christ,  and  the  earth  those 
who  shall  be  judged;  and  thus  the  words,  “He 
shall  call  the  heaven  above,”  would  not  mean, 
“He  shall  catch  up  into  the  air,”  but  “He  shall 
lift  up  to  seats  of  judgment.”  Possibly,  too, 
“He  shall  call  the  heaven,”  may  mean,  He  shall 
call  the  angels  in  the  high  and  lofty  places,  that 
He  may  descend  with  them  to  do  judgment; 
and  “He  shall  call  the  earth  also”  would  then 
mean.  He  shall  call  the  men  on  the  earth  to 
judgment.  But  if  with  the  words  “and  the 
earth”  we  understand  not  only  “He  shall  call,” 
but  also  “above,”  so  as  to  make  the  full  sense 
be,  “He  shall  call  the  heaven  above,  and  He 
shall  call  the  earth  above,”  then  I  think  it  is 
best  understood  of  the  men  who  shall  be  caught 
up  to  meet  Christ  in  the  air,  and  that  they  are 
called  the  heaven  with  reference  to  their  souls, 
and  the  earth  with  reference  to  their  bodies. 
Then  what  is  “to  judge  His  people,”  but  to  sep¬ 
arate  by  judgment  the  good  from  the  bad,  as 
the  sheep  from  the  goats?  Then  he  turns  to  ad¬ 
dress  the  angels:  “Gather  His  saints  together 
unto  Him.”  For  certainly  a  matter  so  important 
must  be  accomplished  by  the  ministry  of  angels. 
And  if  we  ask  who  the  saints  are  who  are  gath¬ 
ered  unto  Him  by  the  angels,  we  are  told,  “They 
who  make  a  covenant  with  Him  over  sacrifices.” 
This  is  the  whole  life  of  the  saints,  to  make  a 
covenant  with  God  over  sacrifices.  For  “over 
sacrifices”  either  refers  to  works  of  mercy, 
wThich  are  preferable  to  sacrifices  in  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  God.  who  says,  “I  desire  mercy  more 
than  sacrifices,”  1  or  if  “over  sacrifices”  means 
in  sacrifices,  then  these  very  works  of  mercy 
are  the  sacrifices  with  which  God  is  pleased,  as 
I  remember  to  have  stated  in  the  tenth  book  of 
this  work;2  and  in  these  works  the  saints  make 
a  covenant  with  God.  because  they  do  them  for 
the  sake  of  the  promises  which  are  contained  in 
His  New  Testament  or  covenant.  And  hence, 
when  His  saints  have  been  gathered  to  Him  and 
set  at  His  right  hand  in  the  last  judgment, 
Christ  shall  say,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Fa¬ 
ther,  take  possession  of  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  For 
I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  to  eat,”  3  and  so 
on.  mentioning  the  good  works  of  the  good,  and 
^os.  6.  6.  2Chap.  6.  3Matt.  25.  34. 


their  eternal  rewards  assigned  by  the  last  sen¬ 
tence  of  the  Judge. 

Chap.  25.  Of  Malachi’s  prophecy,  in  which  he 
speaks  of  the  last  judgment,  and  of  a  cleans¬ 
ing  which  some  are  to  undergo  by  purifying 
punishments 

The  prophet  Malachi  or  Malachias,  who  is 
also  called  Angel,  and  is  by  some  (for  Jerome 
tells  us  that  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  Hebrews) 
identified  wdth  Ezra  the  priest,  others  of  whose 
writings  have  been  received  into  the  canon,  pre¬ 
dicts  the  last  judgment,  saying,  “Behold.  He 
cometh,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty;  and  who  shall 
abide  the  day  of  His  entrance?  ...  for  I  am  the 
Lord  your  God,  and  I  change  not.” 4  From  these 
words  it  more  evidently  appears  that  some  shall 
in  the  last  judgment  suffer  some  kind  of  purga¬ 
torial  punishments ;  for  what  else  can  be  under¬ 
stood  by  the  word.  “Who  shall  abide  the  day  of 
His  entrance,  or  who  shall  be  able  to  look  upon 
Him?  for  He  enters  as  a  moulder’s  fire,  and  as 
the  herb  of  fullers :  and  He  shall  sit  fusing  and 
purifying  as  if  over  gold  and  silver:  and  He 
shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  pour  them 
out  like  gold  and  silver”?  Similarly  Isaiah  says, 
“The  Lord  shall  wash  the  filthiness  of  the  sons 
and  daughters  of  Zion,  and  shall  cleanse  away 
the  blood  from  their  midst,  by  the  spirit  of 
judgment  and  by  the  spirit  of  burning.”5  Un¬ 
less  perhaps  we  should  say  that  they  are 
cleansed  from  filthiness  and  in  a  manner  clari¬ 
fied,  when  the  wicked  are  separated  from  them 
by  penal  judgment,  so  that  the  elimination  and 
damnation  of  the  one  party  is  the  purgation  of 
the  others,  because  they  shall  henceforth  live 
free  from  the  contamination  of  such  men.  But 
when  he  says,  “And  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of 
Levi,  and  pour  them  out  like  gold  and  silver, 
and  they  shall  offer  to  the  Lord  sacrifices  in 
righteousness;  and  the  sacrifices  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  shall  be  pleasing  to  the  Lord.”  he  de¬ 
clares  that  those  wTho  shall  be  purified  shall  then 
please  the  Lord  wdth  sacrifices  of  righteousness, 
and  consequently  they  themselves  shall  be  puri¬ 
fied  from  their  own  unrighteousness  which  made 
them  displeasing  to  God.  Now  they  themselves, 
when  they  have  been  purified,  shall  be  sacrifices 
of  complete  and  perfect  righteousness;  for  what 
more  acceptable  offering  can  such  persons  make 
to  God  than  themselves?  But  this  question  of 
purgatorial  punishments  we  must  defer  to  an¬ 
other  time,  to  give  it  a  more  adequate  treat¬ 
ment.  By  the  sons  of  Levi  and  Judah  and  Jerusa- 
4Mal.  3.  1-6.  6Isa.  4.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  25-26 


lem  we  ought  to  understand  the  Church  herself, 
gathered  not  from  the  Hebrews  only,  but  from 
other  nations  as  well;  nor  such  a  Church  as  she 
now  is,  when  “if  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us,”  1 
but  as  she  shall  then  be,  purged  by  the  last 
judgment  as  a  threshing-floor  by  a  winnowing 
wind,  and  those  of  her  members  who  need  it  be¬ 
ing  cleansed  by  fire,  so  that  there  remains  ab¬ 
solutely  not  one  who  offers  sacrifice  for  his 
sins.  For  all  who  make  such  offerings  are  as¬ 
suredly  in  their  sins,  for  the  remission  of  which 
they  make  offerings,  that  having  made  to  God  an 
acceptable  offering,  they  may  then  be  absolved. 

Chap.  26.  Of  the  sacrifices  offered  to  God  by  the 
saints ,  which  are  to  be  pleasing  to  him ,  as  in 
the  primitive  days  and  former  years 
And  it  was  with  the  design  of  showing  that 
His  city  shall  not  then  follow  this  custom,  that 
God  said  that  the  sons  of  Levi  should  offer  sac¬ 
rifices  in  righteousness — not  therefore  in  sin, 
and  consequently  not  for  sin.  And  hence  we  see 
how  vainly  the  Jews  promise  themselves  a  re¬ 
turn  of  the  old  times  of  sacrificing  according  to 
the  law  of  the  Old  Testament,  grounding  on  the 
words  which  follow,  “And  the  sacrifice  of  Judah 
and  Jerusalem  shall  be  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  as 
in  the  primitive  days,  and  as  in  former  years.” 
For  in  the  times  of  the  law  they  offered  sacri¬ 
fices  not  in  righteousness  but  in  sins,  offering  es¬ 
pecially  and  primarily  for  sins,  so  much  so  that 
even  the  priest  himself,  whom  we  must  suppose 
to  have  been  their  most  righteous  man,  was  ac¬ 
customed  to  offer,  according  to  God’s  command¬ 
ments,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the 
sins  of  the  people.  And  therefore  we  must  ex¬ 
plain  how  we  are  to  understand  the  words,  “as 
in  the  primitive  days,  and  as  in  former  years”; 
for  perhaps  he  alludes  to  the  time  in  which  our 
first  parents  were  in  Paradise.  Then,  indeed,  in¬ 
tact  and  pure  from  all  stain  and  blemish  of  sin, 
they  offered  themselves  to  God  as  the  purest 
sacrifices.  But  since  they  were  banished  thence 
on  account  of  their  transgression,  and  human 
nature  was  condemned  in  them,  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  the  one  Mediator  and  those  who  have 
been  baptized,  and  are  as  yet  infants,  “there  is 
none  clean  from  stain,  not  even  the  babe  whose 
life  has  been  but  for  a  day  upon  the  earth.”  2 
But  if  it  be  replied  that  those  who  offer  in  faith 
may  be  said  to  offer  in  righteousness,  because 
the  righteous  lives  by  faith3 — he  deceives  him- 

*1  John,  I.  8.  2Job,  14.  4. 

3Rom.  1.  17. 


555 

self,  however,  if  he  says  that  he  has  no  sin,  and 
therefore  he  does  not  say  so,  because  he  lives 
by  faith — will  any  man  say  this  time  of  faith 
can  be  placed  on  an  equal  footing  with  that  con¬ 
summation  when  they  who  offer  sacrifices  in 
righteousness  shall  be  purified  by  the  fire  of  the 
last  judgment?  And  consequently,  since  it  must 
be  believed  that  after  such  a  cleansing  the  right¬ 
eous  shall  retain  no  sin,  assuredly  that  time,  so 
far  as  regards  its  freedom  from  sin,  can  be  com¬ 
pared  to  no  other  period,  unless  to  that  during 
which  our  first  parents  lived  in  Paradise  in  the 
most  innocent  happiness  before  their  transgres¬ 
sion.  It  is  this  period,  then,  which  is  properly 
understood  when  it  is  said,  “as  in  the  primitive 
days,  and  as  in  former  years.”  For  in  Isaiah, 
too,  after  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
have  been  promised,  among  other  elements  in 
the  blessedness  of  the  saints  which  are  there  de¬ 
picted  by  allegories  and  figures,  from  giving  an 
adequate  explanation  of  which  I  am  prevented 
by  a  desire  to  avoid  prolixity,  it  is  said,  “Ac¬ 
cording  to  the  days  of  the  tree  of  life  shall  be  the 
days  of  my  people.”  4  And  who  that  has  looked 
at  Scripture  does  not  know  where  God  planted 
the  tree  of  life,  from  whose  fruit  He  excluded 
our  first  parents  when  their  own  iniquity  ejected 
them  from  Paradise,  and  round  which  a  terrible 
and  fiery  fence  was  set? 

But  if  any  one  contends  that  those  days  of  the 
tree  of  life  mentioned  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  are 
the  present  times  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and 
that  Christ  Himself  is  prophetically  called  the 
Tree  of  Life,  because  He  is  Wisdom,  and  of  wis¬ 
dom  Solomon  says,  “It  is  a  tree  of  life  to  all 
who  embrace  it”  ;5  and  if  they  maintain  that  our 
first  parents  did  not  pass  years  in  Paradise,  but 
were  driven  from  it  so  soon  that  none  of  their 
children  were  begotten  there,  and  that  therefore 
that  time  cannot  be  alluded  to  in  words  which 
run,  “as  in  the  primitive  days,  and  as  in  former 
years,”  I  forbear  entering  on  this  question,  lest 
by  discussing  everything  I  become  prolix  and 
leave  the  whole  subject  in  uncertainty.  For  I 
see  another  meaning,  which  should  keep  us 
from  believing  that  a  restoration  of  the  primi¬ 
tive  days  and  former  years  of  the  legal  sacri¬ 
fices  could  have  been  promised  to  us  by  the 
prophet  as  a  great  boon.  For  the  animals  select¬ 
ed  as  victims  under  the  old  law  were  required 
to  be  immaculate,  and  free  from  all  blemish 
whatever,  and  symbolized  holy  men  free  from 
all  sin,  the  only  instance  of  which  character  was 
found  in  Christ.  As,  therefore,  after  the  judg- 

4Isa.  65.  22.  BProv.  3.  18. 


556  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ment  those  who  are  worthy  of  such  purification 
shall  be  purified  even  by  fire,  and  shall  be  ren¬ 
dered  thoroughly  sinless,  and  shall  offer  them¬ 
selves  to  God  in  righteousness,  and  be  indeed 
victims  immaculate  and  free  from  all  blemish 
whatever,  they  shall  then  certainly  be,  “as  in 
the  primitive  days,  and  as  in  former  years,” 
when  the  purest  victims  were  offered,  the  shad¬ 
ow  of  this  future  reality.  For  there  shall  then 
be  in  the  body  and  soul  of  the  saints  the  purity 
which  was  symbolized  in  the  bodies  of  these 
victims. 

Then,  with  reference  to  those  who  are  worthy 
not  of  cleansing  but  of  damnation,  He  says, 
“And  I  will  draw  near  to  you  to  judgment,  and 
I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  evil-doers  and 
against  adulterers” ;  and  after  enumerating  oth¬ 
er  damnable  crimes,  He  adds,  “For  I  am  the 
Lord  your  God,  and  I  am  not  changed.”  It  is  as 
if  He  said,  “Though  your  fault  has  changed  you 
for  the  worse,  and  my  grace  has  changed  you 
for  the  better.  I  am  not  changed.”  And  he  says 
that  He  Himself  will  be  a  witness,  because  in  His 
judgment  He  needs  no  witnesses;  and  that  He 
will  be  “swift,”  either  because  He  is  to  come 
suddenly,  and  the  judgment  which  seemed  to 
lag  shall  be  very  swift  by  His  unexpected  arriv¬ 
al,  or  because  He  will  convince  the  consciences 
of  men  directly  and  without  any  prolix  ha¬ 
rangue.  “For,”  as  it  is  written,  “in  the  thoughts 
of  the  wicked  His  examination  shall  be  conduct¬ 
ed.”  1  And  the  apostle  says,  “The  thoughts  ac¬ 
cusing  or  else  excusing,  in  the  day  in  which 
God  shall  judge  the  hidden  things  of  men,  ac¬ 
cording  to  my  gospel  in  Jesus  Christ.” 2  Thus, 
then,  shall  the  Lord  be  a  swift  witness,  when 
He  shall  suddenly  bring  back  into  the  memory 
that  which  shall  convince  and  punish  the  con¬ 
science. 

Chap.  27.  Of  the  separation  of  the  good  and  the 
bad}  which  proclaim  the  discriminating  influ¬ 
ence  of  the  last  judgment 
The  passage  also  which  I  formerly  quoted  for 
another  purpose  from  this  prophet  refers  to  the 
last  judgment,  in  which  he  says,  “They  shall 
be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  in  the  day  in 
which  I  make  up  my  gains,”  etc.3  When  this  di¬ 
versity  between  the  rewards  and  punishments 
which  distinguish  the  righteous  from  the  wicked 
shall  appear  under  that  Sun  of  righteousness  in 
the  brightness  of  life  eternal — a  diversity  which 
is  not  discerned  under  this  sun  which  shines  on 
the  vanity  of  this  life — there  shall  then  be  such 
a  judgment  as  has  never  before  been. 
l\Visd.  1.  9.  2Rom.  2.  15,  16.  *Mal.  3.  17;  4.  3. 


Chap.  28.  That  the  law  of  Moses  must  be  spir¬ 
itually  understood  to  preclude  the  damnable 
murmurs  of  a  carnal  interpretation 

In  the  succeeding  words,  “Remember  the  law 
of  Moses  my  servant,  which  I  commanded  to 
him  in  Horeb  for  all  Israel,” 4  the  prophet  op¬ 
portunely  mentions  precepts  and  statutes,  after 
declaring  the  important  distinction  hereafter  to 
be  made  between  those  who  observe  and  those 
who  despise  the  law.  He  intends  also  that  they 
learn  to  interpret  the  law  spiritually  and  find 
Christ  in  it,  by  whose  judgment  that  separation 
between  the  good  and  the  bad  is  to  be  made.  For 
it  is  not  without  reason  that  the  Lord  Himself 
says  to  the  Jews,  “Had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye 
would  have  believed  me;  for  he  wrote  of  me.”  5 
For  by  receiving  the  law  carnally  without  per¬ 
ceiving  that  its  earthly  promises  were  figures  of 
things  spiritual,  they  fell  into  such  murmurings 
as  audaciously  to  say,  “It  is  vain  to  serve  God; 
and  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  His  or¬ 
dinance,  and  that  we  have  walked  suppliantly 
before  the  face  of  the  Lord  Almighty?  And  now 
we  call  aliens  happy;  yea,  they  that  work  wick¬ 
edness  are  set  up.” 6  It  was  these  words  of  theirs 
which  in  a  manner  compelled  the  prophet  to 
announce  the  last  judgment,  in  which  the 
wicked  shall  not  even  in  appearance  be  happy, 
but  shall  manifestly  be  most  miserable;  and  in 
which  the  good  shall  be  oppressed  with  not  even 
a  transitory  wretchedness,  but  shall  enjoy  un¬ 
sullied  and  eternal  felicity.  For  he  had  previous¬ 
ly  cited  some  similar  expressions  of  those  who 
said,  “Every  one  that  doeth  evil  is  good  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  and  such  are  pleasing  to 
Him.”  7  It  was,  I  say,  by  understanding  the  law 
of  Moses  carnally  that  they  had  come  to  mur¬ 
mur  thus  against  God.  And  hence,  too,  the  writ¬ 
er  of  the  73d  Psalm  says  that  his  feet  were  al¬ 
most  gone,  his  steps  had  well-nigh  slipped,  be¬ 
cause  he  was  envious  of  sinners  while  he  consid¬ 
ered  their  prosperity,  so  that  he  said  among  oth¬ 
er  things,  “How  doth  God  know,  and  is  there 
knowledge  in  the  Most  High?”  and  again, 
“Have  I  sanctified  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washed 
my  hands  in  innocency?”  He  goes  on  to  say 
that  his  efforts  to  solve  this  most  difficult  prob¬ 
lem,  which  arises  when  the  good  seem  to  be 
wretched  and  the  wicked  happy,  were  in  vain 
until  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God  and  un¬ 
derstood  the  last  things.8  For  in  the  last  judg¬ 
ment  things  shall  not  be  so;  but  in  the  manifest 
felicity  of  the  righteous  and  manifest  misery  of 

4Mal.  4.  4.  5John,  5.  46.  6Mal.  3.  14,  15* 

7Mal.  2.  17.  8Ps.  73- 


THE  CITY  OF 

the  wicked  quite  another  state  of  things  shall 
appear. 

Chap.  29.  Of  the  coming  of  Elias  before  the 
Judgment,  that  the  Jews  may  be  converted 
to  Christ  by  his  preaching  and  explanation  of 
Scripture 

After  admonishing  them  to  give  heed  to  the 
law  of  Moses,  as  he  foresaw  that  for  a  long  time 
to  come  they  would  not  understand  it  spiritually 
and  rightly,  he  went  on  to  say,  “And,  behold,  I 
will  send  to  you  Elias  the  Tishbite  before  the 
great  and  signal  day  of  the  Lord  come:  and  he 
shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  father  to  the  son,  and 
the  heart  of  a  man  to  his  next  of  kin,  lest  I  come 
and  utterly  smite  the  earth.”  1  It  is  a  familiar 
theme  in  the  conversation  and  heart  of  the 
faithful,  that  in  the  last  days  before  the  judg¬ 
ment  the  Jews  shall  believe  in  the  true  Christ, 
that  is,  our  Christ,  by  means  of  this  great  and 
admirable  prophet  Elias  who  shall  expound  the 
law  to  them.  For  not  without  reason  do  we  hope 
that  before  the  coming  of  our  Judge  and  Saviour 
Elias  shall  come,  because  we  have  good  reason 
to  believe  that  he  is  now  alive;  for,  as  Scripture 
most  distinctly  informs  us,2  he  was  taken  up 
from  this  life  in  a  chariot  of  fire.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  he  is  come,  he  shall  give  a  spiritual  expla¬ 
nation  of  the  law  which  the  Jews  at  present  un¬ 
derstand  carnally,  and  shall  thus  “turn  the  heart 
of  the  father  to  the  son,”  that  is,  the  heart  of 
fathers  to  their  children;  for  the  Septuagint 
translators  have  frequently  put  the  singular  for 
the  plural  number.  And  the  meaning  is,  that  the 
sons,  that  is,  the  Jews,  shall  understand  the  law 
as  the  fathers,  that  is,  the  prophets,  and  among 
them  Moses  himself,  understood  it.  For  the 
heart  of  the  fathers  shall  be  turned  to  their  chil¬ 
dren  when  the  children  understand  the  law  as 
their  fathers  did ;  and  the  heart  of  the  children 
shall  be  turned  to  their  fathers  when  they  have 
the  same  sentiments  as  the  fathers.  The  Sep¬ 
tuagint  used  the  expression,  “and  the  heart  of  a 
man  to  his  next  of  kin,”  because  fathers  and 
children  # are  eminently  neighbours  to  one  an¬ 
other.  Another  and  a  preferable  sense  can  be 
found  in  the  words  of  the  Septuagint  transla¬ 
tors,  who  have  translated  Scripture  with  an  eye 
to  prophecy,  the  sense,  viz.,  that  Elias  shall  turn 
the  heart  of  God  the  Father  to  the  Son,  not  cer¬ 
tainly  as  if  he  should  bring  about  this  love  of 
the  Father  for  the  Son,  but  meaning  that  he 
should  make  it  known,  and  that  the  Jews  also, 
who  had  previously  hated,  should  then  love  the 
Son  who  is  our  Christ.  For  so  far  as  regards  the 
1Mal.  4.  5,  6.  2II  Kings,  2.  11. 


GOD  XX.  27-30  557 

Jews,  God  has  His  heart  turned  away  from  our 
Christ,  this  being  their  conception  about  God 
and  Christ.  But  in  their  case  the  heart  of  God 
shall  be  turned  to  the  Son  when  they  themselves 
shall  turn  in  heart,  and  learn  the  love  of  the 
Father  towards  the  Son.  The  words  following, 
“and  the  heart  of  a  man  to  his  next  of  kin” — 
that  is,  Elias  shall  also  turn  the  heart  of  a  man 
to  his  next  of  kin — how  can  we  understand  this 
better  than  as  the  heart  of  a  man  to  the  man 
Christ?  For  though  in  the  form  of  God  He  is 
our  God,  yet,  taking  the  form  of  a  servant,  He 
condescended  to  become  also  our  next  of  kin.  It 
is  this,  then,  which  Elias  will  do,  “lest,”  he  says, 
“I  come  and  smite  the  earth  utterly.”  For  they 
who  mind  earthly  things  are  the  earth.  Such  are 
the  carnal  Jews  until  this  day;  and  hence  these 
murmurs  of  theirs  against  God,  “The  wicked  are 
pleasing  to  Him,”  and  “It  is  a  vain  thing  to 
serve  God.” 3 

Chap.  30.  That  in  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,  where  it  is  said  that  God  shall  judge 
the  world,  the  perso?i  of  Christ  is  not  explicit¬ 
ly  indicated ,  but  it  plainly  appears  from  some 
passages  in  which  the  Lord  God  speaks  that 
Christ  is  meant 

There  are  many  other  passages  of  Scripture 
bearing  on  the  last  judgment  of  God — so 
many,  indeed,  that  to  cite  them  all  would  swell 
this  book  to  an  unpardonable  size.  Suffice  it  to 
have  proved  that  both  Old  and  New  Testament 
enounce  the  judgment.  But  in  the  Old  it  is  not 
so  definitely  declared  as  in  the  New  that  the 
judgment  shall  be  administered  by  Christ,  that 
is,  that  Christ  shall  descend  from  heaven  as  the 
Judge;  for  when  it  is  therein  stated  by  the  Lord 
God  or  His  prophet  that  the  Lord  God  shall 
come,  we  do  not  necessarily  understand  this  of 
Christ.  For  both  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  are  the  Lord  God.  We  must  not, 
however,  leave  this  without  proof.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  must  first  show  how  Jesus  Christ  speaks 
in  the  prophetical  books  under  the  title  of  the 
Lord  God,  while  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  is  Jesus  Christ  Who  speaks;  so  that  in  other 
passages  where  this  is  not  at  once  apparent,  and 
where  nevertheless  it  is  said  that  the  Lord  God 
will  come  to  that  last  judgment,  we  may  under¬ 
stand  that  Jesus  Christ  is  meant.  There  is  a 
passage  in  the  prophet  Isaiah  which  illustrates 
what  I  mean.  For  God  says  by  the  prophet, 
“Hear  me,  Jacob  and  Israel,  whom  I  call.  I  am 
the  first,  and  I  am  for  ever:  and  my  hand  has 
founded  the  earth,  and  my  right  hand  has  estab- 
3Mal.  2.  17;  3.  14. 


558  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


lished  the  heaven.  I  will  call  them,  and  they 
shall  stand  together,  and  be  gathered,  and  hear. 
Who  has  declared  to  them  these  things?  In  love 
of  thee  I  have  done  thy  pleasure  upon  Babylon, 
that  I  might  take  away  the  seed  of  the  Chal¬ 
deans.  I  have  spoken,  and  I  have  called:  I  have 
brought  him,  and  have  made  his  way  prosper¬ 
ous.  Come  ye  near  unto  me,  and  hear  this.  I 
have  not  spoken  in  secret  from  the  beginning; 
when  they  were  made,  there  was  I.  And  now  the 
Lord  God  and  His  Spirit  hath  sent  me.”  1  It  was 
Himself  Who  was  speaking  as  the  Lord  God; 
and  yet  we  should  not  have  understood  that  it 
was  Jesus  Christ  had  He  not  added,  “And  now 
the  Lord  God  and  His  Spirit  hath  sent  me.”  For 
He  said  this  with  reference  to  the  form  of  a 
servant,  speaking  of  a  future  event  as  if  it  were 
past,  as  in  the  same  prophet  we  read,  “He  was 
led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter.”  2  not  “He  shall 
be  led”;  but  the  past  tense  is  used  to  express 
the  future.  And  prophecy  constantly  speaks  in 
this  way. 

There  is  also  another  passage  in  Zechariah 
which  plainly  declares  that  the  Almighty  sent 
the  Almighty;  and  of  what  persons  can  thfs  be 
understood  but  of  God  the  Father  and  God  the 
Son?  For  it  is  written,  “Thus  saith  the  Lord  Al¬ 
mighty,  After  the  glory  hath  He  sent  me  unto 
the  nations  which  spoiled  you;  for  he  that 
toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye.  Be¬ 
hold,  I  will  bring  mine  hand  upon  them,  and 
they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  servants:  and  ye 
shall  know  that  the  Lord  Almighty  hath  sent 
me.”3  Observe,  the  Lord  Almighty  saith  that 
the  Lord  Almighty  sent  Him.  Who  can  presume 
to  understand  these  words  of  any  other  than 
Christ,  who  is  speaking  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel?  For  He  says  in  the  Gospel,  “I 
am  not  sent  save  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel,” 4  which  He  here  compared  to  the  pu¬ 
pil  of  God’s  eye,  to  signify  the  profoundest  love. 
And  to  this  class  of  sheep  the  apostles  them¬ 
selves  belonged.  But  after  the  glory,  to  wit,  of 
His  resurrection — for  before  it  happened  the 
evangelist  said  that  “Jesus  was  not  yet  glori¬ 
fied”  5 — He  was  sent  unto  the  nations  in  the  per¬ 
sons  of  His  apostles;  and  thus  the  saying  of  the 
psalm  was  fulfilled,  “Thou  wilt  deliver  me  from 
the  contradictions  of  the  people;  Thou  wilt  set 
me  as  the  head  of  the  nations.”6  So  that  those 
who  had  spoiled  the  Israelites,  and  whom  the 
Israelites  had  served  when  they  were  subdued 
by  them,  were  not  themselves  to  be  spoiled  in 
the  same  fashion,  but  were  in  their  own  persons 

1Isa.  48.  12-16.  2Isa.  53.  7.  3Zech.  2.  8,  9. 

4Matt.  15.  24.  5John,  7.  39.  6Ps.  18.  43. 


to  become  the  spoil  of  the  Israelites.  For  this 
had  been  promised  to  the  apostles  when  the 
Lord  said,  “I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men.” 7 
And  to  one  of  them  He  says,  “From  henceforth 
thou  shalt  catch  men.”  8  They  were  then  to  be¬ 
come  a  spoil,  but  in  a  good  sense,  as  those  who 
are  snatched  from  that  strong  one  when  he  is 
bound  by  a  stronger.9 

In  like  manner  the  Lord,  speaking  by  the 
same  prophet,  says,  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  that  day,  that  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the 
nations  that  come  against  Jerusalem.  And  I  will 
pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and 
mercy;  and  they  shall  look  upon  me  because 
they  have  insulted  me,  and  they  shall  mourn  for 
Him  as  for  one  very  dear,  and  shall  be  in  bitter¬ 
ness  as  for  an  only-begotten.”10  To  Whom  but 
to  God  does  it  belong  to  destroy  all  the  nations 
that  are  hostile  to  the  holy  city  Jerusalem, 
which  “come  against  it,”  that  is,  are  opposed  to 
it,  or,  as  some  translate,  “come  upon  it,”  as  if 
putting  it  down  under  them;  or  to  pour  out 
upon  the  house  of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  the  spirit  of  grace  and  mercy?  This 
belongs  doubtless  to  God,  and  it  is  to  God  the 
prophet  ascribes  the  words;  and  yet  Christ 
shows  that  He  is  the  God  who  does  these  so 
great  and  divine  things,  when  He  goes  on  to  say, 
“And  they  shall  look  upon  me  because  they 
have  insulted  me,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  Him 
as  if  for  one  very  dear  (or  beloved),  and  shall 
be  in  bitterness  for  Him  as  for  an  only-begot¬ 
ten.”  For  in  that  day  the  Jews — those  of  them, 
at  least,  who  shall  receive  the  spirit  of  grace  and 
mercy — when  they  see  Him  coming  in  His  maj¬ 
esty,  and  recognize  that  it  is  He  Whom  they,  in 
the  person  of  their  parents,  insulted  when  He 
came  before  in  His  humiliation,  shall  repent  of 
insulting  Him  in  His  passion :  and  their  parents 
themselves,  who  were  the  perpetrators  of  this 
huge  impiety,  shall  see  Him  when  they  rise;  but 
this  will  be  only  for  their  punishment,  and  not 
for  their  correction.  It  is  not  of  them  we  are  to 
understand  the  words,  “And  I  will  pour  upon 
the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  mercy,  and 
they  shall  look  upon  me  because  they  have  in¬ 
sulted  me” ;  but  we  are  to  understand  the  words 
of  their  descendants,  who  shall  at  that  time  be¬ 
lieve  through  Elias.  But  as  we  say  to  the  Jews, 
You  killed  Christ,  although  it  was  their  parents 
who  did  so,  so  these  persons  shall  grieve  that 
they  in  some  sort  did  what  their  progenitors 

7Matt.  4.  19.  8Luke,  5.  10.  9Matt.  12.  29. 

10Zech.  12.  9,  10. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XX.  30  559 


did.  Although,  therefore,  those  that  receive  the 
spirit  of  mercy  and  grace,  and  believe,  shall  not 
be  condemned  with  their  impious  parents,  yet 
they  shall  mourn  as  if  they  themselves  had  done 
what  their  parents  did.  Their  grief  shall  arise 
not  so  much  from  guilt  as  from  pious  affection. 
Certainly  the  words  which  the  Septuagint  have 
translated,  “They  shall  look  upon  me  because 
they  insulted  me,”  stand  in  the  Hebrew,  “They 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  pierced.”  And  by 
this  word  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  is  certainly 
more  plainly  indicated.  But  the  Septuagint 
translators  preferred  to  allude  to  the  insult 
which  was  involved  in  His  whole  passion.  For  in 
point  of  fact  they  insulted  Him  both  when  He 
wras  arrested  and  when  He  was  bound,  when  He 
was  judged,  when  He  was  mocked  by  the  robe 
they  put  on  Him  and  the  homage  they  did  on 
bended  knee,  when  He  was  crowned  with  thorns 
and  struck  with  a  rod  on  the  head,  when  He 
bore  His  cross,  and  when  at  last  He  hung  upon 
the  tree.  And  therefore  we  recognize  more  fully 
the  Lord’s  passion  when  we  do  not  confine  our¬ 
selves  to  one  interpretation,  but  combine  both, 
and  read  both  “insulted”  and  “pierced.” 

When,  therefore,  we  read  in  the  prophetical 
books  that  God  is  to  come  to  do  judgment  at 
the  last,  from  the  mere  mention  of  the  judg¬ 
ment,  and  although  there  is  nothing  else  to  de¬ 
termine  the  meaning,  we  must  gather  that  Christ 
is  meant;  for  though  the  Father  will  judge,  He 
will  judge  by  the  coming  of  the  Son.  For  He 
Himself,  by  His  own  manifested  presence, 
“judges  no  man,  but  has  committed  all  judg¬ 
ment  to  the  Son” ; 1  for  as  the  Son  was  judged  as 
a  man.  He  shall  also  judge  in  human  form.  For 
it  is  none  but  He  of  whom  God  speaks  by  Isaiah 
under  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  of  whose 
seed  Christ  took  a  body,  as  it  is  written,  “Jacob 
is  my  servant,  I  will  uphold  Him ;  Israel  is  mine 
elect,  my  Spirit  has  assumed  Him;  I  have  put 
my  Spirit  upon  Him;  He  shall  bring  forth 
judgment  to  the  Gentiles.  He  shall  not  cry,  nor 
cease,  neither  shall  His  voice  be  heard  without. 
A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  the 
smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench:  but  in  truth 
shall  He  bring  forth  judgment.  He  shall  shine 
and  shall  not  be  broken,  until  He  sets  judg¬ 
ment  in  the  earth :  and  the  nations  shall  hope  in 
His  name.”2  The  Hebrew  has  not  “Jacob”  and 
“Israel”;  but  the  Septuagint  translators,  wish¬ 
ing  to  show  the  significance  of  the  expression 
“my  servant,”  and  that  it  refers  to  the  form  of 
a  servant  in  which  the  Most  High  humbled 
Himself,  inserted  the  name  of  that  man  from 
^ohn,  5.  22.  2Isa.  42.  1-4. 


whose  stock  He  took  the  form  of  a  servant.  The 
Holy  Spirit  was  given  to  Him,  and  was  mani¬ 
fested,  as  the  evangelist  testifies,  in  the  form  of 
a  dove.3  He  brought  forth  judgment  to  the 
Gentiles,  because  He  predicted  what  was  hidden 
from  them.  In  His  meekness  He  did  not  cry,  nor 
did  He  cease  to  proclaim  the  truth.  But  His 
voice  was  not  heard,  nor  is  it  heard,  without,  be¬ 
cause  He  is  not  obeyed  by  those  who  are  outside 
of  His  body.  And  the  Jews  themselves,  who  per¬ 
secuted  Him,  He  did  not  break,  ^though  as  a 
bruised  reed  they  had  lost  their  integrity,  and  as 
smoking  flax  their  light  was  quenched;  for  He 
spared  them,  having  come  to  be  judged  and  not 
yet  to  judge.  He  brought  forth  judgment  in 
truth,  declaring  that  they  should  be  punished 
did  they  persist  in  their  wickedness.  His  face 
shone  on  the  Mount/  His  fame  in  the  world.  He 
is  not  broken  nor  overcome,  because  neither  in 
Himself  nor  in  His  Church  has  persecution  pre¬ 
vailed  to  annihilate  Him.  And  therefore  that  has 
not,  and  shall  not,  be  brought  about  which  His 
enemies  said  or  say,  “When  shall  He  die,  and  His 
name  perish?”5  “until  He  set  judgment  in  the 
earth.”  Behold,  the  hidden  thing  which  we  were 
seeking  is  discovered.  For  this  is  the  last  judg¬ 
ment,  which  He  will  set  in  the  earth  when  He 
comes  from  heaven.  And  it  is  in  Him,  too,  we  al¬ 
ready  see  the  concluding  expression  of  the 
prophecy  fulfilled:  “In  His  name  shall  the  na¬ 
tions  hope.”  And  by  this  fulfilment,  which  no 
one  can  deny,  men  are  encouraged  to  believe  in 
that  which  is  most  impudently  denied.  For  who 
could  have  hoped  for  that  which  even  those 
who  do  not  yet  believe  in  Christ  now  see  ful¬ 
filled  among  us,  and  which  is  so  undeniable  that 
they  can  but  gnash  their  teeth  and  pine  away? 
Who,  I  say,  could  have  hoped  that  the  nations 
would  hope  in  the  name  of  Christ,  when  He  was 
arrested,  bound,  scourged,  mocked,  crucified, 
when  even  the  disciples  themselves  had  lost  the 
hope  which  they  had  begun  to  have  in  Him? 
The  hope  which  was  then  entertained  scarcely 
by  the  one  thief  on  the  cross  is  now  cherished 
by  nations  everywhere  on  the  earth,  who  are 
marked  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  which  He 
died  that  they  may  not  die  eternally. 

That  the  last  judgment,  then,  shall  be  ad¬ 
ministered  by  Jesus  Christ  in  the  manner  pre¬ 
dicted  in  the  sacred  writings  is  denied  or  doubt¬ 
ed  by  no  one,  unless  by  those  who,  through 
some  incredible  animosity  or  blindness,  decline 
to  believe  these  writings,  though  already  their 
truth  is  demonstrated  to  all  the  world.  And  at  or 
in  connection  with  that  judgment  the  following 
3John,  I.  32.  4Matt.  17.  1,  2.  6Ps.  41.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


560 

events  shall  come  to  pass,  as  we  have  learned : 
Elias  the  Tishbite  shall  come;  the  Jews  shall 
believe ;  Antichrist  shall  persecute ;  Christ  shall 
judge;  the  dead  shall  rise;  the  good  and  the 
wicked  shall  be  separated;  the  world  shall  be 
burned  and  renewed.  All  these  things,  we  be¬ 
lieve,  shall  come  to  pass;  but  how,  or  in  what 
order,  human  understanding  cannot  perfectly 
teach  us.  but  only  the  experience  of  the  events 
themselves.  My  opinion,  however,  is,  that  they 
will  happen  in  the  order  that  I  have  related. 

Two  books  yet  remain  to  be  written  by  me, 
in  order  to  complete,  by  God’s  help,  what  I 
promised.  One  of  these  will  explain  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  the  wicked,  the  other  the  happiness  of 


the  righteous  and  in  them  I  shall  be  at  special 
pains  to  refute,  by  God’s  grace,  the  arguments 
by  which  some  unhappy  creatures  seem  to 
themselves  to  undermine  the  divine  promises 
and  threatenings,  and  to  ridicule  as  empty  words 
statements  which  are  the  most  salutary  nutri¬ 
ment  of  faith.  But  they  who  are  instructed  in 
divine  things  hold  the  truth  and  omnipotence  of 
God  to  be  the  strongest  arguments  in  favour  of 
those  things  which,  however  incredible  they 
seem  to  men,  are  yet  contained  in  the  Scrip¬ 
tures,  whose  truth  has  already  in  many  ways 
been  proved;  for  they  are  sure  that  God  can  in 
no  wise  lie  and  that  He  can  do  what  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  the  unbelieving. 


BOOK  XXI 

ARGUMENT.  Of  the  end  reserved  for  the  city  of  the  devil,  namely,  the 

ETERNAL  PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  DAMNED;  AND  OF  THE  ARGUMENTS  WHICH  UNBE¬ 
LIEF  BRINGS  AGAINST  IT. 


Chap.  i.  Of  the  order  of  the  discussion ,  which 
requires  that  we  first  speak  of  the  eternal  pun¬ 
ishment  of  the  lost  in  company  with  the  devil , 
and  then  of  the  eternal  happiness  of  the  saints 
I  propose,  with  such  ability  as  God  may  grant 
me,  to  discuss  in  this  book  more  thoroughly 
the  nature  of  the  punishment  which  shall  be  as¬ 
signed  to  the  devil  and  all  his  retainers,  when 
the  two  cities,  the  one  of  God,  the  other  of  the 
devil,  shall  have  reached  their  proper  ends 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  the  Judge  of 
quick  and  dead.  And  I  have  adopted  this  order, 
and  preferred  to  speak,  first  of  the  punishment 
of  the  devils,  and  afterwards  of  the  blessedness 
of  the  saints,  because  the  body  partakes  of  ei¬ 
ther  destiny;  and  it  seems  to  be  more  incredible 
that  bodies  endure  in  everlasting  torments  than 
that  they  continue  to  exist  without  any  pain  in 
everlasting  felicity.  Consequently,  when  I  shall 
have  demonstrated  that  that  punishment  ought 
not  to  be  incredible,  this  will  materially  aid  me 
in  proving  that  which  is  much  more  credible, 
viz.,  the  immortality  of  the  bodies  of  the  saints 
which  are  delivered  from  all  pain.  Neither  is 
this  order  out  of  harmony  with  the  divine  writ¬ 
ings,  in  which  sometimes,  indeed,  the  blessed¬ 
ness  of  the  good  is  placed  first,  as  in  the  words, 
“They  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrec¬ 
tion  of  life;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto 
the  resurrection  of  judgment” ; 1  but  some¬ 
times  also  last,  as,  “The  Son  of  man  shall  send 
Tohn,  5.  29. 


forth  His  angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of 
His  kingdom  all  things  which  offend,  and  shall 
cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire:  there  shall  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Then  shall  the 
righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  His  Father”;2  and  that,  “These  shall  go  away 
into  eternal  punishment,  but  the  righteous  into 
life  eternal.”3  And  though  we  have  not  room  to 
cite  instances,  any  one  who  examines  the  proph¬ 
ets  will  find  that  they  adopt  now  the  one  ar¬ 
rangement  and  now  the  other.  My  own  reason 
for  following  the  latter  order  I  have  given. 

Chap.  2.  Whether  it  is  possible  for  bodies  to 
last  for  ever  in  burning  fire 
What,  then,  can  I  adduce  to  convince  those 
who  refuse  to  believe  that  human  bodies,  ani¬ 
mated  and  living,  can  not  only  survive  death, 
but  also  last  in  the  torments  of  everlasting 
fires?  They  will  not  allow  us  to  refer  this  simply 
to  the  power  of  the  Almighty,  but  demand  that 
we  persuade  them  by  some  example.  If,  then,  we 
reply  to  them,  that  there  are  animals  which  cer¬ 
tainly  are  corruptible,  because  they  are  mortal, 
and  which  yet  live  in  the  midst  of  flames;  and 
likewise,  that  in  springs  of  water  so  hot  that  no 
one  can  put  his  hand  in  it  with  impunity  a  spe¬ 
cies  of  worm  is  found,  which  not  only  lives 
there,  but  cannot  live  elsewhere ;  they  either  re¬ 
fuse  to  believe  these  facts  unless  we  can  show 
them,  or,  if  we  are  in  circumstances  to  prove 
them  by  ocular  demonstration  or  by  adequate 
2Matt.  13.  41-43.  3Matt.  25.  46. 


THE  CITY  OF 

testimony,  they  contend,  with  the  same  scepti¬ 
cism,  that  these  facts  are  not  examples  of  what 
we  seek  to  prove,  inasmuch  as  these  animals  do 
not  live  for  ever,  and  besides,  they  live  in  that 
blaze  of  heat  without  pain,  the  element  of  fire 
being  congenial  to  their  nature,  and  causing  it  to 
thrive  and  not  to  suffer — just  as  if  it  were  not 
more  incredible  that  it  should  thrive  than  that  it 
should  suffer  in  such  circumstances.  It  is  strange 
that  anything  should  suffer  in  fire  and  yet  live, 
but  stranger  that  it  should  live  in  fire  and  not 
suffer.  If,  then,  the  latter  be  believed,  why  not 
also  the  former? 

Chap.  3.  Whether  bodily  suffering  necessarily 
terminates  in  the  destruction  of  the  flesh 
But,  say  they,  there  is  no  body  which  can  suf¬ 
fer  and  cannot  also  die.  How  do  we  know  this? 
For  who  can  say  with  certainty  that  the  devils 
do  not  suffer  in  their  bodies,  when  they  own  that 
they  are  grievously  tormented?  And  if  it  is  re¬ 
plied  that  there  is  no  earthly  body — that  is  to 
say,  no  solid  and  perceptible  body,  or,  in  one 
word,  no  flesh — which  can  suffer  and  cannot  die, 
is  not  this  to  tell  us  only  what  men  have  gath¬ 
ered  from  experience  and  their  bodily  senses? 
For  they  indeed  have  no  acquaintance  with  any 
flesh  but  that  which  is  mortal;  and  this  is  their 
whole  argument,  that  what  they  have  had  no  ex¬ 
perience  of  they  judge  quite  impossible.  For  we 
cannot  call  it  reasoning  to  make  pain  a  presump¬ 
tion  of  death,  while,  in  fact,  it  is  rather  a  sign  of 
life.  For  though  it  be  a  question  whether  that 
which  suffers  can  continue  to  live  for  ever,  yet  it 
is  certain  that  everything  which  suffers  pain 
does  live,  and  that  pain  can  exist  only  in  a  living 
subject.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  he  who 
is  pained  be  living,  not  necessary  that  pain  kill 
him;  for  every  pain  does  not  kill  even  those 
mortal  bodies  of  ours  which  are  destined  to  die. 
And  that  any  pain  kills  them  is  caused  by  the 
circumstance  that  the  soul  is  so  connected  with 
the  body  that  it  succumbs  to  great  pain  and 
withdraws;  for  the  structure  of  our  members 
and  vital  parts  is  so  infirm  that  it  cannot  bear 
up  against  that  violence  which  causes  great  or 
extreme  agony.  But  in  the  life  to  come  this  con¬ 
nexion  of  soul  and  body  is  of  such  a  kind,  that 
as  it  is  dissolved  by  no  lapse  of  time,  so  neither 
is  it  burst  asunder  by  any  pain.  And  so,  although 
it  be  true  that  in  this  world  there  is  no  flesh 
which  can  suffer  pain  and  yet  cannot  die,  yet  in 
the  world  to  come  there  shall  be  flesh  such  as 
now  there  is  not,  as  there  will  also  be  death  such 
as  now  there  is  not.  For  death  will  not  be  abol¬ 
ished,  but  will  be  eternal,  since  the  soul  will  nei- 


GOD  XXI.  1-3  561 

ther  be  able  to  enjoy  God  and  live,  nor  to  die 
and  escape  the  pains  of  the  body.  The  first  death 
drives  the  soul  from  the  body  against  her  will: 
the  second  death  holds  the  soul  in  the  body 
against  her  will.  The  two  have  this  in  common, 
that  the  soul  suffers  against  her  will  what  her 
own  body  inflicts. 

Our  opponents,  too,  make  much  of  this,  that 
in  this  world  there  is  no  flesh  which  can  suffer 
pain  and  cannot  die;  while  they  make  nothing 
of  the  fact  that  there  is  something  which  is 
greater  than  the  body.  For  the  spirit,  whose 
presence  animates  and  rules  the  body,  can  both 
suffer  pain  and  cannot  die.  Here  then  is  some¬ 
thing  which,  though  it  can  feel  pain,  is  immortal. 
And  this  capacity,  which  we  now  see  in  the  spir¬ 
it  of  all,  shall  be  hereafter  in  the  bodies  of  the 
damned.  Moreover,  if  we  attend  to  the  matter  a 
little  more  closely,  we  see  that  what  is  called 
bodily  pain  is  rather  to  be  referred  to  the  soul. 
For  it  is  the  soul,  not  the  body,  which  is  pained, 
even  when  the  pain  originates  with  the  body — 
the  soul  feeling  pain  at  the  point  where  the  body 
is  hurt.  As  then  we  speak  of  bodies  feeling  and 
living,  though  the  feeling  and  life  of  the  body 
are  from  the  soul,  so  also  we  speak  of  bodies  be¬ 
ing  pained,  though  no  pain  can  be  suffered  by 
the  body  apart  from  the  soul.  The  soul,  then,  is 
pained  with  the  body  in  that  part  where  some¬ 
thing  occurs  to  hurt  it;  and  it  is  pained  alone, 
though  it  be  in  the  body,  when  some  invisible 
cause  distresses  it,  while  the  body  is  safe  and 
sound.  Even  when  not  associated  with  the  body 
it  is  pained;  for  certainly  that  rich  man  was  suf¬ 
fering  in  hell  when  he  cried,  “I  am  tormented  in 
this  flame.”1  But  as  for  the  body,  it  suffers  no 
pain  when  it  is  soulless ;  and  even  when  animate 
it  can  suffer  only  by  the  soul’s  suffering.  If, 
therefore,  we  might  draw  a  just  presumption 
from  the  existence  of  pain  to  that  of  death,  and 
conclude  that  where  pain  can  be  felt  death  can 
occur,  death  would  rather  be  the  property  of  the 
soul,  for  to  it  pain  more  peculiarly  belongs.  But, 
seeing  that  that  which  suffers  most  cannot  die, 
what  ground  is  there  for  supposing  that  those 
bodies,  because  destined  to  suffer,  are  therefore, 
destined  to  die?  The  Platonists  indeed  main¬ 
tained  that  these  earthly  bodies  and  dying  mem¬ 
bers  gave  rise  to  the  fears,  desires,  griefs,  and 
joys  of  the  soul.  “Hence,”  says  Virgil  (i.e.,  from 
these  earthly  bodies  and  dying  members), 

Hence  wild  desires  and  grovelling  fears, 

And  human  laughter,  human  tears.2 

But  in  the  fourteenth  book  of  this  work3  we 
have  proved  that,  according  to  the  Platonists’ 

Tuke,  16.  24.  2&neid,  bk.  vi.  733.  3Chaps.  3,  5,  6. 


562  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


own  theory,  souls,  even  when  purged  from  all 
pollution  of  the  body,  are  yet  possessed  by  a 
monstrous  desire  to  return  again  into  their  bod¬ 
ies.  But  where  desire  can  exist,  certainly  pain 
also  can  exist;  for  desire  frustrated,  either  by 
missing  what  it  aims  at  or  losing  what  it  had  at¬ 
tained,  is  turned  into  pain.  And  therefore,  if  the 
soul,  which  is  either  the  only  or  the  chief  suffer¬ 
er,  has  yet  a  kind  of  immortality  of  its  own,  it 
is  inconsequent  to  say  that  because  the  bodies 
of  the  damned  shall  suffer  pain,  therefore  they 
shall  die.  In  fine,  if  the  body  causes  the  soul  to 
suffer,  why  can  the  body  not  cause  death  as  well 
as  suffering,  unless  because  it  does  not  follow 
that  what  causes  pain  causes  death  as  well?  And 
why  then  is  it  incredible  that  these  fires  can 
cause  pain  but  not  death  to  those  bodies  we 
speak  of,  just  as  the  bodies  themselves  cause 
pain,  but  not  therefore  death,  to  the  souls?  Pain 
is  therefore  no  necessary  presumption  of  death. 

Chap.  4.  Examples  from  nature  proving  that 

bodies  may  remain  unconsumed  and  alive  in 

fire 

If,  therefore,  the  salamander  lives  in  fire,  as 
naturalists1  have  recorded,  and  if  certain  fa¬ 
mous  mountains  of  Sicily  have  been  continually 
on  fire  from  the  remotest  antiquity  until  now, 
and  yet  remain  entire,  these  are  sufficiently  con¬ 
vincing  examples  that  everything  which  burns  is 
not  consumed.  As  the  soul,  too,  is  a  proof  that 
not  everything  which  can  suffer  pain  can  also 
die,  why  then  do  they  yet  demand  that  we  pro¬ 
duce  real  examples  to  prove  that  it  is  not  incred¬ 
ible  that  the  bodies  of  men  condemned  to  ever¬ 
lasting  punishment  may  retain  their  soul  in  the 
fire,  may  burn  without  being  consumed,  and 
may  suffer  without  perishing?  For  suitable  prop¬ 
erties  will  be  communicated  to  the  substance  of 
the  flesh  by  Him  who  has  endowed  the  things 
we  see  with  so  marvellous  and  diverse  proper¬ 
ties,  that  their  very  multitude  prevents  our  won¬ 
der.  For  who  but  God  the  Creator  of  all  things 
has  given  to  the  flesh  of  the  peacock  its  antisep¬ 
tic  property?  This  property,  when  I  first  heard 
of  it,  seemed  to  me  incredible ;  but  it  happened 
at  Carthage  that  a  bird  of  this  kind  was  cooked 
and  served  up  to  me,  and,  taking  a  suitable  slice 
of  flesh  from  its  breast,  I  ordered  it  to  be  kept, 
and  when  it  had  been  kept  as  many  days  as 
make  any  other  flesh  stinking,  it  was  produced 
and  set  before  me.  and  emitted  no  offensive 
smell.  And  after  it  had  been  laid  by  for  thirty 

Aristotle  does  not  affirm  it  as  a  fact  observed  by  him¬ 
self,  but  as  a  popular  tradition  {History  of  Animals ,  bk.  v. 
19). 


days  and  more,  it  was  still  in  the  same  state; 
and  a  year  after,  the  same  still,  except  that  it 
was  a  little  more  shrivelled  and  drier.  Who  gave 
to  chaff  such  power  to  freeze  that  it  preserves 
snow  buried  under  it,  and  such  power  to  warm 
that  it  ripens  green  fruit? 

But  who  can  explain  the  strange  properties  of 
fire  itself,  which  blackens  everything  it  burns, 
though  itself  bright;  and  which,  though  of  the 
most  beautiful  colours,  discolours  almost  all  it 
touches  and  feeds  upon,  and  turns  blazing  fuel 
into  grimy  cinders?  Still  this  is  not  laid  down  as 
an  absolutely  uniform  law;  for,  on  the  contrary, 
stones  baked  in  glowing  fire  themselves  also 
glow,  and  though  the  fire  be  rather  of  a  red  hue, 
and  they  white,  yet  white  is  congruous  with 
light,  and  black  with  darkness.  Thus,  though  the 
fire  burns  the  wood  in  calcining  the  stones,  these 
contrary  effects  do  not  result  from  the  contra¬ 
riety  of  the  materials.  For  though  wood  and 
stone  differ,  they  are  not  contraries,  like  black 
and  white,  the  one  of  which  colours  is  produced 
in  the  stones,  while  the  other  is  produced  in  the 
wood  by  the  same  action  of  fire,  which  imparts 
its  own  brightness  to  the  former,  while  it  be¬ 
grimes  the  latter,  and  which  could  have  no  ef¬ 
fect  on  the  one  were  it  not  fed  by  the  other. 
Then  what  wonderful  properties  do  we  find  in 
charcoal,  which  is  so  brittle  that  a  light  tap 
breaks  it  and  a  slight  pressure  pulverizes  it,  and 
yet  is  so  strong  that  no  moisture  rots  it,  nor  any 
time  causes  it  to  decay.  So  enduring  is  it,  that  it 
is  customary  in  laying  down  landmarks  to  put 
charcoal  underneath  them,  so  that  if,  after  the 
longest  interval,  any  one  raises  an  action,  and 
pleads  that  there  is  no  boundary  stone,  he  may 
be  convicted  by  the  charcoal  below.  What  then 
has  enabled  it  to  last  so  long  without  rotting, 
though  buried  in  the  damp  earth  in  which  wood 
rots,  except  this  same  fire  which  consumes  all 
things? 

Again,  let  us  consider  the  wonders  of  lime; 
for  besides  growing  white  in  fire,  which  makes 
other  things  black,  and  of  which  I  have  already 
said  enough,  it  has  also  a  mysterious  property 
of  conceiving  fire  within  it.  Itself  cold  to  the 
touch,  it  yet  has  a  hidden  store  of  fire,  which  is 
not  at  once  apparent  to  our  senses,  but  which 
experience  teaches  us,  lies  as  it  were  slumber¬ 
ing  within  it  even  while  unseen.  And  it  is  for  this 
reason  called  “quick  lime,”  as  if  the  fire  were 
the  invisible  soul  quickening  the  visible  sub¬ 
stance  or  body.  But  the  marvellous  thing  is,  that 
this  fire  is  kindled  when  it  is  extinguished.  For 
to  disengage  the  hidden  fire  the  lime  is  mois¬ 
tened  or  drenched  with  water,  and  then,  though 


THE  CITY  OF 

it  be  cold  before,  it  becomes  hot  by  that  very 
application  which  cools  what  is  hot.  As  if  the 
fire  were  departing  from  the  lime  and  breath¬ 
ing  its  last,  it  no  longer  lies  hid,  but  appears; 
and  then  the  lime  lying  in  the  coldness  of  death 
cannot  be  requickened,  and  what  we  before 
called  “quick,”  we  now  call  “slaked.”  What  can 
be  stranger  than  this?  Yet  there  is  a  greater 
marvel  still.  For  if  you  treat  the  lime,  not  with 
water,  but  with  oil,  which  is  as  fuel  to  fire,  no 
amount  of  oil  will  heat  it.  Now  if  this  marvel 
had  been  told  us  of  some  Indian  mineral  which 
we  had  no  opportunity  of  experimenting  upon, 
we  should  either  have  forthwith  pronounced  it 
a  falsehood,  or  certainly  should  have  been  great¬ 
ly  astonished.  But  things  that  daily  present 
themselves  to  our  own  observation  we  despise, 
not  because  they  are  really  less  marvellous,  but 
because  they  are  common;  so  that  even  some 
products  of  India  itself,  remote  as  it  is  from 
ourselves,  cease  to  excite  our  admiration  as  soon 
as  we  can  admire  them  at  our  leisure.1 

The  diamond  is  a  stone  possessed  by  many 
among  ourselves,  especially  by  jewellers  and 
lapidaries,  and  the  stone  is  so  hard  that  it  can  be 
wrought  neither  by  iron  nor  fire,  nor,  they  say, 
by  anything  at  all  except  goat’s  blood.  But  do 
you  suppose  it  is  as  much  admired  by  those  who 
own  it  and  are  familiar  with  its  properties  as  by 
those  to  whom  it  is  shown  for  the  first  time? 
Persons  who  have  not  seen  it  perhaps  do  not  be¬ 
lieve  what  is  said  of  it,  or  if  they  do,  they  won¬ 
der  as  at  a  thing  beyond  their  experience ;  and  if 
they  happen  to  see  it,  still  they  marvel  because 
they  are  unused  to  it,  but  gradually  familiar  ex¬ 
perience  dulls  their  admiration.  We  know  that 
the  loadstone  has  a  wonderful  power  of  attract¬ 
ing  iron.  When  I  first  saw  it  I  was  thunder¬ 
struck,  for  I  saw  an  iron  ring  attracted  and  sus¬ 
pended  by  the  stone;  and  then,  as  if  it  had  com¬ 
municated  its  own  property  to  the  iron  it  at¬ 
tracted,  and  had  made  it  a  substance  like  itself, 
this  ring  was  put  near  another,  and  lifted  it  up; 
and  as  the  first  ring  clung  to  the  magnet,  so  did 
the  second  ring  to  the  first.  A  third  and  a  fourth 
were  siriiilarly  added,  so  that  there  hung  from 
the  stone  a  kind  of  chain  of  rings,  with  their 
hoops  connected,  not  interlinking,  but  attached 
together  by  their  outer  surface.  Who  would  not 
be  amazed  at  this  virtue  of  the  stone,  subsisting 
as  it  does  not  only  in  itself,  but  transmitted 
through  so  many  suspended  rings,  and  binding 
them  together  by  invisible  links?  Yet  far  more 
astonishing  is  what  I  heard  about  this  stone 
from  my  brother  in  the  episcopate,  Severus 
^ee  Lucretius,  bk.  ii.  1025. 


GOD  XXL  4-5  563 

bishop  of  Milevis.  He  told  me  that  Bathanarius, 
once  count  of  Africa,  when  the  bishop  was  din¬ 
ing  with  him,  produced  a  magnet,  and  held  it 
under  a  silver  plate  on  which  he  placed  a  bit  of 
iron;  then  as  he  moved  his  hand  with  the  mag¬ 
net  underneath  the  plate,  the  iron  upon  the  plate 
moved  about  accordingly.  The  intervening  sil¬ 
ver  was  not  affected  at  all,  but  precisely  as  the 
magnet  was  moved  backwards  and  forwards  be¬ 
low  it,  no  matter  how  quickly,  so  was  the  iron 
attracted  above.  I  have  related  what  I  myself 
have  witnessed;  I  have  related  what  I  was  told 
by  one  whom  I  trust  as  I  trust  my  own  eyes.  Let 
me  further  say  what  I  have  read  about  this  mag¬ 
net.  When  a  diamond  is  laid  near  it,  it  does  not 
lift  iron;  or  if  it  has  already  lifted  it,  as  soon  as 
the  diamond  approaches,  it  drops  it.  These 
stones  come  from  India.  But  if  we  cease  to  ad¬ 
mire  them  because  they  are  now  familiar,  how 
much  less  must  they  admire  them  who  procure 
them  very  easily  and  send  them  to  us?  Perhaps 
they  are  held  as  cheap  as  we  hold  lime,  which, 
because  it  is  common,  we  think  nothing  of, 
though  it  has  the  strange  property  of  burning 
when  water,  which  is  wont  to  quench  fire,  is 
poured  on  it,  and  of  remaining  cool  when  mixed 
with  oil,  which  ordinarily  feeds  fire. 

Chap.  5.  That  there  are  many  things  which  rea¬ 
son  cannot  account  for ,  and  which  are  never¬ 
theless  true 

Nevertheless,  when  we  declare  the  miracles 
which  God  has  wrought,  or  will  yet  work,  and 
which  we  cannot  bring  under  the  very  eyes  of 
men,  sceptics  keep  demanding  that  we  shall  ex¬ 
plain  these  marvels  to  reason.  And  because  we 
cannot  do  so,  inasmuch  as  they  are  above  hu¬ 
man  comprehension,  they  suppose  we  are  speak¬ 
ing  falsely.  These  persons  themselves,  therefore, 
ought  to  account  for  all  these  marvels  which 
we  either  can  or  do  see.  And  if  they  perceive 
that  this  is  impossible  for  man  to  do,  they 
should  acknowledge  that  it  cannot  be  conclud¬ 
ed  that  a  thing  has  not  been  or  shall  not  be  be¬ 
cause  it  cannot  be  reconciled  to  reason,  since 
there  are  things  now  in  existence  of  which  the 
same  is  true.  I  will  not,  then,  detail  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  marvels  which  are  related  in  books,  and 
which  refer  not  to  things  that  happened  once 
and  passed  away,  but  that  are  permanent  in  cer¬ 
tain  places,  where,  if  any  one  has  the  desire  and 
opportunity,  he  may  ascertain  their  truth ;  but  a 
few  only  I  recount.  The  following  are  some  of 
the  marvels  men  tell  us: — The  salt  of  Agrigen- 
tum  in  Sicily,  when  thrown  into  the  fire,  be¬ 
comes  fluid  as  if  it  were  in  water,  but  in  the 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


564 

water  it  crackles  as  if  it  were  in  the  fire.  The 
Garamantae  have  a  fountain  so  cold  by  day  that 
no  one  can  drink  it,  so  hot  by  night  no  one  can 
touch  it.  In  Epirus,  too,  there  is  a  fountain 
which,  like  all  others,  quenches  lighted  torches, 
but,  unlike  all  others,  lights  quenched  torches. 
There  is  a  stone  found  in  Arcadia,  and  called 
asbestos,  because  once  lit  it  cannot  be  put  out. 
The  wood  of  a  certain  kind  of  Egyptian  fig-tree 
sinks  in  water,  and  does  not  float  like  other 
wood;  and,  stranger  still,  when  it  has  been  sunk 
to  the  bottom  for  some  time,  it  rises  again  to  the 
surface,  though  nature  requires  that  when 
soaked  in  water  it  should  be  heavier  than  ever. 
Then  there  are  the  apples  of  Sodom,  which  grow 
indeed  to  an  appearance  of  ripeness,  but,  when 
you  touch  them  with  hand  or  tooth,  the  peel 
cracks,  and  they  crumble  into  dust  and  ashes. 
The  Persian  stone  pyrites  burns  the  hand  when 
it  is  tightly  held  in  it,  and  so  gets  its  name  from 
fire.  In  Persia,  too,  there  is  found  another  stone 
called  selenite,  because  its  interior  brilliancy 
waxes  and  wanes  with  the  moon.  Then  in  Cap¬ 
padocia  the  mares  are  impregnated  by  the  wind, 
and  their  foals  live  only  three  years.  Tilom  an 
Indian  island,  has  this  advantage  over  all  other 
lands,  that  no  tree  which  grows  in  it  ever  loses 
its  foliage. 

These  and  numberless  other  marvels  record¬ 
ed  in  the  history,  not  of  past  events,  but  of  per¬ 
manent  localities,  I  have  no  time  to  enlarge  up¬ 
on  and  diverge  from  my  main  object;  but  let 
those  sceptics  who  refuse  to  credit  the  divine 
writings  give  me,  if  they  can,  a  rational  account 
of  them.  For  their  only  ground  of  unbelief  in  the 
Scriptures  is,  that  they  contain  incredible  things, 
just  such  as  I  have  been  recounting.  For,  say 
they,  reason  cannot  admit  that  flesh  burn  and 
remain  unconsumed,  suffer  without  dying. 
Mighty  reasoners,  indeed,  who  are  competent 
to  give  the  reason  of  all  the  marvels  that  exist ! 
Let  them  then  give  us  the  reason  of  the  few 
things  we  have  cited,  and  which,  if  they  did  not 
know  they  existed,  and  were  only  assured  by  us 
they  would  at  some  future  time  occur,  they 
would  believe  still  less  than  that  which  they 
now  refuse  to  credit  on  our  word.  For  which  of 
them  would  believe  us  if,  instead  of  saying  that 
the  living  bodies  of  men  hereafter  will  be  such 
as  to  endure  everlasting  pain  and  fire  without 
ever  dying,  we  were  to  say  that  in  the  world  to 
come  there  will  be  salt  which  becomes  liquid  in 
fire  as  if  it  were  in  water,  and  crackles  in  water 
as  if  it  were  in  fire;  or  that  there  will  be  a  foun¬ 
tain  whose  water  in  the  chill  air  of  night  is  so 
hot  that  it  cannot  be  touched,  while  in  the  heat 


of  day  it  is  so  cold  that  it  cannot  be  drunk;  or 
that  there  will  be  a  stone  which  by  its  own  heat 
burns  the  hand  when  tightly  held,  or  a  stone 
which  cannot  be  extinguished  if  it  has  been  lit  in 
any  part ;  or  any  of  those  wonders  I  have  cited, 
while  omitting  numberless  others?  If  we  were  to 
say  that  these  things  would  be  found  in  the 
world  to  come,  and  our  sceptics  were  to  reply, 
“If  you  wish  us  to  believe  these  things,  satisfy 
our  reason  about  each  of  them,”  we  should  con¬ 
fess  that  we  could  not,  because  the  frail  com¬ 
prehension  of  man  cannot  master  these  and 
such-like  wonders  of  God’s  working;  and  that 
yet  our  reason  was  thoroughly  convinced  that 
the  Almighty  does  nothing  without  reason, 
though  the  frail  mind  of  man  cannot  explain  the 
reason ;  and  that  while  we  are  in  many  instances 
uncertain  what  He  intends,  yet  that  it  is  always 
most  certain  that  nothing  which  He  intends  is 
impossible  to  Him ;  and  that  when  He  declares 
His  mind,  we  believe  Him  Whom  we  cannot  be¬ 
lieve  to  be  either  powerless  or  false.  Neverthe¬ 
less  these  cavillers  at  faith  and  exactors  of  rea¬ 
son,  how  do  they  dispose  of  those  things  of 
which  a  reason  cannot  be  given,  and  which  yet 
exist,  though  in  apparent  contrariety  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things?  If  we  had  announced  that  these 
things  were  to  be,  these  sceptics  would  have  de¬ 
manded  from  us  the  reason  of  them,  as  they  do 
in  the  case  of  those  things  which  we  are  an¬ 
nouncing  as  destined  to  be.  And  consequently, 
as  these  present  marvels  are  not  non-existent, 
though  human  reason  and  discourse  are  lost  in 
such  works  of  God,  so  those  things  we  speak  of 
are  not  impossible  because  inexplicable;  for  in 
this  particular  they  are  in  the  same  predicament 
as  the  marvels  of  earth. 

Chap.  6.  That  all  marvels  are  not  of  nature’s 
production,  but  that  some  are  due  to  human 
ingenuity  and  others  to  diabolic  contrivance 
At  this  point  they  will  perhaps  reply,  “These 
things  have  no  existence;  we  don’t  believe  one 
of  them;  they  are  travellers’  tales  and  fictitious 
romances”;  and  they  may  add  what  has  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  argument,  and  say,  “If  you  believe 
such  things  as  these,  believe  what  is  recorded  in 
the  same  books,  that  there  was  or  is  a  temple 
of  Venus  in  which  a  candelabrum  set  in  the 
open  air  holds  a  lamp,  which  burns  so  strongly 
that  no  storm  or  rain  extinguishes  it,  and  which 
is  therefore  called,  like  the  stone  mentioned 
above,  the  asbestos  or  inextinguishable  lamp.” 
They  may  say  this  with  the  intention  of  putting 
us  into  a  dilemma:  for  if  we  say  this  is  incredi¬ 
ble,  then  we  shall  impugn  the  truth  of  the  other 


THE  CITY  OF 

recorded  marvels;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  ad¬ 
mit  that  this  is  credible,  we  shall  avouch  the 
pagan  deities.  But,  as  I  have  already  said  in  the 
eighteenth  book  of  this  work,  we  do  not  hold  it 
necessary  to  believe  all  that  profane  history  con¬ 
tains,  since,  as  Varro  says,  even  historians  them¬ 
selves  disagree  on  so  many  points  that  one 
would  think  they  intended  and  were  at  pains  to 
do  so;  but  we  believe,  if  we  are  disposed,  those 
things  which  are  not  contradicted  by  these 
books,  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  we  are 
bound  to  believe.  But  as  to  those  permanent 
miracles  of  nature,  whereby  we  wish  to  per¬ 
suade  the  sceptical  of  the  miracles  of  the  world 
to  come,  those  are  quite  sufficient  for  our  pur¬ 
pose  which  we  ourselves  can  observe,  or  of 
which  it  is  not  difficult  to  find  trustworthy  wit¬ 
nesses.  Moreover,  that  temple  of  Venus,  with 
its  inextinguishable  lamp,  so  far  from  hemming 
us  into  a  corner,  opens  an  advantageous  field  to 
our  argument.  For  to  this  inextinguishable  lamp 
we  add  a  host  of  marvels  wrought  by  men,  or  by 
magic — that  is,  by  men  under  the  influence  of 
devils,  or  by  the  devils  directly — for  such  mar¬ 
vels  we  cannot  deny  without  impugning  the 
truth  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  we  believe.  That 
lamp,  therefore,  was  either  by  some  mechani¬ 
cal  and  human  device  fitted  with  asbestos,  or  it 
was  arranged  by  magical  art  in  order  that  the 
worshippers  might  be  astonished,  or  some  devil 
under  the  name  of  Venus  so  signally  manifested 
himself  that  this  prodigy  both  began  and  be¬ 
came  permanent.  Now  devils  are  attracted  to 
dwell  in  certain  temples  by  means  of  the  crea¬ 
tures  (God’s  creatures,  not  theirs),  who  present 
to  them  what  suits  their  various  tastes.  They  are 
attracted  not  by  food  like  animals,  but.  like  spir¬ 
its,  by  such  symbols  as  suit  their  taste,  various 
kinds  of  stones,  woods,  plants,  animals,  songs, 
rites.  And  that  men  may  provide  these  attrac¬ 
tions,  the  devils  first  of  all  cunningly  seduce 
them,  either  by  imbuing  their  hearts  with  a  se¬ 
cret  poison,  or  by  revealing  themselves  under  a 
friendly  guise,  and  thus  make  a  few  of  them 
their  disciples,  who  become  the  instructors  of 
the  multitude.  For  unless  they  first  instructed 
men,  it  were  impossible  to  know  what  each  of 
them  desires,  what  they  shrink  from,  by  what 
name  they  should  be  invoked  or  constrained  to 
be  present.  Hence  the  origin  of  magic  and  ma¬ 
gicians.  But,  above  all,  they  possess  the  hearts 
of  men,  and  are  chiefly  proud  of  this  possession 
when  they  transform  themselves  into  angels  of 
light.  Very  many  things  that  occur,  therefore, 
are  their  doing;  and  these  deeds  of  theirs  we 
ought  all  the  more  carefully  to  shun  as  we  ac- 


GOD  XXL  6-7  565 

knowledge  them  to  be  very  surprising.  And  yet 
these  very  deeds  forward  my  present  argu¬ 
ments.  For  if  such  marvels  are  wrought  by  un¬ 
clean  devils,  how  much  mightier  are  the  holy 
angels !  and  what  can  not  that  God  do  Who  made 
the  angels  themselves  capable  of  working  mira¬ 
cles! 

If,  then,  very  many  effects  can  be  contrived 
by  human  art,  of  so  surprising  a  kind  that  the 
uninitiated  think  them  divine,  as  when,  e.g.,  in 
a  certain  temple  two  magnets  have  been  adjust¬ 
ed,  one  in  the  roof,  another  in  the  floor,  so  that 
an  iron  image  is  suspended  in  mid-air  between 
them,  one  would  suppose  by  the  power  of  the  di¬ 
vinity,  were  he  ignorant  of  the  magnets  above 
and  beneath;  or,  as  in  the  case  of  that  lamp  of 
Venus  which  we  already  mentioned  as  being  a 
skillful  adaptation  of  asbestos;  if,  again,  by  the 
help  of  magicians,  whom  Scripture  calls  sorcer¬ 
ers  and  enchanters,  the  devils  could  gain  such 
power  that  the  noble  poet  Virgil  should  consider 
himself  justified  in  describing  a  very  powerful 
magician  in  these  lines : 

Her  charms  can  cure  what  souls  she  please , 
Rob  other  hearts  of  healthful  ease, 

Turn  rivers  backward  to  their  source, 

And  make  the  stars  forget  their  course, 

And  call  up  ghosts  from  night: 

The  ground  shall  bellow  ’neath  your  feet: 

The  mountain-ash  shall  quit  its  seat, 

And  travel  down  the  height ;l 

if  this  be  so,  how  much  more  able  is  God  to  do 
those  things  which  to  sceptics  are  incredible, 
but  to  His  power  easy,  since  it  is  He  Who  has 
given  to  stones  and  all  other  things  their  virtue, 
and  to  men  their  skill  to  use  them  in  wonderful 
ways ;  He  Who  has  given  to  the  angels  a  nature 
more  mighty  than  that  of  all  that  lives  on  earth ; 
He  Whose  power  surpasses  all  marvels,  and 
Whose  wisdom  in  working,  ordaining,  and  per¬ 
mitting  is  no  less  marvellous  in  its  governance 
of  all  things  than  in  its  creation  of  all! 

Chap.  7.  That  the  ultimate  reason  for  believing 
miracles  is  the  omnipotence  of  the  Creator 
Why,  then,  cannot  God  effect  both  that  the 
bodies  of  the  dead  shall  rise,  and  that  the  bodies 
of  the  damned  shall  be  tormented  in  everlast¬ 
ing  fire — God,  Who  made  the  world  full  of 
countless  miracles  in  sky,  earth,  air,  and  waters, 
while  itself  is  a  miracle  unquestionably  greater 
and  more  admirable  than  all  the  marvels  it  is 
filled  with?  But  those  with  whom  or  against 
whom  we  are  arguing,  who  believe  both  that 
there  is  a  God  Who  made  the  world,  and  that 
lAineid,  bk.  iv.  487-491. 


566  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


there  are  gods  created  by  Him  who  administer 
the  world’s  laws  as  His  viceregents — our  adver¬ 
saries,  I  say,  who,  so  far  from  denying  emphati¬ 
cally,  assert  that  there  are  powers  in  the  world 
which  effect  marvellous  results  (whether  of 
their  own  accord,  or  because  they  are  invoked 
by  some  rite  or  prayer,  or  in  some  magical  way) , 
when  we  lay  before  them  the  wonderful  proper¬ 
ties  of  other  things  which  are  neither  rational 
animals  nor  rational  spirits,  but  such  material 
objects  as  those  we  have  just  cited,  are  in  the 
habit  of  replying,  “This  is  their  natural  proper¬ 
ty,  their  nature ;  these  are  the  powers  naturally 
belonging  to  them.”  Thus  the  whole  reason  why 
Agrigentine  salt  dissolves  in  fire  and  crackles  in 
water  is  that  this  is  its  nature.  Yet  this  seems 
rather  contrary  to  nature,  which  has  given  not 
to  fire  but  to  water  the  power  of  melting  salt, 
and  the  power  of  scorching  it  not  to  water  but 
to  fire.  But  this,  they  say,  is  the  natural  proper¬ 
ty  of  this  salt,  to  show  effects  contrary  to  these. 
The  same  reason,  therefore,  is  assigned  to  ac¬ 
count  for  that  Garamantian  fountain,  of  which 
one  and  the  same  runlet  is  chill  by  day  and  boil¬ 
ing  by  night,  so  that  in  either  extreme  it  cannot 
be  touched.  So  also  of  that  other  fountain 
which,  though  it  is  cold  to  the  touch,  and  though 
it,  like  other  fountains,  extinguishes  a  lighted 
torch,  yet,  unlike  other  fountains,  and  in  a  sur¬ 
prising  manner,  kindles  an  extinguished  torch. 
So  of  the  asbestos  stone,  which,  though  it  has  no 
heat  of  its  own,  yet  when  kindled  by  fire  applied 
to  it,  cannot  be  extinguished.  And  so  of  the  rest, 
which  I  am  weary  of  reciting,  and  in  which, 
though  there  seems  to  be  an  extraordinary  prop¬ 
erty  contrary  to  nature,  yet  no  other  reason  is 
given  for  them  than  this,  that  this  is  their  na¬ 
ture — a  brief  reason  truly  and,  I  own,  a  satis¬ 
factory  reply.  But  since  God  is  the  author  of  all 
natures,  how  is  it  that  our  adversaries,  when 
they  refuse  to  believe  what  we  affirm,  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  impossible,  are  unwilling  to  ac¬ 
cept  from  us  a  better  explanation  than  their 
own,  viz.,  that  this  is  the  will  of  Almighty  God 
— for  certainly  He  is  called  Almighty  only  be¬ 
cause  He  is  mighty  to  do  all  He  will — He  Who 
was  able  to  create  so  many  marvels,  not  only 
unknown,  but  very  well  ascertained,  as  I  have 
been  showing,  and  which,  were  they  not  under 
our  own  observation,  or  reported  by  recent  and 
credible  witnesses,  would  certainly  be  pro¬ 
nounced  impossible?  For  as  for  those  marvels 
which  have  no  other  testimony  than  the  writers 
in  whose  books  we  read  them,  and  who  wrote 
without  being  divinely  instructed,  and  are  there¬ 
fore  liable  to  human  error,  we  cannot  justly 


blame  any  one  who  declines  to  believe  them. 

For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  wish  all  the  mar¬ 
vels  I  have  cited  to  be  rashly  accepted,  for  I  do 
not  myself  believe  them  implicitly,  save  those 
which  have  either  come  under  my  own  observa¬ 
tion,  or  which  any  one  can  readily  verify,  such 
as  the  lime  which  is  heated  by  water  and  cooled 
by  oil ;  the  magnet  which  by  its  mysterious  and 
insensible  suction  attracts  the  iron,  but  has  no 
affect  on  a  straw;  the  peacock’s  flesh  which  tri¬ 
umphs  over  the  corruption  from  which  not  the 
flesh  of  Plato  is  exempt;  the  chaff  so  chilling 
that  it  prevents  snow  from  melting,  so  heating 
that  it  forces  apples  to  ripen;  the  glowing  fire, 
which,  in  accordance  with  its  glowing  appear¬ 
ance,  whitens  the  stones  it  bakes,  while,  con¬ 
trary  to  its  glowing  appearance,  it  begrimes 
most  things  it  burns  (just  as  dirty  stains  are 
made  by  oil,  however  pure  it  be,  and  as  the  lines 
drawn  by  white  silver  are  black) ;  the  charcoal, 
too,  which  by  the  action  of  fire  is  so  completely 
changed  from  its  original,  that  a  finely  marked 
piece  of  wood  becomes  hideous,  the  tough  be¬ 
comes  brittle,  the  decaying  incorruptible.  Some 
of  these  things  I  know  in  common  with  many 
other  persons,  some  of  them  in  common  with  all 
men;  and  there  are  many  others  which  I  have 
not  room  to  insert  in  this  book.  But  of  those 
which  I  have  cited,  though  I  have  not  myself 
seen,  but  only  read  about  them,  I  have  been  un¬ 
able  to  find  trustworthy  witnesses  from  whom  I 
could  ascertain  whether  they  are  facts,  except 
in  the  case  of  that  fountain  in  which  burning 
torches  are  extinguished  and  extinguished  torch¬ 
es  lit,  and  of  the  apples  of  Sodom,  which  are  ripe 
to  appearance,  but  are  filled  with  dust.  And  in¬ 
deed  I  have  not  met  with  any  who  said  they  had 
seen  that  fountain  in  Epirus,  but  with  some  who 
knew  there  was  a  similar  fountain  in  Gaul  not 
far  from  Grenoble.  The  fruit  of  the  trees  of  Sod¬ 
om,  however,  is  not  only  spoken  of  in  books 
worthy  of  credit,  but  so  many  persons  say  that 
they  have  seen  it  that  I  cannot  doubt  the  fact. 
But  the  rest  of  the  prodigies  I  receive  without 
definitely  affirming  or  denying  them ;  and  I  have 
cited  them  because  I  read  them  in  the  authors 
of  our  adversaries,  and  that  I  might  prove  how 
many  things  many  among  themselves  believe, 
because  they  are  written  in  the  works  of  their 
own  literary  men,  though  no  rational  explana¬ 
tion  of  them  is  given,  and  yet  they  scorn  to  be¬ 
lieve  us  when  we  assert  that  Almighty  God  will 
do  what  is  beyond  their  experience  and  observa¬ 
tion  ;  and  this  they  do  even  though  we  assign  a 
reason  for  His  work.  For  what  better  and  strong¬ 
er  reason  for  such  things  can  be  given  than  to 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXI.  8  567 


say  that  the  Almighty  is  able  to  bring  them  to 
pass,  and  will  bring  them  to  pass,  having  pre¬ 
dicted  them  in  those  books  in  which  many  other 
marvels  which  have  already  come  to  pass  were 
predicted?  Those  things  which  are  regarded  as 
impossible  will  be  accomplished  according  to  the 
word,  and  by  the  power  of  that  God  Who  pre¬ 
dicted  and  effected  that  the  incredulous  nations 
should  believe  incredible  wonders. 

Chap.  8.  That  it  is  not  contrary  to  nature  that , 
in  an  object  whose  nature  is  known ,  there 
should  be  discovered  an  alteration  of  the 
properties  which  have  been  known  as  its  nat¬ 
ural  properties 

But  if  they  reply  that  their  reason  for  not  be¬ 
lieving  us  when  we  say  that  human  bodies  will 
always  burn  and  yet  never  die,  is  that  the  nature 
of  human  bodies  is  known  to  be  quite  otherwise 
constituted ;  if  they  say  that  for  this  miracle  we 
cannot  give  the  reason  which  was  valid  in  the 
case  of  those  natural  miracles,  viz.,  that  this  is 
the  natural  property,  the  nature  of  the  thing — 
for  we  know  that  this  is  not  the  nature  of  hu¬ 
man  flesh — we  find  our  answer  in  the  sacred 
writings,  that  even  this  human  flesh  was  consti¬ 
tuted  in  one  fashion  before  there  was  sin — was 
constituted,  in  fact,  so  that  it  could  not  die — 
and  in  another  fashion  after  sin,  being  made 
such  as  we  see  it  in  this  miserable  state  of  mor¬ 
tality,  unable  to  retain  enduring  life.  And  so  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead  shall  it  be  consti¬ 
tuted  differently  from  its  present  well-known 
condition.  But  as  they  do  not  believe  these  writ¬ 
ings  of  ours,  in  which  we  read  what  nature  man 
had  in  paradise,  and  how  remote  he  was  from 
the  necessity  of  death — and  indeed,  if  they  did 
believe  them,  we  should,  of  course,  have  little 
trouble  in  debating  with  them  the  future  pun¬ 
ishment  of  the  damned — we  must  produce  from 
the  writings  of  their  own  most  learned  authori¬ 
ties  some  instances  to  show  that  it  is  possible  for 
a  thing  to  become  different  from  what  it  was 
formerly  known  characteristically  to  be. 

From  the  book  of  Marcus  Varro,  entitled,  Of 
the  Rade  of  the  Roman  People ,  I  cite  word  for 
word  the  following  instance:  “There  occurred  a 
remarkable  celestial  portent ;  for  Castor  records 
that,  in  the  brilliant  star  Venus,  called  Vesperu- 
go  by  Plautus,  and  the  lovely  Hesperus  by  Ho¬ 
mer,  there  occurred  so  strange  a  prodigy,  that 
it  changed  its  colour,  size,  form,  course,  which 
never  happened  before  nor  since.  Adrastus  of 
Cyzicus,  and  Dion  of  Naples,  famous  mathema¬ 
ticians,  said  that  this  occurred  in  the  reign  of 
Ogyges.”  So  great  an  author  as  Varro  would 


certainly  not  have  called  this  a  portent  had  it 
not  seemed  to  be  contrary  to  nature.  For  we  say 
that  all  portents  are  contrary  to  nature;  but 
they  are  not  so.  For  how  is  that  contrary  to  na¬ 
ture  which  happens  by  the  will  of  God,  since  the 
will  of  so  mighty  a  Creator  is  certainly  the  na¬ 
ture  of  each  created  thing?  A  portent,  therefore, 
happens  not  contrary  to  nature,  but  contrary  to 
what  we  know  as  nature.  But  who  can  number 
the  multitude  of  portents  recorded  in  profane 
histories?  Let  us  then  at  present  fix  our  atten¬ 
tion  on  this  one  only  which  concerns  the  matter 
in  hand.  What  is  there  so  arranged  by  the  Au¬ 
thor  of  the  nature  of  heaven  and  earth  as  the 
exactly  ordered  course  of  the  stars?  What  is 
there  established  by  laws  so  sure  and  inflexible? 
And  yet,  when  it  pleased  Him  Who  with  sover¬ 
eignty  and  supreme  power  regulates  all  He  has 
created,  a  star  conspicuous  among  the  rest  by  its 
size  and  splendour  changed  its  colour,  size, 
form,  and,  most  wonderful  of  all,  the  order  and 
law  of  its  course!  Certainly  that  phenomenon 
disturbed  the  canons  of  the  astronomers,  if 
there  were  any  then,  by  which  they  tabulate,  as 
by  unerring  computation,  the  past  and  future 
movements  of  the  stars,  so  as  to  take  upon  them 
to  affirm  that  this  which  happened  to  the  morn¬ 
ing  star  (Venus)  never  happened  before  nor 
since.  But  we  read  in  the  divine  books  that  even 
the  sun  itself  stood  still  when  a  holy  man, 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  had  begged  this  from 
God  until  victory  should  finish  the  battle  he  had 
begun;  and  that  it  even  went  back,  that  the 
promise  of  fifteen  years  added  to  the  life  of  king 
Hezekiah  might  be  sealed  by  this  additional 
prodigy.  But  these  miracles,  which  were  vouch¬ 
safed  to  the  merits  of  holy  men,  even  when  our 
adversaries  believe  them,  they  attribute  to  magi¬ 
cal  arts;  so  Virgil,  in  the  lines  I  quoted  above, 
ascribes  to  magic  the  power  to 

Turn  rivers  backward  to  their  source, 

And  make  the  stars  forget  their  course. 

For  in  our  sacred  books  we  read  that  this  also 
happened,  that  a  river  “turned  backward,”  was 
stayed  above  while  the  lower  part  flowed  on, 
when  the  people  passed  over  under  the  above- 
mentioned  leader,  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun;  and 
also  when  Elias  the  prophet  crossed;  and  after¬ 
wards,  when  his  disciple  Elisha  passed  through 
it:  and  we  have  just  mentioned  how,  in  the  case 
of  king  Hezekiah,  the  greatest  of  the  “stars  for¬ 
got  its  course.”  But  what  happened  to  Venus, 
according  to  Varro,  was  not  said  by  him  to  have 
happened  in  answer  to  any  man’s  prayer. 

Let  not  the  sceptics  then  benight  themselves 
in  this  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things,  as  if 


568  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


divine  power  cannot  bring  to  pass  in  an  object 
anything  else  than  what  their  own  experience 
has  shown  them  to  be  in  its  nature.  Even  the 
very  things  which  are  most  commonly  known  as 
natural  would  not  be  less  wonderful  nor  less  ef¬ 
fectual  to  excite  surprise  in  all  who  beheld  them, 
if  men  were  not  accustomed  to  admire  nothing 
but  what  is  rare.  For  who  that  thoughtfully  ob¬ 
serves  the  countless  multitude  of  men,  and  their 
similarity  of  nature,  can  fail  to  remark  with 
surprise  and  admiration  the  individuality  of 
each  man’s  appearance,  suggesting  to  us,  as  it 
does,  that  unless  men  were  like  one  another, 
they  would  not  be  distinguished  from  the  rest 
of  the  animals;  while  unless,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  were  unlike,  they  could  not  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  one  another,  so  that  those  whom 
we  declare  to  be  like,  we  also  find  to  be  unlike? 
And  the  unlikeness  is  the  more  wonderful  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  two;  for  a  common  nature 
seems  rather  to  require  similarity.  And  yet.  be¬ 
cause  the  very  rarity  of  things  is  that  which 
makes  them  wonderful,  we  are  filled  with  much 
greater  wonder  when  we  are  introduced  to  two 
men  so  like,  that  we  either  always  or  frequently 
mistake  in  endeavouring  to  distinguish  between 
them. 

But  possibly,  though  Varro  is  a  heathen  his¬ 
torian,  and  a  very  learned  one,  they  may  disbe¬ 
lieve  that  what  I  have  cited  from  him  truly  oc¬ 
curred;  or  they  may  say  the  example  is  invalid, 
because  the  star  did  not  for  any  length  of  time 
continue  to  follow  its  new  course,  but  returned 
to  its  ordinary  orbit.  There  is,  then,  another 
phenomenon  at  present  open  to  their  observa¬ 
tion,  and  which,  in  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  suf¬ 
ficient  to  convince  them  that,  though  they  have 
observed  and  ascertained  some  natural  law,  they 
ought  not  on  that  account  to  prescribe  to  God, 
as  if  He  could  not  change  and  turn  it  into  some¬ 
thing  very  different  from  what  they  have  ob¬ 
served.  The  land  of  Sodom  was  not  always  as  it 
now  is;  but  once  it  had  the  appearance  of  other 
lands,  and  enjoyed  equal  if  not  richer  fertility; 
for,  in  the  divine  narrative,  it  was  compared  to 
the  paradise  of  God.  But  after  it  was  touched 
from  heaven,  as  even  pagan  history  testifies, 
and  as  is  now  witnessed  by  those  who  visit  the 
spot,  it  became  unnaturally  and  horribly  sooty 
in  appearance;  and  its  apples,  under  a  deceitful 
appearance  of  ripeness,  contain  ashes  within. 
Here  is  a  thing  which  was  of  one  kind  and  is  of 
another.  You  see  how  its  nature  was  converted 
by  the  wonderful  transmutation  wrought  by  the 
Creator  of  all  natures  into  so  very  disgusting  a 
diversity — an  alteration  which  after  so  long  a 


time  took  place,  and  after  so  long  a  time  still 
continues.  As  therefore  it  was  not  impossible  to 
God  to  create  such  natures  as  He  pleased,  so  it 
is  not  impossible  to  Him  to  change  these  na¬ 
tures  of  His  own  creation  into  whatever  He 
pleases,  and  thus  spread  abroad  a  multitude  of 
those  marvels  which  are  called  monsters,  por¬ 
tents,  prodigies,  phenomena,  and  which  if  I  were 
minded  to  cite  and  record,  what  end  would  there 
be  to  this  work?  They  say  that  they  are  called 
“monsters,”  because  they  demonstrate  or  signi¬ 
fy  something;  “portents,”  because  they  portend 
something;  and  so  forth.  But  let  their  diviners 
see  how  they  are  either  deceived,  or  even  when 
they  do  predict  true  things,  it  is  because  they 
are  inspired  by  spirits,  who  are  intent  upon  en¬ 
tangling  the  minds  of  men  (worthy,  indeed,  of 
such  a  fate)  in  the  meshes  of  a  hurtful  curiosity, 
or  how  they  light  now  and  then  upon  some  truth, 
because  they  make  so  many  predictions.  Yet, 
for  our  part,  these  things  which  happen  con¬ 
trary  to  nature,  and  are  said  to  be  contrary  to 
nature  (as  the  apostle,  speaking  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  men,  says  that  to  graft  the  wild  olive  into 
the  good  olive,  and  to  partake  of  its  fatness,  is 
contrary  to  nature),  and  are  called  monsters, 
phenomena,  portents,  prodigies,  ought  to  dem¬ 
onstrate,  portend,  predict  that  God  will  bring  to 
pass  what  He  has  foretold  regarding  the  bodies 
of  men,  no  difficulty  preventing  Him,  no  law  of 
nature  prescribing  to  Him  His  limit.  How  He 
has  foretold  what  He  is  to  do,  I  think  I  have  suf¬ 
ficiently  shown  in  the  preceding  book,  culling 
from  the  sacred  Scriptures,  both  of  the  New 
and  Old  Testaments,  not,  indeed,  all  the  pas¬ 
sages  that  relate  to  this,  but  as  many  as  I  judged 
to  suffice  for  this  work. 

Chap.  9.  Of  hell,  and  the  nature  of  eternal  pun¬ 
ishments 

So  then  what  God  by  His  prophet  has  said  of 
the  everlasting  punishment  of  the  damned  shall 
come  to  pass — shall  without  fail  come  to  pass — 
“their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall  their  fire 
be  quenched.”1  In  order  to  impress  this  upon  us 
most  forcibly,  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself,  when 
ordering  us  to  cut  off  our  members,  meaning 
thereby  those  persons  whom  a  man  loves  as  the 
most  useful  members  of  his  body,  says,  “It  is 
better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed,  than 
having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell,  into  the  fire 
that  never  shall  be  quenched;  where  their  worm 
dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched.”  Simi¬ 
larly  of  the  foot:  “It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter 
halt  into  life,  than  having  two  feet  to  be  cast 

1Isa.  66.  24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

into  hell,  into  the  fire  that  never  shall  be 
quenched;  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the 
fire  is  not  quenched.”  So,  too,  of  the  eye:  “It  is 
better  for  thee  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
with  one  eye,  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast 
into  hell  fire;  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
the  fire  is  not  quenched.”1  He  did  not  shrink 
from  using  the  same  words  three  times  over  in 
one  passage.  And  who  is  not  terrified  by  this 
repetition,  and  by  the  threat  of  that  punishment 
uttered  so  vehemently  by  the  lips  of  the  Lord 
Himself? 

Now  they  who  would  refer  both  the  fire  and 
the  worm  to  the  spirit,  and  not  to  the  body,  af¬ 
firm  that  the  wicked,  who  are  separated  from 
the  kingdom  of  God,  shall  be  burned,  as  it  were, 
by  the  anguish  of  a  spirit  repenting  too  late  and 
fruitlessly;  and  they  contend  that  fire  is  there¬ 
fore  not  inappropriately  used  to  express  this 
burning  torment,  as  when  the  apostle  exclaims 
“Who  is  offended,  and  I  burn  not?”2  The  worm, 
too,  they  think,  is  to  be  similarly  understood. 
For  it  is  written,  they  say,  “As  the  moth  con¬ 
sumes  the  garment,  and  the  worm  the  wood,  so 
does  grief  consume  the  heart  of  a  man.”3  But 
they  who  make  no  doubt  that  in  that  future  pun¬ 
ishment  both  body  and  soul  shall  suffer,  affirm 
that  the  body  shall  be  burned  with  fire,  while  the 
soul  shall  be.  as  it  were,  gnawed  by  a  worm  of 
anguish.  Though  this  view  is  more  reasonable — 
for  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  either  body  or 
soul  will  escape  pain  in  the  future  punishment — * 
yet,  for  my  own  part,  I  find  it  easier  to  under¬ 
stand  both  as  referring  to  the  body  than  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  neither  does ;  and  I  think  that  Scrip¬ 
ture  is  silent  regarding  the  spiritual  pain  of  the 
damned,  because,  though  not  expressed,  it  is 
necessarily  understood  that  in  a  body  thus  tor¬ 
mented  the  soul  also  is  tortured  with  a  fruitless 
repentance.  For  we  read  in  the  ancient  Scrip¬ 
tures,  “The  vengeance  of  the  flesh  of  the  un¬ 
godly  is  fire  and  worms.”4  It  might  have  been 
more  briefly  said,  “The  vengeance  of  the  ungod¬ 
ly.”  Why,  then,  was  it  said,  “The  flesh  of  the 
ungodly,”  unless  because  both  the  fire  and  the 
worm  are  to  be  the  punishment  of  the  flesh?  Or 
if  the  object  of  the  writer  in  saying,  “The  venge¬ 
ance  of  the  flesh,”  was  to  indicate  that  this 
shall  be  the  punishment  of  those  who  live  after 
the  flesh  (for  this  leads  to  the  second  death,  as 
the  apostle  intimated  when  he  said,  “For  if  ye 
live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die”5),  let  each  one 
make  his  own  choice,  either  assigning  the  fire 
to  the  body  and  the  worm  to  the  soul — the  one 

'Mark,  9.  43-48.  2II  Cor.  n.  29.  3Isa.  51.  8. 

4Ecclus.  7.  17.  6Rom.  8.  13. 


GOD  XXI.  9-10  569 

figuratively,  the  other  really — or  assigning  both 
really  to  the  body.  For  I  have  already  sufficient¬ 
ly  made  out  that  animals  can  live  in  the  fire,  in 
burning  without  being  consumed,  in  pain  with¬ 
out  dying,  by  a  miracle  of  the  most  omnipotent 
Creator,  to  Whom  no  one  can  deny  that  this  is 
possible,  if  he  be  not  ignorant  by  Whom  has  been 
made  all  that  is  wonderful  in  all  nature.  For  it  is 
God  Himself  Who  has  wrought  all  these  mira¬ 
cles,  great  and  small,  in  this  world  which  I  have 
mentioned,  and  incomparably  more  which  I 
have  omitted,  and  Who  has  enclosed  these  mar¬ 
vels  in  this  world,  itself  the  greatest  miracle  of 
all.  Let  each  man,  then,  choose  which  he  will, 
whether  he  thinks  that  the  worm  is  real  and  per¬ 
tains  to  the  body,  or  that  spiritual  things  are 
meant  by  bodily  representations,  and  that  it  be¬ 
longs  to  the  soul.  But  which  of  these  is  true  will 
be  more  readily  discovered  by  the  facts  them¬ 
selves,  when  there  shall  be  in  the  saints  such 
knowledge  as  shall  not  require  that  their  own 
experience  teach  them  the  nature  of  these  pun¬ 
ishments,  but  as  shall,  by  its  own  fullness  and 
perfection,  suffice  to  instruct  them  in  this  mat¬ 
ter.  For  “now  we  know  in  part,  until  that  which 
is  perfect  is  come”;6  only,  this  we  believe  about 
those  future  bodies,  that  they  shall  be  such  as 
shall  certainly  be  pained  by  the  fire. 

Chap.  10.  Whether  the  fire  of  hell,  if  it  he  ma¬ 
terial  fire,  can  burn  the  wicked  spirits,  that  is 
to  say,  devils,  who  are  immaterial 
Here  arises  the  question :  If  the  fire  is  not  to 
be  immaterial,  analogous  to  the  pain  of  the  soul, 
but  material,  burning  by  contact,  so  that  bodies 
may  be  tormented  in  it,  how  can  evil  spirits  be 
punished  in  it?  For  it  is  undoubtedly  the  same 
fire  which  is  to  serve  for  the  punishment  of  men 
and  of  devils,  according  to  the  words  of  Christ : 
“Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels” ; 7  un¬ 
less,  perhaps,  as  learned  men  have  thought,  the 
devils  have  a  kind  of  body  made  of  that  dense 
and  humid  air  which  we  feel  strikes  us  when  the 
wind  is  blowing.  And  if  this  kind  of  substance 
could  not  be  affected  by  fire,  it  could  not  burn 
when  heated  in  the  baths.  For  in  order  to  burn, 
it  is  first  burned,  and  affects  other  things  as  it¬ 
self  is  affected.  But  if  any  one  maintains  that 
the  devils  have  no  bodies,  this  is  not  a  matter 
either  to  be  laboriously  investigated,  or  to  be  de¬ 
bated  with  keenness.  For  why  may  we  not  as¬ 
sert  that  even  immaterial  spirits  may,  in  some 
extraordinary  way,  yet  really  be  pained  by  the 
punishment  of  material  fire,  if  the  spirits  of 
6I  Cor.  13.  9,  10.  7Matt.  25.  41. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


570 

men,  which  also  are  certainly  immaterial,  are 
both  now  contained  in  material  members  of  the 
body  and  in  the  world  to  come  shall  be  indis¬ 
solubly  united  to  their  own  bodies?  Therefore, 
though  the  devils  have  no  bodies,  yet  their  spir¬ 
its,  that  is,  the  devils  themselves,  shall  be 
brought  into  thorough  contact  with  the  material 
fires,  to  be  tormented  by  them ;  not  that  the  fires 
themselves  with  which  they  are  brought  into 
contact  shall  be  animated  by  their  connection 
with  these  spirits,  and  become  animals  com¬ 
posed  of  body  and  spirit,  but,  as  I  said,  this 
junction  will  be  effected  in  a  wonderful  and  in¬ 
effable  way,  so  that  they  shall  receive  pain  from 
the  fires,  but  give  no  life  to  them.  And,  in  truth, 
this  other  mode  of  union,  by  which  bodies  and 
spirits  are  bound  together  and  become  animals, 
is  thoroughly  marvellous  and  beyond  the  com¬ 
prehension  of  man,  though  this  it  is  which  is 
man. 

I  would  indeed  say  that  these  spirits  will  burn 
without  any  body  of  their  own,  as  that  rich  man 
was  burning  in  hell  when  he  exclaimed,  “I  am 
tormented  in  this  flame,”1  were  I  not  aware  that 
it  is  aptly  said  in  reply,  that  that  flame  was  of 
the  same  nature  as  the  eyes  he  raised  and  fixed 
on  Lazarus,  as  the  tongue  on  which  he  entreated 
that  a  little  cooling  water  might  be  dropped,  or 
as  the  finger  of  Lazarus,  with  which  he  asked 
that  this  might  be  done — all  of  which  took  place 
where  souls  exist  without  bodies.  Thus,  there¬ 
fore,  both  that  flame  in  which  he  burned  and 
that  drop  he  begged  were  immaterial  and  resem¬ 
bled  the  visions  of  sleepers  or  persons  in  an  ec¬ 
stasy,  to  whom  immaterial  objects  appear  in  a 
bodily  form.  For  the  man  himself  who  is  in  such 
a  state,  though  it  be  in  spirit  only,  not  in  body, 
yet  sees  himself  so  like  to  his  own  body  that  he 
cannot  discern  any  difference  whatever.  But 
that  hell,  which  also  is  called  a  lake  of  fire  and 
brimstone,2  will  be  material  fire,  and  will  tor¬ 
ment  the  bodies  of  the  damned,  whether  men  or 
devils — the  solid  bodies  of  the  one,  aerial  bodies 
of  the  others;  or  if  only  men  have  bodies  as  well 
as  souls,  yet  the  evil  spirits,  though  without 
bodies,  shall  be  so  connected  with  the  bodily 
fires  as  to  receive  pain  without  imparting  life. 
One  fire  certainly  shall  be  the  lot  of  both,  for 
thus  the  truth  has  declared. 

Chap.  ii.  Whether  it  is  jtist  that  the  punish¬ 
ments  of  sins  last  longer  than  the  sins  them¬ 
selves  lasted 

Some,  however,  of  those  against  whom  we 
are  defending  the  city  of  God,  think  it  unjust 

^uke,  16.  24.  2Rev.  20.  10. 


that  any  man  be  doomed  to  an  eternal  punish¬ 
ment  for  sins  which,  no  matter  how  great  they 
were,  were  perpetrated  in  a  brief  space  of  time; 
as  if  any  law  ever  regulated  the  duration  of  the 
punishment  by  the  duration  of  the  offence  pun¬ 
ished!  Cicero  tells  us  that  the  laws  recognize 
eight  kinds  of  penalty — damages,  imprison¬ 
ment,  scourging,  reparation,  disgrace,  exile, 
death,  slavery.  Is  there  any  one  of  these  which 
may  be  compressed  into  a  brevity  proportioned 
to  the  rapid  commission  of  the  offence,  so  that 
no  longer  time  may  be  spent  in  its  punishment 
than  in  its  perpetration,  unless,  perhaps,  repara¬ 
tion?  For  this  requires  that  the  offender  suffer 
what  he  did,  as  that  clause  of  the  law  says,  “Eye 
for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth.” 3  For  certainly  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  an  offender  to  lose  his  eye  by  the  sever¬ 
ity  of  legal  retaliation  in  as  brief  a  time  as  he 
deprived  another  of  his  eye  by  the  cruelty  of  his 
own  lawlessness.  But  if  scourging  be  a  reason¬ 
able  penalty  for  kissing  another  man’s  wife,  is 
not  the  fault  of  an  instant  visited  with  long 
hours  of  atonement,  and  the  momentary  delight 
punished  with  lasting  pain?  What  shall  we  say 
of  imprisonment?  Must  the  criminal  be  con¬ 
fined  only  for  so  long  a  time  as  he  spent  on  the 
offence  for  which  he  is  committed?  or  is  not  a 
penalty  of  many  years’  confinement  imposed  on 
the  slave  who  has  provoked  his  master  with  a 
word,  or  has  struck  him  a  blow  that  is  quickly 
over?  And  as  to  damages,  disgrace,  exile,  slav¬ 
ery,  which  are  commonly  inflicted  so  as  to  admit 
of  no  relaxation  or  pardon,  do  not  these  resem¬ 
ble  eternal  punishments  in  so  far  as  this  short 
life  allows  a  resemblance?  For  they  are  not  eter¬ 
nal  only  because  the  life  in  which  they  are  en¬ 
dured  is  not  eternal;  and  yet  the  crimes  which 
are  punished  with  these  most  protracted  suffer¬ 
ings  are  perpetrated  in  a  very  brief  space  of 
time.  Nor  is  there  any  one  who  would  suppose 
that  the  pains  of  punishment  should  occupy  as 
short  a  time  as  the  offense ;  or  that  murder,  adul¬ 
tery,  sacrilege,  or  any  other  crime,  should  be 
measured,  not  by  the  enormity  of  the  injury  or 
wickedness,  but  by  the  length  of  time  spent  in 
its  perpetration.  Then  as  to  the  award  of  death 
for  any  great  crime,  do  the  laws  reckon  the  pun¬ 
ishment  to  consist  in  the  brief  moment  in  which 
death  is  inflicted,  or  in  this,  that  the  offender 
is  eternally  banished  from  the  society  of  the  liv¬ 
ing?  And  just  as  the  punishment  of  the  first 
death  cuts  men  off  from  this  present  mortal  city, 
so  does  the  punishment  of  the  second  death  cut 
men  off  from  that  future  immortal  city.  For  as 
the  laws  of  this  present  city  do  not  provide  for 
3Ex.  21.  24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

the  executed  criminal’s  return  to  it,  so  neither  is 
he  who  is  condemned  to  the  second  death  re¬ 
called  again  to  life  everlasting.  But  if  temporal 
sin  is  visited  with  eternal  punishment,  how, 
then,  they  say,  is  that  true  which  your  Christ 
says,  “With  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete 
withal  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again”?1  and 
they  do  not  observe  that  “the  same  measure” 
refers,  not  to  an  equal  space  of  time,  but  to  the 
retribution  of  evil,  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  law 
by  which  he  who  has  done  evil  suffers  evil.  Be¬ 
sides,  these  words  could  be  appropriately  under¬ 
stood  as  referring  to  the  matter  of  which  our 
Lord  was  speaking  when  He  used  them,  viz., 
judgments  and  condemnation.  Thus,  if  he  who 
unjustly  judges  and  condemns  is  himself  justly 
judged  and  condemned,  he  receives  “with  the 
same  measure”  though  not  the  same  thing  as  he 
gave.  For  judgment  he  gave,  and  judgment  he 
receives,  though  the  judgment  he  gave  was  un¬ 
just,  the  judgment  he  receives  just. 

Chap.  12.  Of  the  greatness  of  the  first  trans¬ 
gression,  on  account  of  which  eternal  punish¬ 
ment  is  due  to  all  who  are  not  within  the  pale 
of  the  Saviour’s  grace 

But  eternal  punishment  seems  hard  and  un¬ 
just  to  human  perceptions,  because  in  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  our  mortal  condition  there  is  wanting 
that  highest  and  purest  wisdom  by  which  it  can 
be  perceived  how  great  a  wickedness  was  com¬ 
mitted  in  that  first  transgression.  The  more  en¬ 
joyment  man  found  in  God,  the  greater  was  his 
wickedness  in  abandoning  Him ;  and  he  who  de¬ 
stroyed  in  himself  a  good  which  might  have 
been  eternal,  became  worthy  of  eternal  evil. 
Hence  the  whole  mass  of  the  human  race  is  con¬ 
demned;  for  he  who  at  first  gave  entrance  to  sin 
has  been  punished  with  all  his  posterity  who 
were  in  him  as  in  a  root,  so  that  no  one  is  ex¬ 
empt  from  this  just  and  due  punishment,  unless 
delivered  by  mercy  and  undeserved  grace ;  and 
the  human  race  is  so  apportioned  that  in  some 
is  displayed  the  efficacy  of  merciful  grace,  in 
the  re^t  the  efficacy  of  just  retribution.  For  both 
could  not  be  displayed  in  all;  for  if  all  had  re¬ 
mained  under  the  punishment  of  just  condem¬ 
nation,  there  would  have  been  seen  in  no  one 
the  mercy  of  redeeming  grace.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  all  had  been  transferred  from  darkness 
to  light,  the  severity  of  retribution  would  have 
been  manifested  in  none.  But  many  more  are 
left  under  punishment  than  are  delivered  from 
it,  in  order  that  it  may  thus  be  shown  what  was 
due  to  all.  And  had  it  been  inflicted  on  all,  no 
^uke,  6.  38. 


GOD  XXL  11-13  571 

one  could  justly  have  found  fault  with  the  jus¬ 
tice  of  Him  Who  taketh  vengeance;  whereas,  in 
the  deliverance  of  so  many  from  that  just 
award,  there  is  cause  to  render  the  most  cordial 
thanks  to  the  gratuitous  bounty  of  Him  Who  de¬ 
livers. 

Chap.  13.  Against  the  opinion  of  those  who 
think  that  the  punishments  of  the  wicked  af¬ 
ter  death  are  purgatorial 
The  Platonists,  indeed,  while  they  maintain 
that  no  sins  are  unpunished,  suppose  that  all 
punishment  is  administered  for  remedial  pur¬ 
poses,2  be  it  inflicted  by  human  or  divine  law,  in 
this  life  or  after  death;  for  a  man  may  be  scath- 
less  here,  or,  though  punished,  may  yet  not 
amend.  Hence  that  passage  of  Virgil,  where, 
when  he  had  said  of  our  earthly  bodies  and  mor¬ 
tal  members,  that  our  souls  derive — 

Hence  wild  desires  and  grovelling  fears, 

And  human  laughter,  human  tears; 

Immured  in  dungeon-seeming  night, 

They  look  abroad,  yet  see  no  light, 
goes  on  to  say: 

Nay,  when  at  last  the  life  has  fled, 

And  left  the  body  cold  and  dead, 

Ee’n  then  there  passes  not  away 
The  painful  heritage  of  clay; 

Fidl  many  a  long-contracted  stain 
Perforce  must  linger  deep  in  grain. 

So  penal  sufferings  they  endure 

For  ancient  crime,  to  make  them  pure; 

Some  hang  aloft  in  open  view, 

For  winds  to  pierce  them  through  and  through, 
While  others  purge  their  guilt  deep-dyed 
In  burning  fire  or  whelming  tide? 

They  who  are  of  this  opinion  would  have  all 
punishments  after  death  to  be  purgatorial;  and 
as  the  elements  of  air,  fire,  and  water  are  supe¬ 
rior  to  earth,  one  or  other  of  these  may  be  the 
instrument  of  expiating  and  purging  away  the 
stain  contracted  by  the  contagion  of  earth.  So 
Virgil  hints  at  the  air  in  the  words,  “Some  hang 
aloft  for  winds  to  pierce”;  at  the  water  in 
“whelming  tide”;  and  at  fire  in  the  expression 
“in  burning  fire.”  For  our  part,  we  recognize 
that  even  in  this  life  some  punishments  are  pur¬ 
gatorial — not,  indeed,  to  those  whose  life  is 
none  the  better,  but  rather  the  worse  for  them, 
but  to  those  who  are  constrained  by  them  to 
amend  their  life.  All  other  punishments,  wheth¬ 
er  temporal  or  eternal,  inflicted  as  they  are  on 
every  one  by  divine  providence,  are  sent  either 
on  account  of  past  sins,  or  of  sins  presently  al¬ 
lowed  in  the  life,  or  to  exercise  and  reveal  a 
man’s  graces.  They  may  be  inflicted  by  the  in- 
2See  Plato,  Protagoras ,  324.  zAZneid,  bk.  vi.  733. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


strumentality  of  bad  men  and  angels  as  well  as 
of  the  good.  For  even  if  any  one  suffers  some 
hurt  through  another’s  wickedness  or  mistake, 
the  man  indeed  sins  whose  ignorance  or  injus¬ 
tice  does  the  harm;  but  God,  Who  by  His  just 
though  hidden  judgment  permits  it  to  be  done, 
sins  not.  But  temporary  punishments  are  suf¬ 
fered  by  some  in  this  life  only,  by  others  after 
death,  by  others  both  now  and  then;  but  all  of 
them  before  that  last  and  strictest  judgment. 
But  of  those  who  suffer  temporary  punishments 
after  death,  all  are  not  doomed  to  those  ever¬ 
lasting  pains  which  are  to  follow  that  judgment ; 
for  to  some,  as  we  have  already  said,  what  is  not 
remitted  in  this  world  is  remitted  in  the  next, 
that  is,  they  are  not  punished  with  the  eternal 
punishment  of  the  world  to  come. 

Chap.  14.  Of  the  temporary  punishments  of 
this  life  to  which  the  human  condition  is  sub¬ 
ject 

Quite  exceptional  are  those  who  are  not  pun¬ 
ished  in  this  life,  but  only  afterwards.  Yet  that 
there  have  been  some  who  have  reached  the  de¬ 
crepitude  of  age  without  experiencing  even  the 
slightest  sickness,  and  who  have  had  uninter¬ 
rupted  enjoyment  of  life,  I  know  both  from  re¬ 
port  and  from  my  own  observation.  However, 
the  very  life  we  mortals  lead  is  itself  all  punish¬ 
ment,  for  it  is  all  temptation,  as  the  Scriptures 
declare,  where  it  is  written,  “Is  not  the  life  of 
man  upon  earth  a  temptation?”1  For  ignorance 
is  itself  no  slight  punishment,  or  want  of  cul¬ 
ture,  which  it  is  with  justice  thought  so  neces¬ 
sary  to  escape,  that  boys  are  compelled,  under 
pain  of  severe  punishment,  to  learn  trades  or 
letters ;  and  the  learning  to  which  they  are  driv¬ 
en  by  punishment  is  itself  so  much  of  a  punish¬ 
ment  to  them,  that  they  sometimes  prefer  the 
pain  that  drives  them  to  the  pain  to  which  they 
are  driven  by  it.  And  who  would  not  shrink  from 
the  alternative  and  elect  to  die,  if  it  were  pro¬ 
posed  to  him  either  to  suffer  death  or  to  be  again 
an  infant?  Our  infancy,  indeed,  introducing  us 
to  this  life  not  with  laughter  but  with  tears, 
seems  unconsciously  to  predict  the  ills  we  are  to 
encounter.  Zoroaster  alone  is  said  to  have 
laughed  when  he  was  born,  and  that  unnatural 
omen  portended  no  good  to  him.  For  he  is  said 
to  have  been  the  inventor  of  magical  arts, 
though  indeed  they  were  unable  to  secure  to  him 
even  the  poor  felicity  of  this  present  life  against 
the  assaults  of  his  enemies.  For,  himself  king  of 
the  Bactrians,  he  was  conquered  by  Ninus  king 
'Job,  7.  1. 


of  the  Assyrians.  In  short,  the  words  of  Scrip¬ 
ture,  “An  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  Adam, 
from  the  day  that  they  go  out  of  their  mother’s 
womb  till  the  day  that  they  return  to  the  moth¬ 
er  of  all  things”  2 — these  words  so  infallibly  find 
fulfilment  that  even  the  little  ones,  who  by  the 
laver  of  regeneration  have  been  freed  from  the 
bond  of  original  sin  in  which  alone  they  were 
held,  yet  suffer  many  ills,  and  in  some  instances 
are  even  exposed  to  the  assaults  of  evil  spirits. 
But  let  us  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that  this 
suffering  is  prejudicial  to  their  future  happiness, 
even  though  it  has  so  increased  as  to  sever  soul 
from  body  and  to  terminate  their  life  in  that 
early  age. 

Chap.  15.  That  everything  which  the  grace  of 
God  does  in  the  way  of  rescuing  us  from  the 
inveterate  evils  in  which  we  are  sunk ,  pertains 
to  the  future  world,  in  which  all  things  are 
made  new 

Nevertheless,  in  the  “heavy  yoke  that  is  laid 
upon  the  sons  of  Adam,  from  the  day  that  they 
go  out  of  their  mother’s  womb  to  the  day  that 
they  return  to  the  mother  of  all  things,”  there 
is  found  an  admirable  though  painful  monitor 
teaching  us  to  be  sober-minded,  and  convincing 
us  that  this  life  has  become  penal  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  that  outrageous  wickedness  which 
was  perpetrated  in  Paradise,  and  that  all  to 
which  the  New  Testament  invites  belongs  to 
that  future  inheritance  which  awaits  us  in  the 
world  to  come,  and  is  offered  for  our  acceptance, 
as  the  earnest  that  we  may,  in  its  own  due  time, 
obtain  that  of  which  it  is  the  pledge.  Now,  there¬ 
fore,  let  us  walk  in  hope,  and  let  us  by  the  spirit 
mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  and  so  make  prog¬ 
ress  from  day  to  day.  For  “the  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  His”  ;3  and  “as  many  as  are  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  sons  of  God,”  4  but 
by  grace,  not  by  nature.  For  there  is  but  one  Son 
of  God  by  nature,  Who  in  His  compassion  be¬ 
came  Son  of  man  for  our  sakes,  that  we,  by  na¬ 
ture  sons  of  men,  might  by  grace  become 
through  Him  sons  of  God.  For  He,  abiding  un¬ 
changeable,  took  upon  Him  our  nature,  that 
thereby  He  might  take  us  to  Himself ;  and,  hold¬ 
ing  fast  His  own  divinity,  He  became  partaker 
of  our  infirmity,  that  we,  being  changed  into 
some  better  thing,  might,  by  participating  in  His 
righteousness  and  immortality,  lose  our  own 
properties  of  sin  and  mortality,  and  preserve 
whatever  good  quality  He  had  implanted  in  our 
nature,  perfected  now  by  sharing  in  the  goodness 
2Ecclus.  40.  1.  3II  Tim.  2.  19.  4Rom.  8.  14. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXI.  14-16  573 


of  His  nature.  For  as  by  the  sin  of  one  man  we 
have  fallen  into  a  misery  so  deplorable,  so  by 
the  righteousness  of  one  Man,  Who  also  is  God, 
shall  we  come  to  a  blessedness  inconceivably  ex¬ 
alted.  Nor  ought  any  one  to  trust  that  he  has 
passed  from  the  one  man  to  the  other  until  he 
shall  have  reached  that  place  where  there  is  no 
temptation  and  have  entered  into  the  peace 
which  he  seeks  in  the  many  and  various  conflicts 
of  this  war,  in  which  “the  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.”  1 
Now,  such  a  war  as  this  would  have  had  no  ex¬ 
istence,  if  human  nature  had,  in  the  exercise  of 
free  will,  continued  steadfast  in  the  uprightness 
in  which  it  was  created.  But  now  in  its  misery  it 
makes  war  upon  itself,  because  in  its  blessed¬ 
ness  it  would  not  continue  at  peace  with  God; 
and  this,  though  it  be  a  miserable  calamity,  is 
better  than  the  earlier  stages  of  this  life,  which 
do  not  recognize  that  a  war  is  to  be  maintained. 
For  better  is  it  to  contend  with  vices  than  with¬ 
out  conflict  to  be  subdued  by  them.  Better,  I 
say,  is  war  with  the  hope  of  peace  everlasting 
than  captivity  without  any  thought  of  deliver¬ 
ance.  We  long,  indeed,  for  the  cessation  of  this 
war,  and,  kindled  by  the  flame  of  divine  love,  we 
burn  for  entrance  on  that  well-ordered  peace  in 
which  whatever  is  inferior  is  for  ever  subordi¬ 
nated  to  what  is  above  it.  But  if  (which  God  for¬ 
bid)  there  had  been  no  hope  of  so  blessed  a  con¬ 
summation,  we  should  still  have  preferred  to  en¬ 
dure  the  hardness  of  this  conflict,  rather  than, 
by  our  non-resistance,  to  yield  ourselves  to  the 
dominion  of  vice. 

Chap.  16.  The  laws  of  grace,  which  extend  to  all 
the  epochs  of  the  life  of  the  regenerate 
But  such  is  God’s  mercy  towards  the  vessels 
of  mercy  which  He  has  prepared  for  glory  that 
even  the  first  age  of  man,  that  is,  infancy,  which 
submits  without  any  resistance  to  the  flesh,  and 
the  second  age,  which  is  called  boyhood,  and 
which  has  not  yet  understanding  enough  to  un¬ 
dertake  this  warfare,  and  therefore  yields  to  al¬ 
most' every  vicious  pleasure  (because  though 
this  age  has  the  power  of  speech,  and  may  there¬ 
fore  seem  to  have  passed  infancy,  the  mind  is 
still  too  weak  to  comprehend  the  command¬ 
ment),  yet  if  either  of  these  ages  has  received 
the  sacraments  of  the  Mediator,  then,  although 
the  present  life  be  immediately  brought  to  an 
end,  the  child,  having  been  translated  from  the 
power  of  darkness  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
shall  not  only  be  saved  from  eternal  punish- 
Gal.  5.  17. 


ments,  but  shall  not  even  suffer  purgatorial  tor¬ 
ments  after  death.  For  spiritual  regeneration  of 
itself  suffices  to  prevent  any  evil  consequences 
resulting  after  death  from  the  connection  with 
death  which  carnal  generation  forms.  But  when 
we  reach  that  age  which  can  now  comprehend 
the  commandment,  and  submit  to  the  dominion 
of  law,  we  must  declare  war  upon  vices  and 
wage  this  war  keenly,  lest  we  be  landed  in 
damnable  sins.  And  if  vices  have  not  gathered 
strength,  by  habitual  victory  they  are  more  eas¬ 
ily  overcome  and  subdued;  but  if  they  have 
been  used  to  conquer  and  rule,  it  is  only  with 
difficulty  and  labour  they  are  mastered.  And  in¬ 
deed  this  victory  cannot  be  sincerely  and  truly 
gained  but  by  delighting  in  true  righteousness, 
and  it  is  faith  in  Christ  that  gives  this.  For  if  the 
law  be  present  with  its  command,  and  the  Spirit 
be  absent  with  His  help,  the  presence  of  the  pro¬ 
hibition  serves  only  to  increase  the  desire  to  sin, 
and  adds  the  guilt  of  transgression.  Sometimes, 
indeed,  patent  vices  are  overcome  by  other  and 
hidden  vices,  which  are  reckoned  virtues, 
though  pride  and  a  kind  of  ruinous  self-sufficien¬ 
cy  are  their  informing  principles.  Accordingly 
vices  are  then  only  to  be  considered  overcome 
when  they  are  conquered  by  the  love  of  God, 
which  God  Himself  alone  gives,  and  which  He 
gives  only  through  the  Mediator  between  God 
and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  Who  became  a 
partaker  of  our  mortality  that  He  might  make 
us  partakers  of  His  divinity.  But  few  indeed  are 
they  who  are  so  happy  as  to  have  passed  their 
youth  without  committing  any  damnable  sins, 
either  by  dissolute  or  violent  conduct,  or  by  fol¬ 
lowing  some  godless  and  unlawful  opinions,  but 
have  subdued  by  their  greatness  of  soul  every¬ 
thing  in  them  which  could  make  them  the  slaves 
of  carnal  pleasures.  The  greater  number  having 
first  become  transgressors  of  the  law  that  they 
have  received,  and  having  allowed  vice  to  have 
the  ascendency  in  them,  then  flee  to  grace  for 
help,  and  so,  by  a  penitence  more  bitter,  and  a 
struggle  more  violent  than  it  would  otherwise 
have  been,  they  subdue  the  soul  to  God,  and 
thus  give  it  its  lawful  authority  over  the  flesh, 
and  become  victors.  Whoever,  therefore,  desires 
to  escape  eternal  punishment,  let  him  not  only 
be  baptized,  but  also  justified  in  Christ,  and  so 
let  him  in  truth  pass  from  the  devil  to  Christ. 
And  let  him  not  fancy  that  there  are  any  purga¬ 
torial  pains  except  before  that  final  and  dread¬ 
ful  judgment.  We  must  not,  however,  deny  that 
even  the  eternal  fire  will  be  proportioned  to  the 
deserts  of  the  wicked,  so  that  to  some  it  will  be 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


more,  and  to  others  less  painful,  whether  this 
result  be  accomplished  by  a  variation  in  the 
temperature  of  the  fire  itself,  graduated  accord¬ 
ing  to  every  one’s  merit,  or  whether  it  be  that 
the  heat  remains  the  same,  but  that  all  do  not 
feel  it  with  equal  intensity  of  torment. 

Chap.  17.  Of  those  who  fancy  that  no  men  shall 

be  punished  eternally 

I  must  now,  I  see,  enter  the  lists  of  amicable 
controversy  with  those  tender-hearted  Chris¬ 
tians  who  decline  to  believe  that  any,  or  that 
all  of  those  whom  the  infallibly  just  Judge  may 
pronounce  worthy  of  the  punishment  of  hell, 
shall  suffer  eternally,  and  who  suppose  that  they 
shall  be  delivered  after  a  fixed  term  of  punish¬ 
ment,  longer  or  shorter  according  to  the  amount 
of  each  man’s  sin.  In  respect  of  this  matter,  Or- 
igen  was  even  more  indulgent ;  for  he  believed 
that  even  the  devil  himself  and  his  angels,  after 
suffering  those  more  severe  and  prolonged  pains 
which  their  sins  deserved,  should  be  delivered 
from  their  torments,  and  associated  with  the 
holy  angels.  But  the  Church,  not  without  reason, 
condemned  him  for  this  and  other  errors,  es¬ 
pecially  for  his  theory  of  the  ceaseless  alterna¬ 
tion  of  happiness  and  misery,  and  the  intermin¬ 
able  transitions  from  the  one  state  to  the  other 
at  fixed  periods  of  ages;  for  in  this  theory  he 
lost  even  the  credit  of  being  merciful,  by  allot¬ 
ting  to  the  saints  real  miseries  for  the  expia¬ 
tion  of  their  sins,  and  false  happiness,  which 
brought  them  no  true  and  secure  joy,  that  is,  no 
fearless  assurance  of  eternal  blessedness.  Very 
different,  however,  is  the  error  we  speak  of, 
which  is  dictated  by  the  tenderness  of  these 
Christians  who  suppose  that  the  sufferings  of 
those  who  are  condemned  in  the  judgment  will 
be  temporary,  while  the  blessedness  of  all  who 
are  sooner  or  later  set  free  will  be  eternal.  Which 
opinion,  if  it  is  good  and  true  because  it  is  mer¬ 
ciful,  will  be  so  much  the  better  and  truer  in 
proportion  as  it  becomes  more  merciful.  Let, 
then,  this  fountain  of  mercy  be  extended,  and 
flow  forth  even  to  the  lost  angels,  and  let  them 
also  be  set  free,  at  least  after  as  many  and  long 
ages  as  seem  fit!  Why  does  this  stream  of  mercy 
flow  to  all  the  human  race,  and  dry  up  as  soon 
as  it  reaches  the  angelic?  And  yet  they  dare  not 
extend  their  pity  further,  and  propose  the  de¬ 
liverance  of  the  devil  himself.  Or  if  any  one  is 
bold  enough  to  do  so,  he  does  indeed  put  to 
shame  their  charity,  but  is  himself  convicted  of 
error  that  is  more  unsightly,  and  a  wresting  of 
God’s  truth  that  is  more  perverse,  in  proportion 
as  his  clemency  of  sentiment  seems  to  be  greater. 


Chap,  i  S.  Of  those  who  fancy  that ,  on  account 
of  the  saint s}  intercession,  no  man  shall  be 
damned  in  the  last  judgment 

There  are  others,  again,  with  whose  opinions 
I  have  become  acquainted  in  conversation,  who, 
though  they  seem  to  reverence  the  holy  Scrip¬ 
tures,  are  yet  of  reprehensible  life,  and  who  ac¬ 
cordingly,  in  their  own  interest,  attribute  to  God 
a  still  greater  compassion  towards  men.  For  they 
acknowledge  that  it  is  truly  predicted  in  the  di¬ 
vine  word  that  the  wicked  and  unbelieving  are 
worthy  of  punishment,  but  they  assert  that, 
when  the  judgment  comes,  mercy  will  prevail. 
For,  say  they,  God,  having  compassion  on  them, 
will  give  them  up  to  the  prayers  and  interces¬ 
sion  of  His  saints.  For  if  the  saints  used  to  pray 
for  them  when  they  suffered  from  their  cruel 
hatred,  how  much  more  will  they  do  so  when 
they  see  them  prostrate  and  humble  suppliants? 
For  we  cannot,  they  say,  believe  that  the  saints 
shall  lose  their  bowels  of  compassion  wdien  they 
have  attained  the  most  perfect  and  complete 
holiness;  so  that  they  who,  when  still  sinners, 
prayed  for  their  enemies,  should  now,  when  they 
are  freed  from  sin,  withhold  from  interceding 
for  their  suppliants.  Or  shall  God  refuse  to  listen 
to  so  many  of  His  beloved  children,  when  their 
holiness  has  purged  their  prayers  of  all  hin¬ 
drance  to  His  answering  them?  And  the  passage 
of  the  psalm  which  is  cited  by  those  who  admit 
that  wicked  men  and  infidels  shall  be  punished 
for  a  long  time,  though  in  the  end  delivered 
from  all  sufferings,  is  claimed  also  by  the  per¬ 
sons  we  are  now  speaking  of  as  making  much 
more  for  them.  The  verse  runs :  “Shall  God  for¬ 
get  to  be  gracious?  Shall  He  in  anger  shut  up  His 
tender  mercies?”1  His  anger,  they  say,  would 
condemn  all  that  are  unworthy  of  everlasting 
happiness  to  endless  punishment.  But  if  He  suf¬ 
fer  them  to  be  punished  for  a  long  time,  or  even 
at  all,  must  He  not  shut  up  His  tender  mercies, 
which  the  Psalmist  implies  He  will  not  do?  For 
he  does  not  say,  Shall  He  in  anger  shut  up  His 
tender  mercies  for  a  long  period?  but  he  implies 
that  He  will  not  shut  them  up  at  all. 

And  they  deny  that  thus  God’s  threat  of  judg¬ 
ment  is  proved  to  be  false  even  though  He  con¬ 
demn  no  man,  any  more  than  we  can  say  that 
His  threat  to  overthrow  Nineveh  was  false, 
though  the  destruction  which  was  absolutely 
predicted  was  not  accomplished.  For  He  did  not 
say,  “Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown  if  they  do 
not  repent  and  amend  their  ways,”  but  without 
any  such  condition  He  foretold  that  the  city 
^s.  77-  9- 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXI.  17-21  575 


should  be  overthrown.  And  this  prediction,  they 
maintain,  was  true  because  God  predicted  the 
punishment  which  they  deserved,  although  He 
was  not  to  inflict  it.  For  though  He  spared  them 
on  their  repentance,  yet  He  was  certainly  aware 
that  they  would  repent,  and,  notwithstanding, 
absolutely  and  definitely  predicted  that  the  city 
should  be  overthrown.  This  was  true,  they  say, 
in  the  truth  of  severity,  because  they  were  wor¬ 
thy  of  it;  but  in  respect  of  the  compassion 
which  checked  His  anger,  so  that  He  spared  the 
suppliants  from  the  punishment  with  which  He 
had  threatened  the  rebellious,  it  was  not  true. 
If,  then,  He  spared  those  whom  His  own  holy 
prophet  was  provoked  at  His  sparing,  how  much 
more  shall  He  spare  those  more  wretched  sup¬ 
pliants  for  whom  all  His  saints  shall  intercede? 
And  they  suppose  that  this  conjecture  of  theirs 
is  not  hinted  at  in  Scripture,  for  the  sake  of 
stimulating  many  to  reformation  of  life  through 
fear  of  very  protracted  or  eternal  sufferings,  and 
of  stimulating  others  to  pray  for  those  who  have 
not  reformed.  However,  they  think  that  the  di¬ 
vine  oracles  are  not  altogether  silent  on  this 
point;  for  they  ask  to  what  purpose  is  it  said, 
“How  great  is  Thy  goodness  which  Thou  hast 
hidden  for  them  that  fear  Thee,”  1  if  it  be  not  to 
teach  us  that  the  great  and  hidden  sweetness  of 
God’s  mercy  is  concealed  in  order  that  men  may 
fear?  To  the  same  purpose  they  think  the  apos¬ 
tle  said,  “For  God  hath  concluded  all  men  in  un¬ 
belief,  that  He  may  have  mercy  upon  all,”  2  sig¬ 
nifying  that  no  one  should  be  condemned  by 
God.  And  yet  they  who  hold  this  opinion  do  not 
extend  it  to  the  acquittal  or  liberation  of  the 
devil  and  his  angels.  Their  human  tenderness  is 
moved  only  towards  men,  and  they  plead  chiefly 
their  own  cause,  holding  out  false  hopes  of  im¬ 
punity  to  their  own  depraved  lives  by  means  of 
this  quasi  compassion  of  God  to  the  whole  race. 
Consequently  they  who  promise  this  impunity 
even  to  the  prince  of  the  devils  and  his  satellites 
make  a  still  further  exhibition  of  the  mercy  of 
God. 

# 

Chap.  19.  Of  those  who  promise  impunity  from 
all  sins  even  to  heretics ,  through  virtue  of 
their  participation  of  the  body  of  Christ 
So,  too,  there  are  others  who  promise  this  de¬ 
liverance  from  eternal  punishment,  not,  indeed, 
to  all  men,  but  only  to  those  who  have  been 
washed  in  Christian  baptism,  and  who  become 
partakers  of  the  body  of  Christ,  no  matter  how 
they  have  lived,  or  what  heresy  or  impiety  they 
have  fallen  into.  They  ground  this  opinion  on  the 
^s.  31.  19.  2Rom.  11.  32. 


saying  of  Jesus,  “This  is  the  bread  which  cometh 
down  from  heaven,  that  if  any  man  eat  thereof, 
he  shall  not  die.  I  am  the  living  bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven.  If  a  man  eat  of  this 
bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever.” 3  Therefore,  say 
they,  it  follows  that  these  persons  must  be  de¬ 
livered  from  death  eternal,  and  at  one  time  or 
other  be  introduced  to  everlasting  life. 

Chap.  20.  Of  those  who  promise  this  indulgence 
not  to  ally  but  only  to  those  who  have  been 
baptized  as  Catholics,  though  afterwards  they 
have  broken  out  into  many  crimes  and  here¬ 
sies 

There  are  others  still  who  make  this  promise 
not  even  to  all  who  have  received  the  sacra¬ 
ments  of  the  baptism  of  Christ  and  of  His  body, 
but  only  to  the  Catholics,  however  badly  they 
have  lived.  For  these  have  eaten  the  body  of 
Christ,  not  only  sacramentally  but  really,  be¬ 
ing  incorporated  in  His  body,  as  the  apostle 
says,  “We,  being  many,  are  one  bread,  one 
body”;4  so  that,  though  they  have  afterwards 
lapsed  into  some  heresy,  or  even  into  heathen¬ 
ism  and  idolatry,  yet  by  virtue  of  this  one  thing, 
that  they  have  received  the  baptism  of  Christ 
and  eaten  the  body  of  Christ,  in  the  body  of 
Christ,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  Catholic  Church, 
they  shall  not  die  eternally,  but  at  one  time  or 
other  obtain  eternal  life ;  and  all  that  wickedness 
of  theirs  shall  not  avail  to  make  their  punish¬ 
ment  eternal,  but  only  proportionately  long  and 
severe. 

Chap.  21  .Of  those  who  assert  that  all  Catholics 
who  continue  in  the  faith,  even  though  by  the 
depravity  of  their  lives  they  have  merited 
hell  fire,  shall  be  saved  on  account  of  the 
“foundations”  of  their  faith 
There  are  some,  too,  who  found  upon  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  Scripture,  “He  that  endureth  to  the 
end  shall  be  saved,”  5  and  who  promise  salvation 
only  to  those  who  continue  in  the  Church  Catho¬ 
lic  ;  and  though  such  persons  have  lived  badly, 
yet,  say  they,  they  shall  be  saved  as  by  fire 
through  virtue  of  the  foundation  of  which  the 
apostle  says,  “For  other  foundation  hath  no 
man  laid  than  that  which  is  laid,  which  is  Christ 
Jesus.  Now  if  any  man  build  upon  this  founda¬ 
tion  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay, 
stubble;  every  man’s  work  shall  be  made  mani¬ 
fest:  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  shall  declare  it,  for 
it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire;  and  each  man’s  work 
shall  be  proved  of  what  sort  it  is.  If  any  man’s 
work  shall  endure  which  he  hath  built  there- 
3John,  6.  50,  51.  4I  Cor.  io.  17.  6Matt.  24.  13. 


576  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


upon,  he  shall  receive  a  reward.  But  if  any  man’s 
work  shall  be  burned,  he  shall  suffer  loss:  but 
he  himself  shall  be  saved;  yet  so  as  through 
fire.”1  They  say,  accordingly,  that  the  Catholic 
Christian,  no  matter  what  his  life  be.  has  Christ 
as  his  foundation,  while  this  foundation  is  not 
possessed  by  any  heresy  which  is  separated  from 
the  unity  of  His  body.  And  therefore,  through 
virtue  of  this  foundation,  even  though  the  Cath¬ 
olic  Christian  by  the  inconsistency  of  his  life  has 
been  as  one  building  up  wood,  hay,  stubble,  up¬ 
on  it  they  believe  that  he  shall  be  saved  by  fire, 
in  other  words,  that  he  shall  be  delivered  after 
tasting  the  pain  of  that  fire  to  which  the  wicked 
shall  be  condemned  at  the  last  judgment. 

Chap.  22.  Of  those  who  fancy  that  the  sins 
which  are  intermingled  with  alms-deeds  shall 
not  be  charged  at  the  day  of  judgment 
I  have  also  met  with  some  who  are  of  opinion 
that  such  only  as  neglect  to  cover  their  sins  with 
alms-deeds  shall  be  punished  in  everlasting  fire ; 
and  they  cite  the  words  of  the  Apostle  James, 
“He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  who 
hath  shown  no  mercy.”2  Therefore,  say  they, 
he  who  has  not  amended  his  ways,  but  yet  has 
intermingled  his  profligate  and  wicked  actions 
with  works  of  mercy,  shall  receive  mercy  in  the 
judgment,  so  that  he  shall  either  quite  escape 
condemnation,  or  shall  be  liberated  from  his 
doom  after  some  time  shorter  or  longer.  They 
suppose  that  this  was  the  reason  why  the  Judge 
Himself  of  quick  and  dead  declined  to  mention 
anything  else  than  works  of  mercy  done  or  omit¬ 
ted,  when  awarding  to  those  on  His  right  hand 
life  eternal,  and  to  those  on  His  left  everlasting 
punishment.3  To  the  same  purpose,  they  say,  is 
the  daily  petition  we  make  in  the  Lord’s  prayer, 
“Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debt¬ 
ors.”  4  For,  no  doubt,  whoever  pardons  the  per¬ 
son  who  has  wronged  him  does  a  charitable  ac¬ 
tion.  And  this  has  been  so  highly  commended  by 
the  Lord  Himself,  that  He  says,  “For  if  ye  for¬ 
give  men  their  trespasses,  your  heavenly  Father 
will  also  forgive  you:  but  if  ye  forgive  not  men 
their  trespasses,  neither  will  your  Father  for¬ 
give  your  trespasses.”  5  And  so  it  is  to  this  kind 
of  alms-deeds  that  the  saying  of  the  Apostle 
James  refers,  “He  shall  have  judgment  with¬ 
out  mercy  that  hath  shown  no  mercy.”  And  our 
Lord,  they  say,  made  no  distinction  of  great  and 
small  sins,  but  “Your  Father  will  forgive  your 
sins,  if  ye  forgive  men  theirs.”  Consequently 
they  conclude  that,  though  a  man  has  led  an 

*1  Cor.  3.  n-15.  2Jas.  2.  13.  3Matt.  25.  33. 

4Matt.  6.  12.  5Matt.  6.  14,  15. 


abandoned  life  up  to  the  last  day  of  it,  yet  what¬ 
soever  his  sins  have  been,  they  are  all  remitted 
by  virtue  of  this  daily  prayer,  if  only  he  has 
been  mindful  to  attend  to  this  one  thing,  that 
when  they  who  have  done  him  any  injury  ask  his 
pardon,  he  forgive  them  from  his  heart. 

When,  by  God’s  help,  I  have  replied  to  all 
these  errors,  I  shall  conclude  this  (twenty-first) 
book. 

Chap.  23.  Against  those  who  are  of  opinion  that 
the  punishment  neither  of  the  devil  nor  of 
wicked  men  shall  be  eternal 
First  of  all,  it  behoves  us  to  inquire  and  to 
recognize  why  the  Church  has  not  been  able  to 
tolerate  the  idea  that  promises  cleansing  or  in¬ 
dulgence  to  the  devil  even  after  the  most  severe 
and  protracted  punishment.  For  so  many  holy 
men,  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament,  did  not  grudge  to  angels  of  any  rank 
or  character  that  they  should  enjoy  the  bless¬ 
edness  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  after  being 
cleansed  by  suffering,  but  rather  they  perceived 
that  they  could  not  invalidate  nor  evacuate  the 
divine  sentence  which  the  Lord  predicted  that 
He  would  pronounce  in  the  judgment,  saying, 
“Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.”  6  For 
here  it  is  evident  that  the  devil  and  his  angels 
shall  burn  in  everlasting  fire.  And  there  is  also 
that  declaration  in  the  Apocalypse,  “The  devil 
their  deceiver  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and 
brimstone,  where  also  are  the  beast  and  the  false 
prophet.  And  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and 
night  for  ever.”  7  In  the  former  passage  “ever¬ 
lasting”  is  used,  in  the  latter  “for  ever”;  and  by 
these  words  Scripture  is  wont  to  mean  nothing 
else  than  endless  duration.  And  therefore  no 
other  reason,  no  reason  more  obvious  and  just, 
can  be  found  for  holding  it  as  the  fixed  and  im¬ 
movable  belief  of  the  truest  piety  that  the  devil 
and  his  angels  shall  never  return  to  the  justice 
and  life  of  the  saints  than  that  Scripture,  which 
deceives  no  man,  says  that  God  spared  them  not, 
and  that  they  were  condemned  beforehand  by 
Him  and  cast  into  prisons  of  darkness  in  hell,8 
being  reserved  to  the  judgment  of  the  last  day, 
when  eternal  fire  shall  receive  them,  in  which 
they  shall  be  tormented  world  without  end.  And 
if  this  be  so,  how  can  it  be  believed  that  all  men, 
or  even  some,  shall  be  withdrawn  from  the  en¬ 
durance  of  punishment  after  some  time  has  been 
spent  in  it?  how  can  this  be  believed  without 
enervating  our  faith  in  the  eternal  punishment 
of  the  devils?  For  if  all  or  some  of  those  to 
6Matt.  25.  41.  7Rev.  20.  10.  8II  Pet.  2.  4. 


THE  CITY  OF 

whom  it  shall  be  said,  “Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the 
devil  and  his  angels,”  1  are  not  to  be  always  in 
that  fire,  then  what  reason  is  there  for  believing 
that  the  devil  and  his  angels  shall  always  be 
there?  Or  is  perhaps  the  sentence  of  God,  which 
is  to  be  pronounced  on  wicked  men  and  angels 
alike,  to  be  true  in  the  case  of  the  angels,  false 
in  that  of  men?  Plainly  it  will  be  so  if  the  con¬ 
jectures  of  men  are  to  weigh  more  than  the 
word  of  God.  But  because  this  is  absurd,  they 
who  desire  to  be  rid  of  eternal  punishment  ought 
to  abstain  from  arguing  against  God,  and  rath¬ 
er,  while  yet  there  is  opportunity,  obey  the  di¬ 
vine  commands.  Then  what  a  fond  fancy  is  it  to 
suppose  that  eternal  punishment  means  long 
continued  punishment,  while  eternal  life  means 
life  without  end,  since  Christ  in  the  very  same 
passage  spoke  of  both  in  similar  terms  in  one 
and  the  same  sentence,  “These  shall  go  away 
into  eternal  punishment,  but  the  righteous  into 
life  eternal!”2  If  both  destinies  are  “eternal,” 
then  we  must  either  understand  both  as  long- 
continued  but  at  last  terminating,  or  both  as 
endless.  For  they  are  correlative — on  the  one 
hand,  punishment  eternal,  on  the  other  hand, 
life  eternal.  And  to  say  in  one  and  the  same 
sense,  life  eternal  shall  be  endless,  punishment 
eternal  shall  come  to  an  end,  is  the  height  of  ab¬ 
surdity.  Wherefore,  as  the  eternal  life  of  the 
saints  shall  be  endless,  so  too  the  eternal  pun¬ 
ishment  of  those  who  are  doomed  to  it  shall 
have  no  end. 

Chap.  24.  Against  those  who  fancy  that  in  the 
judgment  of  God  all  the  accused  will  he 
spared  in  virtue  of  the  prayers  of  the  saints 
And  this  reasoning  is  equally  conclusive 
against  those  who,  in  their  own  interest,  but  un¬ 
der  the  guise  of  a  greater  tenderness  of  spirit,  at¬ 
tempt  to  invalidate  the  words  of  God,  and  who 
assert  that  these  words  are  true,  not  because 
men  shall  suffer  those  things  which  are  threat¬ 
ened  by  God,  but  because  they  deserve  to  suffer 
them!  For  God,  they  say,  will  yield  them  to  the 
prayers  of  His  saints,  who  will  then  the  more 
earnestly  pray  for  their  enemies,  as  they  shall 
be  more  perfect  in  holiness,  and  whose  prayers 
will  be  the  more  efficacious  and  the  more  worthy 
of  God’s  ear,  because  now  purged  from  all  sin 
whatsoever.  Why,  then,  if  in  that  perfected  holi¬ 
ness  their  prayers  be  so  pure  and  all-availing, 
will  they  not  use  them  in  behalf  of  the  angels 
for  whom  eternal  fire  is  prepared,  that  God  may 
mitigate  His  sentence  and  alter  it,  and  extricate 
1Matt.  25.  41.  2Matt.  25.  46. 


GOD  XXI.  22-24  577 

them  from  that  fire?  Or  will  there,  perhaps,  be 
some  one  hardy  enough  to  affirm  that  even  the 
holy  angels  will  make  common  cause  with  holy 
men  (then  become  the  equals  of  God’s  angels) 
and  will  intercede  for  the  guilty,  both  men  and 
angels,  that  mercy  may  spare  them  the  punish¬ 
ment  which  truth  has  pronounced  them  to  de¬ 
serve?  But  this  has  been  asserted  by  no  one 
sound  in  the  faith,  nor  will  be.  Otherwise  there 
is  no  reason  why  the  Church  should  not  even 
now  pray  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  since  God 
her  Master  has  ordered  her  to  pray  for  her  ene¬ 
mies.  The  reason,  then,  which  prevents  the 
Church  from  now  praying  for  the  wicked  angels, 
whom  she  knows  to  be  her  enemies,  is  the  iden¬ 
tical  reason  which  shall  prevent  her,  however 
perfected  in  holiness,  from  praying  at  the  last 
judgment  for  those  men  who  are  to  be  pun¬ 
ished  in  eternal  fire.  At  present  she  prays  for  her 
enemies  among  men,  because  they  have  yet  op¬ 
portunity  for  fruitful  repentance.  For  what  does 
she  especially  beg  for  them  but  that  “God  would 
grant  them  repentance,”  as  the  apostle  says, 
“that  they  may  return  to  soberness  out  of  the 
snare  of  the  devil,  by  whom  they  are  held  cap¬ 
tive  according  to  his  will”?  3  But  if  the  Church 
were  certified  who  those  are,  who,  though  they 
are  still  abiding  in  this  life,  are  yet  predesti¬ 
nated  to  go  with  the  devil  into  eternal  fire,  then 
for  them  she  could  no  more  pray  than  for  him. 
But  since  she  has  this  certainty  regarding  no 
man,  she  prays  for  all  her  enemies  who  yet  live 
in  this  world;  and  yet  she  is  not  heard  in  behalf 
of  all.  But  she  is  heard  in  the  case  of  those  only 
who,  though  they  oppose  the  Church,  are  yet 
predestinated  to  become  her  sons  through  her 
intercession.  But  if  any  retain  an  impenitent 
heart  until  death,  and  are  not  converted  from 
enemies  into  sons,  does  the  Church  continue  to 
pray  for  them,  for  the  spirits,  i.e.,  of  such  per¬ 
sons  deceased?  And  why  does  she  cease  to  pray 
for  them,  unless  because  the  man  who  was  not 
translated  into  Christ’s  kingdom  while  he  was 
in  the  body,  is  now  judged  to  be  of  Satan’s  fol¬ 
lowing? 

It  is  then,  I  say,  the  same  reason  which  pre¬ 
vents  the  Church  at  any  time  from  praying  for 
the  wicked  angels,  which  prevents  her  from 
praying  hereafter  for  those  men  who  are  to  be 
punished  in  eternal  fire;  and  this  also  is  the  rea¬ 
son  why,  though  she  prays  even  for  the  wicked 
so  long  as  they  live,  she  yet  does  not  even  in 
this  world  pray  for  the  unbelieving  and  godless 
who  are  dead.  For  some  of  the  dead,  indeed,  the 
prayer  of  the  Church  or  of  pious  individuals  is 

3II  Tim.  2.  25,  26. 


578  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


heard;  but  it  is  for  those  who,  having  been  re¬ 
generated  in  Christ,  did  not  spend  their  life  so 
wickedly  that  they  can  be  judged  unworthy  of 
such  compassion,  nor  so  well  that  they  can  be 
considered  to  have  no  need  of  it.  As  also,  after 
the  resurrection,  there  will  be  some  of  the  dead 
to  whom,  after  they  have  endured  the  pains 
proper  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  mercy  shall  be 
accorded,  and  acquittal  from  the  punishment  of 
the  eternal  fire.  For  were  there  not  some  whose 
sins,  though  not  remitted  in  this  life,  shall  be  re¬ 
mitted  in  that  which  is  to  come,  it  could  not  be 
truly  said,  “They  shall  not  be  forgiven,  neither 
in  this  world,  neither  in  that  which  is  to  come.”1 
But  when  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  has  said, 
“Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the 
kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world,”  and  to  those  on  the  other  side, 
“Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  the  eternal 
fire,  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  an¬ 
gels,”  and  “These  shall  go  away  into  eternal 
punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  eternal  life,”2 
it  were  excessively  presumptuous  to  say  that 
the  punishment  of  any  of  those  whom  God  has 
said  shall  go  away  into  eternal  punishment  shall 
not  be  eternal,  and  so  bring  either  despair  or 
doubt  upon  the  corresponding  promise  of  life 
eternal. 

Let  no  man  then  so  understand  the  words  of 
the  Psalmist,  “Shall  God  forget  to  be  gracious? 
shall  He  shut  up  in  His  anger  His  tender  mer¬ 
cies”3  as  if  the  sentence  of  God  were  true  of 
good  men,  false  of  bad  men,  or  true  of  good  men 
and  wicked  angels,  but  false  of  bad  men.  For 
the  Psalmist’s  words  refer  to  the  vessels  of  mer¬ 
cy  and  the  children  of  the  promise,  of  whom  the 
prophet  himself  was  one;  for  when  he  had  said, 
“Shall  God  forget  to  be  gracious?  shall  He  shut 
up  in  His  anger  His  tender  mercies?”  and  then 
immediately  subjoins,  “And  I  said,  Now  I  be¬ 
gin:  this  is  the  change  wrought  by  the  right 
hand  of  the  Most  High,”4  he  manifestly  ex¬ 
plained  what  he  meant  by  the  words,  “Shall  he 
shut  up  in  His  anger  His  tender  mercies?”  For 
God’s  anger  is  this  mortal  life,  in  which  man  is 
made  like  to  vanity,  and  his  days  pass  as  a  shad¬ 
ow.5  Yet  in  this  anger  God  does  not  forget  to  be 
gracious,  causing  His  sun  to  shine  and  His  rain 
to  descend  on  the  just  and  the  unjust;6  and  thus 
He  does  not  in  His  anger  cut  short  His  tender 
mercies,  and  especially  in  what  the  Psalmist 
speaks  of  in  the  words,  “Now  I  begin:  this 
change  is  from  the  right  hand  of  the  Most 
High”;  for  He  changes  for  the  better  the  vessels 

!Matt.  12.  32.  2Matt.  25.  34,  41,  46.  3Ps.  77.  9. 

4Ps.  77.  10.  5Ps.  144.  4.  6Matt.  5.  45. 


of  mercy,  even  while  they  are  still  in  this  most 
wretched  life,  which  is  God’s  anger,  and  even 
while  His  anger  is  manifesting  itself  in  this  mis¬ 
erable  corruption;  for  “in  His  anger  He  does 
not  shut  up  His  tender  mercies.”  And  since  the 
truth  of  this  divine  canticle  is  quite  satisfied  by 
this  application  of  it,  there  is  no  need  to  give  it 
a  reference  to  that  place  in  which  those  who  do 
not  belong  to  the  city  of  God  are  punished  in 
eternal  fire.  But  if  any  persist  in  extending  its 
application  to  the  torments  of  the  wicked,  let 
them  at  least  understand  it  so  that  the  anger  of 
God,  which  has  threatened  the  wicked  with  eter¬ 
nal  punishment,  shall  abide,  but  shall  be  mixed 
with  mercy  to  the  extent  of  alleviating  the  tor¬ 
ments  which  might  justly  be  inflicted;  so  that 
the  wicked  shall  neither  wholly  escape,  nor  only 
for  a  time  endure  these  threatened  pains,  but 
that  they  shall  be  less  severe  and  more  endura¬ 
ble  than  they  deserve.  Thus  the  anger  of  God 
shall  continue,  and  at  the  same  time  He  will  not 
in  this  anger  shut  up  His  tender  mercies.  But 
even  this  hypothesis  I  am  not  to  be  supposed  to 
affirm  because  I  do  not  positively  oppose  it. 

As  for  those  who  find  an  empty  threat  rather 
than  a  truth  in  such  passages  as  these:  “Depart 
from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire”;  and 
“These  shall  go  away  into  eternal  punish¬ 
ment”;7  and  “They  shall  be  tormented  for  ever 
and  ever”;8  and  “Their  worm  shall  not  die,  and 
their  fire  shall  not  be  quenched”  9 — such  per¬ 
sons,  I  say,  are  most  emphatically  and  abun¬ 
dantly  refuted,  not  by  me  so  much  as  by  the  di¬ 
vine  Scripture  itself.  For  the  men  of  Nineveh 
repented  in  this  life,  and  therefore  their  repen¬ 
tance  was  fruitful,  inasmuch  as  they  sowed  in 
that  field  which  the  Lord  meant  to  be  sown  in 
tears  that  it  might  afterwards  be  reaped  in  joy. 
And  yet  who  will  deny  that  God’s  prediction 
was  fulfilled  in  their  case,  if  at  least  he  observes 
that  God  destroys  sinners  not  only  in  anger  but 
also  in  compassion?  For  sinners  are  destroyed 
in  two  ways — either,  like  the  Sodomites,  the 
men  themselves  are  punished  for  their  sins,  or, 
like  the  Ninevites,  the  men’s  sins  are  destroyed 
by  repentance.  God’s  prediction,  therefore,  was 
fulfilled — the  wicked  Nineveh  was  overthrown, 
and  a  good  Nineveh  built  up.  For  its  walls  and 
houses  remained  standing;  the  city  was  over¬ 
thrown  in  its  depraved  manners.  And  thus, 
though  the  prophet  was  provoked  that  the  de¬ 
struction  which  the  inhabitants  dreaded,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  prediction,  did  not  take  place,  yet 
that  which  God’s  foreknowledge  had  predicted 
did  take  place,  for  He  Who  foretold  the  destruc- 
7Matt.  25.  41,  46.  8Rev.  20.  10.  9Isa.  66.  24. 


THE  CITY  OF 

tion  knew  how  it  should  be  fulfilled  in  a  less  ca¬ 
lamitous  sense. 

But  that  these  perversely  compassionate  per¬ 
sons  may  see  what  is  the  purport  of  these  words, 
“How  great  is  the  abundance  of  Thy  sweetness, 
Lord,  which  Thou  hast  hidden  for  them  that 
fear  Thee,”1  let  them  read  what  follows.  “And 
Thou  hast  perfected  it  for  them  that  hope  in 
Thee.”  For  what  means,  “Thou  hast  hidden  it 
for  them  that  fear  Thee,”  “Thou  hast  perfected 
it  for  them  that  hope  in  Thee,”  unless  this,  that 
to  those  who  through  fear  of  punishment  seek  to 
establish  their  own  righteousness  by  the  law, 
the  righteousness  of  God  is  not  sweet,  because 
they  are  ignorant  of  it?  They  have  not  tasted 
it.  For  they  hope  in  themselves,  not  in  Him; 
and  therefore  God’s  abundant  sweetness  is  hid¬ 
den  from  them.  They  fear  God,  indeed,  but  it  is 
with  that  servile  fear  “which  is  not  in  love;  for 
perfect  love  casteth  out  fear.”  2  Therefore  to 
them  that  hope  in  Him  He  perfecteth  His  sweet¬ 
ness,  inspiring  them  with  His  own  love,  so  that 
with  a  holy  fear,  which  love  does  not  cast  out, 
but  which  endureth  for  ever,  they  may,  when 
they  glory,  glory  in  the  Lord.  For  the  righteous¬ 
ness  of  God  is  Christ,  “who  is  of  God  made  unto 
us,”  as  the  apostle  says,  “wisdom,  and  right¬ 
eousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption: 
as  it  is  written,  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord.” 3  This  righteousness  of  God,  which  is 
the  gift  of  grace  without  merits,  is  not  known  by 
those  who  go  about  to  establish  their  own  right¬ 
eousness,  and  are  therefore  not  subject  to  the 
righteousness  of  God,  which  is  Christ.4  But  it  is 
in  this  righteousness  that  we  find  the  great  abun¬ 
dance  of  God’s  sweetness,  of  which  the  psalm 
says,  “Taste  and  see  how  sweet  the  Lord  is.”  5 
And  this  we  rather  taste  than  partake  of  to  sa¬ 
tiety  in  this  our  pilgrimage.  We  hunger  and 
thirst  for  it  now,  that  hereafter  we  may  be  sat¬ 
isfied  with  it  when  we  see  Him  as  He  is,  and 
that  is  fulfilled  which  is  written,  “I  shall  be  sat¬ 
isfied  when  Thy  glory  shall  be  manifested.”  6  It 
is  thus  that  Christ  perfects  the  great  abundance 
of  His  sweetness  to  them  that  hope  in  Him.  But 
if  God  conceals  His  sweetness  from  them  that 
fear  Him  in  the  sense  that  these  our  objectors 
fancy,  so  that  men’s  ignorance  of  His  purpose  of 
mercy  towards  the  wicked  may  lead  them  to 
fear  Him  and  live  better,  and  so  that  there  may 
be  prayer  made  for  those  who  are  not  living  as 
they  ought,  how  then  does  He  perfect  His 
sweetness  to  them  that  hope  in  Him,  since,  if 
their  dreams  be  true,  it  is  this  very  sweetness 

1Ps.  31.  19.  2I  John,  4.  18.  3I  Cor.  1.  30,  31. 

4Rom.  10.  3.  6Ps.  34.  8.  6Ps.  17.  15. 


GOD  XXI.  25  579 

which  will  prevent  Him  from  punishing  those 
who  do  not  hope  in  Him?  Let  us  then  seek  that 
sweetness  of  His,  which  He  perfects  to  them 
that  hope  in  Him,  not  that  which  He  is  supposed 
to  perfect  to  those  who  despise  and  blaspheme 
Him ;  for  in  vain,  after  this  life,  does  a  man  seek 
for  what  he  has  neglected  to  provide  while  in 
this  life. 

Then,  as  to  that  saying  of  the  apostle,  “For 
God  hath  concluded  all  in  unbelief,  that  He  may 
have  mercy  upon  all,”  7  it  does  not  mean  that 
He  will  condemn  no  one  but  the  foregoing  con¬ 
text  shows  what  is  meant.  The  apostle  composed 
the  epistle  for  the  Gentiles  who  were  already 
believers;  and  when  he  was  speaking  to  them  of 
the  Jews  who  were  yet  to  believe,  he  says,  “For 
as  ye  in  times  past  believed  not  God,  yet  have 
now  obtained  mercy  through  their  unbelief; 
even  so  have  these  also  now  not  believed,  that 
through  your  mercy  they  also  may  obtain  mer¬ 
cy.”  Then  he  added  the  words  in  question  with 
which  these  persons  beguile  themselves:  “For 
God  concluded  all  in  unbelief,  that  He  might 
have  mercy  upon  all.”  All  whom,  if  not  all  those 
of  whom  he  was  speaking,  just  as  if  he  had  said, 
“Both  you  and  them”?  God  then  concluded  all 
those  in  unbelief,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom 
He  foreknew  and  predestinated  to  be  con¬ 
formed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  confounded  by  the  bitterness  of 
unbelief,  and  might  repent  and  believingly  turn 
to  the  sweetness  of  God’s  mercy,  and  might  take 
up  that  exclamation  of  the  psalm,  “How  great  is 
the  abundance  of  Thy  sweetness,  0  Lord,  which 
Thou  hast  hidden  for  them  that  fear  Thee,  but 
hast  perfected  to  them  that  hope,”  not  in  them¬ 
selves,  but  “in  Thee.”  He  has  mercy,  then,  on 
all  the  vessels  of  mercy.  And  what  means  “all”? 
Both  those  of  the  Gentiles  and  those  of  the  Jews 
whom  He  predestinated,  called,  justified,  glori¬ 
fied:  none  of  these  will  be  condemned  by  Him; 
but  we  cannot  say  none  of  all  men  whatever. 

Chap.  25.  Whether  those  who  received  heretical 
baptism ,  and  have  afterwards  fallen  away  to 
wickedness  of  life;  or  those  who  have  re¬ 
ceived  Catholic  baptism,  but  have  afterwards 
passed  over  to  heresy  and  schism;  or  those 
who  have  remained  in  the  Catholic  Church  in 
which  they  were  baptized,  but  have  contin¬ 
ued  to  live  immorally — may  hope  through  the 
virtue  of  the  sacraments  for  the  remission  of 
eternal  punishment 

But  let  us  now  reply  to  those  who  promise  de¬ 
liverance  from  eternal  fire,  not  to  the  devil  and 
7Rom.  11.  32. 


580  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


his  angels  (as  neither  do  they  of  whom  we  have 
been  speaking),  nor  even  to  all  men  whatever, 
but  only  to  those  who  have  been  washed  by  the 
baptism  of  Christ,  and  have  become  partakers 
of  His  body  and  blood,  no  matter  how  they  have 
lived,  no  matter  what  heresy  or  impiety  they 
have  fallen  into.  But  they  are  contradicted  by 
the  apostle,  where  he  says,  “Now  the  works  of 
the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  these;  forni¬ 
cation,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idolatry, 
witchcraft,  hatred,  variances,  emulations,  wrath, 
strife,  heresies,  envyings,  drunkenness,  revel- 
lings,  and  the  like :  of  the  which  I  tell  you  before, 
as  I  have  also  told  you  in  time  past,  for  they 
which  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  king¬ 
dom  of  God.”  1  Certainly  this  sentence  of  the 
apostle  is  false,  if  such  persons  shall  be  deliv¬ 
ered  after  any  lapse  of  time,  and  shall  then  in¬ 
herit  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  as  it  is  not  false, 
they  shall  certainly  never  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God.  And  if  they  shall  never  enter  that  king¬ 
dom,  then  they  shall  always  be  retained  in  eter¬ 
nal  punishment;  for  there  is  no  middle  place 
where  he  may  live  unpunished  who  has  not  been 
admitted  into  that  kingdom. 

And  therefore  we  may  reasonably  inquire 
how  we  are  to  understand  these  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus:  “This  is  the  bread  which  cometh 
down  from  heaven,  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof, 
and  not  die.  I  am  the  living  bread  which  came 
down  from  heaven.  If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread, 
he  shall  live  for  ever.”2  And  those,  indeed, 
whom  we  are  now  answering,  are  refuted  in  their 
interpretation  of  this  passage  by  those  whom  we 
are  shortly  to  answer,  and  who  do  not  promise 
this  deliverance  to  all  who  have  received  the 
sacraments  of  baptism  and  the  Lord’s  body,  but 
only  to  the  Catholics,  however  wickedly  they 
live;  for  these,  say  they,  have  eaten  the  Lord’s 
body  not  only  sacramentally,  but  really,  being 
constituted  members  of  His  body,  of  which  the 
apostle  says,  “We  being  many  are  one  bread, 
one  body.”3  He  then  who  is  in  the  unity  of 
Christ’s  body  (that  is  to  say,  in  the  Christian 
membership),  of  which  body  the  faithful  have 
been  wont  to  receive  the  sacrament  at  the  altar, 
that  man  is  truly  said  to  eat  the  body  and  drink 
the  blood  of  Christ.  And  consequently  heretics 
and  schismatics  being  separate  from  the  unity 
of  this  body,  are  able  to  receive  the  same  sacra¬ 
ment,  but  with  no  profit  to  themselves — nay, 
rather  to  their  own  hurt,  so  that  they  are  rather 
more  severely  judged  than  liberated  after  some 
time.  For  they  are  not  in  that  bond  of  peace 
which  is  symbolized  by  that  sacrament. 

1Gal.  5.  19-21.  2John,  6.  50,  51.  3I  Cor.  10.  17. 


But  again,  even  those  who  sufficiently  under¬ 
stand  that  he  who  is  not  in  the  body  of  Christ 
cannot  be  said  to  eat  the  body  of  Christ,  are  in 
error  when  they  promise  liberation  from  the  fire 
of  eternal  punishment  to  persons  who  fall  away 
from  the  unity  of  that  body  into  heresy,  or  even 
into  heathenish  superstition.  For,  in  the  first 
place,  they  ought  to  consider  how  intolerable  it 
is,  and  how  discordant  with  sound  doctrine,  to 
suppose  that  many,  indeed,  or  almost  all,  who 
have  forsaken  the  Church  Catholic,  and  have 
originated  impious  heresies  and  become  heresi- 
archs,  should  enjoy  a  destiny  superior  to  those 
who  never  were  Catholics,  but  have  fallen  into 
the  snares  of  these  others;  that  is  to  say,  if  the 
fact  of  their  Catholic  baptism  and  original  recep¬ 
tion  of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ  in 
the  true  body  of  Christ  is  sufficient  to  deliver 
these  heresiarchs  from  eternal  punishment.  For 
certainly  he  who  deserts  the  faith,  and  from  a 
deserter  becomes  an  assailant,  is  worse  than  he 
who  has  not  deserted  the  faith  he  never  held. 
And,  in  the  second  place,  they  are  contradicted 
by  the  apostle,  who,  after  enumerating  the 
works  of  the  flesh,  says  with  reference  to  here¬ 
sies,  “They  who  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God.” 

And  therefore  neither  ought  such  persons  as 
lead  an  abandoned  and  damnable  life  to  be  con¬ 
fident  of  salvation,  though  they  persevere  to  the 
end  in  the  communion  of  the  Church  Catholic 
and  comfort  themselves  with  the  words,  “He 
that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.”  By  the 
iniquity  of  their  life  they  abandon  that  very 
righteousness  of  life  which  Christ  is  to  them, 
whether  it  be  by  fornication,  or  by  perpetrating 
in  their  body  the  other  uncleannesses  which  the 
apostle  would  not  so  much  as  mention,  or  by  a 
dissolute  luxury,  or  by  doing  any  one  of  those 
things  of  which  he  says,  “They  who  do  such 
things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.” 
Consequently,  they  who  do  such  things  shall  not 
exist  anywhere  but  in  eternal  punishment,  since 
they  cannot  be  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  For, 
while  they  continue  in  such  things  to  the  very 
end  of  life,  they  cannot  be  said  to  abide  in  Christ 
to  the  end;  for  to  abide  in  Him  is  to  abide  in 
the  faith  of  Christ.  And  this  faith,  according  to 
the  apostle’s  definition  of  it,  “worketh  by  love.”4 
And  “love,”  as  he  elsewhere  says,  “worketh  no 
evil.” 5  Neither  can  these  persons  be  said  to  eat 
the  body  of  Christ,  for  they  cannot  even  be 
reckoned  among  His  members.  For,  not  to  men¬ 
tion  other  reasons,  they  cannot  be  at  once  the 
members  of  Christ  and  the  members  of  a  har- 
4Gal.  5.  6.  6Rom.  13.  10. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXI.  26 


lot.  In  fine.  He  Himself,  when  He  says,  “He  that 
eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth 
in  me,  and  I  in  him,”  1  shows  what  it  is  in  reali¬ 
ty,  and  not  sacramentally,  to  eat  His  body  and 
drink  His  blood;  for  this  is  to  dwell  in  Christ, 
that  He  also  may  dwell  in  us.  So  that  it  is  as  if 
He  said,  He  that  dwelleth  not  in  me,  and  in 
whom  I  do  not  dwell,  let  him  not  say  or  think 
that  he  eateth  my  body  or  drinketh  my  blood. 
Accordingly,  they  who  are  not  Christ’s  members 
do  not  dwell  in  Him.  And  they  who  make  them¬ 
selves  members  of  a  harlot,  are  not  members  of 
Christ  unless  they  have  penitently  abandoned 
that  evil,  and  have  returned  to  this  good  to  be 
reconciled  to  it. 

Chap.  26.  What  it  is  to  have  Christ  for  a  foun¬ 
dation,  and  who  they  are  to  whom  salvation  as 

by  fire  is  promised 

But,  say  they,  the  Catholic  Christians  have 
Christ  for  a  foundation,  and  they  have  not  fall¬ 
en  away  from  union  with  Him,  no  matter  how 
depraved  a  life  they  have  built  on  this  founda¬ 
tion,  as  wood,  hay,  stubble;  and  accordingly  the 
well-directed  faith  by  which  Christ  is  their  foun¬ 
dation  will  suffice  to  deliver  them  some  time 
from  the  continuance  of  that  fire,  though  it  be 
with  loss,  since  those  things  they  have  built  on 
it  shall  be  burned.  Let  the  Apostle  James  sum¬ 
marily  reply  to  them :  “If  any  man  say  he  has 
faith,  and  have  not  works,  can  faith  save  him?”2 
And  who  then  is  it,  they  ask,  of  whom  the  Apos¬ 
tle  Paul  says,  “But  he  himself  shall  be  saved, 
yet  so  as  by  fire”?  3  Let  us  join  them  in  their  in¬ 
quiry;  and  one  thing  is  very  certain,  that  it  is 
not  he  of  whom  James  speaks,  else  we  should 
make  the  two  apostles  contradict  one  another, 
if  the  one  says,  “Though  a  man’s  works  be  evil, 
his  faith  will  save  him  as  by  fire,”  while  the  oth¬ 
er  says,  “If  he  have  not  good  works,  can  his 
faith  save  him?” 

We  shall  then  ascertain  who  it  is  who  can  be 
saved  by  fire,  if  we  first  discover  what  it  is  to 
have  Christ  for  a  foundation.  And  this  we  may 
very  feadily  learn  from  the  image  itself.  In  a 
building  the  foundation  is  first.  Whoever,  then, 
has  Christ  in  his  heart,  so  that  no  earthly  or  tem¬ 
poral  things — not  even  those  that  are  legitimate 
and  allowed — are  preferred  to  Him,  has  Christ 
as  a  foundation.  But  if  these  things  be  preferred, 
then  even  though  a  man  seem  to  have  faith  in 
Christ,  yet  Christ  is  not  the  foundation  to  that 
man;  and  much  more  if  he,  in  contempt  of 
wholesome  precepts,  seek  forbidden  gratifica¬ 
tions,  is  he  clearly  convicted  of  putting  Christ 

'John,  6.  56.  2Jas.  2.  14.  3I  Cor.  3.  15. 


581 

not  first  but  last,  since  he  has  despised  Him  as 
his  ruler  and  has  preferred  to  fulfil  his  own 
wicked  lusts,  in  contempt  of  Christ’s  commands 
and  allowances.  Accordingly,  if  any  Christian 
man  loves  a  harlot  and,  attaching  himself  to  her, 
becomes  one  body,  he  has  not  now  Christ  for  a 
foundation.  But  if  any  one  loves  his  own  wife 
and  loves  her  as  Christ  would  have  him  love  her, 
who  can  doubt  that  he  has  Christ  for  a  founda¬ 
tion?  But  if  he  loves  her  in  the  world’s  fashion, 
carnally,  as  the  disease  of  lust  prompts  him,  and 
as  the  Gentiles  love  who  know  not  God,  even 
this  the  apostle,  or  rather  Christ  by  the  apostle, 
allows  as  a  venial  fault.  And  therefore  even  such 
a  man  may  have  Christ  for  a  foundation.  For  so 
long  as  he  does  not  prefer  such  an  affection  or 
pleasure  to  Christ,  Christ  is  his  foundation, 
though  on  it  he  builds  wood,  hay,  stubble ;  and 
therefore  he  shall  be  saved  as  by  fire.  For  the 
fire  of  affliction  shall  burn  such  luxurious 
pleasures  and  earthly  loves,  though  they  be 
not  damnable,  because  enjoyed  in  lawful  wed¬ 
lock.  And  of  this  fire  the  fuel  is  bereavement, 
and  all  those  calamities  which  consume  these 
joys.  Consequently  the  superstructure  will  be 
lost  to  him  who  has  built  it,  for  he  shall  not  re¬ 
tain  it,  but  shall  be  agonized  by  the  loss  of 
those  things  in  the  enjoyment  of  which  he 
found  pleasure.  But  by  this  fire  he  shall  be 
saved  through  virtue  of  the  foundation,  be¬ 
cause  even  if  a  persecutor  demanded  whether 
he  would  retain  Christ  or  these  things,  he 
would  prefer  Christ.  Would  you  hear,  in  the 
apostle’s  own  words,  who  he  is  who  builds  on 
the  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones? 
“He  that  is  unmarried,”  he  says,  “careth  for 
the  things  that  belong  to  the  Lord,  how  he  may 
please  the  Lord.”  4  Would  you  hear  who  he  is 
that  buildeth  wood,  hay,  stubble?  “But  he  that 
is  married  careth  for  the  things  that  are  of  the 
world,  how  he  may  please  his  wife.” 5  “Every 
man’s  work  shall  be  made  manifest:  for  the 
day  shall  declare  it” — the  day,  no  doubt,  of 
tribulation — “because,”  says  he,  “it  shall  be 
revealed  by  fire.”  6  He  calls  tribulation  fire,  just 
as  it  is  elsewhere  said,  “The  furnace  proves  the 
vessels  of  the  potter,  and  the  trial  of  affliction 
righteous  men.”  7  And  “The  fire  shall  try  every 
man’s  work  of  what  sort  it  is.  If  any  man’s 
work  abide” — for  a  man’s  care  for  the  things 
of  the  Lord,  how  he  may  please  the  Lord, 
abides — “which  he  hath  built  thereupon,  he 
shall  receive  a  reward” — that  is,  he  shall  reap 
the  fruit  of  his  care.  “But  if  any  man’s  work 

4I  Cor.  7.  32.  5I  Cor.  7.  33.  6I  Cor.  3.  13. 

7Ecclus.  27.  5. 


582  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


shall  be  burned,  he  shall  suffer  loss” — for  what 
he  loved  he  shall  not  retain — ‘‘but  he  himself 
shall  be  saved” — for  no  tribulation  shall  have 
moved  him  from  that  stable  foundation — “yet 
so  as  by  fire”;1  for  that  which  he  possessed 
with  the  sweetness  of  love  he  does  not  lose 
without  the  sharp  sting  of  pain.  Here,  then,  as 
seems  to  me,  we  have  a  fire  which  destroys  nei¬ 
ther,  but  enriches  the  one,  brings  loss  to  the 
other,  proves  both. 

But  if  this  passage  is  to  interpret  that  fire  of 
which  the  Lord  shall  say  to  those  on  His  left 
hand,  “Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever¬ 
lasting  fire,”2  so  that  among  these  we  are  to 
believe  there  are  those  who  build  on  the  foun¬ 
dation  wood,  hay,  stubble,  and  that  they, 
through  virtue  of  the  good  foundation,  shall 
after  a  time  be  liberated  from  the  fire  that  is 
the  award  of  their  evil  deserts,  what  then  shall 
we  think  of  those  on  the  right  hand,  to  whom 
it  shall  be  said,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Fa¬ 
ther,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you,”  3 
unless  that  they  are  those  who  have  built  on 
the  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones? 
But  if  the  fire  of  which  our  Lord  speaks  is  the 
same  as  that  of  which  the  apostle  says,  “Yet 
so  as  by  fire,”  then  both — that  is  to  say,  both 
those  on  the  right  as  well  as  those  on  the  left 
— are  to  be  cast  into  it.  For  that  fire  is  to  try 
both,  since  it  is  said,  “For  the  day  of  the  Lord 
shall  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by 
fire;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man’s  work  of 
what  sort  it  is.” 4  If,  therefore,  the  fire  shall 
try  both,  in  order  that  if  any  man’s  work  abide 
— i.e.,  if  the  superstructure  be  not  consumed 
by  the  fire — he  may  receive  a  reward,  and  that 
if  his  work  is  burned  he  may  suffer  loss,  cer¬ 
tainly  that  fire  is  not  the  eternal  fire  itself.  For 
into  this  latter  fire  only  those  on  the  left  hand 
shall  be  cast,  and  that  with  final  and  everlast¬ 
ing  doom;  but  that  former  fire  proves  those 
on  the  right  hand.  But  some  of  them  it  so 
proves  that  it  does  not  burn  and  consume  the 
structure  which  is  found  to  have  been  built  by 
them  on  Christ  as  the  foundation;  while  oth¬ 
ers  of  them  it  proves  in  another  fashion,  so  as 
to  burn  what  they  have  built  up,  and  thus 
cause  them  to  suffer  loss,  while  they  them¬ 
selves  are  saved  because  they  have  retained 
Christ,  who  was  laid  as  their  sure  foundation, 
and  have  loved  Him  above  all.  But  if  they  are 
saved,  then  certainly  they  shall  stand  at  the 
right  hand,  and  shall  with  the  rest  hear  the  sen- 

*1  Cor.  3.  i4,  15.  2Matt.  25.  41.  3Matt.  25.  34. 

4I  Cor.  3.  13. 


tence,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you”;  and  not  at 
the  left  hand,  where  those  shall  be  who  shall 
not  be  saved,  and  shall  therefore  hear  the 
doom,  “Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever¬ 
lasting  fire.”  For  from  that  fire  no  man  shall 
be  saved,  because  they  all  shall  go  away  into 
eternal  punishment,  where  their  worms  shall 
not  die,  nor  their  fire  be  quenched,  in  which 
they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever. 

But  if  it  be  said  that  in  the  interval  of  time 
between  the  death  of  this  body  and  that  last 
day  of  judgment  and  retribution  which  shall 
follow  the  resurrection,  the  bodies  of  the 
dead  shall  be  exposed  to  a  fire  of  such  a  nature 
that  it  shall  not  affect  those  who  have  not  in 
this  life  indulged  in  such  pleasures  and  pur¬ 
suits  as  shall  be  consumed  like  wood,  hay, 
stubble,  but  shall  affect  those  others  who  have 
carried  with  them  structures  of  that  kind ;  if  it 
be  said  that  such  worldliness,  being  venial, 
shall  be  consumed  in  the  fire  of  tribulation  ei¬ 
ther  here  only,  or  here  and  hereafter  both,  or 
here  that  it  may  not  be  hereafter — this  I  do 
not  contradict,  because  possibly  it  is  true.  For 
perhaps  even  the  death  of  the  body  is  itself  a 
part  of  this  tribulation,  for  it  results  from  the 
first  transgression,  so  that  the  time  which  fol¬ 
lows  death  takes  its  colour  in  each  case  from 
the  nature  of  the  man’s  building.  The  persecu¬ 
tions,  too,  which  have  crowned  the  martyrs, 
and  which  Christians  of  all  kinds  suffer,  try 
both  buildings  like  a  fire,  consuming  some, 
along  with  the  builders  themselves,  if  Christ  is 
not  found  in  them  as  their  foundation,  while 
others  they  consume  without  the  builders,  be¬ 
cause  Christ  is  found  in  them,  and  they  are 
saved,  though  with  loss;  and  other  buildings 
still  they  do  not  consume,  because  such  mate¬ 
rials  as  abide  for  ever  are  found  in  them.  In 
the  end  of  the  world  there  shall  be  in  the  time 
of  Antichrist  tribulation  such  as  has  never 
before  been.  How  many  edifices  there  shall 
then  be,  of  gold  or  of  hay,  built  on  the  best 
foundation,  Christ  Jesus,  which  that  fire  shall 
prove,  bringing  joy  to  some,  loss  to  others,  but 
without  destroying  either  sort,  because  of  this 
stable  foundation!  But  whosoever  prefers,  I 
do  not  say  his  wife,  with  whom  he  lives  for 
carnal  pleasure,  but  any  of  those  relatives  who 
afford  no  delight  of  such  a  kind,  and  whom  it 
is  right  to  love — whosoever  prefers  these  to 
Christ,  and  loves  them  after  a  human  and  car¬ 
nal  fashion,  has  not  Christ  as  a  foundation, 
and  will  therefore  not  be  saved  by  fire,  nor  in- 


THE  CITY  OF 

deed  at  all;  for  he  shall  not  possibly  dwell  with 
the  Saviour,  Who  says  very  explicitly  concern¬ 
ing  this  very  matter,  “He  that  loveth  father  or 
mother  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me; 
and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 
me  is  not  worthy  of  me.”1  But  he  who  loves  his 
relations  carnally,  and  yet  so  that  he  does  not 
prefer  them  to  Christ,  but  would  rather  want 
them  than  Christ  if  he  were  put  to  the  proof, 
shall  be  saved  by  fire,  because  it  is  necessary 
that  by  the  loss  of  these  relations  he  suffer 
pain  in  proportion  to  his  love.  And  he  who 
loves  father,  mother,  sons,  daughters,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Christ,  so  that  he  aids  them  in  obtaining 
His  kingdom  and  cleaving  to  Him,  or  loves 
them  because  they  are  members  of  Christ. 
God  forbid  that  this  love  should  be  consumed 
as  wood,  hay,  stubble,  and  not  rather  be  reck¬ 
oned  a  structure  of  gold,  silver,  precious 
stones.  For  how  can  a  man  love  those  more 
than  Christ  whom  he  loves  only  for  Christ’s 
sake? 

Chap.  27.  Against  the  belief  of  those  who  think 
that  the  sins  which  have  been  accompanied 
with  almsgiving  will  do  them  no  harm 
It  remains  to  reply  to  those  who  maintain  that 
those  only  shall  burn  in  eternal  fire  who  neglect 
alms-deeds  proportioned,  to  their  sins,  resting 
this  opinion  on  the  words  of  the  Apostle  James, 
“He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  that 
hath  showed  no  mercy.”2  Therefore,  they  say, 
he  that  hath  showed  mercy,  though  he  has  not 
reformed  his  dissolute  conduct,  but  has  lived 
wickedly  and  iniquitously  even  while  abound¬ 
ing  in  alms,  shall  have  a  merciful  judgment, 
so  that  he  shall  either  be  not  condemned  at  all, 
or  shall  be  delivered  from  final  judgment  after 
a  time.  And  for  the  same  reason  they  suppose 
that  Christ  will  discriminate  between  those  on 
the  right  hand  and  those  on  the  left,  and  will 
send  the  one  party  into  His  kingdom,  the  other 
into  eternal  punishment  on  the  sole  ground  of 
their  attention  to  or  neglect  of  works  of  charity. 
Moreover,  they  endeavour  to  use  the  prayer 
which  the  Lord  Himself  taught  as  a  proof  and 
bulwark  of  their  opinion,  that  daily  sins  which 
are  never  abandoned  can  be  expiated  through 
alms-deeds,  no  matter  how  offensive  or  of  what 
sort  they  be.  For,  say  they,  as  there  is  no  day 
on  which  Christians  ought  not  to  use  this  prayer, 
so  there  is  no  sin  of  any  kind  which,  though 
committed  every  day,  is  not  remitted  when  we 
say,  “Forgive  us  our  debts,”  if  we  take  care  to 
xMatt.  10.  37.  2Jas.  2.  13. 


GOD  XXL  27  583 

fulfill  what  follows,  “as  we  forgive  our  debt¬ 
ors.”3  For,  they  go  on  to  say,  the  Lord  does  not 
say,  “If  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your 
heavenly  Father  will  forgive  you  your  little 
daily  sins,”  but  “will  forgive  you  your  sins.” 
Therefore,  be  they  of  any  kind  or  magnitude 
whatever,  be  they  perpetrated  daily  and  never 
abandoned  or  subdued  in  this  life,  they  can  be 
pardoned,  they  presume,  through  alms-deeds. 

But  they  are  right  to  inculcate  the  giving  of 
alms  proportioned  to  past  sins;  for  if  they  said 
that  any  kind  of  alms  could  obtain  the  divine 
pardon  of  great  sins  committed  daily  and  with 
habitual  enormity,  if  they  said  that  such  sins 
could  thus  be  daily  remitted,  they  would  see  that 
their  doctrine  was  absurd  and  ridiculous.  For 
they  would  thus  be  driven  to  acknowledge  that 
it  were  possible  for  a  very  wealthy  man  to  buy 
absolution  from  murders,  adulteries,  and  all 
manner  of  wickedness,  by  paying  a  daily  alms 
of  ten  paltry  coins.  And  if  it  be  most  absurd  and 
insane  to  make  such  an  acknowledgment,  and 
if  we  still  ask  what  are  those  fitting  alms  of 
which  even  the  forerunner  of  Christ  said, 
“Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  repen¬ 
tance,”  4  undoubtedly  it  will  be  found  that  they 
are  not  such  as  are  done  by  men  who  undermine 
their  life  by  daily  enormities  even  to  the  very 
end.  For  they  suppose  that  by  giving  to  the  poor 
a  small  fraction  of  the  wealth  they  acquire  by 
extortion  and  spoliation  they  can  propitiate 
Christ,  so  that  they  may  with  impunity  commit 
the  most  damnable  sins,  in  the  persuasion  that 
they  have  bought  from  Him  a  license  to  trans¬ 
gress,  or  rather  do  buy  a  daily  indulgence.  And 
if  they  for  one  crime  have  distributed  all  their 
goods  to  Christ’s  needy  members,  that  could 
profit  them  nothing  unless  they  desisted  from  all 
similar  actions,  and  attained  charity  which 
worketh  no  evil.  He  therefore  who  does  alms- 
deeds  proportioned  to  his  sins  must  first  begin 
with  himself.  For  it  is  not  reasonable  that  a 
man  who  exercises  charity  towards  his  neigh¬ 
bour  should  not  do  so  towards  himself,  since  he 
hears  the  Lord  saying,  “Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself,”5  and  again,  “Have  com¬ 
passion  on  thy  soul,  and  please  God.” 6  He  then 
who  has  not  compassion  on  his  own  soul  that  he 
may  please  God,  how  can  he  be  said  to  do  alms- 
deeds  proportioned  to  his  sins?  To  the  same 
purpose  is  that  written,  “He  who  is  bad  to  him¬ 
self,  to  whom  can  he  be  good?”7  We  ought 
therefore  to  do  alms  that  we  may  be  heard  when 

3Matt.  6.  12.  4Matt.  3.  8.  5Matt.  22.  39. 

6Ecclus.  30.  24.  7Ecclus.  21.  1. 


584  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


we  pray  that  our  past  sins  may  be  forgiven,  not 
that  while  we  continue  in  them  we  may  think 
to  provide  ourselves  with  a  licence  for  wicked¬ 
ness  by  alms-deeds. 

The  reason,  therefore,  of  our  predicting  that 
He  will  impute  to  those  on  His  right  hand  the 
alms-deed  they  have  done,  and  charge  those  on 
His  left  with  omitting  the  same,  is  that  He  may 
thus  show  the  efficacy  of  charity  for  the  dele¬ 
tion  of  past  sins,  not  for  impunity  in  their  per¬ 
petual  commission.  And  such  persons,  indeed,  as 
decline  to  abandon  their  evil  habits  of  life  for  a 
better  course  cannot  be  said  to  do  charitable 
deeds.  For  this  is  the  purport  of  the  saying,  “In¬ 
asmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of 
these,  ye  did  it  not  to  me.”  1  He  shows  them  that 
they  do  not  perform  charitable  actions  even 
when  they  think  they  are  doing  so.  For  if  they 
gave  bread  to  a  hungering  Christian  because  he 
is  a  Christian,  assuredly  they  would  not  deny  to 
themselves  the  bread  of  righteousness,  that  is, 
Christ  Himself ;  for  God  considers  not  the  per¬ 
son  to  whom  the  gift  is  made,  but  the  spirit  in 
which  it  is  made.  He  therefore  who  loves  Christ 
in  a  Christian  extends  alms  to  him  in  the  same 
spirit  in  which  he  draws  near  to  Christ,  not  in 
that  spirit  which  would  abandon  Christ  if  it 
could  do  so  with  impunity.  For  in  proportion  as 
a  man  loves  what  Christ  disapproves  does  he 
himself  abandon  Christ.  For  what  does  it  profit 
a  man  that  he  is  baptized,  if  he  is  not  justified? 
Did  not  He  Who  said,  “Except  a  man  be  born  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  shall  not  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,”  2  say  also,  “Except  your 
righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  not  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven”?3  Why  do  many 
through  fear  of  the  first  saying  run  to  baptism, 
while  few  through  fear  of  the  second  seek  to  be 
justified?  As  therefore  it  is  not  to  his  brother  a 
man  says,  “Thou  fool,”  if  when  he  says  it  he  is 
indignant  not  at  the  brotherhood,  but  at  the  sin 
of  the  offender — for  otherwise  he  were  guilty  of 
hell  fire — so  he  who  extends  charity  to  a  Chris¬ 
tian  does  not  extend  it  to  a  Christian  if  he  does 
not  love  Christ  in  him.  Now  he  does  not  love 
Christ  who  refuses  to  be  justified  in  Him.  Or, 
again,  if  a  man  has  been  guilty  of  this  sin  of  call¬ 
ing  his  brother  “Fool,”  unjustly  reviling  him 
without  any  desire  to  remove  his  sin,  his  alms- 
deeds  go  a  small  way  towards  expiating  this 
fault,  unless  he  adds  to  this  the  remedy  of  rec¬ 
onciliation  which  the  same  passage  enjoins.  For 
it  is  there  said,  “Therefore,  if  thou  bring  thy 
gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  rememberest  that 
^latt.  25.  45.  2John,  3.  5.  3Matt.  5.  20. 


thy  brother  hath  aught  against  thee ;  leave  there 
thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way;  first 
be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and 
offer  thy  gift.”4  Just  so  it  is  a  small  matter  to 
do  alms-deeds,  no  matter  how  great  they  be,  for 
any  sin,  so  long  as  the  offender  continues  in  the 
practice  of  sin. 

Then  as  to  the  daily  prayer  which  the  Lord 
Himself  taught,  and  which  is  therefore  called 
the  Lord’s  prayer,  it  obliterates  indeed  the  sins 
of  the  day,  when  day  by  day  we  say,  “Forgive  us 
our  debts,”  and  when  we  not  only  say  but  act 
out  that  which  follows,  “as  we  forgive  our  debt¬ 
ors”;5  but  we  utter  this  petition  because  sins 
have  been  committed,  and  not  that  they  may 
be.  For  by  it  our  Saviour  designed  to  teach  us 
that,  however  righteously  we  live  in  this  life  of 
infirmity  and  darkness,  we  still  commit  sins  for 
the  remission  of  which  we  ought  to  pray,  while 
we  must  pardon  those  who  sin  against  us  that 
we  ourselves  also  may  be  pardoned.  The  Lord 
then  did  not  utter  the  words,  “If  ye  forgive  men 
their  trespasses,  your  Father  will  also  forgive 
you  your  trespasses,”  6  in  order  that  we  might 
contract  from  this  petition  such  confidence  as 
should  enable  us  to  sin  securely  from  day  to 
day,  either  putting  ourselves  above  the  fear  of 
human  laws,  or  craftily  deceiving  men  concern¬ 
ing  our  conduct,  but  in  order  that  we  might  thus 
learn  not  to  suppose  that  we  are  without  sins, 
even  though  we  should  be  free  from  crimes;  as 
also  God  admonished  the  priests  of  the  old  law 
to  this  same  effect  regarding  their  sacrifices, 
which  He  commanded  them  to  offer  first  for 
their  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  For  even  the  very  words  of  so  great  a  Mas¬ 
ter  and  Lord  are  to  be  intently  considered.  For 
He  does  not  say,  “If  ye  forgive  men  their  sins, 
your  Father  will  also  forgive  you  your  sins,  no 
matter  of  what  sort  they  be,”  but  He  says, 
“your  sins”;  for  it  was  a  daily  prayer  He  was 
teaching,  and  it  was  certainly  to  disciples  al¬ 
ready  justified  He  was  speaking.  What,  then, 
does  He  mean  by  “your  sins,”  but  those  sins 
from  which  not  even  you  who  are  justified  and 
sanctified  can  be  free?  While,  then,  those  who 
seek  occasion  from  this  petition  to  indulge  in 
habitual  sin  maintain  that  the  Lord  meant  to  in¬ 
clude  great  sins,  because  He  did  not  say,  “He 
will  forgive  you  your  small  sins,”  but  “your 
sins,”  we,  on  the  other  hand,  taking  into  ac¬ 
count  the  character  of  the  persons  He  was  ad¬ 
dressing,  cannot  see  our  way  to  interpret  the  ex¬ 
pression  “your  sins”  of  anything  but  small  sins, 
because  such  persons  are  no  longer  guilty  of 

4Matt.  5.  23,  24.  5Matt.  6.  12.  6Matt.  6.  14. 


THE  CITY  OF 

great  sins.  Nevertheless  not  even  great  sins 
themselves — sins  from  which  we  must  flee  wTith 
a  total  reformation  of  life — are  forgiven  to 
those  who  pray,  unless  they  observe  the  append¬ 
ed  precept,  “as  ye  also  forgive  your  debtors.” 
For  if  the  very  small  sins  which  attach  even  to 
the  life  of  the  righteous  be  not  remitted  without 
that  condition,  how  much  further  from  obtain¬ 
ing  indulgence  shall  those  be  who  are  involved 
in  many  great  crimes,  if,  while  they  cease  from 
perpetrating  such  enormities,  they  still  inexor¬ 
ably  refuse  to  remit  any  debt  incurred  to  them¬ 
selves,  since  the  Lord  says,  “But  if  ye  forgive 
not  men  their  trespasses,  neither  will  your  Fa¬ 
ther  forgive  your  trespasses”?1  For  this  is  the 
purport  of  the  saying  of  the  Apostle  James  also, 
“He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  that 
hath  showed  no  mercy.”2  For  we  should  re¬ 
member  that  servant  whose  debt  of  ten  thou¬ 
sand  talents  his  lord  cancelled,  but  afterwards 
ordered  him  to  pay  up,  because  the  servant 
himself  had  no  pity  for  his  fellow-servant  who 
owed  him  an  hundred  pence.3  The  words  which 
the  Apostle  James  subjoins,  “And  mercy  re- 
joiceth  against  judgment,”4  find  their  applica¬ 
tion  among  those  who  are  the  children  of  the 
promise  and  vessels  of  mercy.  For  even  those 
righteous  men,  who  have  lived  with  such  holi¬ 
ness  that  they  receive  into  the  eternal  habita¬ 
tions  others  also  who  have  won  their  friendship 
with  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,5  became 
such  only  through  the  merciful  deliverance  of 
Him  Who  justifies  the  ungodly,  imputing  to  him 
a  reward  according  to  grace,  not  according  to 
debt.  For  among  this  number  is  the  apostle, 
who  says,  “I  obtained  mercy  to  be  faithful.”6 

But  it  must  be  admitted,  that  those  who  are 
thus  received  into  the  eternal  habitations  are 
not  of  such  a  character  that  their  own  life  would 
suffice  to  rescue  them  without  the  aid  of  the 
saints,  and  consequently  in  their  case  especially 
does  mercy  rejoice  against  judgment.  And  yet 
we  are  not  on  this  account  to  suppose  that  every 
abandoned  profligate,  who  has  made  no  amend¬ 
ment  of  his  life,  is  to  be  received  into  the  eter¬ 
nal  habitations  if  only  he  has  assisted  the  saints 
with  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness — that  is 
to  say,  with  money  or  wealth  which  has  been 
unjustly  acquired,  or,  if  rightfully  acquired,  is 
yet  not  the  true  riches,  but  only  what  iniquity 
counts  riches,  because  it  knows  not  the  true 
riches  in  which  those  persons  abound,  who  even 
receive  others  also  into  eternal  habitations. 
There  is  then  a  certain  kind  of  life,  which  is  nei- 

xMatt.  6.  15.  2Jas.  2.  13.  3Matt.  18.  23. 

4Jas.  2.  13.  6Luke,  16,  9.  6I  Cor.  7.  25. 


GOD  XXI.  27  585 

ther,  on  the  one  hand,  so  bad  that  those  who 
adopt  it  are  not  helped  towards  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  any  bountiful  alms-giving  by  which 
they  may  relieve  the  wants  of  the  saints,  and 
make  friends  who  could  receive  them  into  eter¬ 
nal  habitations,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  so  good 
that  it  of  itself  suffices  to  win  for  them  that 
great  blessedness,  if  they  do  not  obtain  mercy 
through  the  merits  of  those  whom  they  have 
made  their  friends.  And  I  frequently  wonder 
that  even  Virgil  should  give  expression  to  this 
sentence  of  the  Lord,  in  which  He  says,  “Make 
to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  un¬ 
righteousness,  that  they  may  receive  you  into 
everlasting  habitations”;7  and  this  very  similar 
saying,  “He  that  receiveth  a  prophet,  in  the  name 
of  a  prophet,  shall  receive  a  prophet’s  reward; 
and  he  that  receiveth  a  righteous  man,  in  the 
name  of  a  righteous  man,  shall  receive  a  right¬ 
eous  man’s  reward.”8  For  when  that  poet  de¬ 
scribed  the  Elysian  fields,  in  which  they  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  souls  of  the  blessed  dwell,  he 
placed  there  not  only  those  who  had  been  able 
by  their  own  merit  to  reach  that  abode,  but 
added, 

And  they  who  grateful  memory  won 

By  services  to  others  done ;9 

that  is,  they  who  had  served  others,  and  thereby 
merited  to  be  remembered  by  them.  Just  as  if 
they  used  the  expression  so  common  in  Chris¬ 
tian  lips,  where  some  humble  person  commends 
himself  to  one  of  the  saints,  and  says,  “Remem¬ 
ber  me,”  and  secures  that  he  do  so  by  deserving 
well  at  his  hand.  But  what  that  kind  of  life  we 
have  been  speaking  of  is,  and  what  those  sins 
are  which  prevent  a  man  from  winning  the 
kingdom  of  God  by  himself,  but  yet  permit  him 
to  avail  himself  of  the  merits  of  the  saints,  it  is 
very  difficult  to  ascertain,  very  perilous  to  de¬ 
fine.  For  my  own  part,  in  spite  of  all  investiga¬ 
tion,  I  have  been  up  to  the  present  hour  unable 
to  discover  this.  And  possibly  it  is  hidden  from 
us,  lest  we  should  become  careless  in  avoiding 
such  sins,  and  so  cease  to  make  progress.  For  if 
it  were  known  what  these  sins  are,  which, 
though  they  continue,  and  be  not  abandoned  for 
a  higher  life,  do  yet  not  prevent  us  from  seeking 
and  hoping  for  the  intercession  of  the  saints, 
human  sloth  would  presumptuously  wrap  itself 
in  these  sins,  and  would  take  no  steps  to  be  dis¬ 
entangled  from  such  wrappings  by  the  deft  en¬ 
ergy  of  any  virtue,  but  would  only  desire  to  be 
rescued  by  the  merits  of  other  people,  whose 
friendship  had  been  won  by  a  bountiful  use  of 
7Luke,  16.  9.  8Matt.  10.  41.  9AZneid,  bk.  vi.  664. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


586 

the  mammon  of  unrighteousness.  But  now  that 
we  are  left  in  ignorance  of  the  precise  nature  of 
that  iniquity  which  is  venial,  even  though  it  be 
persevered  in,  certainly  we  are  both  more  vigi¬ 
lant  in  our  prayers  and  efforts  for  progress,  and 
more  careful  to  secure  with  the  mammon  of  un¬ 
righteousness  friends  for  ourselves  among  the 
saints. 

But  this  deliverance,  which  is  effected  by 
one’s  own  prayers,  or  the  intercession  of  holy 
men,  secures  that  a  man  be  not  cast  into  eternal 
fire,  but  not  that,  when  once  he  has  been  cast 
into  it,  he  should  after  a  time  be  rescued  from  it. 
For  even  those  who  fancy  that  what  is  said  of 
the  good  ground  bringing  forth  abundant  fruit, 
some  thirty,  some  sixty,  some  an  hundred  fold, 
is  to  be  referred  to  the  saints,  so  that  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  merits  some  of  them  shall  deliver 
thirty  men,  some  sixty,  some  an  hundred — even 
those  who  maintain  this  are  yet  commonly  in¬ 
clined  to  suppose  that  this  deliverance  will  take 
place  at,  and  not  after  the  day  of  judgment. 


Under  this  impression,  some  one  who  observed 
the  unseemly  folly  with  which  men  promise 
themselves  impunity  on  the  ground  that  all  will 
be  included  in  this  method  of  deliverance,  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  very  happily  remarked,  that  we 
should  rather  endeavour  to  live  so  well  that  we 
shall  be  all  found  among  the  number  of  those 
who  are  to  intercede  for  the  liberation  of  others, 
lest  these  should  be  so  few  in  number,  that,  aft¬ 
er  they  have  delivered  one  thirty,  another 
sixty,  another  an  hundred,  there  should  still  re¬ 
main  many  who  could  not  be  delivered  from 
punishment  by  their  intercessions,  and  among 
them  every  one  who  has  vainly  and  rashly  prom¬ 
ised  himself  the  fruit  of  another’s  labour.  But 
enough  has  been  said  in  reply  to  those  who  ac¬ 
knowledge  the  authority  of  the  same  sacred 
Scriptures  as  ourselves,  but  who,  by  a  mistaken 
interpretation  of  them,  conceive  of  the  future 
rather  as  they  themselves  wish  than  as  the 
Scriptures  teach.  And  having  given  this  reply, 
I  now,  according  to  promise,  close  this  book. 


BOOK  XXII 

ARGUMENT.  This  book  treats  of  the  end  of  the  city  of  god,  that  is  to  say, 

OF  THE  ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS ;  THE  FAITH  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  OF 
THE  BODY  IS  ESTABLISHED  AND  EXPLAINED’,  AND  THE  WORK  CONCLUDES  BY  SHOWING 
HOW  THE  SAINTS,  CLOTHED  IN  IMMORTAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  BODIES,  SHALL  BE  EM¬ 
PLOYED. 


Chap.  i.  Of  the  creation  of  angels  and  men 
As  we  promised  in  the  immediately  preced¬ 
ing  book,  this,  the  last  of  the  whole  work, 
shall  contain  a  discussion  of  the  eternal  bless¬ 
edness  of  the  city  of  God.  This  blessedness 
is  named  eternal,  not  because  it  shall  endure 
for  many  ages,  though  at  last  it  shall  come  to 
an  end,  but  because,  according  to  the  words 
of  the  gospel,  “of  His  kingdom  there  shall  be 
no  end.”1  Neither  shall  it  enjoy  the  mere  ap¬ 
pearance  of  perpetuity  which  is  maintained 
by  the  rise  of  fresh  generations  to  occupy  the 
place  of  those  that  have  died  out,  as  in  an  ever¬ 
green  the  same  freshness  seems  to  continue  per¬ 
manently,  and  the  same  appearance  of  dense 
foliage  is  preserved  by  the  growth  of  fresh 
leaves  in  the  room  of  those  that  have  withered 
and  fallen;  but  in  that  city  all  the  citizens  shall 
be  immortal,  men  now  for  the  first  time  enjoy¬ 
ing  what  the  holy  angels  have  never  lost.  And 
this  shall  be  accomplished  by  God,  the  most  al¬ 
mighty  Founder  of  the  city.  For  He  has  prom- 
Tuke,  1.  33. 


ised  it,  and  cannot  lie,  and  has  already  per¬ 
formed  many  of  His  promises,  and  has  done 
many  unpromised  kindnesses  to  those  whom  He 
now  asks  to  believe  that  He  will  do  this  also. 

For  it  is  He  Who  in  the  beginning  created  the 
world  full  of  all  visible  and  intelligible  beings, 
among  which  He  created  nothing  better  than 
those  spirits  whom  He  endowed  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  made  capable  of  contemplating  and 
enjoying  Him,  and  united  in  our  society,  which 
we  call  the  holy  and  heavenly  city,  and  in  which 
the  material  of  their  sustenance  and  blessedness 
is  God  Himself,  as  it  were  their  common  food 
and  nourishment.  It  is  He  Who  gave  to  this  in¬ 
tellectual  nature  free-will  of  such  a  kind,  that  if 
he  wished  to  forsake  God,  i.e.,  his  blessedness, 
misery  should  forthwith  result.  It  is  He  Who, 
when  He  foreknew  that  certain  angels  would  in 
their  pride  desire  to  suffice  for  their  own  bless¬ 
edness,  and  would  forsake  their  great  good,  did 
not  deprive  them  of  this  power,  deeming  it  to  be 
more  befitting  His  power  and  goodness  to  bring 
good  out  of  evil  than  to  prevent  the  evil  from 
coming  into  existence.  And  indeed  evil  had 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  1-2 


never  been,  had  not  the  mutable  nature — mu¬ 
table,  though  good,  and  created  by  the  most 
high  God  and  immutable  Good,  Who  created  all 
things  good — brought  evil  upon  itself  by  sin. 
And  this  its  sin  is  itself  proof  that  its  nature  was 
originally  good.  For  had  it  not  been  very  good, 
though  not  equal  to  its  Creator,  the  desertion 
of  God  as  its  light  could  not  have  been  an  evil 
to  it.  For  as  blindness  is  a  vice  of  the  eye,  and 
this  very  fact  indicates  that  the  eye  was  created 
to  see  the  light,  and  as,  consequently,  vice  itself 
proves  that  the  eye  is  more  excellent  than  the 
other  members,  because  it  is  capable  of  light 
(for  on  no  other  supposition  would  it  be  a  vice 
of  the  eye  to  want  light),  so  the  nature  which 
once  enjoyed  God  teaches,  even  by  its  very  vice, 
that  it  was  created  the  best  of  all,  since  it  is  now 
miserable  because  it  does  not  enjoy  God.  It  is 
He  Who  with  very  just  punishment  doomed  the 
angels  who  voluntarily  fell  to  everlasting  mis¬ 
ery,  and  rewarded  those  who  continued  in  their 
attachment  to  the  supreme  good  with  the  assur¬ 
ance  of  endless  stability  as  the  meed  of  their 
fidelity.  It  is  He  Who  made  also  man  himself  up¬ 
right,  with  the  same  freedom  of  will — an  earth¬ 
ly  animal,  indeed,  but  fit  for  heaven  if  he  re¬ 
mained  faithful  to  his  Creator,  but  destined  to 
the  misery  appropriate  to  such  a  nature  if  he 
forsook  Him.  It  is  He  Who,  when  He  foreknew 
that  man  would  in  his  turn  sin  by  abandoning 
God  and  breaking  His  law,  did  not  deprive  him 
of  the  power  of  free-will,  because  He  at  the 
same  time  foresaw  what  good  He  Himself 
would  bring  out  of  the  evil,  and  how  from  this 
mortal  race,  deservedly  and  justly  condemned, 
He  would  by  His  grace  collect,  as  now  He  does, 
a  people  so  numerous,  that  He  thus  fills  up  and 
repairs  the  blank  made  by  the  fallen  angels,  and 
that  thus  that  beloved  and  heavenly  city  is  not 
defrauded  of  the  full  number  of  its  citizens,  but 
perhaps  may  even  rejoice  in  a  still  more  over¬ 
flowing  population. 

Chap.  2.  Of  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  will 

of  God 

It  is  true  that  wicked  men  do  many  things 
contrary  to  God’s  will;  but  so  great  is  His  wis¬ 
dom  and  power,  that  all  things  which  seem  ad¬ 
verse  to  His  purpose  do  still  tend  towards  those 
just  and  good  ends  and  issues  which  He  Him¬ 
self  has  foreknown.  And  consequently,  when 
God  is  said  to  change  His  will,  as  when,  e.g.,  He 
becomes  angry  with  those  to  whom  He  was  gen¬ 
tle,  it  is  rather  they  than  He  who  are  changed, 
and  they  find  Him  changed  in  so  far  as  their  ex¬ 
perience  of  suffering  at  His  hand  is  new,  as  the 


587 

sun  is  changed  to  injured  eyes,  and  becomes  as 
it  were  fierce  from  being  mild,  and  hurtful  from 
being  delightful,  though  in  itself  it  remains  the 
same  as  it  was.  That  also  is  called  the  will  of 
God  which  He  does  in  the  hearts  of  those  who 
obey  His  commandments;  and  of  this  the  apos¬ 
tle  says,  “For  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you  both 
to  will.”  1  As  God’s  “righteousness”  is  used  not 
only  of  the  righteousness  wherewith  He  Him¬ 
self  is  righteous,  but  also  of  that  which  He  pro¬ 
duces  in  the  man  whom  He  justifies,  so  also  that 
is  called  His  law,  which,  though  given  by  God,  is 
rather  the  law  of  men.  For  certainly  they  were 
men  to  whom  Jesus  said,  “It  is  written  in  your 
law,”  2  though  in  another  place  we  read,  “The 
law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart.”3  According  to 
this  will  which  God  works  in  men,  He  is  said 
also  to  will  what  He  Himself  does  not  will,  but 
causes  His  people  to  will;  as  He  is  said  to  know 
what  He  has  caused  those  to  know  who  were 
ignorant  of  it.  For  when  the  apostle  says,  “But 
now,  after  that  ye  have  known  God,  or  rather 
are  known  of  God,”  4  we  cannot  suppose  that 
God  there  for  the  first  time  knew  those  who 
were  foreknown  by  Him  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world;  but  He  is  said  to  have  known 
them  then,  because  then  He  caused  them  to 
know.  But  I  remember  that  I  discussed  these 
modes  of  expression  in  the  preceding  books. 
According  to  this  will,  then,  by  which  we  say 
that  God  wills  what  He  causes  to  be  willed  by 
others,  from  whom  the  future  is  hidden.  He  wills 
many  things  which  He  does  not  perform. 

Thus  His  saints,  inspired  by  His  holy  will, 
desire  many  things  which  never  happen.  They 
pray,  e.g.,  for  certain  individuals — they  pray  in 
a  pious  and  holy  manner — but  what  they  re¬ 
quest  He  does  not  perform,  though  He  Himself 
by  His  own  Holy  Spirit  has  wrought  in  them 
this  will  to  pray.  And  consequently,  when  the 
saints,  in  conformity  with  God’s  mind,  will  and 
pray  that  all  men  be  saved,  we  can  use  this 
mode  of  expression:  God  wills  and  does  not 
perform — meaning  that  He  Who  causes  them  to 
will  these  things  Himself  wills  them.  But  if  we 
speak  of  that  will  of  His  which  is  eternal  as  His 
foreknowledge,  certainly  He  has  already  done 
all  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth  that  He  has 
willed — not  only  past  and  present  things,  but 
even  things  still  future.  But  before  the  arrival 
of  that  time  in  which  He  has  willed  the  occur¬ 
rence  of  what  He  foreknew  and  arranged  before 
all  time,  we  say,  “It  will  happen  when  God 
wills.”  But  if  we  are  ignorant  not  only  of  the 
time  in  which  it  is  to  be,  but  even  whether  it 

1Phil.  2. 13.  2John,  8. 17.  3Ps.  37.  31.  4Gal.  4.  9. 


588  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


shall  be  at  all,  we  say.  “It  will  happen  if  God 
wills” — not  because  God  will  then  have  a  new 
will  which  He  had  not  before,  but  because  that 
event,  which  from  eternity  has  been  prepared 
in  His  unchangeable  will,  shall  then  come  to 
pass. 

Chap.  3.  Of  the  promise  of  eternal  blessedness 
to  the  saints,  and  everlasting  punishment  to 
the  wicked 

Wherefore,  not  to  mention  many  other  in¬ 
stances  besides,  as  we  now  see  in  Christ  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  that  which  God  promised  to  Abra¬ 
ham  when  He  said,  “In  thy  seed  shall  all  na¬ 
tions  be  blessed,”  1  so  this  also  shall  be  fulfilled 
which  He  promised  to  the  same  race,  when  He 
said  by  the  prophet,  “They  that  are  in  their 
sepulchres  shall  rise  again,”  2  and  also,  “There 
shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth:  and  the 
former  shall  not  be  mentioned,  nor  come  into 
mind;  but  they  shall  find  joy  and  rejoicing  in 
it:  for  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and 
my  people  a  joy.  And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem, 
and  joy  in  my  people,  and  the  voice  of  weeping 
shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her.”  3  And  by  another 
prophet  He  uttered  the  same  prediction:  “At 
that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,  every 
one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book.  And 
many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  (or,  as 
some  interpret  it,  “in  the  mound”)  of  the 
earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and 
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.”4  And 
in  another  place  by  the  same  prophet:  “The 
saints  of  the  Most  High  shall  take  the  kingdom, 
and  shall  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for 
ever  and  ever.”  5  And  a  little  after  he  says,  “His 
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom.” 6  Other 
prophecies  referring  to  the  same  subject  I  have 
advanced  in  the  twentieth  book,  and  others  still 
which  I  have  not  advanced  are  found  written  in 
the  same  Scriptures;  and  these  predictions  shall 
be  fulfilled,  as  those  also  have  been  which  unbe¬ 
lieving  men  supposed  would  be  frustrate.  For  it 
is  the  same  God  who  promised  both,  and  pre¬ 
dicted  that  both  would  come  to  pass — the  God 
whom  the  pagan  deities  tremble  before,  as  even 
Porphyry,  the  noblest  of  pagan  philosophers, 
testifies. 

Chap.  4.  Against  the  wise  men  of  the  world, 
who  fancy  that  the  earthly  bodies  of  men  can¬ 
not  be  transferred  to  a  heavenly  habitation 
But  men  who  use  their  learning  and  intellec¬ 
tual  ability  to  resist  the  force  of  that  great  au- 

^en.  22.  18.  2Isa.  26.  19.  3Isa.  65.  17-19. 

4Dan.  12.  1,  2.  6Dan.  7.  18.  6Dan.  7.  27. 


thority  which,  in  fulfilment  of  what  was  so  long 
before  predicted,  has  converted  all  races  of  men 
to  faith  and  hope  in  its  promises,  seem  to  them¬ 
selves  to  argue  acutely  against  the  resurrection 
of  the  body  while  they  cite  what  Cicero  men¬ 
tions  in  the  third  book  De  Republica.  For  when 
he  was  asserting  the  apotheosis  of  Hercules  and 
Romulus,  he  says:  “Whose  bodies  were  not  tak¬ 
en  up  into  heaven;  for  nature  would  not  permit 
a  body  of  earth  to  exist  anywhere  except  upon 
earth.”  This,  forsooth,  is  the  profound  reason¬ 
ing  of  the  wise  men,  whose  thoughts  God  knows 
that  they  are  vain.  For  if  we  were  only  souls, 
that  is,  spirits  without  any  body,  and  if  we 
dwelt  in  heaven  and  had  no  knowledge  of  earth¬ 
ly  animals,  and  were  told  that  we  should  be 
bound  to  earthly  bodies  by  some  wonderful 
bond  of  union,  and  should  animate  them,  should 
we  not  much  more  vigorously  refuse  to  believe 
this,  and  maintain  that  nature  would  not  permit 
an  incorporeal  substance  to  be  held  by  a  cor¬ 
poreal  bond?  And  yet  the  earth  is  full  of  living 
spirits,  to  which  terrestrial  bodies  are  bound, 
and  with  which  they  are  in  a  wonderful  way 
implicated.  If,  then,  the  same  God  who  has 
created  such  beings  wills  this  also,  what  is  to 
hinder  the  earthly  body  from  being  raised  to  a 
heavenly  body,  since  a  spirit,  which  is  more  ex¬ 
cellent  than  all  bodies,  and  consequently  than 
even  a  heavenly  body,  has  been  tied  to  an  earth¬ 
ly  body?  If  so  small  an  earthly  particle  has  been 
able  to  hold  in  union  with  itself  something  bet¬ 
ter  than  a  heavenly  body,  so  as  to  receive  sen¬ 
sation  and  life,  will  heaven  disdain  to  receive,  or 
at  least  to  retain,  this  sentient  and  living  parti¬ 
cle,  which  derives  its  life  and  sensation  from  a 
substance  more  excellent  than  any  heavenly 
body?  If  this  does  not  happen  now,  it  is  because 
the  time  is  not  yet  come  which  has  been  deter¬ 
mined  by  Him  who  has  already  done  a  much 
more  marvellous  thing  than  that  which  these 
men  refuse  to  believe.  For  why  do  we  not  more 
intensely  wonder  that  incorporeal  souls,  which 
are  of  higher  rank  than  heavenly  bodies,  are 
bound  to  earthly  bodies,  rather  than  that  bod¬ 
ies,  although  earthly,  are  exalted  to  an  abode 
which,  though  heavenly,  is  yet  corporeal,  except 
because  we  have  been  accustomed  to  see  this, 
and  indeed  are  this,  while  we  are  not  as  yet  that 
other  marvel,  nor  have  as  yet  ever  seen  it?  Cer¬ 
tainly,  if  we  consult  sober  reason,  the  more 
wonderful  of  the  two  divine  works  is  found  to 
be  to  attach  somehow  corporeal  things  to  in¬ 
corporeal,  and  not  to  connect  earthly  things 
with  heavenly,  which,  though  diverse,  are  yet 
both  of  them  corporeal. 


THE  CITY  OF 

Chap.  5.  Of  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  which 
some  refuse  to  believe,  though  the  world  at 
large  believes  it 

But  granting  that  this  was  once  incredible, 
behold,  now,  the  world  has  come  to  the  belief 
that  the  earthly  body  of  Christ  was  received  up 
into  heaven.  Already  both  the  learned  and  un¬ 
learned  have  believed  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
flesh  and  its  ascension  to  the  heavenly  places, 
while  only  a  very  few  either  of  the  educated  or 
uneducated  are  still  staggered  by  it.  If  this  is  a 
credible  thing  which  is  believed,  then  let  those 
who  do  not  believe  see  how  stolid  they  are ;  and 
if  it  is  incredible,  then  this  also  is  an  incredible 
thing,  that  what  is  incredible  should  have  re¬ 
ceived  such  credit.  Here  then  we  have  two  in- 
credibles — to  wit,  the  resurrection  of  our  body 
to  eternity,  and  that  the  world  should  believe  so 
incredible  a  thing;  and  both  these  incredibles 
the  same  God  predicted  should  come  to  pass 
before  either  had  as  yet  occurred.  We  see  that 
already  one  of  the  two  has  come  to  pass,  for  the 
world  has  believed  what  was  incredible;  why 
should  we  despair  that  the  remaining  one  shall 
also  come  to  pass,  and  that  this  which  the  world 
believed,  though  it  was  incredible,  shall  itself 
occur?  For  already  that  which  was  equally  in¬ 
credible  has  come  to  pass,  in  the  world’s  be¬ 
lieving  an  incredible  thing.  Both  were  incredi¬ 
ble  :  the  one  we  see  accomplished,  the  other  we 
believe  shall  be;  for  both  were  predicted  in 
those  same  Scriptures  by  means  of  which  the 
world  believed.  And  the  very  manner  in  which 
the  world’s  faith  was  won  is  found  to  be  even 
more  incredible,  if  we  consider  it.  Men  unin¬ 
structed  in  any  branch  of  a  liberal  education, 
without  any  of  the  refinement  of  heathen  learn¬ 
ing.  unskilled  in  grammar,  not  armed  with  dia¬ 
lectic,  not  adorned  with  rhetoric,  but  plain  fish¬ 
ermen,  and  very  few  in  number — these  were  the 
men  whom  Christ  sent  with  the  nets  of  faith  to 
the  sea  of  this  world,  and  thus  took  out  of  every 
race  so  many  fishes,  and  even  the  philosophers 
themselVes,  wonderful  as  they  are  rare.  Let  us 
add.  if  you  please,  or  because  you  ought  to  be 
pleased,  this  third  incredible  thing  to  the  two 
former.  And  now  we  have  three  incredibles,  all 
of  which  have  yet  come  to  pass.  It  is  incredible 
that  Jesus  Christ  should  have  risen  in  the  flesh 
and  ascended  with  flesh  into  heaven;  it  is  in¬ 
credible  that  the  world  should  have  believed  so 
incredible  a  thing;  it  is  incredible  that  a  very 
few  men,  of  mean  birth  and  the  lowest  rank,  and 
no  education,  should  have  been  able  so  effectu¬ 
ally  to  persuade  the  world,  and  even  its  learned 


GOD  XXII.  3-5  589 

men,  of  so  incredible  a  thing.  Of  these  three  in¬ 
credibles,  the  parties  with  whom  we  are  debat¬ 
ing  refuse  to  believe  the  first;  they  cannot  re¬ 
fuse  to  see  the  second,  which  they  are  unable  to 
account  for  if  they  do  not  believe  the  third.  It 
is  indubitable  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
and  His  ascension  into  heaven  with  the  flesh  in 
which  He  rose,  is  already  preached  and  believed 
in  the  whole  world.  If  it  is  not  credible,  how  is 
it  that  it  has  already  received  credence  in  the 
whole  world?  If  a  number  of  noble,  exalted,  and 
learned  men  had  said  that  they  had  witnessed 
it,  and  had  been  at  pains  to  publish  what  they 
had  witnessed,  it  were  not  wonderful  that  the 
world  should  have  believed  it,  but  it  were  very 
stubborn  to  refuse  credence;  but  if,  as  is  true, 
the  world  has  believed  a  few  obscure,  inconsid¬ 
erable,  uneducated  persons,  who  state  and  write 
that  they  witnessed  it,  is  it  not  unreasonable 
that  a  handful  of  wrong-headed  men  should  op¬ 
pose  themselves  to  the  creed  of  the  whole  world, 
and  refuse  their  belief?  And  if  the  world  has 
put  faith  in  a  small  number  of  men,  of  mean 
birth  and  the  lowest  rank,  and  no  education,  it 
is  because  the  divinity  of  the  thing  itself  ap¬ 
peared  all  the  more  manifestly  in  such  con¬ 
temptible  witnesses.  The  eloquence,  indeed, 
which  lent  persuasion  to  their  message,  consist¬ 
ed  of  wonderful  works,  not  words.  For  they  who 
had  not  seen  Christ  risen  in  the  flesh,  nor  ascend¬ 
ing  into  heaven  with  His  risen  body,  believed 
those  who  related  how  they  had  seen  these 
things,  and  who  testified  not  only  with  words 
but  wonderful  signs.  For  men  whom  they  knew 
to  be  acquainted  with  only  one,  or  at  most  two 
languages,  they  marvelled  to  hear  speaking  in 
the  tongues  of  all  nations.  They  saw  a  man,  lame 
from  his  mother’s  womb,  after  forty  years 
stand  up  sound  at  their  word  in  the  name  of 
Christ;  that  handkerchiefs  taken  from  their 
bodies  had  virtue  to  heal  the  sick;  that  count¬ 
less  persons,  sick  of  various  diseases,  were  laid 
in  a  row  in  the  road  where  they  were  to  pass, 
that  their  shadow  might  fall  on  them  as  they 
walked,  and  that  they  forthwith  received  health ; 
that  many  other  stupendous  miracles  were 
wrought  by  them  in  the  name  of  Christ;  and, 
finally,  that  they  even  raised  the  dead.  If  it  be 
admitted  that  these  things  occurred  as  they  are 
related,  then  we  have  a  multitude  of  incredible 
things  to  add  to  those  three  incredibles.  That 
the  one  incredibility  of  the  resurrection  and  as¬ 
cension  of  Jesus  Christ  may  be  believed,  we  ac¬ 
cumulate  the  testimonies  of  countless  incredi¬ 
ble  miracles,  but  even  so  we  do  not  bend  the 
frightful  obstinacy  of  these  sceptics.  But  if  they 


590  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


do  not  believe  that  these  miracles  were  wrought 
by  Christ’s  apostles  to  gain  credence  to  their 
preaching  of  His  resurrection  and  ascension, 
this  one  grand  miracle  suffices  for  us,  that  the 
whole  world  has  believed  without  any  miracles. 

Chap.  6.  That  Rome  made  its  founder  Romidus 
a  god  because  it  loved  him;  but  the  Church 
loved  Christ  because  it  believed  Him  to  be 
God 

Let  us  here  recite  the  passage  in  which  Tully 
expresses  his  astonishment  that  the  apotheosis 
of  Romulus  should  have  been  credited.  I  shall 
insert  his  words  as  they  stand:  “It  is  most 
worthy  of  remark  in  Romulus,  that  other  men 
who  are  said  to  have  become  gods  lived  in  less 
educated  ages,  when  there  was  a  greater  pro¬ 
pensity  to  the  fabulous,  and  when  the  unin¬ 
structed  were  easily  persuaded  to  believe  any¬ 
thing.  But  the  age  of  Romulus  was  barely  six 
hundred  years  ago,  and  already  literature  and 
science  had  dispelled  the  errors  that  attach  to 
an  uncultured  age.”  And  a  little  after  he  says  of 
the  same  Romulus  words  to  this  effect:  “From 
this  we  may  perceive  that  Homer  had  flourished 
long  before  Romulus,  and  that  there  was  now  so 
much  learning  in  individuals,  and  so  generally 
diffused  an  enlightenment,  that  scarcely  any 
room  was  left  for  fable.  For  antiquity  admitted 
fables,  and  sometimes  even  very  clumsy  ones; 
but  this  age  was  sufficiently  enlightened  to  re¬ 
ject  whatever  had  not  the  air  of  truth.”  Thus 
one  of  the  most  learned  men,  and  certainly  the 
most  eloquent,  M.  Tullius  Cicero,  says  that  it  is 
surprising  that  the  divinity  of  Romulus  was  be¬ 
lieved  in,  because  the  times  were  already  so  en¬ 
lightened  that  they  would  not  accept  a  fabulous 
fiction.  But  who  believed  that  Romulus  was  a 
god  except  Rome,  which  was  itself  small  and  in 
its  infancy?  Then  afterwards  it  was  necessary 
that  succeeding  generations  should  preserve  the 
tradition  of  their  ancestors  that,  drinking  in  this 
superstition  with  their  mother’s  milk,  the  state 
might  grow  and  come  to  such  power  that  it 
might  dictate  this  belief,  as  from  a  point  of  van¬ 
tage,  to  all  the  nations  over  whom  its  sway  ex¬ 
tended.  And  these  nations,  though  they  might 
not  believe  that  Romulus  was  a  god.  at  least  said 
so,  that  they  might  not  give  offence  to  their  sov¬ 
ereign  state  by  refusing  to  give  its  founder  that 
title  which  was  given  him  by  Rome,  which  had 
adopted  this  belief,  not  by  a  love  of  error,  but 
an  error  of  love.  But  though  Christ  is  the  found¬ 
er  of  the  heavenly  and  eternal  city,  yet  it  did  not 
believe  Him  to  be  God  because  it  was  founded 
by  Him,  but  rather  it  is  founded  by  Him,  in  vir¬ 


tue  of  its  belief.  Rome,  after  it  had  been  built 
and  dedicated,  worshipped  its  founder  in  a  tem¬ 
ple  as  a  god;  but  this  Jerusalem  laid  Christ,  its 
God.  as  its  foundation,  that  the  building  and 
dedication  might  proceed.  The  former  city  loved 
its  founder,  and  therefore  believed  him  to  be  a 
god;  the  latter  believed  Christ  to  be  God,  and 
therefore  loved  Him.  There  was  an  antecedent 
cause  for  the  love  of  the  former  city,  and  for 
its  believing  that  even  a  false  dignity  attached 
to  the  object  of  its  love;  so  there  was  an  ante¬ 
cedent  cause  for  the  belief  of  the  latter,  and  for 
its  loving  the  true  dignity  which  a  proper  faith, 
not  a  rash  surmise,  ascribed  to  its  object.  For, 
not  to  mention  the  multitude  of  very  striking 
miracles  which  proved  that  Christ  is  God,  there 
were  also  divine  prophecies  heralding  Him. 
prophecies  most  worthy  of  belief,  which  being 
already  accomplished,  we  have  not,  like  the  fa¬ 
thers,  to  wait  for  their  verification.  Of  Romulus, 
on  the  other  hand,  and  of  his  building  Rome 
and  reigning  in  it.  we  read  or  hear  the  narrative 
of  what  did  take  place,  not  prediction  which  be¬ 
forehand  said  that  such  things  should  be.  And 
so  far  as  his  reception  among  the  gods  is  con¬ 
cerned,  history  only  records  that  this  was  be¬ 
lieved,  and  does  not  state  it  as  a  fact  for  no 
miraculous  signs  testified  to  the  truth  of  this. 
For  as  to  that  wolf  which  is  said  to  have  nursed 
the  twin-brothers,  and  which  is  considered  a 
great  marvel,  how  does  this  prove  him  to  have 
been  divine?  For  even  supposing  that  this  nurse 
was  a  real  wolf  and  not  a  mere  courtezan,  yet 
she  nursed  both  brothers,  and  Remus  is  not 
reckoned  a  god.  Besides,  what  was  there  to  hin¬ 
der  any  one  from  asserting  that  Romulus  or 
Hercules,  or  any  such  man.  was  a  god?  Or  who 
would  rather  choose  to  die  than  profess  belief 
in  his  divinity?  And  did  a  single  nation  worship 
Romulus  among  its  gods,  unless  it  were  forced 
through  fear  of  the  Roman  name?  But  who  can 
number  the  multitudes  who  have  chosen  death 
in  the  most  cruel  shapes  rather  than  deny  the 
divinity  of  Christ?  And  thus  the  dread  of  some 
slight  indignation,  which  it  was  supposed,  per¬ 
haps  groundlessly,  might  exist  in  the  minds  of 
the  Romans,  constrained  some  states  who  were 
subject  to  Rome  to  worship  Romulus  as  a  god; 
whereas  the  dread,  not  of  a  slight  mental  shock, 
but  of  severe  and  various  punishments  and  of 
death  itself,  the  most  formidable  of  all,  could 
not  prevent  an  immense  multitude  of  martyrs 
throughout  the  world  from  not  merely  worship¬ 
ping  but  also  confessing  Christ  as  God.  The  city 
of  Christ,  which,  although  as  yet  a  stranger  upon 
earth,  had  countless  hosts  of  citizens,  did  not 


THE  CITY  OF 

make  war  upon  its  godless  persecutors  for  the 
sake  of  temporal  security,  but  preferred  to  win 
eternal  salvation  by  abstaining  from  war.  They 
were  bound,  imprisoned,  beaten,  tortured, 
burned,  torn  in  pieces,  massacred,  and  yet  they 
multiplied.  It  was  not  given  to  them  to  fight  for 
their  eternal  salvation  except  by  despising  their 
temporal  salvation  for  their  Saviour’s  sake. 

I  am  aware  that  Cicero,  in  the  third  book  of  his 
De  Republica,  if  I  mistake  not,  argues  that  a 
first-rate  power  will  not  engage  in  war  except 
either  for  honour  or  for  safety.  What  he  has  to 
say  about  the  question  of  safety,  and  what  he 
means  by  safety,  he  explains  in  another  place, 
saying,  “Private  persons  frequently  evade,  by  a 
speedy  death,  destitution,  exile,  bonds,  the 
scourge,  and  the  other  pains  which  even  the 
most  insensible  feel.  But  to  states,  death,  which 
seems  to  emancipate  individuals  from  all  pun¬ 
ishments,  is  itself  a  punishment;  for  a  state 
should  be  so  constituted  as  to  be  eternal.  And 
thus  death  is  not  natural  to  a  republic  as  to  a 
man,  to  whom  death  is  not  only  necessary,  but 
often  even  desirable.  But  when  a  state  is  de¬ 
stroyed,  obliterated,  annihilated,  it  is  as  if  (to 
compare  great  things  with  small)  this  whole 
world  perished  and  collapsed.”  Cicero  said  this 
because  he,  with  the  Platonists,  believed  that 
the  world  would  not  perish.  It  is  therefore 
agreed  that,  according  to  Cicero,  a  state  should 
engage  in  war  for  the  safety  which  preserves 
the  state  permanently  in  existence,  though  its 
citizens  change;  as  the  foliage  of  an  olive  or 
laurel,  or  any  tree  of  this  kind,  is  perennial,  the 
old  leaves  being  replaced  by  fresh  ones.  For 
death,  as  he  says,  is  no  punishment  to  individ¬ 
uals,  but  rather  delivers  them  from  all  other 
punishments,  but  it  is  a  punishment  to  the  state. 
And  therefore  it  is  reasonably  asked  whether 
the  Saguntines  did  right  when  they  chose  that 
their  whole  state  should  perish  rather  than  that 
they  should  break  faith  with  the  Roman  repub¬ 
lic;  for  this  deed  of  theirs  is  applauded  by  the 
citizens  of  the  earthly  republic.  But  I  do  not  see 
how  they  could  follow  the  advice  of  Cicero,  who 
tells  us  that  no  war  is  to  be  undertaken  save  for 
safety  or  for  honour;  neither  does  he  say  which 
of  these  two  is  to  be  preferred,  if  a  case  should 
occur  in  which  the  one  could  not  be  preserved 
without  the  loss  of  the  other.  For  manifestly,  if 
the  Saguntines  chose  safety,  they  must  break 
faith;  if  they  kept  faith,  they  must  reject  safe¬ 
ty;  as  also  it  fell  out.  But  the  safety  of  the  city 
of  God  is  such  that  it  can  be  retained,  or  rather 
acquired,  by  faith  and  with  faith;  but  if  faith  be 
abandoned,  no  one  can  attain  it.  It  is  this  thought 


GOD  XXII.  6-8  591 

of  a  most  steadfast  and  patient  spirit  that  has 
made  so  many  noble  martyrs,  while  Romulus 
has  not  had,  and  could  not  have,  so  much  as  one 
to  die  for  his  divinity. 

Chap.  7.  That  the  world’s  belief  in  Christ  is  the 
result  of  divine  power,  not  of  human  persua¬ 
sion 

But  it  is  thoroughly  ridiculous  to  make  men¬ 
tion  of  the  false  divinity  of  Romulus  as  any  way 
comparable  to  that  of  Christ.  Nevertheless,  if 
Romulus  lived  about  six  hundred  years  before 
Cicero,  in  an  age  which  already  was  so  enlight¬ 
ened  that  it  rejected  all  impossibilities,  how 
much  more,  in  an  age  which  certainly  was  more 
enlightened,  being  six  hundred  years  later,  the 
age  of  Cicero  himself,  and  of  the  emperors  Au¬ 
gustus  and  Tiberius,  would  the  human  mind 
have  refused  to  listen  to  or  believe  in  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  Christ’s  body  and  its  ascension  into 
heaven,  and  have  scouted  it  as  an  impossibility, 
had  not  the  divinity  of  the  truth  itself,  or  the 
truth  of  the  divinity,  and  corroborating  miracu¬ 
lous  signs,  proved  that  it  could  happen  and  had 
happened?  Through  virtue  of  these  testimonies, 
and  notwithstanding  the  opposition  and  terror 
of  so  many  cruel  persecutions,  the  resurrection 
and  immortality  of  the  flesh,  first  in  Christ,  and 
subsequently  in  all  in  the  new  world,  was  be¬ 
lieved,  was  intrepidly  proclaimed,  and  was 
sown  over  the  whole  world,  to  be  fertilized  rich¬ 
ly  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs.  For  the  pre¬ 
dictions  of  the  prophets  that  had  preceded  the 
events  were  read,  they  were  corroborated  by 
powerful  signs,  and  the  truth  was  seen  to  be  not 
contradictory  to  reason,  but  only  different  from 
customary  ideas,  so  that  at  length  the  world  em¬ 
braced  the  faith  it  had  furiously  persecuted. 

Chap.  8.  Of  miracles  which  were  wrought  that 
the  world  might  believe  in  Christ ,  and  which 
have  not  ceased  since  the  world  believed 
Why,  they  say,  are  those  miracles,  which  you 
affirm  were  wrought  formerly,  wrought  no  long¬ 
er?  I  might,  indeed,  reply  that  miracles  were 
necessary  before  the  world  believed,  in  order 
that  it  might  believe.  And  whoever  nowadays 
demands  to  see  prodigies  that  he  may  believe,  is 
himself  a  great  prodigy,  because  he  does  not  be¬ 
lieve,  though  the  whole  world  does.  But  they 
make  these  objections  for  the  sole  purpose  of  in¬ 
sinuating  that  even  those  former  miracles  were 
never  wrought.  How,  then,  is  it  that  everywhere 
Christ  is  celebrated  with  such  firm  belief  in  His 
resurrection  and  ascension?  How  is  it  that  in 
enlightened  times,  in  which  every  impossibility 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


is  rejected,  the  world  has.  without  any  miracles, 
believed  things  marvellously  incredible?  Or  will 
they  say  that  these  things  were  credible,  and 
therefore  were  credited?  Why  then  do  they 
themselves  not  believe?  Our  argument,  there¬ 
fore,  is  a  summary  one — either  incredible  things 
which  were  not  witnessed  have  caused  the  world 
to  believe  other  incredible  things  which  both 
occurred  and  were  witnessed,  or  this  matter  was 
so  credible  that  it  needed  no  miracles  in  proof 
of  it  and  therefore  convicts  these  unbelievers 
of  unpardonable  scepticism.  This  I  might  say 
for  the  sake  of  refuting  these  most  frivolous  ob¬ 
jectors.  But  we  cannot  deny  that  many  miracles 
were  wrought  to  confirm  that  one  grand  and 
health-giving  miracle  of  Christ’s  ascension  to 
heaven  with  the  flesh  in  which  He  rose.  For 
these  most  trustworthy  books  of  ours  contain 
in  one  narrative  both  the  miracles  that  were 
wrought  and  the  creed  which  they  were  wrought 
to  confirm.  The  miracles  were  published  that 
they  might  produce  faith,  and  the  faith  which 
they  produced  brought  them  into  greater  promi¬ 
nence.  For  they  are  read  in  congregations  that 
they  may  be  believed,  and  yet  they  would  not  be 
so  read  unless  they  were  believed.  For  even  now 
miracles  are  wrought  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
whether  by  His  sacraments  or  by  the  prayers  or 
relics  of  His  saints;  but  they  are  not  so  brilliant 
and  conspicuous  as  to  cause  them  to  be  pub¬ 
lished  with  such  glory  as  accompanied  the  for¬ 
mer  miracles.  For  the  canon  of  the  sacred  writ¬ 
ings,  which  behoved  to  be  closed,1  causes  those 
to  be  everywhere  recited,  and  to  sink  into  the 
memory  of  all  the  congregations;  but  these 
modern  miracles  are  scarcely  known  even  to  the 
whole  population  in  the  midst  of  which  they  are 
wrought,  and  at  the  best  are  confined  to  one 
spot.  For  frequently  they  are  known  only  to  a 
very  few  persons,  while  all  the  rest  are  ignorant 
of  them,  especially  if  the  state  is  a  large  one; 
and  when  they  are  reported  to  other  persons  in 
other  localities,  there  is  no  sufficient  authority 
to  give  them  prompt  and  unwavering  credence, 
although  they  are  reported  to  the  faithful  by  the 
faithful. 

The  miracle  which  was  wrought  at  Milan 
when  I  was  there,  and  by  which  a  blind  man 
was  restored  to  sight,  could  come  to  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  many;  for  not  only  is  the  city  a  large 
one,  but  also  the  Emperor  was  there  at  the  time, 
and  the  occurrence  was  witnessed  by  an  im¬ 
mense  concourse  of  people  that  had  gathered  to 
the  bodies  of  the  martyrs  Protasius  and  Gerva- 
sius,  which  had  long  lain  concealed  and  un- 

1  Another  reading  has  diffamatum,  “published.” 


known,  but  were  now  made  known  to  the  bishop 
Ambrose  in  a  dream,  and  discovered  by  him.  By 
virtue  of  these  remains  the  darkness  of  that 
blind  man  was  scattered,  and  he  saw  the  light 
of  day.2 

But  who  but  a  very  small  number  are  aware 
of  the  cure  which  was  wrought  upon  Innocen- 
tius,  ex-advocate  of  the  deputy  prefecture,  a 
cure  wrought  at  Carthage,  in  my  presence  and 
under  my  own  eyes?  For  when  I  and  my  broth¬ 
er  Alypius,3  who  were  not  yet  clergymen,4 
though  already  servants  of  God,  came  from 
abroad,  this  man  received  us,  and  made  us  live 
with  him,  for  he  and  all  his  household  were  de¬ 
votedly  pious.  He  was  being  treated  by  medical 
men  for  fistulas,  of  which  he  had  a  large  number 
intricately  seated  in  the  rectum.  He  had  already 
undergone  an  operation,  and  the  surgeons  were 
using  every  means  at  their  command  for  his  re¬ 
lief.  In  that  operation  he  had  suffered  long-con¬ 
tinued  and  acute  pain;  yet,  among  the  many 
folds  of  the  gut,  one  had  escaped  the  operators 
so  entirely,  that,  though  they  ought  to  have  laid 
it  open  with  the  knife,  they  never  touched  it. 
And  thus,  though  all  those  that  had  been  opened 
were  cured,  this  one  remained  as  it  was,  and 
frustrated  all  their  labour.  The  patient,  having 
his  suspicions  awakened  by  the  delay  thus  oc¬ 
casioned,  and  fearing  greatly  a  second  opera¬ 
tion,  which  another  medical  man — one  of  his 
own  domestics — had  told  him  he  must  undergo, 
though  this  man  had  not  even  been  allowed  to 
witness  the  first  operation,  and  had  been  ban¬ 
ished  from  the  house,  and  with  difficulty  al¬ 
lowed  to  come  back  to  his  enraged  master’s 
presence — the  patient,  I  say,  broke  out  to  the 
surgeons,  saying,  “Are  you  going  to  cut  me 
again?  Are  you,  after  all,  to  fulfil  the  prediction 
of  that  man  whom  you  would  not  allow  even  to 
be  present?”  The  surgeons  laughed  at  the  un¬ 
skilful  doctor,  and  soothed  their  patient’s  fears 
with  fair  words  and  promises.  So  several  days 
passed,  and  yet  nothing  they  tried  did  him  good. 
Still  they  persisted  in  promising  that  they  would 
cure  that  fistula  by  drugs,  without  the  knife. 
They  called  in  also  another  old  practitioner  of 
great  repute  in  that  department,  Ammonius  (for 
he  was  still  alive  at  that  time) ;  and  he,  after  ex¬ 
amining  the  part,  promised  the  same  result  as 
themselves  from  their  care  and  skill.  On  this 
great  authority,  the  patient  became  confident, 
and,  as  if  already  well,  vented  his  good  spirits  in 
facetious  remarks  at  the  expense  of  his  domes¬ 
tic  physician,  who  had  predicted  a  second  opera- 

2See  also  Confessions,  bk.  ix.  16. 

3See  Confessions,  passim.  ACleros. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  8 


tion.  To  make  a  long  story  short,  after  a  number 
of  days  had  thus  uselessly  elapsed,  the  sur¬ 
geons,  wearied  and  confused,  had  at  last  to  con¬ 
fess  that  he  could  only  be  cured  by  the  knife. 
Agitated  with  excessive  fear,  he  was  terrified, 
and  grew  pale  with  dread;  and  when  he  collect¬ 
ed  himself  and  was  able  to  speak,  he  ordered 
them  to  go  away  and  never  to  return.  Worn  out 
with  weeping,  and  driven  by  necessity,  it  oc¬ 
curred  to  him  to  call  in  an  Alexandrian,  who 
was  at  that  time  esteemed  a  wonderfully  skilful 
operator,  that  he  might  perform  the  operation 
his  rage  would  not  suffer  them  to  do.  But  when 
he  had  come,  and  examined  with  a  professional 
eye  the  traces  of  their  careful  work,  he  acted  the 
part  of  a  good  man,  and  persuaded  his  patient  to 
allow  those  same  hands  the  satisfaction  of  fin¬ 
ishing  his  cure  which  had  begun  it  with  a  skill 
that  excited  his  admiration,  adding  that  there 
was  no  doubt  his  only  hope  of  a  cure  was  by  an 
operation,  but  that  it  was  thoroughly  inconsis¬ 
tent  with  his  nature  to  win  the  credit  of  the  cure 
by  doing  the  little  that  remained  to  be  done,  and 
rob  of  their  reward  men  whose  consummate 
skill,  care,  and  diligence  he  could  not  but  ad¬ 
mire  when  he  saw  the  traces  of  their  work.  They 
were  therefore  again  received  to  favour;  and  it 
was  agreed  that,  in  the  presence  of  the  Alexan¬ 
drian.  they  should  operate  on  the  fistula,  which, 
by  the  consent  of  all,  could  now  only  be  cured 
by  the  knife.  The  operation  was  deferred  till 
the  following  day.  But  when  they  had  left,  there 
arose  in  the  house  such  a  wailing,  in  sympathy 
with  the  excessive  despondency  of  the  master, 
that  it  seemed  to  us  like  the  mourning  at  a  fu¬ 
neral,  and  we  could  scarcely  repress  it.  Holy 
men  were  in  the  habit  of  visiting  him  daily; 
Saturninus  of  blessed  memory,  at  that  time 
bishop  of  Uzali,  and  the  presbyter  Gelosus,  and 
the  deacons  of  the  church  of  Carthage;  and 
among  these  was  the  bishop  Aurelius,  who  alone 
of  them  all  survives — a  man  to  be  named  by  us 
with  due  reverence — and  with  him  I  have  often 
spoken  of  this  affair,  as  we  conversed  together 
about  tjhe  wonderful  works  of  God,  and  I  have 
found  that  he  distinctly  remembers  what  I  am 
now  relating.  When  these  persons  visited  him 
that  evening  according  to  their  custom,  he  be¬ 
sought  them,  with  pitiable  tears,  that  they 
would  do  him  the  honour  of  being  present  next 
day  at  what  he  judged  his  funeral  rather  than 
his  suffering.  For  such  was  the  terror  his  former 
pains  had  produced,  that  he  made  no  doubt  he 
would  die  in  the  hands  of  the  surgeons.  They 
comforted  him,  and  exhorted  him  to  put  his 
trust  in  God,  and  nerve  his  will  like  a  man.  Then 


593 

we  went  to  prayer;  but  while  we,  in  the  usual 
way,  were  kneeling  and  bending  to  the  ground, 
he  cast  himself  down,  as  if  some  one  were  hurl¬ 
ing  him  violently  to  the  earth,  and  began  to 
pray ;  but  in  what  a  manner,  with  what  earnest¬ 
ness  and  emotion,  with  what  a  flood  of  tears, 
with  what  groans  and  sobs,  that  shook  his  whole 
body,  and  almost  prevented  him  speaking,  who 
can  describe!  Whether  the  others  prayed,  and 
had  not  their  attention  wholly  diverted  by  this 
conduct,  I  do  not  know.  For  myself,  I  could  not 
pray  at  all.  This  only  I  briefly  said  in  my  heart: 
“0  Lord,  what  prayers  of  Thy  people  dost  Thou 
hear  if  Thou  hearest  not  these?”  For  it  seemed 
to  me  that  nothing  could  be  added  to  this  pray¬ 
er,  unless  he  expired  in  praying.  We  rose  from 
our  knees,  and,  receiving  the  blessing  of  the 
bishop,  departed,  the  patient  beseeching  his  visi¬ 
tors  to  be  present  next  morning,  they  exhorting 
him  to  keep  up  his  heart.  The  dreaded  day 
dawned.  The  servants  of  God  were  present,  as 
they  had  promised  to  be;  the  surgeons  arrived; 
all  that  the  circumstances  required  was  ready; 
the  frightful  instruments  are  produced;  all  look 
on  in  wonder  and  suspense.  While  those  who 
have  most  influence  with  the  patient  are  cheer¬ 
ing  his  fainting  spirit,  his  limbs  are  arranged  on 
the  couch  so  as  to  suit  the  hand  of  the  operator ; 
the  knots  of  the  bandages  are  untied;  the  part 
is  bared;  the  surgeon  examines  it,  and,  with 
knife  in  hand,  eagerly  looks  for  the  sinus  that  is 
to  be  cut.  He  searches  for  it  with  his  eyes;  he 
feels  for  it  with  his  finger ;  he  applies  every  kind 
of  scrutiny:  he  finds  a  perfectly  firm  cicatrix! 
No  words  of  mine  can  describe  the  joy,  and 
praise,  and  thanksgiving  to  the  merciful  and  al¬ 
mighty  God  which  was  poured  from  the  lips  of 
all,  with  tears  of  gladness.  Let  the  scene  be  im¬ 
agined  rather  than  described ! 

In  the  same  city  of  Carthage  lived  Innocen- 
tia,  a  very  devout  woman  of  the  highest  rank  in 
the  state.  She  had  cancer  in  one  of  her  breasts, 
a  disease  which,  as  physicians  say,  is  incurable. 
Ordinarily,  therefore,  they  either  amputate,  and 
so  separate  from  the  body  the  member  on  which 
the  disease  has  seized,  or,  that  the  patient’s  life 
may  be  prolonged  a  little,  though  death  is  in¬ 
evitable  even  if  somewhat  delayed,  they  aban¬ 
don  all  remedies,  following,  as  they  say,  the  ad¬ 
vice  of  Hippocrates.  This  the  lady  we  speak  of 
had  been  advised  to  by  a  skilful  physician,  who 
was  intimate  with  her  family;  and  she  betook 
herself  to  God  alone  by  prayer.  On  the  approach 
of  Easter,  she  was  instructed  in  a  dream  to  wait 
for  the  first  woman  that  came  out  from  the 
baptistery  after  being  baptized,  and  to  ask  her 


594  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  make  the  sign  of  Christ  upon  her  sore.  She 
did  so,  and  was  immediately  cured.  The  physi¬ 
cian  who  had  advised  her  to  apply  no  remedy  if 
she  wished  to  live  a  little  longer,  when  he  had 
examined  her  after  this,  and  found  that  she  who. 
on  his  former  examination,  was  afflicted  with 
that  disease  was  now  perfectly  cured,  eagerly 
asked  her  what  remedy  she  had  used,  anxious,  as 
we  may  well  believe,  to  discover  the  drug  which 
should  defeat  the  decision  of  Hippocrates.  But 
when  she  told  him  what  had  happened,  he  is 
said  to  have  replied,  with  religious  politeness, 
though  with  a  contemptuous  tone,  and  an  ex¬ 
pression  which  made  her  fear  he  would  utter 
some  blasphemy  against  Christ,  “I  thought  you 
would  make  some  great  discovery  to  me.”  She, 
shuddering  at  his  indifference,  quickly  replied. 
“What  great  thing  was  it  for  Christ  to  heal  a 
cancer,  who  raised  one  who  had  been  four  days 
dead?”  When,  therefore,  I  had  heard  this,  I  was 
extremely  indignant  that  so  great  a  miracle, 
wrought  in  that  well-known  city,  and  on  a  per¬ 
son  who  was  certainly  not  obscure,  should  not 
be  divulged,  and  I  considered  that  she  should  be 
spoken  to,  if  not  reprimanded  on  this  score.  And 
when  she  replied  to  me  that  she  had  not  kept  si¬ 
lence  on  the  subject,  I  asked  the  women  with 
whom  she  was  best  acquainted  whether  they 
had  ever  heard  of  this  before.  They  told  me  they 
knew  nothing  of  it.  “See,”  I  said,  “what  your 
not  keeping  silence  amounts  to,  since  not  even 
those  who  are  so  familiar  with  you  know  of  it.” 
And  as  I  had  only  briefly  heard  the  story,  I 
made  her  tell  how  the  whole  thing  happened, 
from  beginning  to  end.  while  the  other  women 
listened  in  great  astonishment,  and  glorified 
God. 

A  gouty  doctor  of  the  same  city,  when  he  had 
given  in  his  name  for  baptism,  and  had  been 
prohibited  the  day  before  his  baptism  from  be¬ 
ing  baptized  that  year  by  black  woolly-haired 
boys  who  appeared  to  him  in  his  dreams,  and 
whom  he  understood  to  be  devils,  and  when, 
though  they  trod  on  his  feet,  and  inflicted  the 
acutest  pain  he  had  ever  yet  experienced,  he  re¬ 
fused  to  obey  them,  but  overcame  them,  and 
would  not  defer  being  washed  in  the  laver  of 
regeneration,  was  relieved  in  the  very  act  of 
baptism,  not  only  of  the  extraordinary  pain  he 
was  tortured  with,  but  also  of  the  disease  itself, 
so  that,  though  he  lived  a  long  time  afterwards, 
he  never  suffered  from  gout ;  and  yet  who  knows 
of  this  miracle?  We.  however,  do  know  it,  and 
so,  too,  do  the  small  number  of  brethren  who 
were  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  to  whose  ears 
it  might  come. 


An  old  comedian  of  Curubis1  was  cured  at 
baptism  not  only  of  paralysis,  but  also  of  her¬ 
nia,  and,  being  delivered  from  both  afflictions, 
came  up  out  of  the  font  of  regeneration  as  if  he 
had  had  nothing  wrong  with  his  body.  Who  out¬ 
side  of  Curubis  knows  of  this,  or  who  but  a  very 
few  who  might  hear  it  elsewhere?  But  we,  when 
we  heard  of  it,  made  the  man  come  to  Carthage, 
by  order  of  the  holy  bishop  Aurelius,  although 
we  had  already  ascertained  the  fact  on  the  in¬ 
formation  of  persons  whose  word  we  could  not 
doubt. 

Hesperius,  of  a  tribunitian  family,  and  a 
neighbour  of  our  own,  has  a  farm  called  Zu- 
bedi  in  the  Fussalian  district;2  and,  finding  that 
his  family,  his  cattle,  and  his  servants  were  suf¬ 
fering  from  the  malice  of  evil  spirits,  he  asked 
our  presbyters,  during  my  absence,  that  one  of 
them  would  go  with  him  and  banish  the  spirits 
by  his  prayers.  One  went,  offered  there  the  sac¬ 
rifice  of  the  body  of  Christ,  praying  with  all  his 
might  that  that  vexation  might  cease.  It  did 
cease  forthwith,  through  God’s  mercy.  Now  he 
had  received  from  a  friend  of  his  own  some  holy 
earth  brought  from  Jerusalem,  where  Christ, 
having  been  buried,  rose  again  the  third  day. 
This  earth  he  had  hung  up  in  his  bedroom  to 
preserve  himself  from  harm.  But  when  his  house 
was  purged  of  that  demoniacal  invasion,  he  be¬ 
gan  to  consider  what  should  be  done  with  the 
earth;  for  his  reverence  for  it  made  him  unwill¬ 
ing  to  have  it  any  longer  in  his  bedroom.  It  so 
happened  that  I  and  Maximinus  bishop  of  Syni- 
ta.  and  then  my  colleague,  were  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  Hesperius  asked  us  to  visit  him,  and 
we  did  so.  When  he  had  related  all  the  circum¬ 
stances,  he  begged  that  the  earth  might  be  bur¬ 
ied  somewhere,  and  that  the  spot  should  be 
made  a  place  of  prayer  where  Christians  might 
assemble  for  the  worship  of  God.  We  made  no 
objection :  it  was  done  as  he  desired.  There  was 
in  that  neighbourhood  a  young  countryman  who 
was  paralytic,  who,  when  he  heard  of  this, 
begged  his  parents  to  take  him  without  delay  to 
that  holy  place.  When  he  had  been  brought 
there,  he  prayed,  and  forthwith  went  away  on 
his  own  feet  perfectly  cured. 

There  is  a  country-seat  called  Victoriana,  less 
than  thirty  miles  from  Hippo-Regius.  At  it  there 
is  a  monument  to  the  Milanese  martyrs,  Pro- 
tasius  and  Gervasius.  Thither  a  young  man  was 
carried,  who,  when  he  was  watering  his  horse 
one  summer  day  at  noon  in  a  pool  of  a  river,  had 
been  taken  possession  of  by  a  devil.  As  he  lay  at 

XA  town  near  Carthage. 

2Near  Hippo. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  8 


the  monument,  near  death,  or  even  quite  like  a 
dead  person,  the  lady  of  the  manor,  with  her 
maids  and  religious  attendants,  entered  the 
place  for  evening  prayer  and  praise,  as  her  cus¬ 
tom  was,  and  they  began  to  sing  hymns.  At  this 
sound  the  young  man,  as  if  electrified,  was 
thoroughly  aroused,  and  with  frightful  scream¬ 
ing  seized  the  altar,  and  held  it  as  if  he  did  not 
dare  or  were  not  able  to  let  it  go,  and  as  if  he 
were  fixed  or  tied  to  it;  and  the  devil  in  him, 
with  loud  lamentation,  besought  that  he  might 
be  spared,  and  confessed  where  and  when  and 
how  he  took  possession  of  the  youth.  At  last,  de¬ 
claring  that  he  would  go  out  of  him,  he  named 
one  by  one  the  parts  of  his  body  which  he 
threatened  to  mutilate  as  he  went  out  and  with 
these  words  he  departed  from  the  man.  But  his 
eye,  falling  out  on  his  cheek,  hung  by  a  slender 
vein  as  by  a  root,  and  the  whole  of  the  pupil 
which  had  been  black  became  white.  When  this 
was  witnessed  by  those  present  (others  too  had 
now  gathered  to  his  cries,  and  had  all  joined  in 
prayer  for  him),  although  they  were  delighted 
that  he  had  recovered  his  sanity  of  mind,  yet, 
on  the  other  hand,  they  were  grieved  about  his 
eye,  and  said  he  should  seek  medical  advice.  But 
his  sister’s  husband,  who  had  brought  him  there, 
said,  “God,  who  has  banished  the  devil,  is  able 
to  restore  his  eye  at  the  prayers  of  His  saints.” 
Therewith  he  replaced  the  eye  that  was  fallen 
out  and  hanging,  and  bound  it  in  its  place  with 
his  handkerchief  as  well  as  he  could,  and  advised 
him  not  to  loose  the  bandage  for  seven  days. 
When  he  did  so,  he  found  it  quite  healthy.  Oth¬ 
ers  also  were  cured  there,  but  of  them  it  were 
tedious  to  speak. 

I  know  that  a  young  woman  of  Hippo  was  im¬ 
mediately  dispossessed  of  a  devil,  on  anointing 
herself  with  oil.  mixed  with  the  tears  of  the 
presbyter  who  had  been  praying  for  her.  I  know 
also  that  a  bishop  once  prayed  for  a  demoniac 
young  man  whom  he  never  saw,  and  that  he  was 
cured  on  the  spot. 

There  was  a  fellow-townsman  of  ours  at  Hip¬ 
po,  Floijentius,  an  old  man,  religious  and  poor, 
who  supported  himself  as  a  tailor.  Having  lost 
his  coat,  and  not  having  means  to  buy  another, 
he  prayed  to  the  Twenty  Martyrs,  who  have  a 
very  celebrated  memorial  shrine  in  our  town, 
begging  in  a  distinct  voice  that  he  might  be 
clothed.  Some  scoffing  young  men,  who  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  present,  heard  him,  and  followed 
him  with  their  sarcasm  as  he  went  away,  as  if  he 
had  asked  the  martyrs  for  fifty  pence  to  buy  a 
coat.  But  he,  walking  on  in  silence,  saw  on  the 
shore  a  great  fish,  gasping  as  if  just  cast  up,  and 


595 

having  secured  it  with  the  good-natured  assist¬ 
ance  of  the  youths,  he  sold  it  for  curing  to  a 
cook  of  the  name  of  Catosus,  a  good  Christian 
man,  telling  him  how  he  had  come  by  it,  and  re¬ 
ceiving  for  it  three  hundred  pence,  which  he  laid 
out  in  wool,  that  his  wife  might  exercise  her  skill 
upon,  and  make  into  a  coat  for  him.  But,  on  cut¬ 
ting  up  the  fish,  the  cook  found  a  gold  ring  in  its 
belly;  and  forthwith,  moved  with  compassion, 
and  influenced,  too,  by  religious  fear,  gave  it  up 
to  the  man,  saying,  “See  how  the  Twenty  Mar¬ 
tyrs  have  clothed  you.” 

When  the  bishop  Projectus  was  bringing  the 
relics  of  the  most  glorious  martyr  Stephen  to 
the  waters  of  Tibilis,  a  great  concourse  of  peo¬ 
ple  came  to  meet  him  at  the  shrine.  There  a 
blind  woman  entreated  that  she  might  be  led  to 
the  bishop  who  was  carrying  the  relics.  He  gave 
her  the  flowers  he  was  carrying.  She  took  them, 
applied  them  to  her  eyes,  and  forthwith  saw. 
Those  who  were  present  were  astounded,  while 
she,  with  every  expression  of  joy,  preceded 
them,  pursuing  her  way  without  further  need  of 
a  guide. 

Lucillus  bishop  of  Sinita,in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  colonial  town  of  Hippo,  was  carrying  in 
procession  some  relics  of  the  same  martyr, 
which  had  been  deposited  in  the  castle  of  Sinita. 
A  fistula  under  which  he  had  long  laboured,  and 
which  his  private  physician  was  watching  an  op¬ 
portunity  to  cut,  was  suddenly  cured  by  the 
mere  carrying  of  that  sacred  fardel — at  least, 
afterwards  there  was  no  trace  of  it  in  his  body. 

Eucharius,  a  Spanish  priest,  residing  at  Cala- 
ma,  was  for  a  long  time  a  sufferer  from  stone. 
By  the  relics  of  the  same  martyr,  which  the 
bishop  Possidius  brought  him,  he  was  cured. 
Afterwards  the  same  priest,  sinking  under  an¬ 
other  disease,  was  lying  dead,  and  already  they 
were  binding  his  hands.  By  the  succour  of  the 
same  martyr  he  was  raised  to  life,  the  priest’s 
cloak  having  been  brought  from  the  oratory  and 
laid  upon  the  corpse. 

There  was  there  an  old  nobleman  named 
Martial,  who  had  a  great  aversion  to  the  Chris¬ 
tian  religion,  but  whose  daughter  was  a  Chris¬ 
tian,  while  her  husband  had  been  baptized  that 
same  year.  When  he  was  ill,  they  besought  him 
with  tears  and  prayers  to  become  a  Christian, 
but  he  positively  refused,  and  dismissed  them 
from  his  presence  in  a  storm  of  indignation.  It 
occurred  to  the  son-in-law  to  go  to  the  oratory 
of  St.  Stephen,  and  there  pray  for  him  with  all 
earnestness  that  God  might  give  him  a  right 
mind,  so  that  he  should  not  delay  believing  in 
Christ.  This  he  did  with  great  groaning  and 


596  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tears  and  the  burning  fervour  of  sincere  piety; 
then,  as  he  left  the  place,  he  took  some  of  the 
flowers  that  were  lying  there  and,  as  it  was  al¬ 
ready  night,  laid  them  by  his  father’s  head,  who 
so  slept.  And  lo!  before  dawn,  he  cries  out  for 
some  one  to  run  for  the  bishop;  but  he  hap¬ 
pened  at  that  time  to  be  with  me  at  Hippo.  So 
when  he  had  heard  that  he  was  from  home,  he 
asked  the  presbyters  to  come.  They  came.  To 
the  joy  and  amazement  of  all,  he  declared  that 
he  believed,  and  he  was  baptized.  As  long  as  he 
remained  in  life,  these  words  were  ever  on  his 
lips:  “Christ,  receive  my  spirit,”  though  he  was 
not  aware  that  these  were  the  last  words  of  the 
most  blessed  Stephen  when  he  was  stoned  by 
the  Jews.  They  were  his  last  words  also,  for  not 
long  after  he  himself  also  gave  up  the  ghost. 

There,  too,  by  the  same  martyr,  two  men,  one 
a  citizen,  the  other  a  stranger,  were  cured  of 
gout ;  but  while  the  citizen  was  absolutely  cured, 
the  stranger  was  only  informed  what  he  should 
apply  when  the  pain  returned;  and  when  he  fol¬ 
lowed  this  advice,  the  pain  wras  at  once  relieved. 

Audurus  is  the  name  of  an  estate,  where  there 
is  a  church  that  contains  a  memorial  shrine  of 
the  martyr  Stephen.  It  happened  that,  as  a  little 
boy  was  playing  in  the  court,  the  oxen  drawing 
a  wagon  went  out  of  the  track  and  crushed  him 
with  the  wheel,  so  that  immediately  he  seemed 
at  his  last  gasp.  His  mother  snatched  him  up, 
and  laid  him  at  the  shrine,  and  not  only  did  he 
revive,  but  also  appeared  uninjured. 

A  religious  female,  who  lived  at  Caspalium, 
a  neighbouring  estate,  when  she  was  so  ill  as  to 
be  despaired  of,  had  her  dress  brought  to  this 
shrine,  but  before  it  was  brought  back  she  was 
gone.  However,  her  parents  wrrapped  her  corpse 
in  the  dress,  and,  her  breath  returning,  she  be¬ 
came  quite  wTell. 

At  Hippo  a  Syrian  called  Bassus  was  praying 
at  the  relics  of  the  same  martyr  for  his  daugh¬ 
ter,  who  was  dangerously  ill.  He  too  had  brought 
her  dress  with  him  to  the  shrine.  But  as  he 
prayed,  behold,  his  servants  ran  from  the  house 
to  tell  him  she  was  dead.  His  friends,  however, 
intercepted  them,  and  forbade  them  to  tell  him, 
lest  he  should  bewail  her  in  public.  And  when  he 
had  returned  to  his  house,  which  was  already 
ringing  with  the  lamentations  of  his  family  and 
had  throwm  on  his  daughter’s  body  the  dress  he 
was  carrying,  she  was  restored  to  life. 

There,  too,  the  son  of  a  man,  Irenaeus,  one  of 
our  tax-gatherers,  took  ill  and  died.  And  while 
his  body  was  lying  lifeless,  and  the  last  rites 
were  being  prepared,  amidst  the  weeping  and 
mourning  of  all,  one  of  the  friends  who  were 


consoling  the  father  suggested  that  the  body 
should  be  anointed  with  the  oil  of  the  same  mar¬ 
tyr.  It  wTas  done,  and  he  revived. 

Likewise  Eleusinus,  a  man  of  tribunitian  rank 
among  us,  laid  his  infant  son,  who  had  died,  on 
the  shrine  of  the  martyr,  which  is  in  the  suburb 
where  he  lived,  and,  after  prayer,  which  he 
poured  out  there  with  many  tears,  he  took  up 
his  child  alive. 

What  am  I  to  do?  I  am  so  pressed  by  the 
promise  of  finishing  this  work,  that  I  cannot 
record  all  the  miracles  I  know;  and  doubtless 
several  of  our  adherents,  when  they  read  what  I 
have  narrated,  will  regret  that  I  have  omitted  so 
many  which  they,  as  well  as  I,  certainly  know. 
Even  now  I  beg  these  persons  to  excuse  me,  and 
to  consider  how  long  it  w’ould  take  me  to  relate 
all  those  miracles,  which  the  necessity  of  finish¬ 
ing  the  work  I  have  undertaken  forces  me  to 
omit.  For  were  I  to  be  silent  of  all  others,  and  to 
record  exclusively  the  miracles  of  healing  which 
were  wrought  in  the  district  of  Calama  and  of 
Hippo  by  means  of  this  martyr — I  mean  the 
most  glorious  Stephen — they  would  fill  many 
volumes ;  and  yet  all  even  of  these  could  not  be 
collected,  but  only  those  of  which  narratives 
have  been  written  for  public  recital.  For  when  I 
sawT,  in  our  own  times,  frequent  signs  of  the 
presence  of  divine  powers  similar  to  those  which 
had  been  given  of  old,  I  desired  that  narratives 
might  be  written,  judging  that  the  multitude 
should  not  remain  ignorant  of  these  things.  It  is 
not  yet  two  years  since  these  relics  were  first 
brought  to  Hippo-Regius,  and  though  many  of 
the  miracles  wThich  have  been  wrought  by  it 
have  not,  as  I  have  the  most  certain  means  of 
knowing,  been  recorded,  those  which  have  been 
published  amount  to  almost  seventy  at  the  hour 
at  wThich  I  write.  But  at  Calama,  where  these 
relics  have  been  for  a  longer  time,  and  where 
more  of  the  miracles  were  narrated  for  public 
information,  there  are  incomparably  more. 

At  Uzali,  too,  a  colony  near  Utica,  many  sig¬ 
nal  miracles  were,  to  my  knowledge,  wrought  by 
the  same  martyr,  whose  relics  had  found  a  place 
there  by  direction  of  the  bishop  Evodius,  long 
before  we  had  them  at  Hippo.  But  there  the  cus¬ 
tom  of  publishing  narratives  does  not  obtain,  or, 
I  should  say,  did  not  obtain,  for  possibly  it  may 
now  have  been  begun.  For,  when  I  was  there  re¬ 
cently,  a  woman  of  rank,  Petronia,  had  been 
miraculously  cured  of  a  serious  illness  of  long 
standing,  in  which  all  medical  appliances  had 
failed,  and,  with  the  consent  of  the  above-named 
bishop  of  the  place,  I  exhorted  her  to  publish 
an  account  of  it  that  might  be  read  to  the  peo- 


THE  CITY  OF 

pie.  She  most  promptly  obeyed,  and  inserted  in 
her  narrative  a  circumstance  which  I  cannot 
omit  to  mention,  though  I  am  compelled  to 
hasten  on  to  the  subjects  which  this  work  re¬ 
quires  me  to  treat.  She  said  that  she  had  been 
persuaded  by  a  Jew  to  wear  next  her  skin,  under 
all  her  clothes,  a  hair  girdle,  and  on  this  girdle  a 
ring,  which,  instead  of  a  gem,  had  a  stone  which 
had  been  found  in  the  kidneys  of  an  ox.  Girt  with 
this  charm,  she  was  making  her  way  to  the 
threshold  of  the  holy  martyr.  But,  after  leaving 
Carthage,  and  when  she  had  been  lodging  in  her 
own  demesne  on  the  river  Bagrada,  and  was 
now  rising  to  continue  her  journey,  she  saw  her 
ring  lying  before  her  feet.  In  great  surprise  she 
examined  the  hair  girdle,  and  when  she  found  it 
bound,  as  it  had  been,  quite  firmly  with  knots, 
she  conjectured  that  the  ring  had  been  worn 
through  and  dropped  off;  but  when  she  found 
that  the  ring  was  itself  also  perfectly  whole,  she 
presumed  that  by  this  great  miracle  she  had  re¬ 
ceived  somehow  a  pledge  of  her  cure,  whereupon 
she  untied  the  girdle,  and  cast  it  into  the  river, 
and  the  ring  along  with  it.  This  is  not  credited 
by  those  who  do  not  believe  either  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  came  forth  from  His  mother’s 
womb  without  destroying  her  virginity  and  en¬ 
tered  among  His  disciples  when  the  doors  were 
shut ;  but  let  them  make  strict  inquiry  into  this 
miracle,  and  if  they  find  it  true,  let  them  believe 
those  others.  The  lady  is  of  distinction,  nobly 
born,  married  to  a  nobleman.  She  resides  at 
Carthage.  The  city  is  distinguished,  the  person 
is  distinguished,  so  that  they  who  make  inquiries 
cannot  fail  to  find  satisfaction.  Certainly  the 
martyr  himself,  by  whose  prayers  she  was 
healed,  believed  on  the  Son  of  her  who  remained 
a  virgin ;  on  Him  Who  came  in  among  the  disci¬ 
ples  when  the  doors  were  shut,  in  fine — and  to 
this  tends  all  that  we  have  been  retailing — on 
Him  Who  ascended  into  heaven  with  the  flesh  in 
which  He  had  risen;  and  it  is  because  he  laid 
down  his  life  for  this  faith  that  such  miracles 
were  done  by  his  means. 

Even  now,  therefore,  many  miracles  are 
wrought,  the  same  God  Who  wrought  those  we 
read  of  still  performing  them,  by  whom  He  will 
and  as  He  will ;  but  they  are  not  as  well  known, 
nor  are  they  beaten  into  the  memory,  like  grav¬ 
el,  by  frequent  reading,  so  that  they  cannot  fall 
out  of  mind.  For  even  where,  as  is  now  done 
among  ourselves,  care  is  taken  that  the  pam¬ 
phlets  of  those  who  receive  benefit  be  read  pub¬ 
licly,  yet  those  who  are  present  hear  the  narra¬ 
tive  but  once,  and  many  are  absent;  and  so  it 
comes  to  pass  that  even  those  who  are  present 


GOD  XXII.  8  597 

forget  in  a  few  days  what  they  heard,  and 
scarcely  one  of  them  can  be  found  who  will  tell 
what  he  heard  to  one  who  he  knows  was  not 
present. 

One  miracle  was  wrought  among  ourselves, 
which,  though  no  greater  than  those  I  have  men¬ 
tioned,  was  yet  so  signal  and  conspicuous,  that  I 
suppose  there  is  no  inhabitant  of  Hippo  who  did 
not  either  see  or  hear  of  it,  none  who  could  pos¬ 
sibly  forget  it.  There  were  seven  brothers  and 
three  sisters  of  a  noble  family  of  the  Cappado¬ 
cian  Caesarea,  who  were  cursed  by  their  mother, 
a  new-made  widow,  on  account  of  some  wrong 
they  had  done  her,  and  which  she  bitterly  re¬ 
sented,  and  who  were  visited  with  so  severe  a 
punishment  from  Heaven,  that  all  of  them  were 
seized  with  a  hideous  shaking  in  all  their  limbs. 
Unable,  while  presenting  this  loathsome  appear¬ 
ance,  to  endure  the  eyes  of  their  fellow-citizens, 
they  wandered  over  almost  the  whole  Roman 
world,  each  following  his  own  direction.  Two  of 
them  came  to  Hippo,  a  brother  and  a  sister, 
Paulus  and  Palladia,  already  known  in  many 
other  places  by  the  fame  of  their  wretched  lot. 
Now  it  was  about  fifteen  days  before  Easter 
when  they  came,  and  they  came  daily  to  church, 
and  specially  to  the  relics  of  the  most  glorious 
Stephen,  praying  that  God  might  now  be  ap¬ 
peased,  and  restore  their  former  health.  There, 
and  wherever  they  went,  they  attracted  the  at¬ 
tention  of  everyone.  Some  who  had  seen  them 
elsewhere,  and  knew  the  cause  of  their  trem¬ 
bling,  told  others  as  occasion  offered.  Easter  ar¬ 
rived,  and  on  the  Lord’s  day,  in  the  morning, 
when  there  was  now  a  large  crowd  present,  and 
the  young  man  was  holding  the  bars  of  the  holy 
place  where  the  relics  were,  and  praying,  sud¬ 
denly  he  fell  down,  and  lay  precisely  as  if  asleep, 
but  not  trembling  as  he  was  wont  to  do  even  in 
sleep.  All  present  were  astonished.  Some  were 
alarmed,  some  were  moved  with  pity;  and  while 
some  were  for  lifting  him  up,  others  prevented 
them,  and  said  they  should  rather  wait  and  see 
what  would  result.  And  behold!  he  rose  up,  and 
trembled  no  more,  for  he  was  healed,  and  stood 
quite  well,  scanning  those  who  were  scanning 
him.  Who  then  refrained  himself  from  praising 
God?  The  whole  church  was  filled  with  the 
voices  of  those  who  were  shouting  and  congrat¬ 
ulating  him.  Then  they  came  running  to  me, 
where  I  was  sitting  ready  to  come  into  the 
church.  One  after  another  they  throng  in,  the 
last  comer  telling  me  as  news  what  the  first  had 
told  me  already;  and  while  I  rejoiced  and  in¬ 
wardly  gave  God  thanks,  the  young  man  himself 
also  enters,  with  a  number  of  others,  falls  at  my 


5o8  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


knees,  is  raised  up  to  receive  my  kiss.  We  go  in 
to  the  congregation:  the  church  was  full,  and 
ringing  with  the  shouts  of  joy,  “Thanks  to  God! 
Praised  be  God!”  every  one  joining  and  shout¬ 
ing  on  all  sides,  “I  have  healed  the  people,”  and 
then  with  still  louder  voice  shouting  again.  Si¬ 
lence  being  at  last  obtained,  the  customary  les¬ 
sons  of  the  divine  Scriptures  were  read.  And 
when  I  came  to  my  sermon.  I  made  a  few  re¬ 
marks  suitable  to  the  occasion  and  the  happy 
and  joyful  feeling,  not  desiring  them  to  listen  to 
me,  but  rather  to  consider  the  eloquence  of  God 
in  this  divine  work.  The  man  dined  with  us,  and 
gave  us  a  careful  account  of  his  own,  his  moth¬ 
er’s,  and  his  family’s  calamity.  Accordingly,  on 
the  following  day,  after  delivering  my  sermon,  I 
promised  that  next  day  I  would  read  his  narra¬ 
tive  to  the  people.  And  when  I  did  so,  the  third 
day  after  Easter  Sunday,  I  made  the  brother 
and  sister  both  stand  on  the  steps  of  the  raised 
place  from  which  I  used  to  speak;  and  while 
they  stood  there  their  pamphlet  was  read.  The 
whole  congregation,  men  and  women  alike,  saw 
the  one  standing  without  any  unnatural  move¬ 
ment,  the  other  trembling  in  all  her  limbs;  so 
that  those  who  had  not  before  seen  the  man 
himself  saw  in  his  sister  what  the  divine  com¬ 
passion  had  removed  from  him.  In  him  they  saw 
matter  of  congratulation,  in  her  subject  for 
prayer.  Meanwhile,  their  pamphlet  being  fin¬ 
ished,  I  instructed  them  to  withdraw  from  the 
gaze  of  the  people;  and  I  had  begun  to  discuss 
the  whole  matter  somewhat  more  carefully, 
when  lo !  as  I  was  proceeding,  other  voices  are 
heard  from  the  tomb  of  the  martyr,  shouting 
new  congratulations.  My  audience  turned  round, 
and  began  to  run  to  the  tomb.  The  young  wom¬ 
an,  when  she  had  come  down  from  the  steps 
where  she  had  been  standing,  went  to  pray  at  the 
holy  relics,  and  no  sooner  had  she  touched  the 
bars  than  she,  in  the  same  way  as  her  brother, 
collapsed,  as  if  falling  asleep,  and  rose  up  cured. 
While,  then,  we  were  asking  what  had  happened, 
and  what  occasioned  this  noise  of  joy,  they 
came  into  the  basilica  where  we  were,  leading 
her  from  the  martyr’s  tomb  in  perfect  health. 
Then,  indeed,  such  a  shout  of  wonder  rose  from 
men  and  women  together,  that  the  exclamations 
and  the  tears  seemed  like  never  to  come  to  an 
end.  She  was  led  to  the  place  where  she  had  a 
little  before  stood  trembling.  They  now  rejoiced 
that  she  was  like  her  brother,  as  before  they  had 
mourned  that  she  remained  unlike  him;  and  as 
they  had  not  yet  uttered  their  prayers  in  her  be¬ 
half,  they  perceived  that  their  intention  of  do¬ 
ing  so  had  been  speedily  heard.  They  shouted 


God’s  praises  without  words,  but  with  such  a 
noise  that  our  ears  could  scarcely  bear  it.  What 
was  there  in  the  hearts  of  these  exultant  people 
but  the  faith  of  Christ,  for  which  Stephen  had 
shed  his  blood? 

Chap.  9.  That  all  the  miracles  which  are  done  by 
means  of  the  martyrs  in  the  name  of  Christ 
testify  to  that  faith  which  the  martyrs  had  in 
Christ 

To  what  do  these  miracles  witness,  but  to  this 
faith  which  preaches  Christ  risen  in  the  flesh, 
and  ascended  with  the  same  into  heaven?  For 
the  martyrs  themselves  were  martyrs,  that  is  to 
say,  witnesses  of  this  faith,  drawing  upon  them¬ 
selves  by  their  testimony  the  hatred  of  the 
world,  and  conquering  the  world  not  by  resisting 
it,  but  by  dying.  For  this  faith  they  died,  and 
can  now  ask  these  benefits  from  the  Lord  in 
Whose  name  they  were  slain.  For  this  faith  their 
marvellous  constancy  was  exercised,  so  that  in 
these  miracles  great  power  was  manifested  as 
the  result.  For  if  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  to 
eternal  life  had  not  taken  place  in  Christ,  and 
were  not  to  be  accomplished  in  His  people,  as 
predicted  by  Christ,  or  by  the  prophets  who 
foretold  that  Christ  was  to  come,  why  do  the 
martyrs  who  were  slain  for  this  faith  which  pro¬ 
claims  the  resurrection  possess  such  power?  For 
whether  God  Himself  wrought  these  miracles 
by  that  wonderful  manner  of  working  by  which, 
though  Himself  eternal,  He  produces  effects  in 
time;  or  whether  He  wrought  them  by  servants, 
and  if  so,  whether  He  made  use  of  the  spirits  of 
martyrs  as  He  uses  men  who  are  still  in  the 
body,  or  effects  all  these  marvels  by  means  of 
angels,  over  whom  He  exerts  an  invisible,  im¬ 
mutable,  incorporeal  sway,  so  that  what  is  said 
to  be  done  by  the  martyrs  is  done  not  by  their 
operation,  but  only  by  their  prayer  and  request ; 
or  whether,  finally,  some  things  are  done  in  one 
way,  others  in  another,  and  so  that  man  cannot 
at  all  comprehend  them — nevertheless  these 
miracles  attest  this  faith  which  preaches  the  res¬ 
urrection  of  the  flesh  to  eternal  life. 

Chap.  10.  That  the  martyrs  who  obtain  many 
miracles  in  order  that  the  true  God  may  be 
worshipped ,  are  worthy  of  much  greater  hon¬ 
our  than  the  demons ,  who  do  some  marvels 
that  they  themselves  may  be  supposed  to  be 
God 

Here  perhaps  our  adversaries  will  say  that 
their  gods  also  have  done  some  wonderful 
things,  if  now  they  begin  to  compare  their  gods 
to  our  dead  men.  Or  will  they  also  say  that  they 


599 


THE  CITY  OF 

have  gods  taken  from  among  dead  men,  such  as 
Hercules,  Romulus,  and  many  others  whom 
they  fancy  to  have  been  received  into  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  gods?  But  our  martyrs  are  not  our 
gods;  for  we  know  that  the  martyrs  and  we 
have  both  but  one  God,  and  that  the  same.  Nor 
yet  are  the  miracles  which  they  maintain  to  have 
been  done  by  means  of  their  temples  at  all  com¬ 
parable  to  those  which  are  done  by  the  tombs  of 
our  martyrs.  If  they  seem  similar,  their  gods 
have  been  defeated  by  our  martyrs  as  Pharaoh’s 
magi  were  by  Moses.  In  reality,  the  demons 
wrought  these  marvels  with  the  same  impure 
pride  with  which  they  aspired  to  be  the  gods  of 
the  nations;  but  the  martyrs  do  these  wonders, 
or  rather  God  does  them  while  they  pray  and  as¬ 
sist,  in  order  that  an  impulse  may  be  given  to 
the  faith  by  which  we  believe  that  they  are  not 
our  gods,  but  have,  together  with  ourselves,  one 
God.  In  fine,  they  built  temples  to  these  gods  of 
theirs,  and  set  up  altars,  and  ordained  priests, 
and  appointed  sacrifices ;  but  to  our  martyrs  we 
build,  not  temples  as  if  they  were  gods,  but  mon¬ 
uments  as  to  dead  men  whose  spirits  live  with 
God.  Neither  do  we  erect  altars  at  these  monu¬ 
ments  that  we  may  sacrifice  to  the  martyrs,  but 
to  the  one  God  of  the  martyrs  and  of  ourselves; 
and  in  this  sacrifice  they  are  named  in  their  own 
place  and  rank  as  men  of  God  who  conquered 
the  world  by  confessing  Him,  but  they  are  not 
invoked  by  the  sacrificing  priest.  For  it  is  to 
God,  not  to  them,  he  sacrifices,  though  he  sacri¬ 
fices  at  their  monument;  for  he  is  God’s  priest, 
not  theirs.  The  sacrifice  itself,  too,  is  the  body 
of  Christ,  which  is  not  offered  to  them,  because 
they  themselves  are  this  body.  Which  then  can 
more  readily  be  believed  to  work  miracles? 
They  who  wish  themselves  to  be  reckoned  gods 
by  those  on  whom  they  work  miracles,  or  those 
whose  sole  object  in  working  any  miracle  is  to 
induce  faith  in  God,  and  in  Christ  also  as  God? 
They  who  wished  to  turn  even  their  crimes  into 
sacred  rites,  or  those  who  are  unwilling  that 
even  their  own  praises  be  consecrated  and  seek 
that  everything  for  which  they  are  justly 
praised  be  ascribed  to  the  glory  of  Him  in  Whom 
they  are  praised?  For  in  the  Lord  their  souls  are 
praised.  Let  us  therefore  believe  those  who  both 
speak  the  truth  and  work  wonders.  For  by 
speaking  the  truth  they  suffered,  and  so  won  the 
power  of  working  wonders.  And  the  leading 
truth  they  professed  is  that  Christ  rose  from  the 
dead,  and  first  showed  in  His  own  flesh  the  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  resurrection  which  He  prom¬ 
ised  should  be  ours,  either  in  the  beginning  of 
the  world  to  come,  or  in  the  end  of  this  world. 


GOD  XXII.  9-1 1 

Chap.  ii.  Against  the  Platonists ,  who  argue 

from  the  physical  weight  of  the  elements  that 

an  earthly  body  cannot  inhabit  heaven 

But  against  this  great  gift  of  God,  these  rea- 
soners,  “whose  thoughts  the  Lord  knows  that 
they  are  vain” 1  bring  arguments  from  the 
weights  of  the  elements;  for  they  have  been 
taught  by  their  master  Plato  that  the  two  great¬ 
est  elements  of  the  world,  and  the  furthest  re¬ 
moved  from  one  another,  are  coupled  and  unit¬ 
ed  by  the  two  intermediate,  air  and  water.  And 
consequently  they  say,  since  the  earth  is  the 
first  of  the  elements,  beginning  from  the  base 
of  the  series,  the  second  the  water  above  the 
earth,  the  third  the  air  above  the  water,  the 
fourth  the  heaven  above  the  air,  it  follows  that 
a  body  of  earth  cannot  live  in  the  heaven;  for 
each  element  is  poised  by  its  own  weight  so  as  to 
preserve  its  own  place  and  rank.  Behold  with 
what  arguments  human  infirmity,  possessed 
with  vanity,  contradicts  the  omnipotence  of 
God!  What,  then,  do  so  many  earthly  bodies  do 
in  the  air,  since  the  air  is  the  third  element  from 
the  earth?  Unless  perhaps  He  Who  has  granted 
to  the  earthly  bodies  of  birds  that  they  be  car¬ 
ried  through  the  air  by  the  lightness  of  feathers 
and  wings,  has  not  been  able  to  confer  upon  the 
bodies  of  men  made  immortal  the  power  to 
abide  in  the  highest  heaven.  The  earthly  ani¬ 
mals,  too,  which  cannot  fly,  among  which  are 
men,  ought  on  these  terms  to  live  under  the 
earth,  as  fishes,  which  are  the  animals  of  the  wa¬ 
ter,  live  under  the  water.  Why,  then,  can  an  ani¬ 
mal  of  earth  not  live  in  the  second  element,  that 
is,  in  water,  while  it  can  in  the  third?  Why, 
though  it  belongs  to  the  earth,  is  it  forthwith  suf¬ 
focated  if  it  is  forced  to  live  in  the  second  ele¬ 
ment  next  above  earth,  while  it  lives  in  the  third, 
and  cannot  live  out  of  it?  Is  there  a  mistake  here 
in  the  order  of  the  elements,  or  is  not  the  mis¬ 
take  rather  in  their  reasonings,  and  not  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things?  I  will  not  repeat  what  I  said  in 
the  thirteenth  book,2  that  many  earthly  bodies, 
though  heavy  like  lead,  receive  from  the  work¬ 
man’s  hand  a  form  which  enables  them  to  swim 
in  water;  and  yet  it  is  denied  that  the  omnip¬ 
otent  Worker  can  confer  on  the  human  body  a 
property  which  shall  enable  it  to  pass  into  heav¬ 
en  and  dwell  there. 

But  against  what  I  have  formerly  said  they 
can  find  nothing  to  say,  even  though  they  intro¬ 
duce  and  make  the  most  of  this  order  of  the  el¬ 
ements  in  which  they  confide.  For  if  the  order 
be  that  the  earth  is  first,  the  water  second,  the 

1  Ps.  94.  ii  2  Chap.  1 8. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


600 

air  third,  the  heaven  fourth,  then  the  soul  is 
above  all.  For  Aristotle  said  that  the  soul  was  a 
fifth  body,  while  Plato  denied  that  it  was  a  body 
at  all.  If  it  were  a  fifth  body,  then  certainly  it 
would  be  above  the  rest;  and  if  it  is  not  a  body 
at  all,  so  much  the  more  does  it  rise  above  all. 
What,  then,  does  it  do  in  an  earthly  body?  What 
does  this  soul,  which  is  finer  than  all  else,  do  in 
such  a  mass  of  matter  as  this?  What  does  the 
lightest  of  substances  do  in  this  ponderosity? 
this  swiftest  substance  in  such  sluggishness? 
Will  not  the  body  be  raised  to  heaven  by  virtue 
of  so  excellent  a  nature  as  this?  and  if  now 
earthly  bodies  can  retain  the  souls  below,  shall 
not  the  souls  be  one  day  able  to  raise  the  earthly 
bodies  above? 

If  we  pass  now  to  their  miracles  which  they 
oppose  to  our  martyrs  as  wrought  by  their  gods, 
shall  not  even  these  be  found  to  make  for  us, 
and  help  out  our  argument?  For  if  any  of  the 
miracles  of  their  gods  are  great,  certainly  that  is 
a  great  one  which  Varro  mentions  of  a  vestal 
virgin,  who,  when  she  was  endangered  by  a  false 
accusation  of  unchastity,  filled  a  sieve  with  wa¬ 
ter  from  the  Tiber,  and  carried  it  to  her  judges 
without  any  part  of  it  leaking.  Who  kept  the 
weight  of  water  in  the  sieve?  Who  prevented 
any  drop  from  falling  from  it  through  so  many 
open  holes?  They  will  answer,  “Some  god  or 
some  demon.”  If  a  god,  is  he  greater  than  the 
God  Who  made  the  world?  If  a  demon,  is  he 
mightier  than  an  angel  who  serves  the  God  by 
Whom  the  world  was  made?  If,  then,  a  lesser 
god,  angel,  or  demon  could  so  sustain  the  weight 
of  this  liquid  element  that  the  water  might  seem 
to  have  changed  its  nature,  shall  not  Almighty 
God,  Who  Himself  created  all  the  elements,  be 
able  to  eliminate  from  the  earthly  body  its 
heaviness,  so  that  the  quickened  body  shall 
dwell  in  whatever  element  the  quickening  spirit 
pleases? 

Then,  again,  since  they  give  the  air  a  middle 
place  between  the  fire  above  and  the  water  be¬ 
neath,  how  is  it  that  we  often  find  it  between 
water  and  water,  and  between  the  water  and  the 
earth?  For  what  do  they  make  of  those  watery 
clouds,  between  which  and  the  seas  air  is  con¬ 
stantly  found  intervening?  I  should  like  to  know 
by  what  weight  and  order  of  the  elements  it 
comes  to  pass  that  very  violent  and  stormy  tor¬ 
rents  are  suspended  in  the  clouds  above  the 
earth  before  they  rush  along  upon  the  earth  un¬ 
der  the  air.  In  fine,  why  is  it  that  throughout 
the  whole  globe  the  air  is  between  the  highest 
heaven  and  the  earth,  if  its  place  is  between  the 


sky  and  the  water,  as  the  place  of  the  water  is 
between  the  sky  and  the  earth? 

Finally,  if  the  order  of  the  elements  is  so  dis¬ 
posed  that,  as  Plato  thinks,  the  two  extremes, 
fire  and  earth,  are  united  by  the  two  means,  air 
and  water,  and  that  the  fire  occupies  the  highest 
part  of  the  sky,  and  the  earth  the  lowest  part,  or 
as  it  were  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  that 
therefore  earth  cannot  be  in  the  heavens,  how  is 
fire  in  the  earth?  For,  according  to  this  reason¬ 
ing,  these  two  elements,  earth  and  fire,  ought  to 
be  so  restricted  to  their  own  places,  the  highest 
and  the  lowest,  that  neither  the  lowest  can  rise 
to  the  place  of  the  highest,  nor  the  highest  sink 
to  that  of  the  lowest.  Thus,  as  they  think  that 
no  particle  of  earth  is  or  shall  ever  be  in  the  sky 
so  we  ought  to  see  no  particle  of  fire  on  the 
earth.  But  the  fact  is  that  it  exists  to  such  an  ex¬ 
tent,  not  only  on  but  even  under  the  earth,  that 
the  tops  of  mountains  vomit  it  forth;  besides 
that  we  see  it  to  exist  on  earth  for  human  uses, 
and  even  to  be  produced  from  the  earth,  since  it 
is  kindled  from  wood  and  stones,  which  are 
without  doubt  earthly  bodies.  But  that  fire,  they 
say,  is  tranquil,  pure,  harmless,  eternal;  but  this 
fire  is  turbid,  smoky,  corruptible,  and  corrupt¬ 
ing.  But  it  does  not  corrupt  the  mountains  and 
caverns  of  the  earth  in  which  it  rages  continual¬ 
ly.  But  grant  that  the  earthly  fire  is  so  unlike 
the  other  as  to  suit  its  earthly  position,  why 
then  do  they  object  to  our  believing  that  the  na¬ 
ture  of  earthly  bodies  shall  some  day  be  made 
incorruptible  and  fit  for  the  sky,  even  as  now 
fire  is  corruptible  and  suited  to  the  earth?  They 
therefore  adduce  from  their  weights  and  or¬ 
der  of  the  elements  nothing  from  which  they 
can  prove  that  it  is  impossible  for  Almighty 
God  to  make  our  bodies  such  that  they  can 
dwell  in  the  skies. 

Chap.  12.  Against  the  calumnies  with  which  un¬ 
believers  throw  ridicule  upon  the  Christian 
faith  in  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh 
But  their  way  is  to  feign  a  scrupulous  anxiety 
in  investigating  this  question,  and  to  cast  ridi¬ 
cule  on  our  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body, 
by  asking,  “Whether  abortions  shall  rise?”  And 
as  the  Lord  says,  “Verily  I  say  unto  you,  not  a 
hair  of  your  head  shall  perish,”1  shall  all  bodies 
have  an  equal  stature  and  strength,  or  shall 
there  be  differences  in  size?  For  if  there  is  to  be 
equality,  where  shall  those  abortions,  suppos¬ 
ing  that  they  rise  again,  get  that  bulk  which 
they  had  not  here?  Or  if  they  shall  not  rise  be- 
^uke,  21.  18. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  12-13  601 


cause  they  were  not  born  but  cast  out,  they  raise 
the  same  question  about  children  who  have  died 
in  childhood,  asking  us  whence  they  get  the  stat¬ 
ure  which  we  see  they  had  not  here;  for  we  will 
not  say  that  those  who  have  been  not  only  born, 
but  born  again,  shall  not  rise  again.  Then,  fur¬ 
ther,  they  ask  of  what  size  these  equal  bodies 
shall  be.  For  if  all  shall  be  as  tall  and  large  as 
were  the  tallest  and  largest  in  this  world,  they 
ask  us  how  it  is  that  not  only  children  but  many 
full-grown  persons  shall  receive  what  they  here 
did  not  possess,  if  each  one  is  to  receive  what  he 
had  here.  And  if  the  saying  of  the  apostle,  that 
we  are  all  to  come  to  the  “measure  of  the  age 
of  the  fullness  of  Christ,”1  or  that  other  saying, 
“Whom  He  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  His  Son,”2  is  to  be  understood  to 
mean  that  the  stature  and  size  of  Christ’s  body 
shall  be  the  measure  of  the  bodies  of  all  those 
who  shall  be  in  His  kingdom,  then,  say  they,  the 
size  and  height  of  many  must  be  diminished; 
and  if  so  much  of  the  bodily  frame  itself  be  lost, 
what  becomes  of  the  saying,  “Not  a  hair  of  your 
head  shall  perish”?  Besides,  it  might  be  asked 
regarding  the  hair  itself,  whether  all  that  the 
barber  has  cut  off  shall  be  restored?  And  if  it  is 
to  be  restored,  who  would  not  shrink  from  such 
deformity?  For  as  the  same  restoration  will  be 
made  of  what  has  been  pared  off  the  nails,  much 
will  be  replaced  on  the  body  which  a  regard  for 
its  appearance  had  cut  off.  And  where,  then,  will 
be  its  beauty,  which  assuredly  ought  to  be  much 
greater  in  that  immortal  condition  than  it  could 
be  in  this  corruptible  state?  On  the  other  hand, 
if  such  things  are  not  restored  to  the  body,  they 
must  perish;  how,  then,  they  say,  shall  not  a 
hair  of  the  head  perish?  In  like  manner  they 
reason  about  fatness  and  leanness;  for  if  all  are 
to  be  equal,  then  certainly  there  shall  not  be 
some  fat,  others  lean.  Some,  therefore,  shall 
gain,  others  lose  something.  Consequently  there 
will  not  be  a  simple  restoration  of  what  former¬ 
ly  existed,  but,  on  the  one  hand,  an  addition  of 
what  had  no  existence,  and,  on  the  other,  a  loss 
of  wThat  did  before  exist. 

The  difficulties,  too,  about  the  corruption  and 
dissolution  of  dead  bodies— that  one  is  turned 
into  dust,  while  another  evaporates  into  the  air; 
that  some  are  devoured  by  beasts,  some  by  fire, 
while  some  perish  by  shipwreck  or  by  drown¬ 
ing  in  one  shape  or  other,  so  that  their  bodies 
decay  into  liquid — these  difficulties  give  them 
immoderate  alarm,  and  they  believe  that  all 
those  dissolved  elements  cannot  be  gathered 

1Eph.  4.  13.  2  Rom.  8.  29. 


again  and  reconstructed  into  a  body.  They  also 
make  eager  use  of  all  the  deformities  and  blem¬ 
ishes  which  either  accident  or  birth  has  pro¬ 
duced,  and  accordingly,  with  horror  and  deri¬ 
sion,  cite  monstrous  births  and  ask  if  every  de¬ 
formity  will  be  preserved  in  the  resurrection. 
For  if  we  say  that  no  such  thing  shall  be  repro¬ 
duced  in  the  body  of  a  man,  they  suppose  that 
they  confute  us  by  citing  the  marks  of  the 
wounds  which  we  assert  were  found  in  the  risen 
body  of  the  Lord  Christ.  But  of  all  these  the 
most  difficult  question  is,  into  whose  body  that 
flesh  shall  return  which  has  been  eaten  and  as¬ 
similated  by  another  man  constrained  by  hun¬ 
ger  to  use  it  so;  for  it  has  been  converted  into 
the  flesh  of  the  man  who  used  it  as  his  nutri¬ 
ment,  and  it  filled  up  those  losses  of  flesh  which 
famine  had  produced.  For  the  sake,  then,  of 
ridiculing  the  resurrection,  they  ask,  “Shall  this 
return  to  the  man  whose  flesh  it  first  was,  or  to 
him  whose  flesh  it  afterwards  became?”  And 
thus,  too,  they  seek  to  give  promise  to  the  hu¬ 
man  soul  of  alternations  of  true  misery  and  false 
happiness,  in  accordance  with  Plato’s  theory; 
or,  in  accordance  with  Porphyry’s,  that,  after 
many  transmigrations  into  different  bodies,  it 
ends  its  miseries,  and  never  more  returns  to 
them,  not,  however,  by  obtaining  an  immortal 
body,  but  by  escaping  from  every  kind  of  body. 

Chap.  13.  Whether  abortions ,  if  they  are  num¬ 
bered  among  the  dead,  shall  not  also  have  a 
part  in  the  resurrection 
To  these  objections,  then,  of  our  adversaries 
which  I  have  thus  detailed,  I  will  now  reply, 
trusting  that  God  will  mercifully  assist  my  en¬ 
deavours.  That  abortions,  which,  even  suppos¬ 
ing  they  were  alive  in  the  womb,  did  also  die 
there,  shall  rise  again,  I  make  bold  neither  to 
affirm  nor  to  deny,  although  I  fail  to  see  why,  if 
they  are  not  excluded  from  the  number  of  the 
dead,  they  should  not  attain  to  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  For  either  all  the  dead  shall  not 
rise,  and  there  will  be  to  all  eternity  some  souls 
without  bodies  though  they  once  had  them — 
only  in  their  mother’s  womb,  indeed;  or,  if  all 
human  souls  shall  receive  again  the  bodies  which 
they  had  wherever  they  lived,  and  which  they 
left  when  they  died,  then  I  do  not  see  how  I  can 
say  that  even  those  who  died  in  their  mother’s 
womb  shall  have  no  resurrection.  But  which¬ 
ever  of  these  opinions  any  one  may  adopt  con¬ 
cerning  them,  we  must  at  least  apply  to  them,  if 
they  rise  again,  all  that  we  have  to  say  of  in- 
fants  who  have  been  born. 


602 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  14.  Whether  infants  shall  rise  in  that 
body  which  they  would  have  had  had  they 
grown  up 

What,  then,  are  we  to  say  of  infants,  if  not 
that  they  will  not  rise  in  that  diminutive  body 
in  which  they  died,  but  shall  receive  by  the  mar¬ 
vellous  and  rapid  operation  of  God  that  body 
which  time  by  a  slower  process  would  have  giv¬ 
en  them?  For  in  the  Lord’s  words,  where  He 
says.  “Not  a  hair  of  your  head  shall  perish,”1  it 
is  asserted  that  nothing  which  was  possessed 
shall  be  wanting;  but  it  is  not  said  that  nothing 
which  was  not  possessed  shall  be  given.  To  the 
dead  infant  there  was  wanting  the  perfect  stat¬ 
ure  of  its  body;  for  even  the  perfect  infant  lacks 
the  perfection  of  bodily  size,  being  capable  of 
further  growth.  This  perfect  stature  is,  in  a 
sense,  so  possessed  by  all  that  they  are  con¬ 
ceived  and  born  with  it — that  is,  they  have  it 
potentially,  though  not  yet  in  actual  bulk;  just 
as  all  the  members  of  the  body  are  potentially 
in  the  seed,  though,  even  after  the  child  is  born, 
some  of  them,  the  teeth  for  example,  may  be 
wanting.  In  this  seminal  principle  of  every  Sub¬ 
stance,  there  seems  to  be.  as  it  were,  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  everything  which  does  not  yet  exist,  or 
rather  does  not  appear,  but  which  in  process  of 
time  will  come  into  being,  or  rather  into  sight. 
In  this,  therefore,  the  child  who  is  to  be  tall  or 
short  is  already  tall  or  short.  And  in  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  body,  we  need,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  fear  no  bodily  loss;  for  though  all  should 
be  of  equal  size,  and  reach  gigantic  proportions, 
lest  the  men  who  were  largest  here  should  lose 
anything  of  their  bulk  and  it  should  perish,  in 
contradiction  to  the  words  of  Christ,  Who  said 
that  not  a  hair  of  their  head  should  perish,  yet 
why  should  there  lack  the  means  by  which  that 
wonderful  Worker  should  make  such  additions, 
seeing  that  He  is  the  Creator,  Who  Himself 
created  all  things  out  of  nothing? 

Chap.  15.  Whether  the  bodies  of  all  the  dead 
shall  rise  the  same  size  as  the  Lord’s  body 
It  is  certain  that  Christ  rose  in  the  same  bod¬ 
ily  stature  in  which  He  died,  and  that  it  is  wrong 
to  say  that,  when  the  general  resurrection  shall 
have  arrived.  His  body  shall,  for  the  sake  of 
equalling  the  tallest,  assume  proportions  which 
it  had  not  when  He  appeared  to  the  disciples  in 
the  figure  with  which  they  were  familiar.  But  if 
we  say  that  even  the  bodies  of  taller  men  are  to 
be  reduced  to  the  size  of  the  Lord’s  body,  there 
^uke,  21. 18. 


will  be  a  great  loss  in  many  bodies,  though  He 
promised  that  not  a  hair  of  their  head  should 
perish.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  we  conclude 
that  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  size  which 
he  had  in  youth,  though  he  died  an  old  man,  or 
which  he  would  have  had,  supposing  he  died  be¬ 
fore  his  prime.  As  for  what  the  apostle  said  of 
the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  fullness  of  Christ, 
we  must  either  understand  him  to  refer  to  some¬ 
thing  else,  viz.,  to  the  fact  that  the  measure  of 
Christ  will  be  completed  when  all  the  members 
among  the  Christian  communities  are  added  to 
the  Head;  or  if  we  are  to  refer  it  to  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  body,  the  meaning  is  that  all  shall 
rise  neither  beyond  nor  under  youth,  but  in  that 
vigour  and  age  to  which  we  know  that  Christ 
had  arrived.  For  even  the  world’s  wisest  men 
have  fixed  the  bloom  of  youth  at  about  the  age 
of  thirty;  and  when  this  period  has  been  passed, 
the  man  begins  to  decline  towards  the  defective 
and  duller  period  of  old  age.  And  therefore  the 
apostle  did  not  speak  of  the  measure  of  the 
body,  nor  of  the  measure  of  the  stature  but  of 
“the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  fullness  of 
Christ.” 

Chap.  16.  What  is  meant  by  the  conforming  of 
the  saints  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God 
Then,  again,  these  words,  “Predestinate  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God,”2 
may  be  understood  of  the  inner  man.  So  in  an¬ 
other  place  He  says  to  us,  “Be  not  conformed 
to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed  in  the  re¬ 
newing  of  your  mind.”3  In  so  far,  then,  as  we 
are  transformed  so  as  not  to  be  conformed  to 
the  world,  we  are  conformed  to  the  Son  of  God. 
It  may  also  be  understood  thus,  that  as  He  was 
conformed  to  us  by  assuming  mortality,  we 
shall  be  conformed  to  Him  by  immortality;  and 
this  indeed  is  connected  with  the  resurrection  of 
the  body.  But  if  we  are  also  taught  in  these 
words  what  form  our  bodies  shall  rise  in,  as  the 
measure  we  spoke  of  before,  so  also  this  con¬ 
formity  is  to  be  understood  not  of  size,  but  of 
age.  Accordingly  all  shall  rise  in  the  stature  they 
either  had  attained  or  would  have  attained  had 
they  lived  to  their  prime,  although  it  will  be  no 
great  disadvantage  even  if  the  form  of  the  body 
be  infantine  or  aged,  while  no  infirmity  shall  re¬ 
main  in  the  mind  nor  in  the  body  itself.  So  that 
even  if  any  one  contends  that  every  person  will 
rise  again  in  the  same  bodily  form  in  which  he 
died,  we  need  not  spend  much  labour  in  disput¬ 
ing  with  him. 

2Rom.  8.  29.  3Rom.  12.  2. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  14-18  603 


Chap.  17.  Whether  the  bodies  of  women  shall 

retain  their  own  sex  in  the  resurrection 

From  the  words,  “Till  we  all  come  to  a  per¬ 
fect  man,  to  the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  full¬ 
ness  of  Christ,”  1  and  from  the  words,  “Con¬ 
formed  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God.”  2  some 
conclude  that  women  shall  not  rise  women,  but 
that  all  shall  be  men,  because  God  made  man 
only  of  earth  and  woman  of  the  man.  For  my 
part,  they  seem  to  be  wiser  who  make  no  doubt 
that  both  sexes  shall  rise.  For  there  shall  be  no 
lust,  which  is  now  the  cause  of  confusion.  For 
before  they  sinned,  the  man  and  the  woman 
were  naked  and  were  not  ashamed.  From  those 
bodies,  then,  vice  shall  be  withdrawn,  while 
nature  shall  be  preserved.  And  the  sex  of  wom¬ 
an  is  not  a  vice,  but  nature.  It  shall  then  indeed 
be  superior  to  carnal  intercourse  and  child-bear¬ 
ing;  nevertheless  the  female  members  shall  re¬ 
main  adapted  not  to  the  old  uses,  but  to  a  new 
beauty,  which,  so  far  from  provoking  lust,  now 
extinct,  shall  excite  praise  to  the  wisdom  and 
clemency  of  God,  who  both  made  what  was  not 
and  delivered  from  corruption  what  He  made. 
For  at  the  beginning  of  the  human  race  the 
woman  was  made  of  a  rib  taken  from  the  side 
of  the  man  while  he  slept;  for  it  seemed  fit  that 
even  then  Christ  and  His  Church  should  be 
foreshadowed  in  this  event.  For  that  sleep  of 
the  man  was  the  death  of  Christ,  whose  side,  as 
He  hung  lifeless  upon  the  cross,  was  pierced 
with  a  spear,  and  there  flowed  from  it  blood  and 
water,  and  these  we  know  to  be  the  sacraments 
by  which  the  Church  is  “built  up.”  For  Scrip¬ 
ture  used  this  very  word,  not  saying  “He 
formed”  or  “framed,”  but  “built  her  up  into  a 
woman”;3  whence  also  the  apostle  speaks  of  the 
edification  of  the  body  of  Christ,4  which  is  the 
Church.  The  woman,  therefore,  is  a  creature  of 
God  even  as  the  man;  but  by  her  creation  from 
man  unity  is  commended;  and  the  manner  of 
her  creation  prefigured,  as  has  been  said,  Christ 
and  the  Church.  He,  then,  who  created  both 
sexes  will  restore  both.  Jesus  Himself  also,  when 
asked  by  the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the  resur¬ 
rection,  which  of  the  seven  brothers  should  have 
to  wife  the  woman  whom  all  in  succession  had 
taken  to  raise  up  seed  to  their  brother,  as  the 
law  enjoined,  says,  “Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the 
Scriptures  nor  the  power  of  God.”5  And  though 
it  was  a  fit  opportunity  for  His  saying,  “She 
about  whom  you  make  inquiries  shall  herself  be 

xEph.  4.  13.  2Rom.  8.  29.  3Gen.  2.  22. 

4Eph.  4.  12.  6Matt.  22.  29. 


a  man,  and  not  a  woman,”  He  said  nothing  of 
the  kind;  but  “In  the  resurrection  they  neither 
marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the 
angels  of  God  in  heaven.” 6  They  shall  be  equal 
to  the  angels  in  immortality  and  happiness,  not 
in  flesh,  nor  in  resurrection,  which  the  angels  did 
not  need,  because  they  could  not  die.  The  Lord 
then  denied  that  there  would  be  in  the  resurrec¬ 
tion,  not  women,  but  marriages;  and  He  uttered 
this  denial  in  circumstances  in  which  the  ques¬ 
tion  mooted  would  have  been  more  easily  and 
speedily  solved  by  denying  that  the  female  sex 
would  exist,  if  this  had  in  truth  been  foreknown 
by  Him.  But,  indeed.  He  even  affirmed  that  the 
sex  should  exist  by  saying.  “They  shall  not  be 
given  in  marriage,”  which  can  only  apply  to  fe¬ 
males;  “Neither  shall  they  marry,”  which  ap¬ 
plies  to  males.  There  shall  therefore  be  those 
who  are  in  this  world  accustomed  to  marry  and 
be  given  in  marriage,  only  they  shall  there  make 
no  such  marriages. 

Chap.  18.  Of  the  perfect  man,  that  is,  Christ; 
and  of  His  body,  that  is,  the  Church,  which 
is  his  fullness 

To  understand  what  the  apostle  means  when 
he  says  that  we  shall  all  come  to  a  perfect  man, 
we  must  consider  the  connection  of  the  whole 
passage,  which  runs  thus:  “He  that  descended 
is  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far  above  all 
heavens,  that  He  might  fill  all  things.  And  He 
gave  some,  apostles;  and  some,  prophets;  and 
some,  evangelists ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teach¬ 
ers;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the 
work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the 
body  of  Christ:  till  we  all  come  to  the  unity  of 
the  faith  and  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  a 
perfect  man,  to  the  measure  of  the  age  of  the 
fullness  of  Christ:  that  we  henceforth  be  no 
more  children,  tossed  and  carried  about  with  ev¬ 
ery  wind  of  doctrine,  by  the  sleight  of  men,  and 
cunning  craftiness,  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to 
deceive;  but,  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  may 
grow  up  in  Him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  Head, 
even  Christ:  from  Whom  the  whole  body  fitly 
joined  together  and  compacted  by  that  which 
every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the  effectual 
working  in  the  measure  of  every  part,  maketh 
increase  of  the  body,  unto  the  edifying  of  itself 
in  love.”  7  Behold  what  the  perfect  man  is — the 
head  and  the  body,  which  is  made  up  of  all  the 
members,  which  in  their  own  time  shall  be  per¬ 
fected.  But  new  additions  are  daily  being  made 
to  this  body  while  the  Church  is  being  built  up, 
6Matt.  22.  30.  7Eph.  4.  10-16. 


6o4  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  which  it  is  said,  “Ye  are  the  body  of  Christ 
and  His  members” ;!  and  again,  “For  His  body’s 
sake,”  he  says,  “which  is  the  Church”;2  and 
again,  “We  being  many  are  one  head,  one 
body.”  3  It  is  of  the  edification  of  this  body  that 
it  is  here,  too,  said,  “For  the  perfecting  of  the 
saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edi¬ 
fication  of  the  body  of  Christ”;  and  then  that 
passage  of  which  we  are  now  speaking  is  added, 
“Till  we  all  come  to  the  unity  of  the  faith  and 
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  a  perfect  man, 
to  the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  fullness  of 
Christ,”  and  so  on.  And  he  shows  of  what  body 
we  are  to  understand  this  to  be  the  measure, 
when  he  says,  “That  we  may  grow  up  into  Him 
in  all  things,  which  is  the  Head,  even  Christ: 
from  Whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined  togeth¬ 
er  and  compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  sup- 
plieth,  according  to  the  effectual  working  in  the 
measure  of  every  part.”  As,  therefore,  there  is  a 
measure  of  every  part,  so  there  is  a  measure  of 
the  fullness  of  the  whole  body  which  is  made  up 
of  all  its  parts,  and  it  is  of  this  measure  it  is 
said,  “To  the  measure  of  the  age  of  the  fullness 
of  Christ.”  This  fullness  he  spoke  of  also  in  the 
place  where  he  says  of  Christ,  “And  gave  Him 
to  be  the  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church, 
which  is  His  body,  the  fullness  of  Him  that  fill- 
eth  all  in  all.”4  But  even  if  this  should  be  re¬ 
ferred  to  the  form  in  which  each  one  shall  rise, 
what  should  hinder  us  from  applying  to  the 
woman  what  is  expressly  said  of  the  man,  un¬ 
derstanding  both  sexes  to  be  included  under  the 
general  term  “man”?  For  certainly  in  the  say¬ 
ing,  “Blessed  is  he  who  feareth  the  Lord,” 5 
women  also  who  fear  the  Lord  are  included. 

Chap.  19.  That  all  bodily  blemishes  which  mar 
human  beauty  in  this  life  shall  be  removed  in 
the  resurrection,  the  natural  substance  of  the 
body  remaining,  but  the  quality  and  quantity 
of  it  being  altered  so  as  to  produce  beauty 
What  am  I  to  say  now7  about  the  hair  and 
nails?  Once  it  is  understood  that  no  part  of  the 
body  shall  so  perish  as  to  produce  deformity  in 
the  body,  it  is  at  the  same  time  understood  that 
such  things  as  would  have  produced  a  deform¬ 
ity  by  their  excessive  proportions  shall  be  add¬ 
ed  to  the  total  bulk  of  the  body,  not  to  parts  in 
which  the  beauty  of  the  proportion  would  thus 
be  marred.  Just  as  if,  after  making  a  vessel  of 
clay,  one  wished  to  make  it  over  again  of  the 
same  clay,  it  would  not  be  necessary  that  the 

*1  Cor.  12.  27.  2Col.  1.  24.  3I  Cor.  10.  17. 

4Eph.  1.  22,  23.  5Ps.  112.  1. 


same  portion  of  the  clay  which  had  formed  the 
handle  should  again  form  the  new  handle,  or 
that  what  had  formed  the  bottom  should  again 
do  so,  but  only  that  the  whole  clay  should  go 
to  make  up  the  whole  new  vessel,  and  that  no 
part  of  it  should  be  left  unused.  Wherefore,  if 
the  hair  that  has  been  cropped  and  the  nails 
that  have  been  cut  would  cause  a  deformity 
were  they  to  be  restored  to  their  places,  they 
shall  not  be  restored;  and  yet  no  one  will  lose 
these  parts  at  the  resurrection,  for  they  shall  be 
changed  into  the  same  flesh,  their  substance  be¬ 
ing  so  altered  as  to  preserve  the  proportion  of 
the  various  parts  of  the  body.  However,  what 
our  Lord  said,  “Not  a  hair  of  your  head  shall 
perish,”  might  more  suitably  be  interpreted  of 
the  number,  and  not  of  the  length  of  the  hairs, 
as  He  elsewhere  says,  “The  hairs  of  your  head 
are  all  numbered.”  6  Nor  would  I  say  this  be¬ 
cause  I  suppose  that  any  part  naturally  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  body  can  perish,  but  that  whatever 
deformity  was  in  it  and  served  to  exhibit  the 
penal  condition  in  which  we  mortals  are,  should 
be  restored  in  such  a  way  that,  wrhile  the  sub¬ 
stance  is  entirely  preserved,  the  deformity  shall 
perish.  For  if  even  a  human  workman,  who  has, 
for  some  reason,  made  a  deformed  statue,  can 
recast  it  and  make  it  very  beautiful,  and  this 
without  suffering  any  part  of  the  substance,  but 
only  the  deformity  to  be  lost — if  he  can,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  remove  some  unbecoming  or  dispropor¬ 
tionate  part,  not  by  cutting  off  and  separating 
this  part  from  the  w7hole,  but  by  so  breaking 
down  and  mixing  up  the  whole  as  to  get  rid  of 
the  blemish  without  diminishing  the  quantity  of 
his  material — shall  we  not  think  as  highly  of 
the  almighty  Worker?  Shall  He  not  be  able  to 
remove  and  abolish  all  deformities  of  the  hu¬ 
man  body,  whether  common  ones  or  rare  and 
monstrous,  which,  though  in  keeping  with  this 
miserable  life,  are  yet  not  to  be  thought  of  in 
connection  with  that  future  blessedness;  and 
shall  He  not  be  able  so  to  remove  them  that, 
while  the  natural  but  unseemly  blemishes  are 
put  an  end  to,  the  natural  substance  shall  suf¬ 
fer  no  diminution? 

And  consequently  overgrown  and  emaciated 
persons  need  not  fear  that  they  shall  be  in  heav¬ 
en  of  such  a  figure  as  they  would  not  be  even  in 
this  wrorld  if  they  could  help  it.  For  all  bodily 
beauty  consists  in  the  proportion  of  the  parts, 
together  with  a  certain  agreeableness  of  colour. 
Where  there  is  no  proportion,  the  eye  is  offend¬ 
ed,  either  because  there  is  something  awant- 

^uke,  12.  7. 


605 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  19-20 


ing,  or  too  small,  or  too  large.  And  thus  there 
shall  be  no  deformity  resulting  from  want  of 
proportion  in  that  state  in  which  all  that  is 
wrong  is  corrected,  and  all  that  is  defective  sup¬ 
plied  from  resources  the  Creator  wots  of,  and 
all  that  is  excessive  removed  without  destroying 
the  integrity  of  the  substance.  And  as  for  the 
pleasant  colour,  how  conspicuous  shall  it  be 
where  “the  just  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in 
the  kingdom  of  their  Father!”  1  This  brightness 
we  must  rather  believe  to  have  been  concealed 
from  the  eyes  of  the  disciples  when  Christ  rose, 
than  to  have  been  awanting.  For  weak  human 
eyesight  could  not  bear  it,  and  it  was  necessary 
that  they  should  so  look  upon  Him  as  to  be  able 
to  recognize  Him.  For  this  purpose  also  He  al¬ 
lowed  them  to  touch  the  marks  of  His  wounds, 
and  also  ate  and  drank — not  because  He  needed 
nourishment,  but  because  He  could  take  it  if  He 
wished.  Now,  when  an  object,  though  present,  is 
invisible  to  persons  who  see  other  things  which 
are  present,  as  we  say  that  that  brightness  was 
present  but  invisible  by  those  who  saw  other 
things,  this  is  called  in  Greek  aopaaia ;  and 
our  Latin  translators,  for  want  of  a  better  word, 
have  rendered  this  ccecitas  (blindness)  in  the 
book  of  Genesis.  This  blindness  the  men  of  Sod¬ 
om  suffered  when  they  sought  the  just  Lot’s 
gate  and  could  not  find  it.  But  if  it  had  been 
blindness,  that  is  to  say,  if  they  could  see  noth¬ 
ing,  then  they  would  not  have  asked  for  the  gate 
by  which  they  might  enter  the  house,  but  for 
guides  who  might  lead  them  away. 

But  the  love  we  bear  to  the  blessed  martyrs 
causes  us,  I  know  not  how,  to  desire  to  see  in 
the  heavenly  kingdom  the  marks  of  the  wounds 
which  they  received  for  the  name  of  Christ,  and 
possibly  we  shall  see  them.  For  this  will  not  be  a 
deformity,  but  a  mark  of  honour,  and  will  add 
lustre  to  their  appearance,  and  a  spiritual,  if  not 
a  bodily  beauty.  And  yet  we  need  not  believe 
that  they  to  whom  it  has  been  said,  “Not  a  hair 
of  your  head  shall  perish,”  shall,  in  the  resur¬ 
rection,  want  such  of  their  members  as  they 
have  been  deprived  of  in  their  martyrdom.  But 
if  it  will  be  seemly  in  that  new  kingdom  to  have 
some  marks  of  these  wounds  still  visible  in  that 
immortal  flesh,  the  places  where  they  have  been 
wounded  or  mutilated  shall  retain  the  scars 
without  any  of  the  members  being  lost.  While, 
therefore,  it  is  quite  true  that  no  blemishes 
which  the  body  has  sustained  shall  appear  in  the 
resurrection,  yet  we  are  not  to  reckon  or  name 
these  marks  of  virtue  blemishes. 

^att.  1 3.  43. 


Chap.  20.  That,  in  the  resurrection,  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  our  bodies,  however  disintegrated, 

shall  be  entirely  reunited 

Far  be  it  from  us  to  fear  that  the  omnipo¬ 
tence  of  the  Creator  cannot,  for  the  resuscita¬ 
tion  and  reanimation  of  our  bodies,  recall  all  the 
portions  which  have  been  consumed  by  beasts 
or  fire,  or  have  been  dissolved  into  dust  or  ashes, 
or  have  decomposed  into  water,  or  evaporated 
into  the  air.  Far  from  us  be  the  thought,  that 
anything  which  escapes  our  observation  in  any 
most  hidden  recess  of  nature  either  evades  the 
knowledge  or  transcends  the  power  of  the  Crea¬ 
tor  of  all  things.  Cicero,  the  great  authority  of 
our  adversaries,  wishing  to  define  God  as  accu¬ 
rately  as  possible,  says,  “God  is  a  mind  free  and 
independent,  without  materiality,  perceiving 
and  moving  all  things,  and  itself  endowed  with 
eternal  movement.”  This  he  found  in  the  sys¬ 
tems  of  the  greatest  philosophers.  Let  me  ask, 
then,  in  their  own  language,  how  anything  can  ei¬ 
ther  lie  hid  from  Him  Who  perceives  all  things, 
or  irrevocably  escape  Him  Who  moves  all 
things? 

This  leads  me  to  reply  to  that  question  which 
seems  the  most  difficult  of  all — “To  whom,  in 
the  resurrection,  will  belong  the  flesh  of  a  dead 
man  which  has  become  the  flesh  of  a  living 
man?”  For  if  some  one,  famishing  for  want  and 
pressed  with  hunger,  use  human  flesh  as  food — 
an  extremity  not  unknown,  as  both  ancient  his¬ 
tory  and  the  unhappy  experience  of  our  own 
days  have  taught  us — can  it  be  contended,  with 
any  show  of  reason,  that  all  the  flesh  eaten  has 
been  evacuated,  and  that  none  of  it  has  been  as¬ 
similated  to  the  substance  of  the  eater  though 
the  very  emaciation  which  existed  before,  and 
has  now  disappeared,  sufficiently  indicates  what 
large  deficiencies  have  been  filled  up  with  this 
food?  But  I  have  already  made  some  remarks 
which  will  suffice  for  the  solution  of  this  difficul¬ 
ty  also.  For  all  the  flesh  which  hunger  has  con¬ 
sumed  finds  its  way  into  the  air  by  evaporation, 
whence,  as  we  have  said,  God  Almighty  can  re¬ 
call  it.  That  flesh,  therefore,  shall  be  restored 
to  the  man  in  whom  it  first  became  human  flesh. 
For  it  must  be  looked  upon  as  borrowed  by  the 
other  person,  and,  like  a  pecuniary  loan,  must 
be  returned  to  the  lender.  His  own  flesh,  how¬ 
ever,  which  he  lost  by  famine,  shall  be  restored 
to  him  by  Him  Who  can  recover  even  what  has 
evaporated.  And  though  it  had  been  absolutely 
annihilated,  so  that  no  part  of  its  substance  re¬ 
mained  in  any  secret  spot  of  nature,  the  Al- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


606 

mighty  could  restore  it  by  such  means  as  He 
saw  fit.  For  this  sentence  uttered  by  the  Truth, 
“Not  a  hair  of  your  head  shall  perish,”  forbids  us 
to  suppose  that,  though  no  hair  of  a  man’s  head 
can  perish,  yet  the  large  portions  of  his  flesh  eat¬ 
en  and  consumed  by  the  famishing  can  perish. 

From  all  that  we  have  thus  considered,  and 
discussed  with  such  poor  ability  as  we  can  com¬ 
mand,  we  gather  this  conclusion,  that  in  the  res¬ 
urrection  of  the  flesh  the  body  shall  be  of  that 
size  which  it  either  had  attained  or  should  have 
attained  in  the  flower  of  its  youth,  and  shall  en¬ 
joy  the  beauty  that  arises  from  preserving  sym¬ 
metry  and  proportion  in  all  its  members.  And  it 
is  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  for  the  preserva¬ 
tion  of  this  beauty,  any  part  of  the  body’s  sub¬ 
stance,  which,  if  placed  in  one  spot,  would  pro¬ 
duce  a  deformity,  shall  be  distributed  through 
the  whole  of  it,  so  that  neither  any  part,  nor  the 
symmetry  of  the  whole,  may  be  lost,  but  only 
the  general  stature  of  the  body  somewhat  in¬ 
creased  by  the  distribution  in  all  the  parts  of 
that  which,  in  one  place,  would  have  been  un¬ 
sightly.  Or  if  it  is  contended  that  each  will  rise 
with  the  same  stature  as  that  of  the  body  he" died 
in,  we  shall  not  obstinately  dispute  this,  provid¬ 
ed  only  there  be  no  deformity,  no  infirmity,  no 
languor,  no  corruption — nothing  of  any  kind 
which  would  ill  become  that  kingdom  in  which 
the  children  of  the  resurrection  and  of  the  prom¬ 
ise  shall  be  equal  to  the  angels  of  God,  if  not  in 
body  and  age,  at  least  in  happiness. 

Chap.  21  .Of  the  new  spiritual  body  into  which 
the  flesh  of  the  saints  shall  be  transformed 
Whatever,  therefore,  has  been  taken  from  the 
body,  either  during  life  or  after  death,  shall  be 
restored  to  it,  and,  in  conjunction  with  what  has 
remained  in  the  grave,  shall  rise  again,  trans¬ 
formed  from  the  oldness  of  the  animal  body  in¬ 
to  the  newness  of  the  spiritual  body,  and  clothed 
in  incorruption  and  immortality.  But  even 
though  the  body  has  been  all  quite  ground  to 
powder  by  some  severe  accident,  or  by  the  ruth¬ 
lessness  of  enemies,  and  though  it  has  been  so 
diligently  scattered  to  the  winds,  or  into  the  wa¬ 
ter,  that  there  is  no  trace  of  it  left,  yet  it  shall 
not  be  beyond  the  omnipotence  of  the  Creator 
— no,  not  a  hair  of  its  head  shall  perish.  The  flesh 
shall  then  be  spiritual,  and  subject  to  the  spirit, 
but  still  flesh,  not  spirit,  as  the  spirit  itself,  when 
subject  to  the  flesh,  was  fleshly,  but  still  spirit 
and  not  flesh.  And  of  this  we  have  experimental 
proof  in  the  deformity  of  our  penal  condition. 
For  those  persons  were  carnal,  not  in  a  fleshly, 
but  in  a  spiritual  way,  to  whom  the  apostle  said, 


“I  could  not  speak  to  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but 
as  unto  carnal.”  1  And  a  man  is  in  this  life  spirit¬ 
ual  in  such  a  way,  that  he  is  yet  carnal  with  re¬ 
spect  to  his  body,  and  sees  another  law  in  his 
members  warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind; 
but  even  in  his  body  he  will  be  spiritual  when 
the  same  flesh  shall  have  had  that  resurrection 
of  which  these  words  speak,  “It  is  sown  an  ani¬ 
mal  body,  it  shall  rise  a  spiritual  body.”2  But 
what  this  spiritual  body  shall  be  and  how  great 
its  grace,  I  fear  it  were  but  rash  to  pronounce, 
seeing  that  we  have  as  yet  no  experience  of  it. 
Nevertheless,  since  it  is  fit  that  the  joyfulness 
of  our  hope  should  utter  itself,  and  so  show 
forth  God’s  praise,  and  since  it  was  from  the 
profoundest  sentiment  of  ardent  and  holy  love 
that  the  Psalmist  cried.  “0  Lord,  I  have  loved 
the  beauty  of  Thy  house,” 3  we  may,  with  God’s 
help,  speak  of  the  gifts  He  lavishes  on  men, 
good  and  bad  alike,  in  this  most  wretched  life, 
and  may  do  our  best  to  conjecture  the  great 
glory  of  that  state  which  we  cannot  worthily 
speak  of,  because  we  have  not  yet  experienced 
it.  For  I  say  nothing  of  the  time  when  God  made 
man  upright;  I  say  nothing  of  the  happy  life  of 
“the  man  and  his  wife”  in  the  fruitful  garden, 
since  it  was  so  short  that  none  of  their  children 
experienced  it:  I  speak  only  of  this  life  which 
we  know,  and  in  which  we  now  are,  from  the 
temptations  of  which  we  cannot  escape  so  long 
as  we  are  in  it,  no  matter  what  progress  we 
make,  for  it  is  all  temptation,  and  I  ask,  Who 
can  describe  the  tokens  of  God’s  goodness  that 
are  extended  to  the  human  race  even  in  this  life? 

Chap.  22.  Of  the  miseries  and  ills  to  which  the 
human  race  is  justly  exposed  through  the 
first  sin ,  and  from  which  none  can  be  deliv¬ 
ered  save  by  Christ’s  grace 
That  the  whole  human  race  has  been  con¬ 
demned  in  its  first  origin,  this  life  itself,  if  life 
it  is  to  be  called,  bears  witness  by  the  host  of 
cruel  ills  with  which  it  is  filled.  Is  not  this 
proved  by  the  profound  and  dreadful  ignorance 
which  produces  all  the  errors  that  enfold  the 
children  of  Adam,  and  from  wrhich  no  man  can 
be  delivered  without  toil,  pain,  and  fear?  Is  it 
not  proved  by  his  love  of  so  many  vain  and 
hurtful  things,  which  produces  gnawing  cares, 
disquiet,  griefs,  fears,  wild  joys,  quarrels,  law¬ 
suits,  wars,  treasons,  angers,  hatreds,  deceit, 
flattery,  fraud,  theft,  robbery,  perfidy,  pride, 
ambition,  envy,  murders,  parricides,  cruelty,  fe¬ 
rocity.  wickedness,  luxury,  insolence,  impu¬ 
dence,  shamelessness,  fornications,  adulteries, 
yI  Cor.  3.  1.  2I  Cor.  15.  44.  3Ps.  26.  8. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  21-22  607 


incests,  and  the  numberless  uncleannesses  and 
unnatural  acts  of  both  sexes,  which  it  is  shame¬ 
ful  so  much  as  to  mention;  sacrileges,  heresies, 
blasphemies,  perjuries,  oppression  of  the  inno¬ 
cent,  calumnies,  plots,  falsehoods,  false  witness- 
ings,  unrighteous  judgments,  violent  deeds, 
plunderings,  and  whatever  similar  wickedness 
has  found  its  way  into  the  lives  of  men,  though 
it  cannot  find  its  way  into  the  conception  of 
pure  minds?  These  are  indeed  the  crimes  of 
wicked  men,  yet  they  spring  from  that  root  of 
error  and  misplaced  love  which  is  born  with  ev¬ 
ery  son  of  Adam.  For  who  is  there  that  has  not 
observed  with  what  profound  ignorance,  mani¬ 
festing  itself  even  in  infancy,  and  with  what 
superfluity  of  foolish  desires,  beginning  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  boyhood,  man  comes  into  this  life,  so 
that,  were  he  left  to  live  as  he  pleased,  and  to  do 
whatever  he  pleased,  he  would  plunge  into  all, 
or  certainly  into  many  of  those  crimes  and 
iniquities  which  I  mentioned,  and  could  not 
mention? 

But  because  God  does  not  wholly  desert  those 
whom  He  condemns,  nor  shuts  up  in  His  anger 
His  tender  mercies,  the  human  race  is  restrained 
by  law  and  instruction,  which  keep  guard  against 
the  ignorance  that  besets  us,  and  oppose  the  as¬ 
saults  of  vice,  but  are  themselves  full  of  labour 
and  sorrow.  For  what  mean  those  multifarious 
threats  which  are  used  to  restrain  the  folly  of 
children?  What  mean  pedagogues,  masters,  the 
birch,  the  strap,  the  cane,  the  schooling  which 
Scripture  says  must  be  given  a  child,  “beating 
him  on  the  sides  lest  he  wax  stubborn,”1  and  it 
be  hardly  possible  or  not  possible  at  all  to  sub¬ 
due  him?  Why  all  these  punishments,  save  to 
overcome  ignorance  and  bridle  evil  desires — 
these  evils  with  which  we  come  into  the  world? 
For  why  is  it  that  we  remember  with  difficulty, 
and  without  difficulty  forget?  learn  with  diffi¬ 
culty,  and  without  difficulty  remain  ignorant? 
are  diligent  with  difficulty,  and  without  difficul¬ 
ty  are  indolent?  Does  not  this  show  what  vitiat¬ 
ed  nature  inclines  and  tends  to  by  its  own 
weight,  ^nd  what  succour  it  needs  if  it  is  to  be 
delivered?  Inactivity,  sloth,  laziness,  negligence, 
are  vices  which  shun  labour,  since  labour, 
though  useful,  is  itself  a  punishment. 

But,  besides  the  punishments  of  childhood, 
without  which  there  would  be  no  learning  of 
what  the  parents  wish — and  the  parents  rarely 
wish  anything  useful  to  be  taught — who  can  de¬ 
scribe,  who  can  conceive  the  number  and  se¬ 
verity  of  the  punishments  which  afflict  the  hu¬ 
man  race — pains  which  are  not  only  the  accom- 

^cclus.  30.  12. 


paniment  of  the  wickedness  of  godless  men,  but 
are  a  part  of  the  human  condition  and  the  com¬ 
mon  misery — what  fear  and  what  grief  are 
caused  by  bereavement  and  mourning,  by  losses 
and  condemnations,  by  fraud  and  falsehood,  by 
false  suspicions,  and  all  the  crimes  and  wicked 
deeds  of  other  men?  For  at  their  hands  we  suf¬ 
fer  robbery,  captivity,  chains,  imprisonment, 
exile,  torture,  mutilation,  loss  of  sight,  the  vio¬ 
lation  of  chastity  to  satisfy  the  lust  of  the  op¬ 
pressor,  and  many  other  dreadful  evils.  What 
numberless  casualties  threaten  our  bodies  from 
without — extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  storms, 
floods,  inundations,  lightning,  thunder,  hail, 
earthquakes,  houses  falling;  or  from  the  stum¬ 
bling,  or  shying,  or  vice  of  horses;  from  count¬ 
less  poisons  in  fruits,  water,  air,  animals;  from 
the  painful  or  even  deadly  bites  of  wild  ani¬ 
mals  ;  from  the  madness  which  a  mad  dog  com¬ 
municates,  so  that  even  the  animal  which  of  all 
others  is  most  gentle  and  friendly  to  its  own 
master,  becomes  an  object  of  intenser  fear  than 
a  lion  or  dragon,  and  the  man  whom  it  has  by 
chance  infected  with  his  pestilential  contagion 
becomes  so  rabid,  that  his  parents,  wife,  chil¬ 
dren,  dread  him  more  than  any  wild  beast! 
What  disasters  are  suffered  by  those  who  travel 
by  land  or  sea !  What  man  can  go  out  of  his  own 
house  without  being  exposed  on  all  hands  to  un¬ 
foreseen  accidents?  Returning  home  sound  in 
limb,  he  slips  on  his  own  doorstep,  breaks  his 
leg,  and  never  recovers.  What  can  seem  safer 
than  a  man  sitting  in  his  chair?  Eli  the  priest 
fell  from  his,  and  broke  his  neck.  How  many  ac¬ 
cidents  do  farmers,  or  rather  all  men,  fear  that 
the  crops  may  suffer  from  the  weather,  or  the 
soil,  or  the  ravages  of  destructive  animals? 
Commonly  they  feel  safe  when  the  crops  are 
gathered  and  housed.  Yet,  to  my  certain  knowl¬ 
edge,  sudden  floods  have  driven  the  labourers 
away  and  swept  the  barns  clean  of  the  finest 
harvest.  Is  innocence  a  sufficient  protection 
against  the  various  assaults  of  demons?  That 
no  man  might  think  so,  even  baptized  infants, 
who  are  certainly  unsurpassed  in  innocence,  are 
sometimes  so  tormented,  that  God,  Who  permits 
it,  teaches  us  hereby  to  bewail  the  calamities  of 
this  life,  and  to  desire  the  felicity  of  the  life  to 
come.  As  to  bodily  diseases,  they  are  so  numer¬ 
ous  that  they  cannot  all  be  contained  even  in 
medical  books.  And  in  very  many,  or  almost  all 
of  them,  the  cures  and  remedies  are  themselves 
tortures,  so  that  men  are  delivered  from  a  pain 
that  destroys  by  a  cure  that  pains.  Has  not  the 
madness  of  thirst  driven  men  to  drink  human 
urine,  and  even  their  own?  Has  not  hunger  driv- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


608 

en  men  to  eat  human  flesh,  and  that  the  flesh 
not  of  bodies  found  dead,  but  of  bodies  slain  for 
the  purpose?  Have  not  the  fierce  pangs  of  fam¬ 
ine  driven  mothers  to  eat  their  own  children,  in¬ 
credibly  savage  as  it  seems?  In  fine,  sleep  itself, 
which  is  justly  called  repose,  how  little  of  re¬ 
pose  there  sometimes  is  in  it  when  disturbed 
with  dreams  and  visions;  and  with  what  terror 
is  the  wretched  mind  overwhelmed  by  the  ap¬ 
pearances  of  things  which  are  so  presented,  and 
which,  as  it  were,  so  stand  out  before  the  senses, 
that  we  cannot  distinguish  them  from  realities! 
How  wretchedly  do  false  appearances  distract 
men  in  certain  diseases!  With  what  astonishing 
variety  of  appearances  are  even  healthy  men 
sometimes  deceived  by  evil  spirits,  who  produce 
these  delusions  for  the  sake  of  perplexing  the 
senses  of  their  victims,  if  they  cannot  succeed  in 
seducing  them  to  their  side! 

From  this  hell  upon  earth  there  is  no  escape, 
save  through  the  grace  of  the  Saviour  Christ, 
our  God  and  Lord.  The  very  name  Jesus  shows 
this,  for  it  means  Saviour;  and  He  saves  us 
especially  from  passing  out  of  this  life  into  a 
more  wretched  and  eternal  state,  which  is  rather 
a  death  than  a  life.  For  in  this  life,  though  holy 
men  and  holy  pursuits  afford  us  great  consola¬ 
tions,  yet  the  blessings  which  men  crave  are  not 
invariably  bestowed  upon  them,  lest  religion 
should  be  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  these  tem¬ 
poral  advantages,  while  it  ought  rather  to  be 
cultivated  for  the  sake  of  that  other  life  from 
which  all  evil  is  excluded.  Therefore,  also,  does 
grace  aid  good  men  in  the  midst  of  present  ca¬ 
lamities,  so  that  they  are  enabled  to  endure 
them  with  a  constancy  proportioned  to  their 
faith.  The  world’s  sages  affirm  that  philosophy 
contributes  something  to  this — that  philosophy 
which,  according  to  Cicero,  the  gods  have  be¬ 
stowed  in  its  purity  only  on  a  few  men.  They 
have  never  given,  he  says,  nor  can  ever  give,  a 
greater  gift  to  men.  So  that  even  those  against 
whom  we  are  disputing  have  been  compelled  to 
acknowledge,  in  some  fashion,  that  the  grace 
of  God  is  necessary  for  the  acquisition,  not,  in¬ 
deed,  of  any  philosophy,  but  of  the  true  philos¬ 
ophy.  And  if  the  true  philosophy — this  sole  sup¬ 
port  against  the  miseries  of  this  life — has  been 
given  by  Heaven  only  to  a  few,  it  sufficiently  ap¬ 
pears  from  this  that  the  human  race  has  been 
condemned  to  pay  this  penalty  of  wretchedness. 
And  as,  according  to  their  acknowledgment,  no 
greater  gift  has  been  bestowed  by  God,  so  it 
must  be  believed  that  it  could  be  given  only  by 
that  God  whom  they  themselves  recognize  as 
greater  than  all  the  gods  they  worship. 


Chap.  23.  Of  the  miseries  of  this  life  which  at¬ 
tach  peculiarly  to  the  toil  of  good  men,  irre¬ 
spective  of  those  which  are  common  to  the 

good  and  bad 

But,  irrespective  of  the  miseries  which  in  this 
life  are  common  to  the  good  and  bad,  the  right¬ 
eous  undergo  labours  peculiar  to  themselves,  in 
so  far  as  they  make  war  upon  their  vices,  and 
are  involved  in  the  temptations  and  perils  of 
such  a  contest.  For  though  sometimes  more  vio¬ 
lent  and  at  other  times  slacker,  yet  without  in¬ 
termission  does  the  flesh  lust  against  the  spirit 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  so  that  we  can¬ 
not  do  the  things  we  would,1  and  extirpate  all 
lust,  but  can  only  refuse  consent  to  it,  as  God 
gives  us  ability,  and  so  keep  it  under,  vigilantly 
keeping  watch  lest  a  semblance  of  truth  deceive 
us,  lest  a  subtle  discourse  blind  us,  lest  error 
involve  us  in  darkness,  lest  we  should  take  good 
for  evil  or  evil  for  good,  lest  fear  should  hinder 
us  from  doing  what  we  ought,  or  desire  precipi¬ 
tate  us  into  doing  what  we  ought  not,  lest  the 
sun  go  down  upon  our  wrath,  lest  hatred  pro¬ 
voke  us  to  render  evil  for  evil,  lest  unseemly  or 
immoderate  grief  consume  us,  lest  an  ungrateful 
disposition  make  us  slow  to  recognize  benefits 
received,  lest  calumnies  fret  our  conscience,  lest 
rash  suspicion  on  our  part  deceive  us  regarding 
a  friend,  or  false  suspicion  of  us  on  the  part  of 
others  give  us  too  much  uneasiness,  lest  sin 
reign  in  our  mortal  body  to  obey  its  desires,  lest 
our  members  be  used  as  the  instruments  of  un¬ 
righteousness,  lest  the  eye  follow  lust,  lest  thirst 
for  revenge  carry  us  away,  lest  sight  or  thought 
dwell  too  long  on  some  evil  thing  which  gives 
us  pleasure,  lest  wicked  or  indecent  language  be 
willingly  listened  to,  lest  we  do  what  is  pleasant 
but  unlawful,  and  lest  in  this  warfare,  filled  so 
abundantly  with  toil  and  peril,  we  either  hope  to 
secure  victory  by  our  own  strength,  or  attribute 
it  when  secured  to  our  own  strength,  and  not  to 
His  grace  of  Whom  the  apostle  says,  “Thanks 
be  unto  God,  Who  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ”;2  and  in  another  place 
he  says,  “In  all  these  things  we  are  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us.”3  But 
yet  we  are  to  know  this,  that  however  valorous- 
ly  we  resist  our  vices,  and  however  successful 
we  are  in  overcoming  them,  yet  as  long  as  we  are 
in  this  body  we  have  always  reason  to  say  to 
God,  “Forgive  us  our  debts.”4  But  in  that  king¬ 
dom  where  we  shall  dwell  for  ever,  clothed  in 
immortal  bodies,  we  shall  no  longer  have  either 

1Gal.  5.  17.  2I  Cor.  15.  57.  3Rom.  8.  37. 

4Matt.  6.  12. 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  23-24  609 


conflicts  or  debts — as  indeed  we  should  not  have 
had  at  any  time  or  in  any  condition,  had  our  na¬ 
ture  continued  upright  as  it  was  created.  Con¬ 
sequently  even  this  our  conflict,  in  which  we  are 
exposed  to  peril,  and  from  which  we  hope  to  be 
delivered  by  a  final  victory,  belongs  to  the  ills  of 
this  life,  which  is  proved  by  the  witness  of  so 
many  grave  evils  to  be  a  life  under  condemna¬ 
tion. 

Chap.  24.  Of  the  blessings  with  which  the  Crea¬ 
tor  has  filled  this  life ,  obnoxious  though  it  be 

to  the  curse 

But  we  must  now  contemplate  the  rich  and 
countless  blessings  with  which  the  goodness  of 
God,  Who  cares  for  all  He  has  created,  has  filled 
this  very  misery  of  the  human  race,  which  re¬ 
flects  His  retributive  justice.  That  first  blessing 
which  He  pronounced  before  the  fall,  when  He 
said,  “Increase,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the 
earth,” 1  He  did  not  inhibit  after  man  had 
sinned,  but  the  fecundity  originally  bestowed  re¬ 
mained  in  the  condemned  stock;  and  the  vice  of 
sin,  which  has  involved  us  in  the  necessity  of 
dying,  has  yet  not  deprived  us  of  that  wonderful 
power  of  seed,  or  rather  of  that  still  more  mar¬ 
vellous  power  by  which  seed  is  produced,  and 
which  seems  to  be  as  it  were  inwrought  and  in- 
woven  in  the  human  body.  But  in  this  river,  as 
I  may  call  it,  or  torrent  of  the  human  race,  both 
elements  are  carried  along  together — both  the 
evil  which  is  derived  from  him  who  begets,  and 
the  good  which  is  bestowed  by  Him  Who  creates 
us.  In  the  original  evil  there  are  two  things,  sin 
and  punishment ;  in  the  original  good,  there  are 
two  other  things,  propagation  and  conforma¬ 
tion.  But  of  the  evils,  of  which  the  one,  sin, 
arose  from  our  audacity,  and  the  other,  punish¬ 
ment,  from  God’s  judgment,  we  have  already 
said  as  much  as  suits  our  present  purpose.  I 
mean  now  to  speak  of  the  blessings  which  God 
has  conferred  or  still  confers  upon  our  nature, 
vitiated  and  condemned  as  it  is.  For  in  con¬ 
demning  it  He  did  not  withdraw  all  that  He  had 
given  it, f  else  it  had  been  annihilated;  neither 
did  He,  in  penally  subjecting  it  to  the  devil,  re¬ 
move  it  beyond  His  own  power;  for  not  even 
the  devil  himself  is  outside  of  God’s  govern¬ 
ment,  since  the  devil’s  nature  subsists  only  by 
the  supreme  Creator,  Who  gives  being  to  all  that 
in  any  form  exists. 

Of  these  two  blessings,  then,  which  we  have 
said  flow  from  God’s  goodness,  as  from  a  foun¬ 
tain,  towards  our  nature,  vitiated  by  sin  and 
condemned  to  punishment,  the  one,  propaga- 

^en.  1.  28. 


tion,  was  conferred  by  God’s  benediction  when 
He  made  those  first  works,  from  which  He  rest¬ 
ed  on  the  seventh  day.  But  the  other,  confor¬ 
mation,  is  conferred  in  that  work  of  His  where¬ 
in  “He  worketh  hitherto.” 2  For  were  He  to 
withdraw  His  efficacious  power  from  things, 
they  should  neither  be  able  to  go  on  and  com¬ 
plete  the  periods  assigned  to  their  measured 
movements,  nor  should  they  even  continue  in 
possession  of  that  nature  they  were  created  in. 
God,  then,  so  created  man  that  He  gave  him 
what  we  may  call  fertility,  whereby  he  might 
propagate  other  men,  giving  them  a  congenital 
capacity  to  propagate  their  kind,  but  not  impos¬ 
ing  on  them  any  necessity  to  do  so.  This  capaci¬ 
ty  God  withdraws  at  pleasure  from  individuals, 
making  them  barren;  but  from  the  whole  race 
He  has  not  withdrawn  the  blessing  of  propaga¬ 
tion  once  conferred.  But  though  not  withdrawn 
on  account  of  sin,  this  power  of  propagation  is 
not  what  it  would  have  been  had  there  been  no 
sin.  For  since  “man  placed  in  honour  fell,  he  has 
become  like  the  beasts,”  3  and  generates  as  they 
do,  though  the  little  spark  of  reason,  which  was 
the  image  of  God  in  him,  has  not  been  quite 
quenched.  But  if  conformation  were  not  added 
to  propagation,  there  would  be  no  reproduction 
of  one’s  kind.  For  even  though  there  were  no 
such  thing  as  copulation,  and  God  wished  to  fill 
the  earth  with  human  inhabitants,  He  might 
create  all  these  as  He  created  one  without  the 
help  of  human  generation.  And,  indeed,  even  as 
it  is,  those  who  copulate  can  generate  nothing 
save  by  the  creative  energy  of  God.  As,  there¬ 
fore,  in  respect  of  that  spiritual  growth  where¬ 
by  a  man  is  formed  to  piety  and  righteousness, 
the  apostle  says,  “Neither  is  he  that  planteth 
anything,  neither  he  that  watereth,  but  God  that 
giveth  the  increase,”  4  so  also  it  must  be  said 
that  it  is  not  he  that  generates  that  is  anything, 
but  God  that  giveth  the  essential  form;  that  it 
is  not  the  mother  who  carries  and  nurses  the 
fruit  of  her  womb  that  is  anything,  but  God  that 
giveth  the  increase.  For  He  alone,  by  that  ener¬ 
gy  wherewith  “He  worketh  hitherto,”  causes 
the  seed  to  develop,  and  to  evolve  from  certain 
secret  and  invisible  folds  into  the  visible  forms 
of  beauty  which  we  see.  He  alone,  coupling  and 
connecting  in  some  wonderful  fashion  the  spir¬ 
itual  and  corporeal  natures,  the  one  to  com¬ 
mand,  the  other  to  obey,  makes  a  living  being. 
And  this  work  of  His  is  so  great  and  wonderful 
that  not  only  man,  who  is  a  rational  animal,  and 
consequently  more  excellent  than  all  other  ani¬ 
mals  of  the  earth,  but  even  the  most  diminutive 
2John,  5.  17.  3Ps.  49.  20.  4I  Cor.  3.  7. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


610 

insect,  cannot  be  considered  attentively  without 
astonishment  and  without  praising  the  Creator. 

It  is  He,  then.  Who  has  given  to  the  human 
soul  a  mind,  in  which  reason  and  understanding 
lie  as  it  were  asleep  during  infancy,  and  as  if 
they  were  not,  destined,  however,  to  be  awak¬ 
ened  and  exercised  as  years  increase,  so  as  to 
become  capable  of  knowledge  and  of  receiving 
instruction,  fit  to  understand  what  is  true  and 
to  love  what  is  good.  It  is  by  this  capacity  the 
soul  drinks  in  wisdom,  and  becomes  endowed 
with  those  virtues  by  which,  in  prudence,  forti¬ 
tude,  temperance,  and  righteousness,  it  makes 
war  upon  error  and  the  other  inborn  vices,  and 
conquers  them  by  fixing  its  desires  upon  no  oth¬ 
er  object  than  the  supreme  and  unchangeable 
Good.  And  even  though  this  be  not  uniformly 
the  result,  yet  who  can  competently  utter  or 
even  conceive  the  grandeur  of  this  work  of  the 
Almighty,  and  the  unspeakable  boon  He  has 
conferred  upon  our  rational  nature,  by  giving 
us  even  the  capacity  of  such  attainment?  For 
over  and  above  those  arts  which  are  called  vir¬ 
tues,  and  which  teach  us  how  we  may  spend  our 
life  well,  and  attain  to  endless  happiness — arts 
which  are  given  to  the  children  of  the  promise 
and  the  kingdom  by  the  sole  grace  of  God  which 
is  in  Christ — has  not  the  genius  of  man  invented 
and  applied  countless  astonishing  arts,  partly 
the  result  of  necessity,  partly  the  result  of  ex¬ 
uberant  invention,  so  that  this  vigour  of  mind, 
which  is  so  active  in  the  discovery  not  merely  of 
superfluous  but  even  of  dangerous  and  destruc¬ 
tive  things,  betokens  an  inexhaustible  wealth  in 
the  nature  which  can  invent,  learn,  or  employ 
such  arts?  What  wonderful — one  might  say 
stupefying — advances  has  human  industry  made 
in  the  arts  of  weaving  and  building,  of  agricul¬ 
ture  and  navigation !  With  what  endless  variety 
are  designs  in  pottery,  painting,  and  sculpture 
produced,  and  with  what  skill  executed!  What 
wonderful  spectacles  are  exhibited  in  the  thea¬ 
tres.  which  those  who  have  not  seen  them  can¬ 
not  credit!  How  skillful  the  contrivances  for 
catching,  killing,  or  taming  wild  beasts!  And 
for  the  injury  of  men,  also,  how  many  kinds  of 
poisons,  weapons,  engines  of  destruction,  have 
been  invented,  while  for  the  preservation  or 
restoration  of  health  the  appliances  and  reme¬ 
dies  are  infinite !  To  provoke  appetite  and  please 
the  palate,  what  a  variety  of  seasonings  have 
been  concocted!  To  express  and  gain  entrance 
for  thoughts,  what  a  multitude  and  variety  of 
signs  there  are,  among  which  speaking  and  writ¬ 
ing  hold  the  first  place !  what  ornaments  has  el¬ 
oquence  at  command  to  delight  the  mind!  what 


wealth  of  song  is  there  to  captivate  the  ear !  how 
many  musical  instruments  and  strains  of  har¬ 
mony  have  been  devised !  What  skill  has  been  at¬ 
tained  in  measures  and  numbers !  with  what  sa¬ 
gacity  have  the  movements  and  connections  of 
the  stars  been  discovered!  Who  could  tell  the 
thought  that  has  been  spent  upon  nature,  even 
though,  despairing  of  recounting  it  in  detail,  he 
endeavoured  only  to  give  a  general  view  of  it?  In 
fine,  even  the  defence  of  errors  and  misappre¬ 
hensions,  which  has  illustrated  the  genius  of 
heretics  and  philosophers,  cannot  be  sufficiently 
declared.  For  at  present  it  is  the  nature  of  the 
human  mind  which  adorns  this  mortal  life  which 
we  are  extolling,  and  not  the  faith  and  the  way 
of  truth  which  lead  to  immortality.  And  since 
this  great  nature  has  certainly  been  created  by 
the  true  and  supreme  God,  Who  administers  all 
things  He  has  made  with  absolute  power  and 
justice,  it  could  never  have  fallen  into  these 
miseries,  nor  have  gone  out  of  them  to  miseries 
eternal — saving  only  those  who  are  redeemed — 
had  not  an  exceeding  great  sin  been  found  in  the 
first  man  from  whom  the  rest  have  sprung. 

Moreover,  even  in  the  body,  though  it  dies 
like  that  of  the  beasts,  and  is  in  many  ways 
weaker  than  theirs,  what  goodness  of  God,  what 
providence  of  the  great  Creator,  is  apparent! 
The  organs  of  sense  and  the  rest  of  the  mem¬ 
bers,  are  not  they  so  placed,  the  appearance, 
and  form,  and  stature  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  is 
it  not  so  fashioned  as  to  indicate  that  it  was 
made  for  the  service  of  a  reasonable  soul?  Man 
has  not  been  created  stooping  towards  the  earth, 
like  the  irrational  animals;  but  his  bodily  form, 
erect  and  looking  heavenwards,  admonishes  him 
to  mind  the  things  that  are  above.  Then  the 
marvellous  nimbleness  which  has  been  given  to 
the  tongue  and  the  hands,  fitting  them  to  speak, 
and  write,  and  execute  so  many  duties,  and  prac¬ 
tise  so  many  arts,  does  it  not  prove  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  the  soul  for  which  such  an  assistant 
was  provided?  And  even  apart  from  its  adapta¬ 
tion  to  the  work  required  of  it,  there  is  such  a 
symmetry  in  its  various  parts,  and  so  beautiful 
a  proportion  maintained  that  one  is  at  a  loss  to 
decide  whether,  in  creating  the  body,  greater  re¬ 
gard  was  paid  to  utility  or  to  beauty.  Assuredly 
no  part  of  the  body  has  been  created  for  the 
sake  of  utility  which  does  not  also  contribute 
something  to  its  beauty.  And  this  would  be  all 
the  more  apparent,  if  we  knew  more  precisely 
how  all  its  parts  are  connected  and  adapted  to 
one  another,  and  were  not  limited  in  our  obser¬ 
vations  to  what  appears  on  the  surface;  for  as 
to  what  is  covered  up  and  hidden  from  our  view, 


THE  CITY  OF 

the  intricate  web  of  veins  and  nerves,  the  vital 
parts  of  all  that  lies  under  the  skin,  no  one  can 
discover  it.  For  although,  with  a  cruel  zeal  for 
science,  some  medical  men,  who  are  called  anat¬ 
omists,  have  dissected  the  bodies  of  the  dead, 
and  sometimes  even  of  sick  persons  who  died 
under  their  knives,  and  have  inhumanly  pried 
into  the  secrets  of  the  human  body  to  learn  the 
nature  of  the  disease  and  its  exact  seat,  and  how 
it  might  be  cured,  yet  those  relations  of  which 
I  speak,  and  which  form  the  concord,  or,  as  the 
Greeks  call  it,  harmony ,  of  the  whole  body  out¬ 
side  and  in,  as  of  some  instrument,  no  one  has 
been  able  to  discover,  because  no  one  has  been 
audacious  enough  to  seek  for  them.  But  if  these 
could  be  known,  then  even  the  inward  parts, 
which  seem  to  have  no  beauty,  would  so  delight 
us  with  their  exquisite  fitness  as  to  afford  a  pro¬ 
founder  satisfaction  to  the  mind — and  the  eyes 
are  but  its  ministers — than  the  obvious  beauty 
which  gratifies  the  eye.  There  are  some  things, 
too,  which  have  such  a  place  in  the  body,  that 
they  obviously  serve  no  useful  purpose,  but  are 
solely  for  beauty,  as  e.g.,  the  teats  on  a  man’s 
breast,  or  the  beard  on  his  face;  for  that  this  is 
for  ornament,  and  not  for  protection,  is  proved 
by  the  bare  faces  of  women,  who  ought  rather, 
as  the  weaker  sex,  to  enjoy  such  a  defence.  If, 
therefore,  of  all  those  members  which  are  ex¬ 
posed  to  our  view,  there  is  certainly  not  one  in 
which  beauty  is  sacrificed  to  utility,  while  there 
are  some  which  serve  no  purpose  but  only  beau¬ 
ty,  I  think  it  can  readily  be  concluded  that  in 
the  creation  of  the  human  body  comeliness  was 
more  regarded  than  necessity.  In  truth,  necessi¬ 
ty  is  a  transitory  thing ;  and  the  time  is  coming 
when  we  shall  enjoy  one  another’s  beauty  with¬ 
out  any  lust — a  condition  which  will  specially 
redound  to  the  praise  of  the  Creator,  who,  as  it 
is  said  in  the  psalm,  has  “put  on  praise  and 
comeliness,”  1 

How  can  I  tell  of  the  rest  of  creation,  with  all 
its  beauty  and  utility,  which  the  divine  goodness 
has  given  to  man  to  please  his  eye  and  serve  his 
purposes,  condemned  though  he  is,  and  hurled 
into  these  labours  and  miseries?  Shall  I  speak 
of  the  manifold  and  various  loveliness  of  sky, 
and  earth,  and  sea;  of  the  plentiful  supply  and 
wonderful  qualities  of  the  light;  of  sun,  moon, 
and  stars;  of  the  shade  of  trees;  of  the  colours 
and  perfume  of  flowers;  of  the  multitude  of 
birds,  all  differing  in  plumage  and  in  song;  of 
the  variety  of  animals,  of  which  the  smallest  in 
size  are  often  the  most  wonderful — the  works 
of  ants  and  bees  astonishing  us  more  than  the 

^s.  104.  I. 


GOD  XXII.  24  61 1 

huge  bodies  of  whales?  Shall  I  speak  of  the  sea. 
which  itself  is  so  grand  a  spectacle,  when  it  ar¬ 
rays  itself  as  it  were  in  vestures  of  various  col¬ 
ours,  now  running  through  every  shade  of  green, 
and  again  becoming  purple  or  blue?  Is  it  not  de¬ 
lightful  to  look  at  it  in  storm,  and  experience 
the  soothing  complacency  which  it  inspires,  by 
suggesting  that  we  ourselves  are  not  tossed  and 
shipwrecked?2  What  shall  I  say  of  the  number¬ 
less  kinds  of  food  to  alleviate  hunger,  and  the 
variety  of  seasonings  to  stimulate  appetite 
which  are  scattered  everywhere  by  nature,  and 
for  which  we  are  not  indebted  to  the  art  of  cook¬ 
ery?  How  many  natural  appliances  are  there  for 
preserving  and  restoring  health!  How  grateful 
is  the  alternation  of  day  and  night !  how  pleasant 
the  breezes  that  cool  the  air!  how  abundant  the 
supply  of  clothing  furnished  us  by  trees  and  an¬ 
imals  !  Who  can  enumerate  all  the  blessings  we 
enjoy?  If  I  were  to  attempt  to  detail  and  unfold 
only  these  few  which  I  have  indicated  in  the 
mass,  such  an  enumeration  would  fill  a  volume. 
And  all  these  are  but  the  solace  of  the  wretched 
and  condemned,  not  the  rewards  of  the  blessed. 
What  then  shall  these  rewards  be,  if  such  be  the 
blessings  of  a  condemned  state?  What  will  He 
give  to  those  whom  He  has  predestined  to  life, 
Who  has  given  such  things  even  to  those  whom 
He  has  predestined  to  death?  What  blessings 
will  He  in  the  blessed  life  shower  upon  those  for 
whom,  even  in  this  state  of  misery,  He  has  been 
willing  that  His  only-begotten  Son  should  en¬ 
dure  such  sufferings  even  to  death?  Thus  the 
apostle  reasons  concerning  those  who  are  pre¬ 
destined  to  that  kingdom :  “He  that  spared  not 
His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all, 
how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  give  us  all 
things?”3  When  this  promise  is  fulfilled,  what 
shall  we  be?  What  blessings  shall  we  receive  in 
that  kingdom,  since  already  we  have  received 
as  the  pledge  of  them  Christ’s  dying?  In  what 
condition  shall  the  spirit  of  man  be,  when  it  has 
no  longer  any  vice  at  all ;  when  it  neither  yields 
to  any,  nor  is  in  bondage  to  any,  nor  has  to  make 
war  against  any,  but  is  perfected,  and  enjoys 
undisturbed  peace  with  itself?  Shall  it  not  then 
know  all  things  with  certainty,  and  without  any 
labour  or  error,  when  unhindered  and  joyfully  it 
drinks  the  wisdom  of  God  at  the  fountain-head? 
What  shall  the  body  be,  when  it  is  in  every  re¬ 
spect  subject  to  the  spirit,  from  which  it  shall 
draw  a  life  so  sufficient,  as  to  stand  in  need  of  no 
other  nutriment?  For  it  shall  no  longer  be 

apparently  has  in  view  the  celebrated  passage  in  the 
opening  of  the  second  book  of  Lucretius. 

3Rom.  8.  32. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


612 

animal,  but  spiritual,  having  indeed  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  flesh,  but  without  any  fleshly  corrup¬ 
tion. 

Chap.  25  .Of  the  obstinacy  of  those  individuals 
who  impugn  the  resurrection  of  the  body , 
though ,  as  was  predicted ,  the  whole  world  be¬ 
lieves  it 

The  foremost  of  the  philosophers  agree  with 
us  about  the  spiritual  felicity  enjoyed  by  the 
blessed  in  the  life  to  come ;  it  is  only  the  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  flesh  they  call  in  question,  and 
with  all  their  might  deny.  But  the  mass  of  men, 
learned  and  unlearned,  the  world’s  wise  men  and 
its  fools,  have  believed,  and  have  left  in  meagre 
isolation  the  unbelievers,  and  have  turned  to 
Christ,  Who  in  His  own  resurrection  demon¬ 
strated  the  reality  of  that  which  seems  to  our 
adversaries  absurd.  For  the  world  has  believed 
this  which  God  predicted,  as  it  was  also  pre¬ 
dicted  that  the  world  would  believe — a  predic¬ 
tion  not  due  to  the  sorceries  of  Peter,1  since  it 
was  uttered  so  long  before.  He  Who  has  predict¬ 
ed  these  things,  as  I  have  already  said,  and  am 
not  ashamed  to  repeat,  is  the  God  before  Wliom 
all  other  divinities  tremble,  as  Porphyry  him¬ 
self  owns,  and  seeks  to  prove,  by  testimonies 
from  the  oracles  of  these  gods,  and  goes  so  far 
as  to  call  Him  God  the  Father  and  King.  Far  be 
it  from  us  to  interpret  these  predictions  as  they 
do  who  have  not  believed,  along  with  the  whole 
world,  in  that  which  it  was  predicted  the  world 
would  believe  in.  For  why  should  we  not  rath¬ 
er  understand  them  as  the  world  does,  whose  be¬ 
lief  was  predicted,  and  leave  that  handful  of 
unbelievers  to  their  idle  talk  and  obstinate  and 
solitary  infidelity?  For  if  they  maintain  that 
they  interpret  them  differently  only  to  avoid 
charging  Scripture  with  folly,  and  so  doing  an 
injury  to  that  God  to  Whom  they  bear  so  nota¬ 
ble  a  testimony,  is  it  not  a  much  greater  injury 
they  do  Him  when  they  say  that  His  predictions 
must  be  understood  otherwise  than  the  world 
believed  them,  though  He  Himself  praised, 
promised,  accomplished  this  belief  on  the 
world’s  part?  And  why  cannot  He  cause  the 
body  to  rise  again,  and  live  for  ever?  or  is  it  not 
to  be  believed  that  He  will  do  this,  because  it  is 
an  undesirable  thing,  and  unworthy  of  God?  Of 
His  omnipotence,  which  effects  so  many  great 
miracles,  we  have  already  said  enough.  If  they 
wish  to  know  what  the  Almighty  cannot  do,  I 
shall  tell  them  He  cannot  lie.  Let  us  therefore 
believe  what  He  can  do,  by  refusing  to  believe 
what  He  cannot  do.  Refusing  to  believe  that  He 
1See  bk.  xviii,  chap.  53. 


can  lie.  let  them  believe  that  He  will  do  what 
He  has  promised  to  do;  and  let  them  believe  it 
as  the  world  has  believed  it,  whose  faith  He  pre¬ 
dicted,  whose  faith  He  praised,  whose  faith  He 
promised,  whose  faith  He  now  points  to.  But 
how  do  they  prove  that  the  resurrection  is  an 
undesirable  thing?  There  shall  then  be  no  cor¬ 
ruption,  which  is  the  only  evil  thing  about  the 
body.  I  have  already  said  enough  about  the  or¬ 
der  of  the  elements,  and  the  other  fanciful  ob¬ 
jections  men  raise ;  and  in  the  thirteenth  book  I 
have,  in  my  own  judgment,  sufficiently  illustrat¬ 
ed  the  facility  of  movement  which  the  incor¬ 
ruptible  body  shall  enjoy,  judging  from  the  ease 
and  vigour  we  experience  even  now,  when  the 
body  is  in  good  health.  Those  who  have  either 
not  read  the  former  books,  or  wish  to  refresh 
their  memory,  may  read  them  for  themselves. 

Chap.  26.  That  the  opinion  of  Porphyry,  that 
the  soul,  in  order  to  be  blessed,  must  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  every  kind  of  body,  is  demolished 
by  Plato,  who  says  that  the  Supreme  God 
promised  the  gods  that  they  should  never  be 
ousted  from  their  bodies 
But,  say  they,  Porphyry  tells  us  that  the  soul, 
in  order  to  be  blessed,  must  escape  connexion 
with  every  kind  of  body.  It  does  not  avail,  there¬ 
fore,  to  say  that  the  future  body  shall  be  in¬ 
corruptible,  if  the  soul  cannot  be  blessed  till  de¬ 
livered  from  every  kind  of  body.  But  in  the 
book  above  mentioned  I  have  already  sufficient¬ 
ly  discussed  this.  This  one  thing  only  will  I  re¬ 
peat — let  Plato,  their  master,  correct  his  writ¬ 
ings,  and  say  that  their  gods,  in  order  to  be 
blessed,  must  quit  their  bodies,  or,  in  other 
words,  die ;  for  he  said  that  they  were  shut  up  in 
celestial  bodies,  and  that,  nevertheless,  the  God 
Who  made  them  promised  them  immortality — 
that  is  to  say,  an  eternal  tenure  of  these  same 
bodies,  such  as  was  not  provided  for  them  nat¬ 
urally,  but  only  by  the  further  intervention  of 
His  will,  that  thus  they  might  be  assured  of  fe¬ 
licity.  In  this  he  obviously  overturns  their  asser¬ 
tion  that  the  resurrection  of  the  body  cannot  be 
believed  because  it  is  impossible ;  for,  according 
to  him,  when  the  uncreated  God  promised  im¬ 
mortality  to  the  created  gods,  He  expressly  said 
that  He  would  do  what  was  impossible.  For 
Plato  tells  us  that  He  said,  “As  ye  have  had  a 
beginning,  so  you  cannot  be  immortal  and  in¬ 
corruptible  ;  yet  ye  shall  not  decay,  nor  shall  any 
fate  destroy  you  or  prove  stronger  than  my  will, 
which  more  effectually  binds  you  to  immortality 
than  the  bond  of  your  nature  keeps  you  from 
it.”  If  they  who  hear  these  words  have,  we  do 


THE  CITY  OF  GOD  XXII.  25-28  613 


not  say  understanding,  but  ears,  they  cannot 
doubt  that  Plato  believed  that  God  promised  to 
the  gods  He  had  made  that  He  would  effect  an 
impossibility.  For  He  Who  says,  “Ye  cannot  be 
immortal,  but  by  my  will  ye  shall  be  immortal,” 
what  else  does  He  say  than  this,  “I  shall  make 
you  what  ye  cannot  be”?  The  body,  therefore, 
shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  immortal,  spiritual, 
by  Him  Who,  according  to  Plato,  has  promised 
to  do  that  which  is  impossible.  Why  then  do 
they  still  exclaim  that  this  which  God  has  prom¬ 
ised,  which  the  world  has  believed  on  God’s 
promise  as  was  predicted,  is  an  impossibility? 
For  what  we  say  is,  that  the  God  Who,  even  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  does  impossible  things,  will  do 
this.  It  is  not,  then,  necessary  to  the  blessedness 
of  the  soul  that  it  be  detached  from  a  body  of 
any  kind  whatever,  but  that  it  receive  an  in¬ 
corruptible  body.  And  in  what  incorruptible 
body  will  they  more  suitably  rejoice  than  in 
that  in  which  they  groaned  when  it  was  corrup¬ 
tible?  For  thus  they  shall  not  feel  that  dire 
craving  which  Virgil,  in  imitation  of  Plato,  has 
ascribed  to  them  when  he  says  that  they  wish 
to  return  again  to  their  bodies.1  They  shall  not, 
I  say,  feel  this  desire  to  return  to  their  bodies, 
since  they  shall  have  those  bodies  to  which  a  re¬ 
turn  was  desired,  and  shall,  indeed,  be  in  such 
thorough  possession  of  them  that  they  shall  nev¬ 
er  lose  them  even  for  the  briefest  moment,  nor 
ever  lay  them  down  in  death. 

Chap.  27.  Of  the  apparently  conflicting  opinions 
of  Plato  and  Porphyry ,  which  woidd  have 
conducted  them  both  to  the  truth  if  they 
could  have  yielded  to  one  another 
Statements  were  made  by  Plato  and  Por¬ 
phyry  singly,  which  if  they  could  have  seen  their 
way  to  hold  in  common,  they  might  possibly 
have  become  Christians.  Plato  said  that  souls 
could  not  exist  eternally  without  bodies ;  for  it 
was  on  this  account,  he  said,  that  the  souls  even 
of  wise  men  must  some  time  or  other  return  to 
their  bodies.  Porphyry,  again,  said  that  the  puri¬ 
fied  sou},  when  it  has  returned  to  the  Father, 
shall  never  return  to  the  ills  of  this  world.  Con¬ 
sequently,  if  Plato  had  communicated  to  Por¬ 
phyry  that  which  he  saw  to  be  true,  that  souls, 
though  perfectly  purified  and  belonging  to  the 
wise  and  righteous,  must  return  to  human  bod¬ 
ies;  and  if  Porphyry,  again,  had  imparted  to 
Plato  the  truth  which  he  saw,  that  holy  souls 
shall  never  return  to  the  miseries  of  a  corrupti¬ 
ble  body,  so  that  they  should  not  have  each  held 
only  his  own  opinion,  but  should  both  have  held 
ljEneid ,  bk.  vi.  751. 


both  truths,  I  think  they  would  have  seen  that 
it  follows  that  the  souls  return  to  their  bodies, 
and  also  that  these  bodies  shall  be  such  as  to  af¬ 
ford  them  a  blessed  and  immortal  life.  For,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  even  holy  souls  shall  return  to 
the  body;  according  to  Porphyry,  holy  souls 
shall  not  return  to  the  ills  of  this  world.  Let 
Porphyry  then  say  with  Plato,  “They  shall  re¬ 
turn  to  the  body” ;  let  Plato  say  with  Porphyry, 
“They  shall  not  return  to  their  old  misery” :  and 
they  will  agree  that  they  return  to  bodies  in 
which  they  shall  suffer  no  more.  And  this  is 
nothing  else  than  what  God  has  promised — that 
He  will  give  eternal  felicity  to  souls  joined  to 
their  own  bodies.  For  this,  I  presume,  both  of 
them  would  readily  concede,  that  if  the  souls  of 
the  saints  are  to  be  reunited  to  bodies,  it  shall 
be  to  their  own  bodies,  in  which  they  have  en¬ 
dured  the  miseries  of  this  life,  and  in  which,  to 
escape  these  miseries,  they  served  God  with  pi¬ 
ety  and  fidelity. 

Chap.  28.  What  Plato  or  Labeo,  or  even  Varro, 
might  have  contributed  to  the  true  faith  of 
the  resurrection,  if  they  had  adopted  one  an¬ 
other’s  opinions  into  one  scheme 
Some  Christians,  who  have  a  liking  for  Plato 
on  account  of  his  magnificent  style  and  the 
truths  which  he  now  and  then  uttered,  say  that 
he  even  held  an  opinion  similar  to  our  own  re¬ 
garding  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Cicero, 
however,  alluding  to  this  in  his  Republic,  asserts 
that  Plato  meant  it  rather  as  a  playful  fancy 
than  as  a  reality;  for  he  introduces  a  man2  who 
had  come  to  life  again,  and  gave  a  narrative  of 
his  experience  in  corroboration  of  the  doctrines 
of  Plato.  Labeo,  too,  says  that  two  men  died  on 
one  day,  and  met  at  a  cross-road,  and  that,  be¬ 
ing  afterwards  ordered  to  return  to  their  bodies, 
they  agreed  to  be  friends  for  life,  and  were  so 
till  they  died  again.  But  the  resurrection  which 
these  writers  instance  resembles  that  of  those 
persons  whom  we  have  ourselves  known  to  rise 
again,  and  who  came  back  indeed  to  this  life, 
but  not  so  as  never  to  die  again.  Marcus  Varro, 
however,  in  his  work  On  the  Origin  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  People,  records  something  more  remarka¬ 
ble;  I  think  his  own  words  should  be  given. 
“Certain  astrologers,”  he  says,  “have  written 
that  men  are  destined  to  a  new  birth,  which  the 
Greeks  call  palingenesy .  This  will  take  place  af¬ 
ter  four  hundred  and  forty  years  have  elapsed; 
and  then  the  same  soul  and  the  same  body, 
which  were  formerly  united  in  the  person,  shall 
again  be  reunited.”  This  Varro,  indeed,  or  those 
2In  the  Republic ,  bk.  x. 


6i4  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


nameless  astrologers — for  he  does  not  give  us 
the  names  of  the  men  whose  statement  he  cites 
— have  affirmed  what  is  indeed  not  altogether 
true;  for  once  the  souls  have  returned  to  the 
bodies  they  wore,  they  shall  never  afterwards 
leave  them.  Yet  what  they  say  upsets  and  de¬ 
molishes  much  of  that  idle  talk  of  our  adver¬ 
saries  about  the  impossibility  of  the  resurrec¬ 
tion.  For  those  who  have  been  or  are  of  this 
opinion,  have  not  thought  it  possible  that  bod¬ 
ies  which  have  dissolved  into  air,  or  dust,  or 
ashes,  or  water,  or  into  the  bodies  of  the  beasts 
or  even  of  the  men  that  fed  on  them,  should  be 
restored  again  to  that  which  they  formerly  were. 
And  therefore,  if  Plato  and  Porphyry,  or  rather, 
if  their  disciples  now  living,  agree  with  us  that 
holy  souls  shall  return  to  the  body,  as  Plato  says, 
and  that,  nevertheless,  they  shall  not  return  to 
misery,  as  Porphyry  maintains — if  they  accept 
the  consequence  of  these  two  propositions  which 
is  taught  by  the  Christian  faith,  that  they  shall 
receive  bodies  in  which  they  may  live  eternally 
without  suffering  any  misery — let  them  also 
adopt  from  Varro  the  opinion  that  they  shall  re¬ 
turn  to  the  same  bodies  as  they  were  formerly 
in,  and  thus  the  whole  question  of  the  eternal 
resurrection  of  the  body  shall  be  resolved  out  of 
their  own  mouths. 

Chap.  29.  Of  the  beatific  vision 
And  now  let  us  consider,  with  such  ability  as 
God  may  vouchsafe,  how  the  saints  shall  be  em¬ 
ployed  when  they  are  clothed  in  immortal  and 
spiritual  bodies,  and  when  the  flesh  shall  live  no 
longer  in  a  fleshly  but  a  spiritual  fashion.  And 
indeed,  to  tell  the  truth,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  under¬ 
stand  the  nature  of  that  employment,  or,  shall 
I  rather  say,  repose  and  ease,  for  it  has  never 
come  within  the  range  of  my  bodily  senses.  And 
if  I  should  speak  of  my  mind  or  understanding, 
what  is  our  understanding  in  comparison  of  its 
excellence?  For  then  shall  be  that  “peace  of  God 
which,”  as  the  apostle  says,  “passeth  all  under¬ 
standing”  1 — that  is  to  say,  all  human,  and  per¬ 
haps  all  angelic  understanding,  but  certainly  not 
the  divine.  That  it  passeth  ours  there  is  no 
doubt;  but  if  it  passeth  that  of  the  angels — and 
he  who  says  <(all  understanding”  seems  to  make 
no  exception  in  their  favour — then  we  must  un¬ 
derstand  him  to  mean  that  neither  we  nor  the 
angels  can  understand,  as  God  understands,  the 
peace  which  God  Himself  enjoys.  Doubtless 
this  passeth  all  understanding  but  His  own.  But 
as  we  shall  one  day  be  made  to  participate,  ac¬ 
cording  to  our  slender  capacity,  in  His  peace, 
1Phil-  4.  7- 


both  in  ourselves,  and  with  our  neighbour,  and 
with  God  our  chief  good,  in  this  respect  the  an¬ 
gels  understand  the  peace  of  God  in  their  own 
measure,  and  men  too,  though  now  far  behind 
them,  whatever  spiritual  advance  they  have 
made.  For  we  must  remember  how  great  a  man 
he  was  who  said,  “We  know  in  part,  and  we 
prophesy  in  part,  until  that  which  is  perfect  is 
come”;2  and  “Now  we  see  through  a  glass,  dark¬ 
ly;  but  then  face  to  face.”  3  Such  also  is  now  the 
vision  of  the  holy  angels,  who  are  also  called  our 
angels,  because  we,  being  rescued  out  of  the 
power  of  darkness,  and  receiving  the  earnest  of 
the  Spirit,  are  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  and  already  begin  to  belong  to  those  an¬ 
gels  with  whom  we  shall  enjoy  that  holy  and 
most  delightful  city  of  God  of  which  we  have 
now  written  so  much.  Thus,  then,  the  angels  of 
God  are  our  angels,  as  Christ  is  God’s  and  also 
ours.  They  are  God’s,  because  they  have  not 
abandoned  Him ;  they  are  ours,  because  we  are 
their  fellow-citizens.  The  Lord  Jesus  also  said, 
“See  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones: 
for  I  say  unto  you,  That  in  heaven  their  angels 
do  always  see  the  face  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven.”  4  As,  then,  they  see,  so  shall  we  also 
see ;  but  not  yet  do  we  thus  see.  Wherefore  the 
apostle  uses  the  words  cited  a  little  ago,  “Now 
we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly;  but  then  face  to 
face.”  This  vision  is  reserved  as  the  reward  of 
our  faith;  and  of  it  the  Apostle  John  also  says, 
“When  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him, 
for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.”5  By  “the  face” 
of  God  we  are  to  understand  His  manifestation, 
and  not  a  part  of  the  body  similar  to  that  which 
in  our  bodies  we  call  by  that  name. 

And  so,  when  I  am  asked  how  the  saints  shall 
be  employed  in  that  spiritual  body,  I  do  not  say 
what  I  see,  but  I  say  what  I  believe,  according 
to  that  which  I  read  in  the  psalm,  “I  believed, 
therefore  have  I  spoken.”6  I  say,  then,  they 
shall  in  the  body  see  God;  but  whether  they 
shall  see  Him  by  means  of  the  body,  as  now  we 
see  the  sun.  moon,  stars,  sea,  earth,  and  all  that 
is  in  it.  that  is  a  difficult  question.  For  it  is  hard 
to  say  that  the  saints  shall  then  have  such  bodies 
that  they  shall  not  be  able  to  shut  and  open  their 
eyes  as  they  please ;  while  it  is  harder  still  to  say 
that  every  one  who  shuts  his  eyes  shall  lose  the 
vision  of  God.  For  if  the  prophet  Elisha,  though 
at  a  distance,  saw  his  servant  Gehazi,  who 
thought  that  his  wickedness  would  escape  his 
master’s  observation  and  accepted  gifts  from 
Naaman  the  Syrian,  whom  the  prophet  had 

2I  Cor.  13.  9,  10.  3I  Cor.  13.  12.  4Matt.  18.  10. 

6I  John,  3.  2.  6Ps.  1 16.  10. 


THE  CITY  OF 

cleansed  from  his  foul  leprosy,  how  much  more 
shall  the  saints  in  the  spiritual  body  see  all 
things,  not  only  though  their  eyes  be  shut,  but 
though  they  themselves  be  at  a  great  distance? 
For  then  shall  be  “that  which  is  perfect,”  of 
which  the  apostle  says,  “We  know  in  part,  and 
we  prophesy  in  part;  but  when  that  which  is 
perfect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  shall 
be  done  away.”  Then,  that  he  may  illustrate  as 
well  as  possible,  by  a  simile,  how  superior  the 
future  life  is  to  the  life  now  lived,  not  only  by 
ordinary  men.  but  even  by  the  foremost  of  the 
saints,  he  says,  “When  I  was  a  child.  I  under¬ 
stood  as  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  thought  as 
a  child;  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away 
childish  things.  Now  we  see  through  a  glass, 
darkly;  but  then  face  to  face:  now  I  know  in 
part;  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am 
known.”  1  If,  then,  even  in  this  life,  in  which  the 
prophetic  power  of  remarkable  men  is  no  more 
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  vision  of  the  fu¬ 
ture  life  than  childhood  is  to  manhood.  Elisha, 
though  distant  from  his  servant,  saw  him  ac¬ 
cepting  gifts,  shall  we  say  that  when  that  which 
is  perfect  is  come,  and  the  corruptible  body  no 
longer  oppresses  the  soul,  but  is  incorruptible 
and  offers  no  impediment  to  it,  the  saints  shall 
need  bodily  eyes  to  see,  though  Elisha  had  no 
need  of  them  to  see  his  servant?  For,  following 
the  Septuagint  version,  these  are  the  prophet’s 
words:  “Did  not  my  heart  go  with  thee,  when 
the  man  came  out  of  his  chariot  to  meet  thee, 
and  thou  tookedst  his  gifts?”  2  Or,  as  the  presby¬ 
ter  Jerome  rendered  it  from  the  Hebrew,  “Was 
not  my  heart  present  when  the  man  turned  from 
his  chariot  to  meet  thee?”  The  prophet  said 
that  he  saw  this  with  his  heart,  miraculously 
aided  by  God,  as  no  one  can  doubt.  But  how 
much  more  abundantly  shall  the  saints  enjoy 
this  gift  when  God  shall  be  all  in  all?  Neverthe¬ 
less  the  bodily  eyes  also  shall  have  their  office 
and  their  place,  and  shall  be  used  by  the  spirit 
through  the  spiritual  body.'For  the  prophet  did 
not  forego  the  use  of  his  eyes  for  seeing  what 
was  befpre  them,  though  he  did  not  need  them 
to  see  his  absent  servant,  and  though  he  could 
have  seen  these  present  objects  in  spirit,  and 
with  his  eyes  shut,  as  he  saw  things  far  distant 
in  a  place  where  he  himself  was  not.  Far  be  it, 
then,  from  us  to  say  that  in  the  life  to  come  the 
saints  shall  not  see  God  when  their  eyes  are 
shut,  since  they  shall  always  see  Him  with  the 
spirit. 

But  the  question  arises,  whether,  when  their 
eyes  are  open,  they  shall  see  Him  with  the  bod- 
*1  Cor.  13.  ii,  12.  2II  Kings,  5.  26. 


GOD  XXII.  29  615 

ily  eye?  If  the  eyes  of  the  spiritual  body  have 
no  more  power  than  the  eyes  which  we  now 
possess,  manifestly  God  cannot  be  seen  with 
them.  They  must  be  of  a  very  different  power  if 
they  can  look  upon  that  incorporeal  nature 
which  is  not  contained  in  any  place,  but  is  all  in 
every  place.  For  though  we  say  that  God  is  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  as  He  Himself  says  by  the 
prophet,  “I  fill  heaven  and  earth,”  3  we  do  not 
mean  that  there  is  one  part  of  God  in  heaven 
and  another  part  on  earth ;  but  He  is  all  in  heav¬ 
en  and  all  on  earth,  not  at  alternate  intervals  of 
time,  but  both  at  once,  as  no  bodily  nature  can 
be.  The  eye,  then,  shall  have  a  vastly  superior 
power — the  power  not  of  keen  sight,  such  as  is 
ascribed  to  serpents  or  eagles,  for  however  keen¬ 
ly  these  animals  see,  they  can  discern  nothing 
but  bodily  substances — but  the  power  of  seeing 
things  incorporeal.  Possibly  it  was  this  great 
power  of  vision  which  was  temporarily  commu¬ 
nicated  to  the  eyes  of  the  holy  Job  while  yet  in 
this  mortal  body,  when  he  says  to  God.  “I  have 
heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but 
now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee:  wherefore  I  abhor 
myself,  and  melt  away,  and  count  myself  dust 
and  ashes” ; 4  although  there  is  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  understand  this  of  the  eye  of  the 
heart,  of  which  the  apostle  says,  “Having  the 
eyes  of  your  heart  illuminated.” 5  But  that  God 
shall  be  seen  with  these  eyes  no  Christian  doubts 
who  believingly  accepts  what  our  God  and  Mas¬ 
ter  says,  “Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they 
shall  see  God.”  6  But  whether  in  the  future  life 
God  shall  also  be  seen  with  the  bodily  eye,  this 
is  now  our  question. 

The  expression  of  Scripture,  “And  all  flesh 
shall  see  the  salvation  of  God,”  7  may  without 
difficulty  be  understood  as  if  it  were  said,  “And 
every  man  shall  see  the  Christ  of  God.”  And  He 
certainly  was  seen  in  the  body,  and  shall  be  seen 
in  the  body  when  He  judges  quick  and  dead. 
And  that  Christ  is  the  salvation  of  God,  many 
other  passages  of  Scripture  witness,  but  espe¬ 
cially  the  words  of  the  venerable  Simeon,  who, 
when  he  had  received  into  his  hands  the  infant 
Christ,  said,  “Now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  de¬ 
part  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word:  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation.”8  As  for  the 
words  of  the  above-mentioned  Job,  as  they  are 
found  in  the  Hebrew  manuscripts,  “And  in  my 
flesh  I  shall  see  God,” 9  no  doubt  they  were  a 
prophecy  of  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh ;  yet  he 
does  not  say  “by  the  flesh.”  And  indeed,  if  he 
had  said  this,  it  would  still  be  possible  that 

3Jer.  23.  24.  4Job,  42.  5,  6.  5Eph.  1.  18.  6Matt.  5.  8 

7Luke,  3.  6  8Luke,  2.  29,  30.  9Job,  19.  26. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


616 

Christ  was  meant  by  “God”;  for  Christ  shall  be 
seen  by  the  flesh  in  the  flesh.  But  even  under¬ 
standing  it  of  God,  it  is  only  equivalent  to  say¬ 
ing,  I  shall  be  in  the  flesh  when  I  see  God.  Then 
the  apostle’s  expression,  “face  to  face,”  1  does 
not  oblige  us  to  believe  that  we  shall  see  God  by 
the  bodily  face  in  which  are  the  eyes  of  the 
body,  for  we  shall  see  Him  without  intermission 
in  spirit.  And  if  the  apostle  had  not  referred  to 
the  face  of  the  inner  man.  he  would  not  have 
said,  “But  we,  with  unveiled  face  beholding  as 
in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  transformed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by 
the  spirit  of  the  Lord.”  2  In  the  same  sense  we 
understand  what  the  Psalmist  sings,  “Draw  near 
unto  Him,  and  be  enlightened;  and  your  faces 
shall  not  be  ashamed.”  3  For  it  is  by  faith  we 
draw  near  to  God,  and  faith  is  an  act  of  the  spir¬ 
it,  not  of  the  body.  But  as  we  do  not  know  what 
degree  of  perfection  the  spiritual  body  shall  at¬ 
tain — for  here  we  speak  of  a  matter  of  which  we 
have  no  experience,  and  upon  which  the  author¬ 
ity  of  Scripture  does  not  definitely  pronounce — 
it  is  necessary  that  the  words  of  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  be  illustrated  in  us :  “The  thoughts  of 
mortal  men  are  timid,  and  our  forecastings  un¬ 
certain.”  4 

For  if  that  reasoning  of  the  philosophers,  by 
which  they  attempt  to  make  out  that  intelligi¬ 
ble  or  mental  objects  are  so  seen  by  the  mind, 
and  sensible  or  bodily  objects  so  seen  by  the 
body,  that  the  former  cannot  be  discerned  by 
the  mind  through  the  body,  nor  the  latter  by  the 
mind  itself  without  the  body — if  this  reasoning 
were  trustworthy,  then  it  would  certainly  follow 
that  God  could  not  be  seen  by  the  eye  even  of  a 
spiritual  body.  But  this  reasoning  is  exploded 
both  by  true  reason  and  by  prophetic  authority. 
For  who  is  so  little  acquainted  with  the  truth  as 
to  say  that  God  has  no  cognizance  of  sensible 
objects?  Has  He  therefore  a  body,  the  eyes  of 
which  give  Him  this  knowledge?  Moreover, 
what  we  have  just  been  relating  of  the  prophet 
Elisha,  does  this  not  sufficiently  show  that  bod¬ 
ily  things  can  be  discerned  by  the  spirit  without 
the  help  of  the  body?  For  when  that  servant  re¬ 
ceived  the  gifts,  certainly  this  was  a  bodily  or 
material  transaction,  yet  the  prophet  saw  it  not 
by  the  body,  but  by  the  spirit.  As,  therefore,  it 
is  agreed  that  bodies  are  seen  by  the  spirit,  what 
if  the  power  of  the  spiritual  body  shall  be  so 
great  that  spirit  also  is  seen  by  the  body?  For 
God  is  a  spirit.  Besides,  each  man  recognizes  his 
own  life — that  life  by  which  he  now  lives  in  the 

XI  Cor.  13.  12.  2II  Cor.  3.  18.  3Ps.  34.  5. 

4Wisd.  9.  14. 


body,  and  which  vivifies  these  earthly  members 
and  causes  them  to  grow — by  an  interior  sense, 
and  not  by  his  bodily  eye;  but  the  life  of  other 
men,  though  it  is  invisible,  he  sees  with  the  bod¬ 
ily  eye.  For  how  do  we  distinguish  between  liv¬ 
ing  and  dead  bodies,  except  by  seeing  at  once 
both  the  body  and  the  life  which  we  cannot  see 
save  by  the  eye?  But  a  life  without  a  body  we 
cannot  see  thus. 

Wherefore  it  may  very  well  be,  and  it  is  thor¬ 
oughly  credible,  that  we  shall  in  the  future 
world  see  the  material  forms  of  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth  in  such  a  way  that  we  shall 
most  distinctly  recognize  God  everywhere  pres¬ 
ent  and  governing  all  things,  material  as  well  as 
spiritual,  and  shall  see  Him,  not  as  now  we  un¬ 
derstand  the  invisible  things  of  God,  by  the 
things  which  are  made,5  and  see  Him  darkly,  as 
in  a  mirror,  and  in  part,  and  rather  by  faith  than 
by  bodily  vision  of  material  appearances,  but 
by  means  of  the  bodies  we  shall  wear  and  which 
we  shall  see  wherever  we  turn  our  eyes.  As  we 
do  not  believe,  but  see  that  the  living  men 
around  us  who  are  exercising  vital  functions  are 
alive,  though  we  cannot  see  their  life  without 
their  bodies,  but  see  it  most  distinctly  by  means 
of  their  bodies,  so,  wherever  we  shall  look  with 
those  spiritual  eyes  of  our  future  bodies,  we 
shall  then,  too,  by  means  of  bodily  substances 
behold  God,  though  a  spirit,  ruling  all  things. 
Either,  therefore,  the  eyes  shall  possess  some 
quality  similar  to  that  of  the  mind,  by  which 
they  may  be  able  to  discern  spiritual  things,  and 
among  these  God — a  supposition  for  which  it  is 
difficult  or  even  impossible  to  find  any  support 
in  Scripture— or,  which  is  more  easy  to  compre¬ 
hend,  God  will  be  so  known  by  us,  and  shall  be 
so  much  before  us,  that  we  shall  see  Him  by  the 
spirit  in  ourselves,  in  one  another,  in  Himself, 
in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  in  every 
created  thing  which  shall  then  exist;  and  also 
by  the  body  we  shall  see  Him  in  every  body 
which  the  keen  vision  of  the  eye  of  the  spiritual 
body  shall  reach.  Our  thoughts  also  shall  be  vis¬ 
ible  to  all,  for  then  shall  be  fulfilled  the  words 
of  the  apostle,  “Judge  nothing  before  the  time, 
until  the  Lord  come,  who  both  will  bring  to  light 
the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make 
manifest  the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  and  then 
shall  every  one  have  praise  of  God.”  6 

Chap.  30.  Of  the  eternal  felicity  of  the  city  of 

God,  and  of  the  perpetual  Sabbath 

How  great  shall  be  that  felicity,  which  shall 
be  tainted  with  no  evil,  which  shall  lack  no 

6Rom.  1.  20.  6I  Cor.  4.  5. 


THE  CITY  OF 

good,  and  which  shall  afford  leisure  for  the 
praises  of  God,  Who  shall  be  all  in  all!  For  I 
know  not  what  other  employment  there  can  be 
where  no  lassitude  shall  slacken  activity,  nor 
any  want  stimulate  to  labour.  I  am  admonished 
also  by  the  sacred  song,  in  which  I  read  or  hear 
the  words,  “Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  Thy 
house,  0  Lord;  they  will  be  still  praising  Thee.”1 
All  the  members  and  organs  of  the  incorrupti¬ 
ble  body,  which  now  we  see  to  be  suited  to  vari¬ 
ous  necessary  uses,  shall  contribute  to  the  prais¬ 
es  of  God;  for  in  that  life  necessity  shall  have 
no  place,  but  full,  certain,  secure,  everlasting 
felicity.  For  all  those  parts2  of  the  bodily  har¬ 
mony,  which  are  distributed  through  the  whole 
body,  within  and  without,  and  of  which  I  have 
just  been  saying  that  they  at  present  elude  our 
observation,  shall  then  be  discerned;  and,  along 
with  the  other  great  and  marvellous  discoveries 
which  shall  then  kindle  rational  minds  in  praise 
of  the  great  Artificer,  there  shall  be  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  a  beauty  which  appeals  to  the  reason. 
What  power  of  movement  such  bodies  shall 
possess,  I  have  not  the  audacity  rashly  to  de¬ 
fine,  as  I  have  not  the  ability  to  conceive.  Nev¬ 
ertheless  I  will  say  that  in  any  case,  both  in  mo¬ 
tion  and  at  rest,  they  shall  be,  as  in  their  ap¬ 
pearance,  seemly;  for  into  that  state  nothing 
which  is  unseemly  shall  be  admitted.  One  thing 
is  certain,  the  body  shall  forthwith  be  wherever 
the  spirit  wills,  and  the  spirit  shall  will  nothing 
which  is  unbecoming  either  to  the  spirit  or  to 
the  body.  True  honour  shall  be  there,  for  it  shall 
be  denied  to  none  who  is  worthy,  nor  yielded  to 
any  unworthy ;  neither  shall  any  unworthy  per¬ 
son  so  much  as  sue  for  it,  for  none  but  the  wor¬ 
thy  shall  be  there.  True  peace  shall  be  there, 
where  no  one  shall  suffer  opposition  either  from 
himself  or  any  other.  God  Himself,  Who  is  the 
Author  of  virtue,  shall  there  be  its  reward;  for, 
as  there  is  nothing  greater  or  better,  He  has 
promised  Himself.  What  else  was  meant  by  His 
word  through  the  prophet,  “I  will  be  your  God, 
and  ye  shall  be  my  people,”3  than,  “I  shall  be 
their  satisfaction,  I  shall  be  all  that  men  hon¬ 
ourably  desire” — life,  and  health,  and  nourish¬ 
ment,  and  plenty,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and 
peace,  and  all  good  things?  This,  too,  is  the  right 
interpretation  of  the  saying  of  the  apostle, 
“That  God  may  be  all  in  all.”  4  He  shall  be  the 
end  of  our  desires  who  shall  be  seen  without  end, 
loved  without  cloy,  praised  without  weariness. 
This  outgoing  of  affection,  this  employment, 
shall  certainly  be,  like  eternal  life  itself,  com¬ 
mon  to  all. 

xPs.  84.  4.  2Numbers.  3Lev.  26.  12.  4I  Cor.  15.  28. 


GOD  XXII.  30  617 

But  who  can  conceive,  not  to  say  describe, 
what  degrees  of  honour  and  glory  shall  be 
awarded  to  the  various  degrees  of  merit?  Yet 
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  there  shall  be  degrees. 
And  in  that  blessed  city  there  shall  be  this  great 
blessing,  that  no  inferior  shall  envy  any  superi¬ 
or,  as  now  the  archangels  are  not  envied  by  the 
angels,  because  no  one  will  wish  to  be  what  he 
has  not  received,  though  bound  in  strictest  con¬ 
cord  with  him  who  has  received;  as  in  the  body 
the  finger  does  not  seek  to  be  the  eye,  though 
both  members  are  harmoniously  included  in  the 
complete  structure  of  the  body.  And  thus,  along 
with  his  gift,  greater  or  less,  each  shall  receive 
this  further  gift  of  contentment  to  desire  no 
more  than  he  has. 

Neither  are  we  to  suppose  that,  because  sin 
shall  have  no  power  to  delight  them,  free  will 
must  be  withdrawn.  It  will,  on  the  contrary,  be 
all  the  more  truly  free,  because  set  free  from 
delight  in  sinning  to  take  unfailing  delight  in 
not  sinning.  For  the  first  freedom  of  will  which 
man  received  when  he  was  created  upright  con¬ 
sisted  in  an  ability  not  to  sin,  but  also  in  an  abil¬ 
ity  to  sin ;  whereas  this  last  freedom  of  will  shall 
be  superior,  inasmuch  as  it  shall  not  be  able  to 
sin.  This,  indeed,  shall  not  be  a  natural  ability, 
but  the  gift  of  God.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  be 
God,  another  thing  to  be  a  partaker  of  God.  God 
by  nature  cannot  sin,  but  the  partaker  of  God 
receives  this  inability  from  God.  And  in  this  di¬ 
vine  gift  there  was  to  be  observed  this  grada¬ 
tion,  that  man  should  first  receive  a  free  will  by 
which  he  was  able  not  to  sin,  and  at  last  a  free 
will  by  which  he  was  not  able  to  sin — the  former 
being  adapted  to  the  acquiring  of  merit,  the  lat¬ 
ter  to  the  enjoying  of  the  reward.  But  the  nature 
thus  constituted,  having  sinned  when  it  had  the 
ability  to  do  so,  it  is  by  a  more  abundant  grace 
that  it  is  delivered  so  as  to  reach  that  freedom  in 
which  it  cannot  sin.  For  as  the  first  immortality 
which  Adam  lost  by  sinning  consisted  in  his  be¬ 
ing  able  not  to  die,  while  the  last  shall  consist  in 
his  not  being  able  to  die;  so  the  first  free  will 
consisted  in  his  being  able  not  to  sin,  the  last  in 
his  not  being  able  to  sin.  And  thus  piety  and 
justice  shall  be  as  indefeasible  as  happiness.  For 
certainly  by  sinning  we  lost  both  piety  and  hap¬ 
piness;  but  when  we  lost  happiness,  we  did  not 
lose  the  love  of  it.  Are  we  to  say  that  God  Him¬ 
self  is  not  free  because  He  cannot  sin?  In  that 
city,  then,  there  shall  be  free  will,  one  in  all  the 
citizens,  and  indivisible  in  each,  delivered  from 
all  ill,  filled  with  all  good,  enjoying  indefeasibly 
the  delights  of  eternal  joys,  oblivious  of  sins, 
oblivious  of  sufferings,  and  yet  not  so  oblivious 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


618 

of  its  deliverance  as  to  be  ungrateful  to  its  De¬ 
liverer. 

The  soul,  then,  shall  have  an  intellectual  re¬ 
membrance  of  its  past  ills;  but,  so  far  as  re¬ 
gards  sensible  experience,  they  shall  be  quite 
forgotten.  For  a  skillful  physician  knows,  in¬ 
deed.  professionally  almost  all  diseases;  but  ex¬ 
perimentally  he  is  ignorant  of  a  great  number 
which  he  himself  has  never  suffered  from.  As, 
therefore,  there  are  two  ways  of  knowing  evil 
things — one  by  mental  insight,  the  other  by  sen¬ 
sible  experience,  for  it  is  one  thing  to  under¬ 
stand  all  vices  by  the  wisdom  of  a  cultivated 
mind,  another  to  understand  them  by  the  fool¬ 
ishness  of  an  abandoned  life — so  also  there  are 
two  ways  of  forgetting  evils.  For  a  well-instruct¬ 
ed  and  learned  man  forgets  them  one  way,  and 
he  who  has  experimentally  suffered  from  them 
forgets  them  another — the  former  by  neglecting 
what  he  has  learned,  the  latter  by  escaping  what 
he  has  suffered.  And  in  this  latter  way  the  saints 
shall  forget  their  past  ills,  for  they  shall  have  so 
thoroughly  escaped  them  all  that  they  shall  be 
quite  blotted  out  of  their  experience.  But  their 
intellectual  knowledge,  which  shall  be  great, 
shall  keep  them  acquainted  not  only  with  their 
own  past  woes,  but  with  the  eternal  sufferings  of 
the  lost.  For  if  they  were  not  to  know  that  they 
had  been  miserable,  how  could  they,  as  the 
Psalmist  says,  for  ever  sing  the  mercies  of  God? 
Certainly  that  city  shall  have  no  greater  joy 
than  the  celebration  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  Who 
redeemed  us  by  His  blood.  There  shall  be  ac¬ 
complished  the  words  of  the  psalm,  “Be  still, 
and  know  that  I  am  God.”  1  There  shall  be  the 
great  Sabbath  which  has  no  evening,  which  God 
celebrated  among  His  first  works,  as  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “And  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from 
all  His  works  which  He  had  made.  And  God 
blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it;  be¬ 
cause  that  in  it  He  had  rested  from  all  His  work 
which  God  began  to  make.”  2  For  we  shall  our¬ 
selves  be  the  seventh  day,  when  we  shall  be 
filled  and  replenished  with  God’s  blessing  and 
sanctification.  There  shall  we  be  still,  and  know 
that  He  is  God;  that  He  is  that  which  we  our¬ 
selves  aspired  to  be  when  we  fell  away  from 
Him,  and  listened  to  the  voice  of  the  seducer, 
“Ye  shall  be  as  gods,”  3  and  so  abandoned  God, 
Who  would  have  made  us  as  gods,  not  by  desert¬ 
ing  Him,  but  by  participating  in  Him.  For  with¬ 
out  Him  what  have  we  accomplished,  save  to 
perish  in  His  anger?  But  when  we  are  restored 
by  Him  and  perfected  with  greater  grace,  we 

1Ps.  46.  10.  2Gen.  2.  2,  3.  3Gen.  3.  5. 


shall  have  eternal  leisure  to  see  that  He  is  God, 
for  we  shall  be  full  of  Him  when  He  shall  be  all 
in  all.  For  even  our  good  works,  when  they  are 
understood  to  be  rather  His  than  ours,  are  im¬ 
puted  to  us  that  we  may  enjoy  this  Sabbath  rest. 
For  if  we  attribute  them  to  ourselves,  they  shall 
be  servile;  for  it  is  said  of  the  Sabbath,  “Ye 
shall  do  no  servile  work  in  it.” 4  Wherefore  also 
it  is  said  by  Ezekiel  the  prophet,  “And  I  gave 
them  my  Sabbaths  to  be  a  sign  between  me  and 
them,  that  they  might  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
who  sanctify  them.”5  This  knowledge  shall  be 
perfected  when  we  shall  be  perfectly  at  rest,  and 
shall  perfectly  know  that  He  is  God. 

This  Sabbath  shall  appear  still  more  clearly 
if  we  count  the  ages  as  days,  in  accordance  with 
the  periods  of  time  defined  in  Scripture,  for  that 
period  will  be  found  to  be  the  seventh.  The  first 
age,  as  the  first  day,  extends  from  Adam  to  the 
deluge :  the  second  from  the  deluge  to  Abraham, 
equalling  the  first,  not  in  length  of  time,  but  in 
the  number  of  generations,  there  being  ten  in 
each.  From  Abraham  to  the  advent  of  Christ 
there  are,  as  the  evangelist  Matthew  calculates, 
three  periods,  in  each  of  which  are  fourteen  gen¬ 
erations — one  period  from  Abraham  to  David, 
a  second  from  David  to  the  captivity,  a  third 
from  the  captivity  to  the  birth  of  Christ  in  the 
flesh.  There  are  thus  five  ages  in  all.  The  sixth  is 
now  passing,  and  cannot  be  measured  by  any 
number  of  generations,  as  it  has  been  said,  “It  is 
not  for  you  to  know7  the  times,  w’hich  the  Father 
hath  put  in  His  owm  pow’er.”  6  After  this  period 
God  shall  rest  as  on  the  seventh  day,  w7hen  He 
shall  give  us  (w7ho  shall  be  the  seventh  day)  rest 
in  Himself.7  But  there  is  not  now  space  to  treat 
of  these  ages ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  seventh 
shall  be  our  Sabbath,  which  shall  be  brought  to 
a  close,  not  by  an  evening,  but  by  the  Lord’s 
day,  as  an  eighth  and  eternal  day,  consecrated 
by  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and  prefiguring  the 
eternal  repose  not  only  of  the  spirit,  but  also  of 
the  body.  There  w7e  shall  rest  and  see,  see  and 
love,  love  and  praise.  This  is  w’hat  shall  be  in  the 
end  without  end.  For  wThat  other  end  do  we  pro¬ 
pose  to  ourselves  than  to  attain  to  the  kingdom 
of  wThich  there  is  no  end? 

I  think  I  have  now’,  by  God’s  help,  discharged 
my  obligation  in  w’riting  this  large  work.  Let 
those  who  think  I  have  said  too  little,  or  those 
who  think  I  have  said  too  much,  forgive  me; 
and  let  those  w7ho  think  I  have  said  just  enough 
join  me  in  giving  thanks  to  God.  Amen. 

4Deut.  5.  14.  5Ezek.  20.  12.  6Acts,  1.  7. 

7See  bk.  xx,  Chaps.  6-10. 


CONTENTS:  ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE 


Preface  showing  the  utility  of  the  treatise  on 
Christian  doctrine.  621 

BOOK  I.  The  author  divides  his  work  into  two 
parts,  one  relating  to  the  discovery,  the  other  to 
the  expression,  of  the  true  sense  of  Scripture.  He 
shows  that  to  discover  the  meaning  we  must  at¬ 
tend  both  to  things  and  to  signs,  as  it  is  necessary 
to  know  what  things  we  ought  to  teach  to  the 
Christian  people,  and  also  the  signs  of  these 
things,  that  is,  where  the  knowledge  of  these 
things  is  to  be  sought.  In  this  first  book  he  treats 
of  things,  which  he  divides  into  three  classes — 
things  to  be  enjoyed,  things  to  be  used,  and  things 
which  use  and  enjoy.  The  only  object  which 
ought  to  be  enjoyed  is  the  triune  God ,  Who  is 
our  highest  good  and  our  true  happiness.  We  are 
prevented  by  our  sins  from  enjoying  God;  and 
that  our  sins  might  be  taken  away,  uThe  Word 
was  made  flesh,”  our  Lord  suffered,  and  died, 
and  rose  again,  and  ascended  into  heaven,  taking 
to  Himself  as  His  bride  the  Church,  in  which  we 
receive  remission  of  our  sins.  And  if  our  sins  are 
remitted  and  our  souls  renewed  by  grace,  we  may 
await  with  hope  the  resurrection  of  the  body  to 
eternal  glory ;  if  not,  we  shall  be  raised  to  ever¬ 
lasting  punishment.  These  matters  relating  to 
faith  having  been  expounded,  the  author  goes  on 
to  show  that  all  objects,  except  God,  are  for  use; 
for,  though  some  of  them  may  be  loved,  yet  our 
love  is  not  to  rest  in  them,  but  to  have  reference 
to  God .  And  we  ourselves  are  not  objects  of  en¬ 
joyment  to  God :  he  uses  us,  but  for  our  own  ad¬ 
vantage.  He  then  goes  on  to  show  that  love~the 
love  of  God  for  his  own  sake  and  the  love  of  our 
neighbour  for  Godys  sake — is  the  fulfillment  and 
the  end  of  all  Scripture.  After  adding  a  few  words 
about  hope,  he  shows,  in  conclusion,  that  faith, 
hope,  and  love  are  graces  essentially  necessary 
for  hfm  who  would  understand  and  explain 
aright  the  Holy  Scriptures.  624 

BOOK  II.  Having  completed  his  exposition  of 
things,  the  author  now  proceeds  to  discuss  the 
subject  of  signs.  He  first  defines  what  a  sign  is, 
and  shows  that  there  are  two  classes  of  signs,  the 
natural  and  the  conventional.  Of  conventional 
signs  {which  are  the  only  class  here  noticed), 
words  are  the  most  numerous  and  important,  and 
are  those  with  which  the  interpreter  of  Scripture 
is  chiefly  concerned.  The  difficulties  and  obscuri¬ 
ties  of  Scripture  spring  chiefly  from  two  sources, 


unknown  and  ambiguous  signs.  The  present  book 
deals  only  with  unknown  signs,  the  ambiguities 
of  language  being  reserved  for  treatment  in  the 
next  book.  The  difficulty  arising  from  ignorance 
of  signs  is  to  be  removed  by  learning  the  Greek 
and  Hebrew  languages,  in  which  Scripture  is 
written,  by  comparing  the  various  translations, 
and  by  attending  to  the  context.  In  the  interpre¬ 
tation  of  figurative  expressions,  knowledge  of 
things  is  as  necessary  as  knowledge  of  words; 
and  the  various  sciences  and  arts  of  the  heathen, 
so  far  as  they  are  true  and  useful,  may  be  turned 
to  account  in  removing  our  ignorance  of  signs, 
whether  these  be  direct  or  figurative.  Whilst  ex¬ 
posing  the  folly  and  futility  of  many  heathen  su¬ 
perstitions  and  practices,  the  author  points  out 
how  all  that  is  sound  and  useful  in  their  science 
and  philosophy  may  be  turned  to  a  Christian  use. 
And  in  conclusion,  he  shows  the  spirit  in  which 
it  behoves  us  to  address  ourselves  to  the  study 
and  interpretation  of  the  sacred  books.  636 

BOOK  III.  The  author,  having  discussed  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  book  the  method  of  dealing  with  unknown 
signs,  goes  on  in  this  third  book  to  treat  of  am¬ 
biguous  signs.  Signs  may  be  either  direct  or  figur¬ 
ative.  In  the  case  of  direct  signs  ambiguity  may 
arise  from  the  punctuation,  the  pronunciation, 
or  the  doubtful  signification  of  the  words,  and  is 
to  be  resolved  by  attention  to  the  context,  a  com¬ 
parison  of  translations,  or  a  reference  to  the  or¬ 
iginal  tongue.  In  the  case  of  figurative  signs  we 
need  to  guard  against  two  mistakes'  1.  the  in¬ 
terpreting  literal  expressions  figuratively ;  2.  the 
interpreting  figurative  expressions  literally.  The 
author  lays  down  rules  by  which  we  may  decide 
whether  an  expression  is  literal  or  figurative;  the 
general  rule  being,  that  whatever  can  be  shown 
to  be  in  its  literal  sense  inconsistent  either  with 
purity  of  life  or  correctness  of  doctrine  must  be 
taken  figuratively .  He  then  goes  on  to  lay  down 
rules  for  the  interpretation  of  expressions  which 
have  been  proved  to  be  figurative;  the  general 
principle  being,  that  no  interpretation  can  be 
true  which  does  not  promote  the  love  of  God  and 
the  love  of  man.  The  author  then  proceeds  to  ex¬ 
pound  and  illustrate  the  seven  rules  of  Tichonius 
the  Donatist,  which  he  commends  to  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  student  of  Holy  Scripture.  657 

BOOK  IV.  Passing  to  the  second  part  of  his  work, 
that  which  treats  of  expression,  the  author  pre- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


620 

mises  that  it  is  no  part  of  his  intention  to  write  a 
treatise  on  the  laws  of  rhetoric.  These  can  be 
learned  elsewhere ,  and  ought  not  to  be  neglected , 
being  indeed  specially  necessary  for  the  Christian 
teacher ,  whom  it  behoves  to  excel  in  eloquence 
and  power  of  speech.  After  detailing  with  much 
care  and  minuteness  the  various  qualities  of  an 
orator,  he  recommends  the  authors  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures  as  the  best  models  of  eloquence,  far 
excelling  all  others  in  the  combination  of  elo¬ 
quence  with  wisdom.  He  points  out  that  per¬ 
spicuity  is  the  most  essential  quality  of  style,  and 
ought  to  be  cultivated  with  especial  care  by  the 
teacher,  as  it  is  the  main  requisite  for  instruction, 
although  other  qualities  are  required  for  delight¬ 
ing  and  persuading  the  hearer.  All  these  gifts  are 
to  be  sought  in  earnest  prayer  from  God,  though 


we  are  not  to  forget  to  be  zealous  and  diligent 
in  study.  He  shows  that  there  are  three  species  of 
style — the  subdued,  the  elegant, and  the  majestic; 
the  first  serving  for  instruction,  the  second  for 
praise,  and  the  third  for  exhortation :  and  of  each 
of  these  he  gives  examples,  selected  both  from 
Scripture  and  from  early  teachers  of  the  Church, 
Cyprian  and  Ambrose.  He  shows  that  these  vari¬ 
ous  styles  may  be  mingled,  and  when  and  for 
what  purpose  they  are  mingled;  and  that  they  all 
have  the  same  end  in  view,  to  bring  home  the 
truth  to  the  hearer,  so  that  he  may  understand  it, 
hear  it  with  gladness,  and  practice  it  in  his  life. 
Finally,  he  exhorts  the  teacher  himself,  pointing 
out  the  dignity  and  responsibility  of  the  office 
he  holds,  to  lead  a  life  in  harmony  with  his  own 
teaching,  and  to  show  a  good  example  to  all.  675 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE 


*■**  *J*  ♦*■»  *■**  +**  **■»  *J* 


PREFACE 

Showing  that  to  teach  rules  for  the  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  Scripture  is  not  a  superfluous  task 

i.  There  are  certain  rules  for  the  interpre¬ 
tation  of  Scripture  which  I  think  might  with 
great  advantage  be  taught  to  earnest  students 
of  the  word,  that  they  may  profit  not  only 
from  reading  the  works  of  others  who  have 
laid  open  the  secrets  of  the  sacred  writings,  but 
also  from  themselves  opening  such  secrets  to 
others.  These  rules  I  propose  to  teach  to  those 
who  are  able  and  willing  to  learn,  if  God  our 
Lord  do  not  withhold  from  me,  while  I  write, 
the  thoughts  He  is  wont  to  vouchsafe  to  me 
in  my  meditations  on  this  subject.  But  before 
I  enter  upon  this  undertaking,  I  think  it  well 
to  meet  the  objections  of  those  who  are  likely 
to  take  exception  to  the  work,  or  who  would 
do  so,  did  I  not  conciliate  them  beforehand. 
And  if,  after  all,  men  should  still  be  found  to 
make  objections,  yet  at  least  they  will  not  pre¬ 
vail  with  others  (over  whom  they  might  have 
influence,  did  they  not  find  them  forearmed 
against  their  assaults),  to  turn  them  back  from 
a  useful  study  to  the  dull  sloth  of  ignorance. 

2.  There  are  some,  then,  likely  to  object  to 
this  work  of  mine,  because  they  have  failed  to 
understand  the  rules  here  laid  down.  Others, 
again,  will  think  that  I  have  spent  my  labour 
to  no  purpose,  because,  though  they  under¬ 
stand  the  rules,  yet  in  their  attempts  to  apply 
them  dnd  to  interpret  Scripture  by  them,  they 
have  failed  to  clear  up  the  point  they  wish 
cleared  up;  and  these,  because  they  have  re¬ 
ceived  no  assistance  from  this  work  themselves, 
will  give  it  as  their  opinion  that  it  can  be  of  no 
use  to  anybody.  There  is  a  third  class  of  ob¬ 
jectors  who  either  really  do  understand  Scrip¬ 
ture  well,  or  think  they  do,  and  who,  because 
they  know  (or  imagine)  that  they  have  at¬ 
tained  a  certain  power  of  interpreting  the 
sacred  books  without  reading  any  directions  of 
the  kind  that  I  propose  to  lay  down  here,  will 


cry  out  that  such  rules  are  not  necessary  for 
any  one,  but  that  everything  rightly  done  to¬ 
wards  clearing  up  the  obscurities  of  Scripture 
could  be  better  done  by  the  unassisted  grace 
of  God. 

3.  To  reply  briefly  to  all  these:  To  those 
who  do  not  understand  what  is  here  set  down, 
my  answer  is  that  I  am  not  to  be  blamed  for 
their  want  of  understanding.  It  is  just  as  if 
they  were  anxious  to  see  the  new  or  the  old 
moon,  or  some  very  obscure  star,  and  I  should 
point  it  out  with  my  finger:  if  they  had  not 
sight  enough  to  see  even  my  finger,  they  would 
surely  have  no  right  to  fly  into  a  passion  with 
me  on  that  account.  As  for  those  who,  even 
though  they  know  and  understand  my  direc¬ 
tions,  fail  to  penetrate  the  meaning  of  obscure 
passages  in  Scripture,  they  may  stand  for  those 
who,  in  the  case  I  have  imagined,  are  just  able 
to  see  my  finger,  but  cannot  see  the  stars  at 
which  it  is  pointed.  And  so  both  these  classes 
had  better  give  up  blaming  me,  and  pray  in¬ 
stead  that  God  would  grant  them  the  sight  of 
their  eyes.  For  though  I  can  move  my  finger 
to  point  out  an  object,  it  is  out  of  my  power 
to  open  men’s  eyes  that  they  may  see  either 
the  fact  that  I  am  pointing,  or  the  object  at 
which  I  point. 

4.  But  now  as  to  those  who  talk  vauntingly 
of  Divine  Grace,  and  boast  that  they  under¬ 
stand  and  can  explain  Scripture  without  the 
aid  of  such  directions  as  those  I  now  propose 
to  lay  down,  and  who  think,  therefore,  that 
what  I  have  undertaken  to  write  is  entirely 
superfluous.  I  would  such  persons  could  calm 
themselves  so  far  as  to  remember  that,  how¬ 
ever  justly  they  may  rejoice  in  God’s  great 
gift,  yet  it  was  from  human  teachers  they 
themselves  learnt  to  read.  Now,  they  would 
hardly  think  it  right  that  they  should  for  that 
reason  be  held  in  contempt  by  the  Egyptian 
monk  Antony,  a  just  and  holy  man,  who,  not 
being  able  to  read  himself,  is  said  to  have  com¬ 
mitted  the  Scriptures  to  memory  through  hear- 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


622 

in g  them  read  by  others,  and  by  dint  of  wise 
meditation  to  have  arrived  at  a  thorough  under¬ 
standing  of  them;  or  by  that  barbarian  slave 
Christianus,  of  whom  I  have  lately  heard  from 
very  respectable  and  trustworthy  witnesses, 
who,  without  any  teaching  from  man,  attained 
a  full  knowledge  of  the  art  of  reading  simply 
through  prayer  that  it  might  be  revealed  to  him ; 
after  three  days’  supplication  obtaining  his  re¬ 
quest  that  he  might  read  through  a  book  pre¬ 
sented  to  him  on  the  spot  by  the  astonished  by¬ 
standers. 

5.  But  if  any  one  thinks  that  these  stories 
are  false,  I  do  not  strongly  insist  on  them. 
For,  as  I  am  dealing  with  Christians  who  pro¬ 
fess  to  understand  the  Scriptures  without  any 
directions  from  man  (and  if  the  fact  be  so, 
they  boast  of  a  real  advantage,  and  one  of  no 
ordinary  kind),  they  must  surely  grant  that 
every  one  of  us  learnt  his  own  language  by 
hearing  it  constantly  from  childhood,  and  that 
any  other  language  we  have  learnt — Greek,  or 
Hebrew,  or  any  of  the  rest — we  have  learnt 
either  in  the  same  way,  by  hearing  it  spoken, 
or  from  a  human  teacher.  Now,  then,  suppose 
we  advise  all  our  brethren  not  to  teach  their 
children  any  of  these  things,  because  on  the 
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  apostles  im¬ 
mediately  began  to  speak  the  language  of  every 
race;  and  warn  every  one  who  has  not  had  a 
like  experience  that  he  need  not  consider  him¬ 
self  a  Christian,  or  may  at  least  doubt  whether 
he  has  yet  received  the  Holy  Spirit?  No,  no; 
rather  let  us  put  away  false  pride  and  learn 
whatever  can  be  learnt  from  man;  and  let 
him  who  teaches  another  communicate  what  he 
has  himself  received  without  arrogance  and 
without  jealousy.  And  do  not  let  us  tempt  Him 
in  Whom  we  have  believed,  lest,  being  ensnared 
by  such  wiles  of  the  enemy  and  by  our  own 
perversity,  we  may  even  refuse  to  go  to  the 
churches  to  hear  the  gospel  itself,  or  to  read  a 
book,  or  to  listen  to  another  reading  or  preach¬ 
ing,  in  the  hope  that  we  shall  be  carried  up  to 
the  third  heaven,  “whether  in  the  body  or  out 
of  the  body,”  as  the  apostle  says,1  and  there 
hear  unspeakable  words,  such  as  it  is  not  law¬ 
ful  for  man  to  utter,  or  see  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  hear  the  gospel  from  His  own  lips 
rather  than  from  those  of  men. 

6.  Let  us  beware  of  such  dangerous  tempta¬ 
tions  of  pride,  and  let  us  rather  consider  the 
fact  that  the  Apostle  Paul  himself,  although 
stricken  down  and  admonished  by  the  voice 
of  God  from  heaven,  was  yet  sent  to  a  man 

1II  Cor.  12.  2-4. 


to  receive  the  sacraments  and  be  admitted  into 
the  Church;2  and  that  Cornelius  the  centurion, 
although  an  angel  announced  to  him  that  his 
prayers  were  heard  and  his  alms  had  in  re¬ 
membrance,  was  yet  handed  over  to  Peter  for 
instruction,  and  not  only  received  the  sacra¬ 
ments  from  the  apostle’s  hands,  but  was  also 
instructed  by  him  as  to  the  proper  objects  of 
faith,  hope,  and  love.3  And  without  doubt  it  was 
possible  to  have  done  everything  through  the 
instrumentality  of  angels,  but  the  condition  of 
our  race  would  have  been  much  more  degraded 
if  God  had  not  chosen  to  make  use  of  men  as 
the  ministers  of  His  word  to  their  fellow-men. 
For  how  could  that  be  true  which  is  written, 
“The  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye 
are,”4  if  God  gave  forth  no  oracles  from  His 
human  temple,  but  communicated  everything 
that  He  wished  to  be  taught  to  men  by  voices 
from  heaven,  or  through  the  ministration  of 
angels?  Moreover,  love  itself,  which  binds  men 
together  in  the  bond  of  unity,  would  have  no 
means  of  pouring  soul  into  soul,  and,  as  it  were, 
mingling  them  one  with  another,  if  men  never 
learnt  anything  from  their  fellow-men. 

7.  And  we  know  that  the  eunuch  who  was 
reading  Isaiah  the  prophet,  and  did  not  under¬ 
stand  what  he  read,  was  not  sent  by  the  apostle 
to  an  angel,  nor  was  it  an  angel  who  explained 
to  him  what  he  did  not  understand,  nor  was 
he  inwardly  illuminated  by  the  grace  of  God 
without  the  interposition  of  man;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  at  the  suggestion  of  God,  Philip,  who 
did  understand  the  prophet,  came  to  him,  and 
sat  with  him,  and  in  human  words,  and  with  a 
human  tongue,  opened  to  him  the  Scriptures.5 
Did  not  God  talk  with  Moses,  and  yet  he,  with 
great  wisdom  and  entire  absence  of  jealous 
pride,  accepted  the  plan  of  his  father-in-law,  a 
man  of  an  alien  race,  for  ruling  and  administer¬ 
ing  the  affairs  of  the  great  nation  entrusted  to 
him?6  For  Moses  knew  that  a  wise  plan,  in 
whatever  mind  it  might  originate,  was  to  be 
ascribed  not  to  the  man  who  devised  it,  but  to 
Him  Who  is  the  Truth,  the  unchangeable  God. 

8.  In  the  last  place,  every  one  who  boasts 
that  he,  through  divine  illumination,  under¬ 
stands  the  obscurities  of  Scripture,  though  not 
instructed  in  any  rules  of  interpretation,  at  the 
same  time  believes,  and  rightly  believes,  that 
this  power  is  not  his  own,  in  the  sense  of  orig¬ 
inating  with  himself,  but  is  the  gift  of  God. 
For  so  he  seeks  God’s  glory,  not  his  own.  But 
reading  and  understanding,  as  he  does,  without 

2Acts,  9.  3.  3Acts,  10.  4I  Cor.  3.  17. 

6Acts,  8.  26.  6Ex.  18.  13. 


ON  CHRISTIAN 

the  aid  of  any  human  interpreter,  why  does  he 
himself  undertake  to  interpret  for  others?  Why 
does  he  not  rather  send  them  direct  to  God, 
that  they  too  may  learn  by  the  inward  teach¬ 
ing  of  the  Spirit  without  the  help  of  man?  The 
truth  is,  he  fears  to  incur  the  reproach :  “Thou 
wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou  oughtest  to 
have  put  my  money  to  the  exchangers.”1  See¬ 
ing,  then,  that  these  men  teach  others,  either 
through  speech  or  writing,  what  they  under¬ 
stand,  surely  they  cannot  blame  me  if  I  like¬ 
wise  teach  not  only  what  they  understand,  but 
also  the  rules  of  interpretation  they  follow. 
For  no  one  ought  to  consider  anything  as  his 
own,  except  perhaps  what  is  false.  All  truth  is 
of  Him  who  says,  “I  am  the  truth.”2  For  what 
have  we  that  we  did  not  receive?  and  if  we  have 
received  it,  why  do  we  glory,  as  if  we  had  not 
received  it?3 

9.  He  who  reads  to  an  audience  pronounces 
aloud  the  words  he  sees  before  him:  he  who 
teaches  reading,  does  it  that  others  may  be 
able  to  read  for  themselves.  Each,  however, 
communicates  to  others  what  he  has  learnt  him- 

1Matt.  25.  26,  27.  2John,  14.  6. 

3I  Cor.  4.  7. 


DOCTRINE  623 

self.  Just  so,  the  man  who  explains  to  an  au¬ 
dience  the  passages  of  Scripture  he  understands 
is  like  one  who  reads  aloud  the  words  before 
him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  lays 
down  rules  for  interpretation  is  like  one  who 
teaches  reading,  that  is,  shows  others  how  to 
read  for  themselves.  So  that,  just  as  he  who 
knows  how  to  read  is  not  dependent  on  some 
one  else,  when  he  finds  a  book,  to  tell  him  what 
is  written  in  it,  so  the  man  who  is  in  possession 
of  the  rules  which  I  here  attempt  to  lay  down, 
if  he  meet  with  an  obscure  passage  in  the  books 
which  he  reads,  will  not  need  an  interpreter 
to  lay  open  the  secret  to  him,  but,  holding  fast 
by  certain  rules,  and  following  up  certain  indi¬ 
cations,  will  arrive  at  the  hidden  sense  without 
any  error,  or  at  least  without  falling  into  any 
gross  absurdity.  And  so  although  it  will  suffi¬ 
ciently  appear  in  the  course  of  the  work  itself 
that  no  one  can  justly  object  to  this  undertak¬ 
ing  of  mine,  which  has  no  other  object  than 
to  be  of  service,  yet  as  it  seemed  convenient 
to  reply  at  the  outset  to  any  one  who  might 
make  preliminary  objections,  such  is  the  start 
I  have  thought  good  to  make  on  the  road  I  am 
about  to  traverse  in  this  book. 


624 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


BOOK  I 

ARGUMENT.  The  author  divides  his  work  into  two  parts,  one  relating 

TO  THE  DISCOVERY,  THE  OTHER  TO  THE  EXPRESSION,  OF  THE  TRUE  SENSE  OF  SCRIP¬ 
TURE.  He  shows  that  to  discover  the  MEANING  we  must  attend  both  to 
THINGS  AND  TO  SIGNS,  AS  IT  IS  NECESSARY  TO  KNOW  WHAT  THINGS  WE  OUGHT  TO 
TEACH  THE  CHRISTIAN  PEOPLE,  AND  ALSO  THE  SIGNS  OF  THESE  THINGS,  THAT  IS, 
WHERE  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THESE  THINGS  IS  TO  BE  SOUGHT.  IN  THIS  FIRST  BOOK  HE 
TREATS  OF  THINGS,  WHICH  HE  DIVIDES  INTO  THREE  CLASSES — THINGS  TO  BE  EN¬ 
JOYED,  THINGS  TO  BE  USED,  AND  THINGS  WHICH  USE  AND  ENJOY.  THE  ONLY  OBJECT 
WHICH  OUGHT  TO  BE  ENJOYED  IS  THE  TRIUNE  GOD,  WHO  IS  OUR  HIGHEST  GOOD  AND 
OUR  TRUE  HAPPINESS.  We  ARE  PREVENTED  BY  OUR  SINS  FROM  ENJOYING  GOD;  AND 
THAT  OUR  SINS  MIGHT  BE  TAKEN  AWAY,  “THE  WORD  WAS  MADE  FLESH,”  OUR  LORD 
SUFFERED,  AND  DIED,  AND  ROSE  AGAIN,  AND  ASCENDED  INTO  HEAVEN,  TAKING  TO  HIM¬ 
SELF  AS  HIS  BRIDE  THE  CHURCH,  IN  WHICH  WE  RECEIVE  REMISSION  OF  OUR  SINS. 

And  if  our  sins  are  remitted  and  our  souls  renewed  by  grace,  we  may  await 

WITH  HOPE  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  THE  BODY  TO  ETERNAL  GLORY;  IF  NOT,  WE  SHALL 
BE  RAISED  TO  EVERLASTING  PUNISHMENT.  THESE  MATTERS  RELATING  TO  FAITH  HAV¬ 
ING  BEEN  EXPOUNDED,  THE  AUTHOR  GOES  ON  TO  SHOW  THAT  ALL  OBJECTS,  EXCEPT 
GOD,  ARE  FOR  USE ;  FOR,  THOUGH  SOME  OF  THEM  MAY  BE  LOVED,  YET  OUR  LOVE  IS  NOT 
TO  REST  IN  THEM,  BUT  TO  HAVE  REFERENCE  TO  GOD.  AND  WE  OURSELVES  ARE  NOT 
OBJECTS  OF  ENJOYMENT  TO  GOD:  HE  USES  US,  BUT  FOR  OUR  OWN  ADVANTAGE.  HE 
THEN  GOES  ON  TO  SHOW  THAT  LOVE-5*— THE  LOVE  OF  GOD  FOR  HIS  OWN  SAKE  AND  THE 
LOVE  OF  OUR  NEIGHBOUR  FOR  GOD’S  SAKE — IS  THE  FULFILLMENT  AND  THE  END 
OF  ALL  SCRIPTURE.  AFTER  ADDING  A  FEW  WORDS  ABOUT  HOPE,  HE  SHOWS,  IN  CON¬ 
CLUSION,  THAT  FAITH,  HOPE,  AND  LOVE  ARE  GRACES  ESSENTIALLY  NECESSARY  FOR 
HIM  WHO  WOULD  UNDERSTAND  AND  EXPLAIN  ARIGHT  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES. 


Chapter  i 

The  interpretation  of  Scripture  depends  on  the 
discovery  and  enunciation  of  the  meaning , 
and  is  to  be  undertaken  in  dependence  on 
God’s  aid 

i.  There  are  two  things  on  which  all  inter¬ 
pretation  of  Scripture  depends:  the  mode  of 
ascertaining  the  proper  meaning,  and  the  mode 
of  making  known  the  meaning  when  it  is  as¬ 
certained.  We  shall  treat  first  of  the  mode  of 
ascertaining,  next  of  the  mode  of  making 
known,  the  meaning — a  great  and  arduous  un¬ 
dertaking,  and  one  that,  if  difficult  to  carry  out, 
it  is,  I  fear,  presumptuous  to  enter  upon.  And 
presumptuous  it  would  undoubtedly  be,  if  I 
were  counting  on  my  own  strength;  but  since 
my  hope  of  accomplishing  the  work  rests  on 
Him  Who  has  already  supplied  me  with  many 
thoughts  on  this  subject,  I  do  not  fear  but  that 
He  will  go  on  to  supply  what  is  yet  wanting 
when  once  I  have  begun  to  use  what  He  has  al¬ 
ready  given.  For  a  possession  which  is  not  di¬ 
minished  by  being  shared  with  others,  if  it  is 
possessed  and  not  shared,  is  not  yet  possessed 
as  it  ought  to  be  possessed.  The  Lord  saith, 


“Whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given.”1  He 
will  give,  then,  to  those  who  have;  that  is  to 
say,  if  they  use  freely  and  cheerfully  what  they 
have  received,  He  will  add  to  and  perfect  His 
gifts.  The  loaves  in  the  miracle  were  only  five 
and  seven  in  number  before  the  disciples  began 
to  divide  them  among  the  hungry  people.  But 
when  once  they  began  to  distribute  them, 
though  the  wants  of  so  many  thousands  were 
satisfied,  they  filled  baskets  with  the  fragments 
that  were  left.2  Now,  just  as  that  bread  in¬ 
creased  in  the  very  act  of  breaking  it,  so  those 
thoughts  which  the  Lord  has  already  vouchsafed 
to  me  with  a  view  to  undertaking  this  work  will, 
as  soon  as  I  begin  to  impart  them  to  others,  be 
multiplied  by  His  grace,  so  that,  in  this  very 
work  of  distribution  in  which  I  have  engaged, 
so  far  from  incurring  loss  and  poverty,  I  shall 
be  made  to  rejoice  in  a  marvellous  increase  of 
wealth. 

Chap.  2.  What  a  thing  is,  and  what  a  sign 
2.  All  instruction  is  either  about  things  or 
about  signs ;  but  things  are  learnt  by  means  of 

!Matt.  13.  12. 

2Matt.  14  17,  etc.;  20.  34.  etc. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  1-5  625 


signs.  I  now  use  the  word  “thing”  in  a  strict 
sense  to  signify  that  which  is  never  employed 
as  a  sign  of  anything  else:  for  example,  wood, 
stone,  cattle,  and  other  things  of  that  kind. 
Not,  however,  the  wood  which  we  read  Moses 
cast  into  the  bitter  waters  to  make  them  sweet,1 
nor  the  stone  which  Jacob  used  as  a  pillow,2 
nor  the  ram  which  Abraham  offered  up  instead 
of  his  son;3  for  these,  though  they  are  things, 
are  also  signs  of  other  things.  There  are  signs  of 
another  kind,  those  which  are  never  employed 
except  as  signs:  for  example,  words.  No  one 
uses  words  except  as  signs  of  something  else; 
and  hence  may  be  understood  what  I  call  signs : 
those  things,  to  wit,  which  are  used  to  indicate 
something  else.  Accordingly,  every  sign  is  also 
a  thing;  for  what  is  not  a  thing  is  nothing  at  all. 
Every  thing,  however,  is  not  also  a  sign.  And  so, 
in  regard  to  this  distinction  between  things 
and  signs,  I  shall,  when  I  speak  of  things,  speak 
in  such  a  way  that  even  if  some  of  them  may 
be  used  as  signs  also,  that  will  not  interfere  with 
the  division  of  the  subject  according  to  which 
I  am  to  discuss  things  first  and  signs  afterwards. 
But  we  must  carefully  remember  that  what  we 
have  now  to  consider  about  things  is  what  they 
are  in  themselves,  not  what  other  things  they 
are  signs  of. 

Chap.  3.  Some  things  are  for  use,  some  for  en¬ 
joyment 

3.  There  are  some  things,  then,  which  are  to 
be  enjoyed,  others  which  are  to  be  used,  others 
still  which  enjoy  and  use.  Those  things  which 
are  objects  of  enjoyment  make  us  happy.  Those 
things  which  are  objects  of  use  assist,  and  (so 
to  speak)  support  us  in  our  efforts  after  happi¬ 
ness,  so  that  we  can  attain  the  things  that  make 
us  happy  and  rest  in  them.  We  ourselves,  again, 
who  enjoy  and  use  these  things,  being  placed 
among  both  kinds  of  objects,  if  we  set  ourselves 
to  enjoy  those  which  we  ought  to  use,  are  hin¬ 
dered  in  our  course,  and  sometimes  even  led 
away  from  it;  so  that,  getting  entangled  in  the 
love  of  lower  gratifications,  we  lag  behind  in, 
or  even  altogether  turn  back  from,  the  pursuit 
of  the  real  and  proper  objects  of  enjoyment. 

Chap.  4.  Difference  of  use  and  enjoyment 

4.  For  to  enjoy  a  thing  is  to  rest  with  satis¬ 
faction  in  it  for  its  own  sake.  To  use,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  to  employ  whatever  means  are 
at  one’s  disposal  to  obtain  what  one  desires,  if 
it  is  a  proper  object  of  desire;  for  an  unlaw¬ 
ful  use  ought  rather  to  be  called  an  abuse.  Sup- 

JEx.  15.  25.  2Gen.  28.  11.  3Gen.  22.  13. 


pose,  then,  we  were  wanderers  in  a  strange 
country,  and  could  not  live  happily  away  from 
our  fatherland,  and  that  we  felt  wretched  in 
our  wandering,  and  wishing  to  put  an  end  to 
our  misery,  determined  to  return  home.  We 
find,  however,  that  we  must  make  use  of  some 
mode  of  conveyance,  either  by  land  or  water, 
in  order  to  reach  that  fatherland  where  our  en¬ 
joyment  is  to  commence.  But  the  beauty  of 
the  country  through  which  we  pass,  and  the  very 
pleasure  of  the  motion,  charm  our  hearts,  and 
turning  these  things  which  we  ought  to  use  into 
objects  of  enjoyment,  we  become  unwilling  to 
hasten  the  end  of  our  journey;  and  becoming 
engrossed  in  a  factitious  delight,  our  thoughts 
are  diverted  from  that  home  whose  delights 
would  make  us  truly  happy.  Such  is  a  picture 
of  our  condition  in  this  life  of  mortality.  We 
have  wandered  far  from  God;  and  if  we  wish 
to  return  to  our  Father’s  home,  this  world  must 
be  used,  not  enjoyed,  that  so  the  invisible  things 
of  God  may  be  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
by  the  things  that  are  made4 — that  is,  that  by 
means  of  what  is  material  and  temporary  we 
may  lay  hold  upon  that  which  is  spiritual  and 
eternal. 

Chap.  5.  The  Trinity  the  true  object  of  enjoy¬ 
ment 

5.  The  true  objects  of  enjoyment,  then,  are 
the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
Who  are  at  the  same  time  the  Trinity,  one  Being, 
supreme  above  all,  and  common  to  all  who  en¬ 
joy  Him,  if  He  is  an  object,  and  not  rather  the 
cause  of  all  objects,  or  indeed  even  if  He  is  the 
cause  of  all.  For  it  is  not  easy  to  find  a  name 
that  will  suitably  express  so  great  excellence, 
unless  it  is  better  to  speak  in  this  way:  The 
Trinity,  one  God,  of  Whom  are  all  things, 
through  Whom  are  all  things,  in  Whom  are  all 
things.5  Thus  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  each  of  these  by  Himself,  is 
God,  and  at  the  same  time  they  are  all  one  God; 
and  each  of  them  by  Himself  is  a  complete  sub¬ 
stance,  and  yet  they  are  all  one  substance.  The 
Father  is  not  the  Son  nor  the  Holy  Spirit;  the 
Son  is  not  the  Father  nor  the  Holy  Spirit;  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  not  the  Father  nor  the  Son:  but 
the  Father  is  only  Father,  the  Son  is  only  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  only  Holy  Spirit.  To 
all  three  belong  the  same  eternity,  the  same 
unchangeableness,  the  same  majesty,  the  same 
power.  In  the  Father  is  unity,  in  the  Son 
equality,  in  the  Holy  Spirit  the  harmony  of 
unity  and  equality;  and  these  three  attributes 

4Rom.  1.  20.  5Rom.  11.  36. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


626 

are  all  one  because  of  the  Father,  all  equal  be¬ 
cause  of  the  Son,  and  all  harmonious  because 
of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Chap.  6.  In  what  sense  God  is  ineffable 

6.  Have  I  spoken  of  God.  or  uttered  His 
praise,  in  any  worthy  way?  Nay,  I  feel  that  I 
have  done  nothing  more  than  desire  to  speak; 
and  if  I  have  said  anything,  it  is  not  what  I 
desired  to  say.  How  do  I  know  this,  except 
from  the  fact  that  God  is  unspeakable?  But 
what  I  have  said,  if  it  had  been  unspeakable, 
could  not  have  been  spoken.  And  so  God  is  not 
even  to  be  called  “unspeakable,”  because  to 
say  even  this  is  to  speak  of  Him.  Thus  there 
arises  a  curious  contradiction  of  words,  because 
if  the  unspeakable  is  what  cannot  be  spoken  of, 
it  is  not  unspeakable  if  it  can  be  called  unspeak¬ 
able.  And  this  opposition  of  words  is  rather  to 
be  avoided  by  silence  than  to  be  explained  away 
by  speech.  And  yet  God,  although  nothing 
worthy  of  His  greatness  can  be  said  of  Him, 
has  condescended  to  accept  the  worship  of 
men’s  mouths,  and  has  desired  us  through  the 
medium  of  our  own  words  to  rejoice  in  His 
praise.  For  on  this  principle  it  is  that  He  is 
called  Deus  (God).  For  the  sound  of  those  two 
syllables  in  itself  conveys  no  true  knowledge  of 
His  nature;  but  yet  all  who  know  the  Latin 
tongue  are  led,  when  that  sound  reaches  their 
ears,  to  think  of  a  nature  supreme  in  excellence 
and  eternal  in  existence. 

Chap.  7.  What  all  men  understand  by  the  term 

God 

7.  For  when  the  one  supreme  God  of  gods 
is  thought  of,  even  by  those  who  believe  that 
there  are  other  gods,  and  who  call  them  by  that 
name,  and  worship  them  as  gods,  their  thought 
takes  the  form  of  an  endeavour  to  reach  the 
conception  of  a  nature,  than  which  nothing 
more  excellent  or  more  exalted  exists.  And 
since  men  are  moved  by  different  kinds  of 
pleasures,  partly  by  those  which  pertain  to  the 
bodily  senses,  partly  by  those  which  pertain  to 
the  intellect  and  soul,  those  of  them  who  are 
in  bondage  to  sense  think  that  either  the 
heavens,  or  what  appears  to  be  most  brilliant 
in  the  heavens,  or  the  universe  itself,  is  God 
of  gods:  or  if  they  try  to  get  beyond  the  uni¬ 
verse,  they  picture  to  themselves  something  of 
dazzling  brightness,  and  think  of  it  vaguely  as 
infinite,  or  of  the  most  beautiful  form  conceiv¬ 
able;  or  they  represent  it  in  the  form  of  the 
human  body,  if  they  think  that  superior  to  all 


others.  Or  if  they  think  that  there  is  no  one 
God  supreme  above  the  rest,  but  that  there  are 
many  or  even  innumerable  gods  of  equal  rank, 
still  these  too  they  conceive  as  possessed  of 
shape  and  form,  according  to  what  each  man 
thinks  the  pattern  of  excellence.  Those,  on  the 
other  hand,  who  endeavour  by  an  effort  of  the 
intelligence  to  reach  a  conception  of  God,  place 
Him  above  all  visible  and  bodily  natures,  and 
even  above  all  intelligent  and  spiritual  natures 
that  are  subject  to  change.  All,  however,  strive 
emulously  to  exalt  the  excellence  of  God:  nor 
could  any  one  be  found  to  believe  that  any 
being  to  whom  there  exists  a  superior  is  God. 
And  so  all  concur  in  believing  that  God  is  that 
which  excels  in  dignity  all  other  objects. 

Chap.  8.  God  to  be  esteemed  above  all  else t 
because  he  is  unchangeable  wisdom 

8.  And  since  all  who  think  about  God  think 
of  Him  as  living,  they  only  can  form  any  con¬ 
ception  of  Him  that  is  not  absurd  and  un¬ 
worthy  who  think  of  Him  as  life  itself;  and, 
whatever  may  be  the  bodily  form  that  has  sug¬ 
gested  itself  to  them,  recognize  that  it  is  by 
life  it  lives  or  does  not  live,  and  prefer  what 
is  living  to  what  is  dead;  who  understand  that 
the  living  bodily  form  itself,  however  it  may 
outshine  all  others  in  splendour,  overtop  them 
in  size,  and  excel  them  in  beauty,  is  quite  a 
distinct  thing  from  the  life  by  which  it  is 
quickened;  and  who  look  upon  the  life  as  in¬ 
comparably  superior  in  dignity  and  worth  to 
the  mass  which  is  quickened  and  animated  by 
it.  Then,  when  they  go  on  to  look  into  the 
nature  of  the  life  itself,  if  they  find  it  mere 
nutritive  life,  without  sensibility,  such  as  that 
of  plants,  they  consider  it  inferior  to  sentient 
life,  such  as  that  of  cattle;  and  above  this, 
again,  they  place  intelligent  life,  such  as  that 
of  men.  And,  perceiving  that  even  this  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  change,  they  are  compelled  to  place 
above  it,  again,  that  unchangeable  life,  which 
is  not  at  one  time  foolish,  at  another  time  wise, 
but  on  the  contrary  is  wisdom  itself.  For  a 
wise  intelligence,  that  is,  one  that  has  attained 
to  wisdom,  was,  previous  to  its  attaining  wis¬ 
dom,  unwise.  But  wisdom  itself  never  was  un¬ 
wise,  and  never  can  become  so.  And  if  men 
never  caught  sight  of  this  wisdom,  they  could 
never  with  entire  confidence  prefer  a  life  which 
is  unchangeably  wise  to  one  that  is  subject  to 
change.  This  will  be  evident,  if  we  consider 
that  the  very  rule  of  truth  by  which  they  affirm 
the  unchangeable  life  to  be  the  more  excellent, 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  6-14  627 


is  itself  unchangeable:  and  they  cannot  find 
such  a  rule,  except  by  going  beyond  their  own 
nature;  for  they  find  nothing  in  themselves  that 
is  not  subject  to  change. 

Chap.  9.  All  acknowledge  the  superiority  of 

unchangeable  wisdom  to  that  which  is  vari¬ 
able 

9.  Now,  no  one  is  so  egregiously  silly  as  to 
ask,  “How  do  you  know  that  a  life  of  unchange¬ 
able  wisdom  is  preferable  to  one  of  change?” 
For  that  very  truth  about  which  he  asks,  how 
I  know  it?  is  unchangeably  fixed  in  the  minds 
of  all  men,  and  presented  to  their  common 
contemplation.  And  the  man  who  does  not  see 
it  is  like  a  blind  man  in  the  sun,  whom  it  profits 
nothing  that  the  splendour  of  its  light,  so  clear 
and  so  near,  is  poured  into  his  very  eye-balls. 
The  man,  on  the  other  hand,  who  sees,  but 
shrinks  from  this  truth,  is  weak  in  his  mental 
vision  from  dwelling  long  among  the  shadows  of 
the  flesh.  And  thus  men  are  driven  back  from 
their  native  land  by  the  contrary  blasts  of  evil 
habits,  and  pursue  lower  and  less  valuable  ob¬ 
jects  in  preference  to  that  which  they  own  to 
be  more  excellent  and  more  worthy. 

Chap.  10.  To  see  God,  the  soul  must  be  puri¬ 
fied 

10.  Wherefore,  since  it  is  our  duty  fully  to 
enjoy  the  truth  which  lives  unchangeably,  and 
since  the  triune  God  takes  counsel  in  this  truth 
for  the  things  which  He  has  made,  the  soul 
must  be  purified  that  it  may  have  power  to  per¬ 
ceive  that  light,  and  to  rest  in  it  when  it  is 
perceived.  And  let  us  look  upon  this  purifica¬ 
tion  as  a  kind  of  journey  or  voyage  to  our  na¬ 
tive  land.  For  it  is  not  by  change  of  place  that 
we  can  come  nearer  to  Him  Who  is  in  every 
place,  but  by  the  cultivation  of  pure  desires  and 
virtuous  habits. 

Chap.  ii.  Wisdom  becoming  incarnate ,  a  pat¬ 
tern  to  us  of  purification 

11.  But  of  this  we  should  have  been  wholly 
incapable,  had  not  Wisdom  condescended  to 
adapt  Himself  to  our  weakness,  and  to  show 
us  a  pattern  of  holy  life  in  the  form  of  our  own 
humanity.  Yet,  since  we  when  we  come  to  Him 
do  wisely,  He  when  He  came  to  us  was  con¬ 
sidered  by  proud  men  to  have  done  very  foolish¬ 
ly.  And  since  we  when  we  come  to  Him  be¬ 
come  strong.  He  when  He  came  to  us  was  looked 
upon  as  weak.  But  “the  foolishness  of  God  is 
wiser  than  men;  and  the  weakness  of  God  is 


stronger  than  men.”1  And  thus,  though  Wisdom 
was  Himself  our  home,  He  made  Himself  also 
the  way  by  which  we  should  reach  our  home. 

Chap.  12.  In  what  sense  the  wisdom  of  God 

came  to  us 

And  though  He  is  everywhere  present  to  the 
inner  eye  when  it  is  sound  and  clear,  He  con¬ 
descended  to  make  Himself  manifest  to  the 
outward  eye  of  those  whose  inward  sight  is 
weak  and  dim.  “For  after  that,  in  the  wisdom 
of  God,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it 
pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to 
save  them  that  believe.”2 

12.  Not  then  in  the  sense  of  traversing  space, 
but  because  He  appeared  to  mortal  men  in  the 
form  of  mortal  flesh,  He  is  said  to  have  come 
to  us.  For  He  came  to  a  place  where  He  had 
always  been,  seeing  that  “He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by  Him.”  But,  be¬ 
cause  men,  who  in  their  eagerness  to  enjoy  the 
creature  instead  of  the  Creator  had  grown  into 
the  likeness  of  this  world,  and  are  therefore 
most  appropriately  named  “the  world,”  did  not 
recognize  Him,  therefore  the  evangelist  says, 
“and  the  world  knew  Him  not.”3  Thus,  in  the 
wisdom  of  God,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God.  Why  then  did  He  come,  seeing  that  He 
was  already  here,  except  that  it  pleased  God 
through  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save 
them  that  believe? 

Chap.  13.  The  Word  was  made  flesh 

In  what  way  did  He  come  but  this,  “The 
Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us”?4 
Just  as  when  we  speak,  in  order  that  what  we 
have  in  our  minds  may  enter  through  the  ear 
into  the  mind  of  the  hearer,  the  word  which  we 
have  in  our  hearts  becomes  an  outward  sound 
and  is  called  speech;  and  yet  our  thought  does 
not  lose  itself  in  the  sound,  but  remains  com¬ 
plete  in  itself,  and  takes  the  form  of  speech 
without  being  modified  in  its  own  nature  by  the 
change:  so  the  Divine  Word,  though  suffering 
no  change  of  nature,  yet  became  flesh,  that  He 
might  dwell  among  us. 

Chap.  14.  How  the  wisdom  of  God  healed  man 

13.  Moreover,  as  the  use  of  remedies  is  the 
way  to  health,  so  this  remedy  took  up  sinners 
to  heal  and  restore  them.  And  just  as  surgeons, 
when  they  bind  up  wounds,  do  it  not  in  a 
slovenly  way,  but  carefully,  that  there  may  be 

*1  Cor.  1.  25.  2I  Cor.  i.  21. 

3John,  1.  10.  4John,  1.  14. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


628 

a  certain  degree  of  neatness  in  the  binding,  in 
addition  to  its  mere  usefulness,  so  our  medicine, 
Wisdom,  was  by  His  assumption  of  humanity 
adapted  to  our  wounds,  curing  some  of  them 
by  their  opposites,  some  of  them  by  their  likes. 
And  just  as  he  who  ministers  to  a  bodily  hurt 
in  some  cases  applies  contraries,  as  cold  to  hot, 
moist  to  dry,  etc.,  and  in  other  cases  applies 
likes,  as  a  round  cloth  to  a  round  wound,  or  an 
oblong  cloth  to  an  oblong  wound,  and  does  not 
fit  the  same  bandage  to  all  limbs,  but  puts  like 
to  like;  in  the  same  way  the  Wisdom  of  God 
in  healing  man  has  applied  Himself  to  his  cure, 
being  Himself  healer  and  medicine  both  in  one. 
Seeing,  then,  that  man  fell  through  pride.  He 
restored  him  through  humility.  We  were  en¬ 
snared  by  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent:  we  are 
set  free  by  the  foolishness  of  God.  Moreover, 
just  as  the  former  was  called  wisdom,  but  was 
in  reality  the  folly  of  those  who  despised  God, 
so  the  latter  is  called  foolishness,  but  is  true 
wisdom  in  those  who  overcome  the  devil.  We 
used  our  immortality  so  badly  as  to  incur  the 
penalty  of  death:  Christ  used  His  mortality^ 
well  as  to  restore  us  to  life.  The  disease  was 
brought  in  through  a  woman’s  corrupted  soul: 
the  remedy  came  through  a  woman’s  virgin 
body.  To  the  same  class  of  opposite  remedies 
it  belongs,  that  our  vices  are  cured  by  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  His  virtues.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
following  are,  as  it  were,  bandages  made  in  the 
same  shape  as  the  limbs  and  wounds  to  which 
they  are  applied:  He  was  born  of  a  woman  to 
deliver  us  who  fell  through  a  woman.  He  came 
as  a  man  to  save  us  who  are  men,  as  a  mortal 
to  save  us  who  are  mortals,  by  death  to  save  us 
who  were  dead.  And  those  who  can  follow  out 
the  matter  more  fully,  who  are  not  hurried  on 
by  the  necessity  of  carrying  out  a  set  under¬ 
taking,  will  find  many  other  points  of  instruc¬ 
tion  in  considering  the  remedies,  whether  op¬ 
posites  or  likes,  employed  in  the  medicine  of 
Christianity. 

Chap.  15.  Faith  is  buttressed  by  the  resurrec¬ 
tion  and  ascension  of  Christ ,  arid  is  stimulated 
by  his  coming  to  judgment 

14.  The  belief  of  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord  from  the  dead,  and  of  His  ascension  into 
heaven,  has  strengthened  our  faith  by  adding 
a  great  buttress  of  hope.  For  it  clearly  shows 
how  freely  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us  when 
He  had  it  in  His  power  thus  to  take  it  up  again. 
With  what  assurance,  then,  is  the  hope  of  be¬ 
lievers  animated,  when  they  reflect  how  great 
He  was  Who  suffered  so  great  things  for  them 


while  they  were  still  in  unbelief!  And  when 
men  look  for  Him  to  come  from  heaven  as  the 
judge  of  quick  and  dead,  it  strikes  great  terror 
into  the  careless,  so  that  they  betake  themselves 
to  diligent  preparation,  and  learn  by  holy  living 
to  long  for  His  approach,  instead  of  quaking  at 
it  on  account  of  their  evil  deeds.  And  what 
tongue  can  tell,  or  what  imagination  can  con¬ 
ceive,  the  reward  He  will  bestow  at  the  last, 
when  we  consider  that  for  our  comfort  in  this 
earthly  journey  He  has  given  us  so  freely  of 
His  Spirit  that  in  the  adversities  of  this  life  we 
may  retain  our  confidence  in,  and  love  for,  Him 
Whom  as  yet  we  see  not ;  and  that  He  has  also 
given  to  each  gifts  suitable  for  the  building  up 
of  His  Church,  that  we  may  do  what  He  points 
out  as  right  to  be  done,  not  only  without  a 
murmur,  but  even  with  delight? 

Chap.  16.  Christ  purges  his  Church  by  medi¬ 
cinal  afflictions 

15.  For  the  Church  is  His  body,  as  the  apos¬ 
tle’s  teaching  shows  us;1  and  it  is  even  called 
His  spouse.2  His  body,  then,  which  has  many 
members,  and  all  performing  different  func¬ 
tions,  He  holds  together  in  the  bond  of  unity 
and  love,  which  is  its  true  health.  Moreover  He 
exercises  it  in  the  present  time,  and  purges  it 
with  many  wholesome  afflictions,  that,  when  He 
has  transplanted  it  from  this  world  to  the  eternal 
world,  He  may  take  it  to  Himself  as  His  bride, 
without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing. 

Chap.  17.  Christ,  by  forgiving  our  sins,  opened 

the  way  to  our  home 

16.  Further,  when  we  are  on  the  way,  and  that 
not  a  way  that  lies  through  space,  but  through 
a  change  of  affections,  and  one  which  the  guilt 
of  our  past  sins  like  a  hedge  of  thorns  barred 
against  us,  what  could  He,  Who  was  willing  to  lay 
Himself  down  as  the  way  by  which  we  should  re¬ 
turn,  do  that  would  be  still  gracious  and  more 
merciful,  except  to  forgive  us  all  our  sins,  and  by 
being  crucified  for  us  to  remove  the  stern  de¬ 
crees  that  barred  the  door  against  our  return? 

Chap.  18.  The  keys  given  to  the  Church 

17.  He  has  given,  therefore,  the  keys  to  His 
Church,  that  whatsoever  it  should  bind  on  earth 
might  be  bound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever  it 
should  loose  on  earth  might  be  loosed  in  heav¬ 
en;3  that  is  to  say,  that  whosoever  in  the  Church 
should  not  believe  that  his  sins  are  remitted, 
they  should  not  be  remitted  to  him;  but  that 

1Cf.  Eph.  1.  23  with  Rom.  12.  5. 

2Rev.  19.  7;  21. 9.  3Cf.  Matt.  16. 19  with  18. 18. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  15-22  629 


whosoever  should  believe,  and  should  repent, 
and  turn  from  his  sins,  should  be  saved  by  the 
same  faith  and  repentance  on  the  ground  of 
which  he  is  received  into  the  bosom  of  the 
Church.  For  he  who  does  not  believe  that  his 
sins  can  be  pardoned  falls  into  despair,  and  be¬ 
comes  worse,  as  if  no  greater  good  remained  for 
him  than  to  be  evil,  when  he  has  ceased  to  have 
faith  in  the  results  of  his  own  repentance. 

Chap.  19.  Bodily  and  spiritual  death  and  resur¬ 
rection 

18.  Furthermore,  as  there  is  a  kind  of  death  of 
the  soul,  which  consists  in  the  putting  away  of 
former  habits  and  former  ways  of  life,  and 
which  comes  through  repentance,  so  also  the 
death  of  the  body  consists  in  the  dissolution  of 
the  former  principle  of  life.  And  just  as  the  soul, 
after  it  has  put  away  and  destroyed  by  repen¬ 
tance  its  former  habits,  is  created  anew  after  a 
better  pattern,  so  we  must  hope  and  believe  that 
the  body,  after  that  death  which  we  all  owe  as 
a  debt  contracted  through  sin,  shall  at  the  res¬ 
urrection  be  changed  into  a  better  form;  not 
that  flesh  and  blood  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God  (for  that  is  impossible),  but  that  this  cor¬ 
ruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mor¬ 
tal  shall  put  on  immortality.1  And  thus  the 
body,  being  the  source  of  no  uneasiness  because 
it  can  feel  no  want,  shall  be  animated  by  a  spir¬ 
it  perfectly  pure  and  happy,  and  shall  enjoy  un¬ 
broken  peace. 

Chap.  20.  The  resurrection  to  damnation 

19.  Now  he  whose  soul  does  not  die  to  this 
world  and  begin  here  to  be  conformed  to  the 
truth,  falls  when  the  body  dies  into  a  more  ter¬ 
rible  death,  and  shall  revive,  not  to  change  his 
earthly  for  a  heavenly  habitation,  but  to  endure 
the  penalty  of  his  sin. 

Chap.  21.  Neither  body  nor  soul  extinguished 

at  death 

And  so  faith  clings  to  the  assurance,  and  we 
must  believe  that  it  is  so  in  fact,  that  neither 
the  human  soul  nor  the  human  body  suffers 
complete  extinction,  but  that  the  wicked  rise 
again  to  endure  inconceivable  punishment,  and 
the  good  to  receive  eternal  life. 

Chap.  22.  God  alone  to  be  enjoyed 

20.  Among  all  these  things,  then,  those  only 
are  the  true  objects  of  enjoyment  which  we  have 
spoken  of  as  eternal  and  unchangeable.  The  rest 
are  for  use,  that  we  may  be  able  to  arrive  at  the 

JI  Cor.  15.  50-53. 


full  enjoyment  of  the  former.  We,  however, 
who  enjoy  and  use  other  things  are  things  our¬ 
selves.  For  a  great  thing  truly  is  man,  made  aft¬ 
er  the  image  and  similitude  of  God,  not  as  re¬ 
spects  the  mortal  body  in  which  he  is  clothed, 
but  as  respects  the  rational  soul  by  which  he  is 
exalted  in  honour  above  the  beasts.  And  so  it  be¬ 
comes  an  important  question,  whether  men 
ought  to  enjoy,  or  to  use,  themselves,  or  to  do 
both.  For  we  are  commanded  to  love  one  an¬ 
other:  but  it  is  a  question  whether  man  is  to  be 
loved  by  man  for  his  own  sake,  or  for  the  sake 
of  something  else.  If  it  is  for  his  own  sake,  we 
enjoy  him ;  if  it  is  for  the  sake  of  something  else, 
we  use  him.  It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  he  is  to 
be  loved  for  the  sake  of  something  else.  For  if  a 
thing  is  to  be  loved  for  its  own  sake,  then  in  the 
enjoyment  of  it  consists  a  happy  life,  the  hope 
of  which  at  least,  if  not  yet  the  reality,  is  our 
comfort  in  the  present  time.  But  a  curse  is  pro¬ 
nounced  on  him  who  places  his  hope  in  man.2 

21.  Neither  ought  any  one  to  have  joy  in  him¬ 
self,  if  you  look  at  the  matter  clearly,  because 
no  one  ought  to  love  even  himself  for  his  own 
sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  Him  Who  is  the  true  ob¬ 
ject  of  enjoyment.  For  a  man  is  never  in  so  good 
a  state  as  when  his  whole  life  is  a  journey  to¬ 
wards  the  unchangeable  life,  and  his  affections 
are  entirely  fixed  upon  that.  If,  however,  he 
loves  himself  for  his  own  sake,  he  does  not  look 
at  himself  in  relation  to  God,  but  turns  his  mind 
in  upon  himself,  and  so  is  not  occupied  with  any¬ 
thing  that  is  unchangeable.  And  thus  he  does 
not  enjoy  himself  at  his  best,  because  he  is  bet¬ 
ter  when  his  mind  is  fully  fixed  upon,  and  his 
affections  wrapped  up  in,  the  unchangeable 
good,  than  when  he  turns  from  that  to  enjoy 
even  himself.  Wherefore  if  you  ought  not  to 
love  even  yourself  for  your  own  sake,  but  for 
His  in  Whom  your  love  finds  its  most  worthy  ob¬ 
ject,  no  other  man  has  a  right  to  be  angry  if  you 
love  him  too  for  God’s  sake.  For  this  is  the  law 
of  love  that  has  been  laid  down  by  Divine  au¬ 
thority:  “Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy¬ 
self”;  but,  “Thou  shalt  love  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
mind”:3  so  that  you  are  to  concentrate  all  your 
thoughts,  your  whole  life,  and  your  whole  in¬ 
telligence  upon  Him  from  Whom  you  derive  all 
that  you  bring.  For  when  He  says,  “With  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
mind,”  He  means  that  no  part  of  our  life  is  to 
be  unoccupied,  and  to  afford  room,  as  it  were, 
for  the  wish  to  enjoy  some  other  object,  but  that 

2Jer.  17.  5. 

3Matt.  22.  37-39.  Cf.  Lev.  19.  18;  Deut.  6.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


630 

whatever  else  may  suggest  itself  to  us  as  an  ob¬ 
ject  worthy  of  love  is  to  be  borne  into  the  same 
channel  in  which  the  whole  current  of  our  affec¬ 
tions  flows.  Whoever,  then,  loves  his  neighbour 
aright,  ought  to  urge  upon  him  that  he  too 
should  love  God  with  his  whole  heart,  and  soul, 
and  mind.  For  in  this  way,  loving  his  neighbour 
as  himself,  a  man  turns  the  whole  current  of  his 
love  both  for  himself  and  his  neighbour  into 
the  channel  of  the  love  of  God,  which  suffers  no 
stream  to  be  drawn  off  from  itself  by  whose  di¬ 
version  its  own  volume  would  be  diminished. 

Chap.  23.  Man  needs  no  injunction  to  love  him¬ 
self  and  his  own  body 

22.  Those  things  which  are  objects  of  use  are 
not  all,  however,  to  be  loved,  but  those  only 
which  are  either  united  with  us  in  a  common  re¬ 
lation  to  God.  such  as  a  man  or  an  angel,  or  are 
so  related  to  us  as  to  need  the  goodness  of  God 
through  our  instrumentality,  such  as  the  body. 
For  assuredly  the  martyrs  did  not  love  the  wick¬ 
edness  of  their  persecutors,  although  they  used 
it  to  attain  the  favour  of  God.  As,  then,  there  gje 
four  kinds  of  things  that  are  to  be  loved — first, 
that  which  is  above  us;  second,  ourselves;  third, 
that  which  is  on  a  level  with  us;  fourth,  that 
which  is  beneath  us — no  precepts  need  be  given 
about  the  second  and  fourth  of  these.  For,  how¬ 
ever  far  a  man  may  fall  away  from  the  truth,  he 
still  continues  to  love  himself,  and  to  love  his 
own  body.  The  soul  which  flies  away  from  the 
unchangeable  Light,  the  Ruler  of  all  things, 
does  so  that  it  may  rule  over  itself  and  over  its 
own  body;  and  so  it  cannot  but  love  both  itself 
and  its  own  body. 

23.  Moreover,  it  thinks  it  has  attained  some¬ 
thing  very  great  if  it  is  able  to  lord  it  over  its 
companions,  that  is,  other  men.  For  it  is  inher¬ 
ent  in  the  sinful  soul  to  desire  above  all  things, 
and  to  claim  as  due  to  itself,  that  which  is  prop¬ 
erly  due  to  God  only.  Now  such  love  of  itself  is 
more  correctly  called  hate.  For  it  is  not  just  that 
it  should  desire  what  is  beneath  it  to  be  obedient 
to  it  while  itself  will  not  obey  its  own  superior; 
and  most  justly  has  it  been  said,  “He  who  loveth 
iniquity  hateth  his  own  soul.”  1  And  accordingly 
the  soul  becomes  weak  and  endures  much  suffer¬ 
ing  about  the  mortal  body.  For,  of  course,  it 
must  love  the  body,  and  be  grieved  at  its  cor¬ 
ruption  ;  and  the  immortality  and  incorruptibili¬ 
ty  of  the  body  spring  out  of  the  health  of  the 
soul.  Now  the  health  of  the  soul  is  to  cling  stead¬ 
fastly  to  the  better  part,  that  is,  to  the  un¬ 
changeable  God.  But  when  it  aspires  to  lord  it 

JPs.  10.  5  (Septuagint). 


even  over  those  who  are  by  nature  its  equals — 
that  is,  its  fellow-men — this  is  a  reach  of  ar¬ 
rogance  utterly  intolerable. 

Chap.  24.  No  man  hates  his  own  flesh,  not  even 

those  who  abuse  it 

24.  No  man,  then,  hates  himself.  On  this 
point,  indeed,  no  question  was  ever  raised  by 
any  sect.  But  neither  does  any  man  hate  his  own 
body.  For  the  apostle  says  truly,  “No  man  ever 
yet  hated  his  own  flesh.”  2  And  when  some  peo¬ 
ple  say  that  they  would  rather  be  without  a  body 
altogether,  they  entirely  deceive  themselves. 
For  it  is  not  their  body,  but  its  corruptions  and 
its  heaviness,  that  they  hate.  And  so  it  is  not  no 
body,  but  an  uncorrupted  and  very  light  body, 
that  they  want.  But  they  think  a  body  of  that 
kind  would  be  no  body  at  all,  because  they  think 
such  a  thing  as  that  must  be  a  spirit.  And  as  to 
the  fact  that  they  seem  in  some  sort  to  scourge 
their  bodies  by  abstinence  and  toil,  those  who 
do  this  in  the  right  spirit  do  it  not  that  they  may 
get  rid  of  their  body,  but  that  they  may  have  it 
in  subjection  and  ready  for  every  needful  work. 
For  they  strive  by  a  kind  of  toilsome  exercise 
of  the  body  itself  to  root  out  those  lusts  that  are 
hurtful  to  the  body,  that  is,  those  habits  and  af¬ 
fections  of  the  soul  that  lead  to  the  enjoyment 
of  unworthy  objects.  They  are  not  destroying 
themselves ;  they  are  taking  care  of  their  health. 

25.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  do  this  in  a 
perverse  spirit,  make  war  upon  their  own  body 
as  if  it  were  a  natural  enemy.  And  in  this  mat¬ 
ter  they  are  led  astray  by  a  mistaken  interpre¬ 
tation  of  what  they  read:  “The  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh, 
and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other.”  3 
For  this  is  said  of  the  carnal  habit  yet  unsub¬ 
dued,  against  which  the  spirit  lusteth,  not  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  body,  but  to  eradicate  the  lust  of  the 
body — i.e.,  its  evil  habit — and  thus  to  make  it 
subject  to  the  spirit,  which  is  what  the  order  of 
nature  demands.  For  as,  after  the  resurrection, 
the  body,  having  become  wholly  subject  to  the 
spirit,  will  live  in  perfect  peace  to  all  eternity; 
even  in  this  life  we  must  make  it  an  object  to 
have  the  carnal  habit  changed  for  the  better,  so 
that  its  inordinate  affections  may  not  war 
against  the  soul.  And  until  this  shall  take  place, 
“the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spir¬ 
it  against  the  flesh”;  the  spirit  struggling,  not  in 
hatred,  but  for  the  mastery,  because  it  desires 
that  what  it  loves  should  be  subject  to  the  high¬ 
er  principle;  and  the  flesh  struggling,  not  in  ha¬ 
tred,  but  because  of  the  bondage  of  habit  which 

2Eph.  5.  29.  3Gal.  5.  17. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  23-28  631 


it  has  derived  from  its  parent  stock,  and  which 
has  grown  in  upon  it  by  a  law  of  nature  till  it  has 
become  inveterate.  The  spirit,  then,  in  subduing 
the  flesh,  is  working  as  it  were  to  destroy  the  ill- 
founded  peace  of  an  evil  habit,  and  to  bring 
about  the  real  peace  which  springs  out  of  a  good 
habit.  Nevertheless,  not  even  those  who,  led 
astray  by  false  notions,  hate  their  bodies  would 
be  prepared  to  sacrifice  one  eye,  even  supposing 
they  could  do  so  without  suffering  any  pain,  and 
that  they  had  as  much  sight  left  in  one  as  they 
formerly  had  in  two,  unless  some  object  was  to 
be  attained  which  would  overbalance  the  loss. 
This  and  other  indications  of  the  same  kind  are 
sufficient  to  show  those  who  candidly  seek  the 
truth  how  well-founded  is  the  statement  of  the 
apostle  when  he  says,  “No  man  ever  yet  hated 
his  own  flesh.”  He  adds  too,  “but  nourisheth  and 
cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  Church.”  1 

Chap.  25.  A  man  may  love  something  more  than 

his  body,  but  does  not  therefore  hate  his  body 

26.  Man,  therefore,  ought  to  be  taught  the 
due  measure  of  loving,  that  is,  in  what  measure 
he  may  love  himself  so  as  to  be  of  service  to 
himself.  For  that  he  does  love  himself,  and  does 
desire  to  do  good  to  himself,  nobody  but  a  fool 
would  doubt.  He  is  to  be  taught,  too,  in  what 
measure  to  love  his  body,  so  as  to  care  for  it 
wisely  and  within  due  limits.  For  it  is  equally 
manifest  that  he  loves  his  body  also,  and  desires 
to  keep  it  safe  and  sound.  And  yet  a  man  may 
have  something  that  he  loves  better  than  the 
safety  and  soundness  of  his  body.  For  many 
have  been  found  voluntarily  to  suffer  both  pains 
and  amputations  of  some  of  their  limbs  that 
they  might  obtain  other  objects  which  they  val¬ 
ued  more  highly.  But  no  one  is  to  be  told  not  to 
desire  the  safety  and  health  of  his  body  because 
there  is  something  he  desires  more.  For  the  mi¬ 
ser,  though  he  loves  money,  buys  bread  for  him¬ 
self — that  is,  he  gives  away  money  that  he  is 
very  fond  of  and  desires  to  heap  up — but  it  is 
because  he  values  more  highly  the  bodily  health 
which  jthe  bread  sustains.  It  is  superfluous  to  ar¬ 
gue  longer  on  a  point  so  very  plain,  but  this  is 
just  what  the  error  of  wicked  men  often  com¬ 
pels  us  to  do. 

Chap.  26.  The  command  to  love  God  and  our 

neighbour  includes  a  command  to  love  our¬ 
selves 

27.  Seeing,  then,  that  there  is  no  need  of  a 
command  that  every  man  should  love  himself 
and  his  own  body — seeing,  that  is,  that  we  love 

1Eph.  s.  29. 


ourselves,  and  what  is  beneath  us  but  connected 
with  us,  through  a  law  of  nature  which  has  nev¬ 
er  been  violated,  and  which  is  common  to  us 
with  the  beasts  (for  even  the  beasts  love  them¬ 
selves  and  their  own  bodies) — it  only  remained 
necessary  to  lay  injunctions  upon  us  in  regard 
to  God  above  us,  and  our  neighbour  beside  us. 
“Thou  shalt  love,”  He  says,  “the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and 
with  all  thy  mind ;  and  thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh¬ 
bour  as  thyself.  On  these  two  commandments 
hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets.”  2  Thus  the 
end  of  the  commandment  is  love,  and  that  two¬ 
fold,  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  our  neigh¬ 
bour.  Now,  if  you  take  yourself  in  your  entirety 
— that  is,  soul  and  body  together — and  your 
neighbour  in  his  entirety,  soul  and  body  together 
(for  man  is  made  up  of  soul  and  body),  you  will 
find  that  none  of  the  classes  of  things  that  are 
to  be  loved  is  overlooked  in  these  two  command¬ 
ments.  For  though,  when  the  love  of  God  comes 
first,  and  the  measure  of  our  love  for  Him  is 
prescribed  in  such  terms  that  it  is  evident  all 
other  things  are  to  find  their  centre  in  Him, 
nothing  seems  to  be  said  about  our  love  for  our¬ 
selves;  yet  when  it  is  said,  “Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself,”  it  at  once  becomes  evi¬ 
dent  that  our  love  for  ourselves  has  not  been 
overlooked. 

Chap.  27.  The  order  of  love 

28.  Now  he  is  a  man  of  just  and  holy  life  who 
forms  an  unprejudiced  estimate  of  things,  and 
keeps  his  affections  also  under  strict  control,  so 
that  he  neither  loves  what  he  ought  not  to  love, 
nor  fails  to  love  what  he  ought  to  love,  nor  loves 
that  more  which  ought  to  be  loved  less,  nor 
loves  that  equally  which  ought  to  be  loved  ei¬ 
ther  less  or  more,  nor  loves  that  less  or  more 
which  ought  to  be  loved  equally.  No  sinner  is  to 
be  loved  as  a  sinner;  and  every  man  is  to  be 
loved  as  a  man  for  God’s  sake;  but  God  is  to  be 
loved  for  His  own  sake.  And  if  God  is  to  be 
loved  more  than  any  man,  each  man  ought  to 
love  God  more  than  himself.  Likewise  we  ought 
to  love  another  man  better  than  our  own  body, 
because  all  things  are  to  be  loved  in  reference 
to  God,  and  another  man  can  have  fellowship 
with  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  whereas  our 
body  cannot;  for  the  body  only  lives  through 
the  soul,  and  it  is  by  the  soul  that  we  enjoy  God. 

Chap.  28.  How  we  are  to  decide  whom  to  aid 

29.  Further,  all  men  are  to  be  loved  equally. 
But  since  you  cannot  do  good  to  all,  you  are  to 

2Matt.  22.  37-40. 


63  2  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


pay  special  regard  to  those  who,  by  the  accidents 
of  time,  or  place,  or  circumstance,  are  brought 
into  closer  connection  with  you.  For,  suppose 
that  you  had  a  great  deal  of  some  commodity, 
and  felt  bound  to  give  it  away  to  somebody  who 
had  none,  and  that  it  could  not  be  given  to  more 
than  one  person ;  if  two  persons  presented  them¬ 
selves,  neither  of  whom  had  either  from  need  or 
relationship  a  greater  claim  upon  you  than  the 
other,  you  could  do  nothing  fairer  than  choose 
by  lot  to  which  you  would  give  what  could  not 
be  given  to  both.  Just  so  among  men :  since  you 
cannot  consult  for  the  good  of  them  all,  you 
must  take  the  matter  as  decided  for  you  by  a 
sort  of  lot.  according  as  each  man  happens  for 
the  time  being  to  be  more  closely  connected  with 
you. 

Chap.  29.  We  are  to  desire  and  endeavour  that 

all  me?i  may  love  God 

30.  Now  of  all  who  can  with  us  enjoy  God, 
we  love  partly  those  to  whom  we  render  serv¬ 
ices,  partly  those  who  render  services  to  us, 
partly  those  who  both  help  us  in  our  need  andjn 
turn  are  helped  by  us,  partly  those  upon  whom 
we  confer  no  advantage  and  from  whom  we 
look  for  none.  We  ought  to  desire,  however,  that 
they  should  all  join  with  us  in  loving  God,  and  all 
the  assistance  that  we  either  give  them  or  accept 
from  them  should  tend  to  that  one  end.  For  in 
the  theatres,  dens  of  iniquity  though  they  be,  if 
a  man  is  fond  of  a  particular  actor,  and  enjoys 
his  art  as  a  great  or  even  as  the  very  greatest 
good,  he  is  fond  of  all  who  join  with  him  in  ad¬ 
miration  of  his  favourite,  not  for  their  own 
sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  him  whom  they  ad¬ 
mire  in  common ;  and  the  more  fervent  he  is  in 
his  admiration,  the  more  he  works  in  every  way 
he  can  to  secure  new  admirers  for  him,  and  the 
more  anxious  he  becomes  to  show  him  to  others ; 
and  if  he  find  any  one  comparatively  indifferent, 
he  does  all  he  can  to  excite  his  interest  by  urg¬ 
ing  his  favourite’s  merits :  if,  however,  he  meet 
with  any  one  who  opposes  him,  he  is  exceeding¬ 
ly  displeased  by  such  a  man’s  contempt  of  his 
favourite,  and  strives  in  every  way  he  can  to  re¬ 
move  it.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  what  does  it  become 
us  to  do  who  live  in  the  fellowship  of  the  love  of 
God,  the  enjoyment  of  whom  is  true  happiness 
of  life,  to  whom  all  who  love  Him  owe  both 
their  own  existence  and  the  love  they  bear  Him, 
concerning  whom  we  have  no  fear  that  any  one 
who  comes  to  know  Him  will  be  disappointed 
in  Him,  and  who  desires  our  love,  not  for  any 
gain  to  Himself,  but  that  those  who  love  Him 
may  obtain  an  eternal  reward,  even  Himself 


Whom  they  love?  And  hence  it  is  that  we  love 
even  our  enemies.  For  we  do  not  fear  them,  see¬ 
ing  they  cannot  take  away  from  us  what  we  love; 
but  we  pity  them  rather,  because  the  more  they 
hate  us  the  more  are  they  separated  from  Him 
Whom  we  love.  For  if  they  would  turn  to  Him, 
they  must  of  necessity  love  Him  as  the  supreme 
good,  and  love  us  too  as  partakers  with  them  in 
so  great  a  blessing. 

Chap.  30.  Whether  angels  are  to  be  reckoned 

our  neighbours 

31.  There  arises  further  in  this  connection  a 
question  about  angels.  For  they  are  happy  in  the 
enjoyment  of  Him  Whom  we  long  to  enjoy;  and 
the  more  we  enjoy  Him  in  this  life  as  through  a 
glass  darkly,  the  more  easy  do  we  find  it  to  bear 
our  pilgrimage,  and  the  more  eagerly  do  we  long 
for  its  termination.  But  it  is  not  irrational  to 
ask  whether  in  those  two  commandments  is  in¬ 
cluded  the  love  of  angels  also.  For  that  He  who 
commanded  us  to  love  our  neighbour  made  no 
exception,  as  far  as  men  are  concerned,  is  shown 
both  by  our  Lord  Himself  in  the  Gospel,  and  by 
the  Apostle  Paul.  For  when  the  man  to  whom 
our  Lord  delivered  those  two  commandments, 
and  to  whom  He  said  that  on  these  hang  all  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  asked  Him,  “And  who  is 
my  neighbour?”  He  told  him  of  a  certain  man 
who,  going  down  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  fell 
among  thieves,  and  was  severely  wounded  by 
them,  and  left  naked  and  half  dead.1  And  He 
showed  him  that  nobody  was  neighbour  to  this 
man  except  him  who  took  pity  upon  him  and 
came  forward  to  relieve  and  care  for  him.  And 
the  man  who  had  asked  the  question  admitted 
the  truth  of  this  when  he  was  himself  interro¬ 
gated  in  turn.  To  whom  our  Lord  says,  “Go  and 
do  thou  likewise”;  teaching  us  that  he  is  our 
neighbour  whom  it  is  our  duty  to  help  in  his 
need,  or  whom  it  would  be  our  duty  to  help  if 
he  were  in  need.  Whence  it  follows,  that  he 
whose  duty  it  would  be  in  turn  to  help  us  is  our 
neighbour.  For  the  name  “neighbour”  is  a  rela¬ 
tive  one,  and  no  one  can  be  neighbour  except  to 
a  neighbour.  And,  again,  who  does  not  see  that 
no  exception  is  made  of  any  one  as  a  person  to 
whom  the  offices  of  mercy  may  be  denied  when 
our  Lord  extends  the  rule  even  to  our  enemies? 
“Love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  that  hate 
you.” 2 

32.  And  so  also  the  Apostle  Paul  teaches  when 
he  says :  “For  this.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adul¬ 
tery,  Thou  shalt  not  kill.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 
Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness,  Thou  shalt 

^uke,  10.  29,  ff.  2Matt.  5.  44. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  29-33  633 


not  covet;  and  if  there  be  any  other  command¬ 
ment,  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  saying, 
namely,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy¬ 
self.  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour.”  1 
Whoever  then  supposes  that  the  apostle  did  not 
embrace  every  man  in  this  precept,  is  compelled 
to  admit,  what  is  at  once  most  absurd  and  most 
pernicious,  that  the  apostle  thought  it  no  sin,  if 
a  man  were  not  a  Christian  or  were  an  enemy, 
to  commit  adultery  with  his  wife,  or  to  kill  him, 
or  to  covet  his  goods.  And  as  nobody  but  a  fool 
would  say  this,  it  is  clear  that  every  man  is  to 
be  considered  our  neighbour,  because  we  are  to 
work  no  ill  to  any  man. 

33.  But  now,  if  every  one  to  whom  we  ought 
to  show,  or  who  ought  to  show  to  us,  the  offices 
of  mercy  is  by  right  called  a  neighbour,  it  is 
manifest  that  the  command  to  love  our  neigh¬ 
bour  embraces  the  holy  angels  also,  seeing  that 
so  great  offices  of  mercy  have  been  performed 
by  them  on  our  behalf,  as  may  easily  be  shown 
by  turning  the  attention  to  many  passages  of 
Holy  Scripture.  And  on  this  ground  even  God 
Himself,  our  Lord,  desired  to  be  called  our 
neighbour.  For  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  points  to 
Himself  under  the  figure  of  the  man  who 
brought  aid  to  him  who  was  lying  half  dead  on 
the  road,  wounded  and  abandoned  by  the  rob¬ 
bers.  And  the  Psalmist  says  in  his  prayer,  “I  be¬ 
haved  myself  as  though  he  had  been  my  friend 
or  brother.” 2  But  as  the  Divine  nature  is  of 
higher  excellence  than,  and  far  removed  above, 
our  nature,  the  command  to  love  God  is  distinct 
from  that  to  love  our  neighbour.  For  He  shows 
us  pity  on  account  of  His  own  goodness,  but  we 
show  pity  to  one  another  on  account  of  His; 
that  is,  He  pities  us  that' we  may  fully  enjoy 
Himself ;  we  pity  one  another  that  we  may  fully 
enjoy  Him. 

Chap.  31.  God  uses  rather  than  enjoys  us 

34.  And  on  this  ground,  when  we  say  that  we 
enjoy  only  that  which  we  love  for  its  own  sake, 
and  that  nothing  is  a  true  object  of  enjoyment 
except  that  which  makes  us  happy,  and  that  all 
other  things  are  for  use,  there  seems  still  to  be 
something  that  requires  explanation.  For  God 
loves  us,  and  Holy  Scripture  frequently  sets  be¬ 
fore  us  the  love  He  has  towards  us.  In  what  way 
then  does  He  love  us?  As  objects  of  use  or  as 
objects  of  enjoyment?  If  He  enjoys  us,  He 
must  be  in  need  of  good  from  us,  and  no  sane 
man  will  say  that;  for  all  the  good  we  enjoy  is 
either  Himself,  or  what  comes  from  Himself. 
And  no  one  can  be  ignorant  or  in  doubt  as  to  the 

^om.  13.  9,  10.  2Ps.  35-  14* 


fact  that  the  light  stands  in  no  need  of  the  glit¬ 
ter  of  the  things  it  has  itself  lit  up.  The  Psalm¬ 
ist  says  most  plainly,  “I  said  to  the  Lord.  Thou 
art  my  God,  for  Thou  needest  not  my  good¬ 
ness.”  3  He  does  not  enjoy  us  then,  but  makes 
use  of  us.  For  if  He  neither  enjoys  nor  uses  us, 
I  am  at  a  loss  to  discover  in  what  way  He  can 
love  us. 

Chap.  32.  In  what  way  God  uses  man 

35.  But  neither  does  He  use  after  our  fashion 
of  using.  For  when  we  use  objects,  we  do  so  with 
a  view  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  goodness  of 
God.  God,  however,  in  His  use  of  us,  has  refer¬ 
ence  to  His  own  goodness.  For  it  is  because  He 
is  good  we  exist ;  and  so  far  as  we  truly  exist  we 
are  good.  And,  further,  because  He  is  also  just, 
we  cannot  with  impunity  be  evil ;  and  so  far  as 
we  are  evil,  so  far  is  our  existence  less  complete. 
Now  He  is  the  first  and  supreme  existence,  Who 
is  altogether  unchangeable,  and  Who  could  say 
in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  words,  “I  am  that  I 
am,”  and  “Thou  shalt  say  to  them,  I  am  hath 
sent  me  unto  you”;4  so  that  all  other  things  that 
exist,  both  owe  their  existence  entirely  to  Him, 
and  are  good  only  so  far  as  He  has  given  it  to 
them  to  be  so.  That  use,  then,  which  God  is  said 
to  make  of  us  has  no  reference  to  His  own  ad¬ 
vantage,  but  to  ours  only;  and,  so  far  as  He  is 
concerned,  has  reference  only  to  His  goodness. 
When  we  take  pity  upon  a  man  and  care  for  him, 
it  is  for  his  advantage  we  do  so ;  but  somehow 
or  other  our  own  advantage  follows  by  a  sort  of 
natural  consequence,  for  God  does  not  leave  the 
mercy  we  show  to  him  who  needs  it  to  go  with¬ 
out  reward.  Now  this  is  our  highest  reward,  that 
we  should  fully  enjoy  Him,  and  that  all  who  en¬ 
joy  Him  should  enjoy  one  another  in  Him. 

Chap.  33.  In  what  way  man  should  be  enjoyed 

36.  For  if  we  find  our  happiness  complete  in 
one  another,  we  stop  short  upon  the  road,  and 
place  our  hope  of  happiness  in  man  or  angel. 
Now  the  proud  man  and  the  proud  angel  arro¬ 
gate  this  to  themselves,  and  are  glad  to  have  the 
hope  of  others  fixed  upon  them.  But,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  holy  man  and  the  holy  angel,  even 
when  we  are  weary  and  anxious  to  stay  with 
them  and  rest  in  them,  set  themselves  to  recruit 
our  energies  with  the  provision  which  they  have 
received  of  God  for  us  or  for  themselves;  and 
then  urge  us  thus  refreshed  to  go  on  our  way  to¬ 
wards  Him,  in  the  enjoyment  of  Whom  we  find 
our  common  happiness.  For  even  the  apostle  ex¬ 
claims,  “Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?  or  were  ye 

3Ps.  16.  2  (Septuagint).  4Ex.  3.  14. 


634  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul?”1  and  again: 
“Neither  is  he  that  planteth  anything,  neither 
he  that  watereth;  but  God  that  giveth  the  in¬ 
crease.”  2  And  the  angel  admonisheth  the  man 
who  is  about  to  worship  him,  that  he  should 
rather  worship  Him  Who  is  his  Master,  and  un¬ 
der  Whom  he  himself  is  a  fellow-servant.3 

37.  But  when  you  have  joy  of  a  man  in  God, 
it  is  God  rather  than  man  that  you  enjoy.  For 
you  enjoy  Him  by  Whom  you  are  made  happy, 
and  you  rejoice  to  have  come  to  Him  in  Whose 
presence  you  place  your  hope  of  joy.  And  ac¬ 
cordingly,  Paul  says  to  Philemon,  “Yea,  brother, 
let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord.”  4  For  if  he 
had  not  added  “in  the  Lord.”  but  had  only  said, 
“Let  me  have  joy  of  thee,”  he  would  have  im¬ 
plied  that  he  fixed  his  hope  of  happiness  upon 
him.  although  even  in  the  immediate  context  to 
“enjoy”  is  used  in  the  sense  of  to  “use  with  de¬ 
light.”  For  when  the  thing  that  we  love  is  near 
us,  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  it  should  bring 
delight  with  it.  And  if  you  pass  beyond  this  de¬ 
light,  and  make  it  a  means  to  that  which  you  are 
permanently  to  rest  in,  you  are  using  it,  and  it  js 
an  abuse  of  language  to  say  that  you  enjoy  it. 
But  if  you  cling  to  it,  and  rest  in  it,  finding  your 
happiness  complete  in  it,  then  you  may  be  truly 
and  properly  said  to  enjoy  it.  And  this  we  must 
never  do  except  in  the  case  of  the  Blessed  Trin¬ 
ity,  who  is  the  Supreme  and  Unchangeable 
Good. 

Chap.  34.  Christ  the  first  way  to  God 

38.  And  mark  that  even  when  He  Who  is 
Himself  the  Truth  and  the  Word,  by  Whom  all 
things  were  made,  had  been  made  flesh  that  He 
might  dwell  among  us,  the  apostle  yet  says: 
“Yea,  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the 
flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  Him  no 
more.”  5  For  Christ,  desiring  not  only  to  give 
the  possession  to  those  who  had  completed  the 
journey,  but  also  to  be  Himself  the  way  to  those 
who  were  just  setting  out,  determined  to  take  a 
fleshly  body.  Whence  also  that  expression,  “The 
Lord  created 6  me  in  the  beginning  of  His  way,”7 
that  is,  that  those  who  wished  to  come  might 
begin  their  journey  in  Him.  The  apostle,  there¬ 
fore,  although  still  on  the  way,  and  following 
after  God  Who  called  him  to  the  reward  of  His 
heavenly  calling,  yet  forgetting  those  things 
which  were  behind,  and  pressing  on  towards 
those  things  which  were  before,8  had  already 
passed  over  the  beginning  of  the  way,  and  had 

*1  Cor.  1.  13.  2I  Cor.  3.  7.  3Rev.  19.  10. 

4Philem.  20.  5II  Cor.  5.  16.  7Prov.  8.  22. 

Authorized  Version:  possessed.  8Cf.  Phil.  3.  13. 


now  no  further  need  of  it;  yet  by  this  way  all 
must  commence  their  journey  who  desire  to  at¬ 
tain  to  the  truth,  and  to  rest  in  eternal  life.  For 
He  says :  “I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the 
life”;9  that  is,  by  Me  men  come,  to  Me  they 
come,  in  Me  they  rest.  For  when  we  come  to 
Him,  we  come  to  the  Father  also,  because 
through  an  equal  an  equal  is  known;  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  binds,  and  as  it  were  seals  us,  so 
that  we  are  able  to  rest  permanently  in  the  su¬ 
preme  and  unchangeable  Good.  And  hence  we 
may  learn  how  essential  it  is  that  nothing  should 
detain  us  on  the  way,  when  not  even  our  Lord 
Himself,  so  far  as  He  has  condescended  to  be 
our  way,  is  willing  to  detain  us,  but  wishes  us 
rather  to  press  on;  and,  instead  of  weakly  cling¬ 
ing  to  temporal  things,  even  though  these  have 
been  put  on  and  worn  by  Him  for  our  salvation, 
to  pass  over  them  quickly,  and  to  struggle  to  at¬ 
tain  unto  Himself,  Who  has  freed  our  nature 
from  the  bondage  of  temporal  things  and  has 
set  it  down  at  the  right  hand  of  His  Father. 

Chap.  35.  The  fulfilment  and  end  of  Scripture 
is  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour 

39.  Of  all,  then,  that  has  been  said  since  we 
entered  upon  the  discussion  about  things,  this 
is  the  sum:  that  we  should  clearly  understand 
that  the  fulfilment  and  the  end  of  the  Law,  and 
of  all  Holy  Scripture,  is  the  love  of  an  object 
which  is  to  be  enjoyed,  and  the  love  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  which  can  enjoy  that  other  in  fellowship 
with  ourselves.  For  there  is  no  need  of  a  com¬ 
mand  that  each  man  should  love  himself.  The 
whole  temporal  dispensation  for  our  salvation, 
therefore,  was  framed  by  the  providence  of 
God  that  we  might  know  this  truth  and  be  able 
to  act  upon  it ;  and  we  ought  to  use  that  dispen¬ 
sation,  not  with  such  love  and  delight  as  if  it 
were  a  good  to  rest  in,  but  with  a  transient  feel¬ 
ing  rather,  such  as  we  have  towards  the  road,  or 
carriages,  or  other  things  that  are  merely  means. 
Perhaps  some  other  comparison  can  be  found 
that  will  more  suitably  express  the  idea  that  we 
are  to  love  the  things  by  which  we  are  borne 
only  for  the  sake  of  that  towards  which  we  are 
borne. 

Chap.  36.  That  interpretation  of  Scripture 
which  builds  us  up  in  love  is  not  perniciously 
deceptive  nor  mendacious ,  even  though  it  be 
faulty.  The  interpreter,  however,  should  be 
corrected 

40.  Whoever,  then,  thinks  that  he  understands 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  any  part  of  them,  but 

9 John,  14.  6. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  34-39 


puts  such  an  interpretation  upon  them  as  does 
not  tend  to  build  up  this  twofold  love  of  God 
and  our  neighbour,  does  not  yet  understand 
them  as  he  ought.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man 
draws  a  meaning  from  them  that  may  be  used 
for  the  building  up  of  love,  even  though  he  does 
not  happen  upon  the  precise  meaning  which  the 
author  whom  he  reads  intended  to  express  in 
that  place,  his  error  is  not  pernicious,  and  he  is 
wholly  clear  from  the  charge  of  deception.  For 
there  is  involved  in  deception  the  intention  to 
say  what  is  false;  and  we  find  plenty  of  people 
who  intend  to  deceive,  but  nobody  who  wishes 
to  be  deceived.  Since,  then,  the  man  who  knows 
practises  deceit,  and  the  ignorant  man  is  prac¬ 
tised  upon,  it  is  quite  clear  that  in  any  particu¬ 
lar  case  the  man  who  is  deceived  is  a  better  man 
than  he  who  deceives,  seeing  that  it  is  better  to 
suffer  than  to  commit  injustice.  Now  every  man 
who  lies  commits  an  injustice;  and  if  any  man 
thinks  that  a  lie  is  ever  useful,  he  must  think 
that  injustice  is  sometimes  useful.  For  no  liar 
keeps  faith  in  the  matter  about  which  he  lies. 
He  wishes,  of  course,  that  the  man  to  whom  he 
lies  should  place  confidence  in  him ;  and  yet  he 
betrays  his  confidence  by  lying  to  him.  Now  ev¬ 
ery  man  who  breaks  faith  is  unjust.  Either, 
then,  injustice  is  sometimes  useful  (which  is  im¬ 
possible),  or  a  lie  is  never. useful. 

41.  Whoever  takes  another  meaning  out  of 
Scripture  than  the  writer  intended,  goes  astray, 
but  not  through  any  falsehood  in  Scripture. 
Nevertheless,  as  I  was  going  to  say,  if  his  mis¬ 
taken  interpretation  tends  to  build  up  love, 
which  is  the  end  of  the  commandment,  he  goes 
astray  in  much  the  same  way  as  a  man  who  by 
mistake  quits  the  high  road,  but  yet  reaches 
through  the  fields  the  same  place  to  which  the 
road  leads.  He  is  to  be  corrected,  however,  and 
to  be  shown  how  much  better  it  is  not  to  quit 
the  straight  road,  lest,  if  he  get  into  a  habit  of 
going  astray,  he  may  sometimes  take  cross 
roads,  or  even  go  in  the  wrong  direction  alto¬ 
gether. 

1 

Chap.  37.  Dangers  of  mistaken  interpretation 

For  if  he  takes  up  rashly  a  meaning  which  the 
author  whom  he  is  reading  did  not  intend,  he 
often  falls  in  with  other  statements  which  he 
cannot  harmonize  with  this  meaning.  And  if  he 
admits  that  these  statements  are  true  and  cer¬ 
tain,  then  it  follows  that  the  meaning  he  had  put 
upon  the  former  passage  cannot  be  the  true  one: 
and  so  it  comes  to  pass,  one  can  hardly  tell  how, 
that,  out  of  love  for  his  own  opinion,  he  begins 
to  feel  more  angry  with  Scripture  than  he  is 


635 

with  himself.  And  if  he  should  once  permit  that 
evil  to  creep  in,  it  will  utterly  destroy  him.  “For 
we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.”  1  Now  faith  will 
totter  if  the  authority  of  Scripture  begin  to 
shake.  And  then,  if  faith  totter,  love  itself  will 
grow  cold.  For  if  a  man  has  fallen  from  faith,  he 
must  necessarily  also  fall  from  love;  for  he  can¬ 
not  love  what  he  does  not  believe  to  exist.  But 
if  he  both  believes  and  loves,  then  through  good 
works,  and  through  diligent  attention  to  the  pre¬ 
cepts  of  morality,  he  comes  to  hope  also  that  he 
shall  attain  the  object  of  his  love.  And  so  these 
are  the  three  things  to  which  all  knowledge 
and  all  prophecy  are  subservient:  faith,  hope, 
love. 

Chap.  38.  Love  never  faileth 

42.  But  sight  shall  displace  faith;  and  hope 
shall  be  swallowed  up  in  that  perfect  bliss  to 
which  we  shall  come :  love,  on  the  other  hand, 
shall  wax  greater  when  these  others  fail.  For  if 
we  love  by  faith  that  which  as  yet  we  see  not, 
how  much  more  shall  we  love  it  when  we  begin 
to  see!  And  if  we  love  by  hope  that  which  as  yet 
we  have  not  reached,  how  much  more  shall  we 
love  it  when  we  reach  it!  For  there  is  this  great 
difference  between  things  temporal  and  things 
eternal,  that  a  temporal  object  is  valued  more 
before  we  possess  it  and  begins  to  prove  worth¬ 
less  the  moment  we  attain  it,  because  it  does  not 
satisfy  the  soul,  which  has  its  only  true  and  sure 
resting-place  in  eternity:  an  eternal  object,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  loved  with  greater  ardour 
when  it  is  in  possession  than  while  it  is  still  an 
object  of  desire,  for  no  one  in  his  longing  for  it 
can  set  a  higher  value  on  it  than  really  belongs 
to  it,  so  as  to  think  it  comparatively  worthless 
when  he  finds  it  of  less  value  than  he  thought; 
on  the  contrary,  however  high  the  value  any 
man  may  set  upon  it  when  he  is  on  his  way  to 
possess  it,  he  will  find  it,  when  it  comes  into  his 
possession,  of  higher  value  still. 

Chap.  39.  He  who  is  mature  in  faith ,  hope  and 

love,  needs  Scripture  no  longer 

43.  And  thus  a  man  who  is  resting  upon  faith, 
hope  and  love,  and  who  keeps  a  firm  hold  upon 
these,  does  not  need  the  Scriptures  except  for 
the  purpose  of  instructing  others.  Accordingly, 
many  live  without  copies  of  the  Scriptures,  even 
in  solitude,  on  the  strength  of  these  three  grac¬ 
es.  So  that  in  their  case,  I  think,  the  saying  is 
already  fulfilled:  “Whether  there  be  prophecies, 
they  shall  fail;  whether  there  be  tongues,  they 
shall  cease;  whether  there  be  knowledge,  it  shall 

ni  Cor.  5.  7. 


636  ST.  AUGUSTINE 

vanish  away.”  1  Yet  by  means  of  these  instru-  upon  these  three  graces,  he  may  come  to  the  in- 


ments  (as  they  may  be  called),  so  great  an  edi¬ 
fice  of  faith  and  love  has  been  built  up  in  them, 
that,  holding  to  what  is  perfect,  they  do  not  seek 
for  what  is  only  in  part  perfect — of  course,  I 
mean,  so  far  as  is  possible  in  this  life;  for,  in 
comparison  with  the  future  life,  the  life  of  no 
just  and  holy  man  is  perfect  here.  Therefore  the 
apostle  says:  “Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  char¬ 
ity,  these  three;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is 
charity”;2  because,  when  a  man  shall  have 
reached  the  eternal  world,  while  the  other  two 
graces  will  fail,  love  will  remain  greater  and 
more  assured. 

Chap.  40.  What  manner  of  reader  Scripture  de¬ 
mands 

44.  And,  therefore,  if  a  man  fully  understands 
that  “the  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity, 
out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good  conscience, 
and  of  faith  unfeigned,”  3  and  is  bent  upon  mak¬ 
ing  all  his  understanding  of  Scripture  to  bear 
ll  Cor.  13.  8.  2I  Cor.  13.  13.  3I  Tim.  1.  5. 


terpretation  of  these  books  with  an  easy  mind. 
For  while  the  apostle  says  “love,”  he  adds  “out 
of  a  pure  heart,”  to  provide  against  anything 
being  loved  but  that  which  is  worthy  of  love. 
And  he  joins  with  this  “a  good  conscience,”  in 
reference  to  hope;  for,df  a  man  has  the  burthen 
of  a  bad  conscience,  he  despairs  of  ever  reach¬ 
ing  that  which  he  believes  in  and  loves.  And  in 
the  third  place  he  says:  “and  of  faith  un¬ 
feigned.”  For  if  our  faith  is  free  from  all  hypoc¬ 
risy,  then  we  both  abstain  from  loving  what  is 
unworthy  of  our  love,  and  by  living  uprightly 
we  are  able  to  indulge  the  hope  that  our  hope 
shall  not  be  in  vain. 

For  these  reasons  I  have  been  anxious  to 
speak  about  the  objects  of  faith,  as  far  as  I 
thought  it  necessary  for  my  present  purpose; 
for  much  has  already  been  said  on  this  subject 
in  other  volumes,  either  by  others  or  by  myself. 
And  so  let  this  be  the  end  of  the  present  book. 
In  the  next  I  shall  discuss,  as  far  as  God  shall 
give  me  light,  the  subject  of  signs. 


BOOK  II 

ARGUMENT.  Having  completed  his  exposition  of  things,  the  author  now 

PROCEEDS  TO  DISCUSS  THE  SUBJECT  OF  SIGNS.  He  FIRST  DEFINES  WHAT  A  SIGN  IS, 
AND  SHOWS  THAT  THERE  ARE  TWO  CLASSES  OF  SIGNS,  THE  NATURAL  AND  THE  CON¬ 
VENTIONAL.  Of  conventional  signs  (which  are  the  only  class  here  noticed), 

WORDS  ARE  THE  MOST  NUMEROUS  AND  IMPORTANT,  AND  ARE  THOSE  WITH  WHICH 
THE  INTERPRETER  OF  SCRIPTURE  IS  CHIEFLY  CONCERNED.  THE  DIFFICULTIES  AND 
OBSCURITIES  OF  SCRIPTURE  SPRING  CHIEFLY  FROM  TWO  SOURCES,  UNKNOWN  AND 
AMBIGUOUS  SIGNS.  The  PRESENT  BOOK  DEALS  ONLY  WITH  UNKNOWN  SIGNS,  THE 
AMBIGUITIES  OF  LANGUAGE  BEING  RESERVED  FOR  TREATMENT  IN  THE  NEXT  BOOK. 

The  difficulty  arising  from  ignorance  of  signs  is  to  be  removed  by  learning 

THE  GREEK  AND  HEBREW  LANGUAGES,  IN  WHICH  SCRIPTURE  IS  WRITTEN,  BY  COM¬ 
PARING  THE  VARIOUS  TRANSLATIONS,  AND  BY  ATTENDING  TO  THE  CONTEXT.  In  THE 
INTERPRETATION  OF  FIGURATIVE  EXPRESSIONS,  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THINGS  IS  AS  NECES¬ 
SARY  AS  KNOWLEDGE  OF  WORDS;  AND  THE  VARIOUS  SCIENCES  AND  ARTS  OF  THE 
HEATHEN,  SO  FAR  AS  THEY  ARE  TRUE  AND  USEFUL,  MAY  BE  TURNED  TO  ACCOUNT  IN 
REMOVING  OUR  IGNORANCE  OF  SIGNS,  WHETHER  THESE  BE  DIRECT  OR  FIGURATIVE. 

Whilst  exposing  the  folly  and  futility  of  many  heathen  superstitions 

AND  PRACTICES,  THE  AUTHOR  POINTS  OUT  HOW  ALL  THAT  IS  SOUND  AND  USEFUL  IN 
THEIR  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  MAY  BE  TURNED  TO  A  CHRISTIAN  USE.  AND  IN 
CONCLUSION,  HE  SHOWS  THE  SPIRIT  IN  WHICH  IT  BEHOVES  US  TO  ADDRESS  OUR¬ 
SELVES  TO  THE  STUDY  AND  INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  SACRED  BOOKS. 


Chap.  i.  Signs,  their  nature  and  variety 
1.  As  when  I  was  writing  about  things,  I  intro¬ 
duced  the  subject  with  a  warning  against  at¬ 
tending  to  anything  but  what  they  are  in  them¬ 
selves,4  even  though  they  are  signs  of  something 
else,  so  now,  when  I  come  in  its  turn  to  dis- 
4See  bk.  1.  ch.  2. 


cuss  the  subject  of  signs,  I  lay  down  this  di¬ 
rection,  not  to  attend  to  what  they  are  in  them¬ 
selves,  but  to  the  fact  that  they  are  signs,  that 
is,  to  what  they  signify.  For  a  sign  is  a  thing 
which,  over  and  above  the  impression  it  makes 
on  the  senses,  causes  something  else  to  come  in¬ 
to  the  mind  as  a  consequence  of  itself :  as  when 
we  see  a  footprint,  we  conclude  that  an  animal 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  I.  40,  II.  1-4  637 


whose  footprint  this  is  has  passed  by;  and  when 
we  see  smoke,  we  know  that  there  is  fire  be¬ 
neath;  and  when  we  hear  the  voice  of  a  living 
man,  we  think  of  the  feeling  in  his  mind;  and 
when  the  trumpet  sounds,  soldiers  know  that 
they  are  to  advance  or  retreat,  or  do  whatever 
else  the  state  of  the  battle  requires. 

2.  Now  some  signs  are  natural,  others  con¬ 
ventional.  Natural  signs  are  those  which,  apart 
from  any  intention  or  desire  of  using  them  as 
signs,  do  yet  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  as,  for  example,  smoke  when  it  indi¬ 
cates  fire.  For  it  is  not  from  any  intention  of 
making  it  a  sign  that  it  is  so,  but  through  atten¬ 
tion  to  experience  we  come  to  know  that  fire  is 
beneath,  even  when  nothing  but  smoke  can  be 
seen.  And  the  footprint  of  an  animal  passing  by 
belongs  to  this  class  of  signs.  And  the  counte¬ 
nance  of  an  angry  or  sorrowful  man  indicates 
the  feeling  in  his  mind,  independently  of  his 
will :  and  in  the  same  way  every  other  emotion 
of  the  mind  is  betrayed  by  the  tell-tale  counte¬ 
nance,  even  though  we  do  nothing  with  the  in¬ 
tention  of  making  it  known.  This  class  of  signs, 
however,  it  is  no  part  of  my  design  to  discuss  at 
present.  But  as  it  comes  under  this  division  of 
the  subject,  I  could  not  altogether  pass  it  over. 
It  will  be  enough  to  have  noticed  it  thus  far. 

Chap.  2.  Of  the  kind  of  signs  we  are  now  con¬ 
cerned  with 

3.  Conventional  signs,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
those  which  living  beings  mutually  exchange 
for  the  purpose  of  showing,  as  well  as  they  can, 
the  feelings  of  their  minds,  or  their  perceptions, 
or  their  thoughts.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  for 
giving  a  sign  except  the  desire  of  drawing  forth 
and  conveying  into  another’s  mind  what  the  giv¬ 
er  of  the  sign  has  in  his  own  mind.  We  wish, 
then,  to  consider  and  discuss  this  class  of  signs 
so  far  as  men  are  concerned  with  it,  because 
even  the  signs  which  have  been  given  us  of  God, 
and  which  are  contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
were  made  known  to  us  through  men — those, 
namely*,  who  wrote  the  Scriptures.  The  beasts, 
too,  have  certain  signs  among  themselves  by 
which  they  make  known  the  desires  in  their 
mind.  For  when  the  poultry-cock  has  discov¬ 
ered  food,  he  signals  with  his  voice  for  the  hen 
to  run  to  him,  and  the  dove  by  cooing  calls  his 
mate,  or  is  called  by  her  in  turn;  and  many 
signs  of  the  same  kind  are  matters  of  common 
observation.  Now  whether  these  signs,  like  the 
expression  or  the  cry  of  a  man  in  grief,  follow 
the  movement  of  the  mind  instinctively  and 
apart  from  any  purpose,  or  whether  they  are 


really  used  with  the  purpose  of  signification,  is 
another  question,  and  does  not  pertain  to  the 
matter  in  hand.  And  this  part  of  the  subject  I 
exclude  from  the  scope  of  this  work  as  not  nec¬ 
essary  to  my  present  object. 

Chap.  3.  Among  signs ,  words  hold  the  chief 

place 

4.  Of  the  signs,  then,  by  which  men  commu¬ 
nicate  their  thoughts  to  one  another,  some  relate 
to  the  sense  of  sight,  some  to  that  of  hearing,  a 
very  few  to  the  other  senses.  For,  when  we  nod, 
we  give  no  sign  except  to  the  eyes  of  the  man  to 
whom  we  wish  by  this  sign  to  impart  our  desire. 
And  some  convey  a  great  deal  by  the  motion  of 
the  hands:  and  actors  by  movements  of  all  their 
limbs  give  certain  signs  to  the  initiated,  and,  so 
to  speak,  address  their  conversation  to  the 
eyes:  and  the  military  standards  and  flags  con¬ 
vey  through  the  eyes  the  will  of  the  command¬ 
ers.  And  all  these  signs  are  as  it  were  a  kind  of 
visible  words.  The  signs  that  address  themselves 
to  the  ear  are,  as  I  have  said,  more  numerous, 
and  for  the  most  part  consist  of  words.  For 
though  the  bugle  and  the  flute  and  the  lyre  fre¬ 
quently  give  not  only  a  sweet  but  a  significant 
sound,  yet  all  these  signs  are  very  few  in  num¬ 
ber  compared  with  words.  For  among  men 
words  have  obtained  far  and  away  the  chief 
place  as  a  means  of  indicating  the  thoughts  of 
the  mind.  Our  Lord,  it  is  true,  gave  a  sign 
through  the  odour  of  the  ointment  which  was 
poured  out  upon  His  feet;1  and  in  the  sacra¬ 
ment  of  His  body  and  blood  He  signified  His  will 
through  the  sense  of  taste;  and  when  by  touch¬ 
ing  the  hem  of  His  garment  the  woman  was 
made  whole,  the  act  was  not  wanting  in  signifi¬ 
cance.2  But  the  countless  multitude  of  the  signs 
through  which  men  express  their  thoughts  con¬ 
sist  of  words.  For  I  have  been  able  to  put  into 
words  all  those  signs,  the  various  classes  of 
which  I  have  briefly  touched  upon,  but  I  could 
by  no  effort  express  words  in  terms  of  those 
signs. 

Chap.  4.  Origin  of  writing 

5.  But  because  words  pass  away  as  soon  as 
they  strike  upon  the  air,  and  last  no  longer  than 
their  sound,  men  have  by  means  of  letters 
formed  signs  of  words.  Thus  the  sounds  of  the 
voice  are  made  visible  to  the  eye,  not  of  course 
as  sounds,  but  by  means  of  certain  signs.  It  has 
been  found  impossible,  however,  to  make  those 
signs  common  to  all  nations  owing  to  the  sin  of 
discord  among  men,  which  springs  from  every 

Mohn,  12.  3-7;  Mark,  14.  8.  2Matt.  9.  20. 


638  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


man  trying  to  snatch  the  chief  place  for  himself. 
And  that  celebrated  tower  which  was  built  to 
reach  to  heaven  was  an  indication  of  this  arro¬ 
gance  of  spirit;  and  the  ungodly  men  concerned 
in  it  justly  earned  the  punishment  of  having  not 
their  minds  only,  but  their  tongues  besides, 
thrown  into  confusion  and  discordance.1 

Chap.  5.  Scripture  translated  into  various  lan¬ 
guages 

6.  And  hence  it  happened  that  even  Holy 
Scripture,  which  brings  a  remedy  for  the  terri¬ 
ble  diseases  of  the  human  will,  being  at  first  set* 
forth  in  one  language,  by  means  of  which  it 
could  at  the  fit  season  be  disseminated  through 
the  whole  world,  was  interpreted  into  various 
tongues  and  spread  far  and  wide,  and  thus  be¬ 
came  known  to  the  nations  for  their  salvation. 
And  in  reading  it,  men  seek  nothing  more  than 
to  find  out  the  thought  and  will  of  those  by 
whom  it  was  written  and  through  these  to  find 
out  the  will  of  God,  in  accordance  with  which 
they  believe  these  men  to  have  spoken. 

Chap.  6.  Use  of  the  obscurities  in  Scripture 

which  arise  from  its  figurative  language 

7.  But  hasty  and  careless  readers  are  led 
astray  by  many  and  manifold  obscurities  and 
ambiguities,  substituting  one  meaning  for  an¬ 
other;  and  in  some  places  they  cannot  hit  upon 
even  a  fair  interpretation.  Some  of  the  expres¬ 
sions  are  so  obscure  as  to  shroud  the  meaning  in 
the  thickest  darkness.  And  I  do  not  doubt  that 
all  this  was  divinely  arranged  for  the  purpose 
of  subduing  pride  by  toil,  and  of  preventing  a 
feeling  of  satiety  in  the  intellect,  which  gener¬ 
ally  holds  in  small  esteem  what  is  discovered 
without  difficulty.  For  why  is  it,  I  ask,  that  if 
any  one  says  that  there  are  holy  and  just  men 
whose  life  and  conversation  the  Church  of 
Christ  uses  as  a  means  of  redeeming  those  who 
come  to  it  from  all  kinds  of  superstitions,  and 
making  them  through  their  imitation  of  good 
men  members  of  its  own  body;  men  who,  as 
good  and  true  servants  of  God,  have  come  to 
the  baptismal  font  laying  down  the  burdens  of 
the  world,  and  who  rising  thence  do,  through 
the  implanting  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  yield  the  fruit 
of  a  twofold  love,  a  love,  that  is,  of  God  and 
their  neighbour;  how  is  it,  I  say,  that  if  a  man 
says  this,  he  does  not  please  his  hearer  so  much 
as  when  he  draws  the  same  meaning  from  that 
passage  in  Canticles,  where  it  is  said  of  the 
Church,  when  it  is  being  praised  under  the  figure 
of  a  beautiful  woman,  “Thy  teeth  are  like  a 

^en.  11. 


flock  of  sheep  that  are  shorn,  which  came  up 
from  the  washing,  whereof  every  one  bears 
twins,  and  none  is  barren  among  them”?2  Does 
the  hearer  learn  anything  more  than  when  he 
listens  to  the  same  thought  expressed  in  the 
plainest  language,  without  the  help  of  this  fig¬ 
ure?  And  yet,  I  don’t  know  why,  I  feel  greater 
pleasure  in  contemplating  holy  men,  when  I 
view  them  as  the  teeth  of  the  Church,  tearing 
men  away  from  their  errors,  and  bringing  them 
into  the  Church’s  body,  with  all  their  harshness 
softened  down,  just  as  if  they  had  been  torn  off 
and  masticated  by  the  teeth.  It  is  with  the 
greatest  pleasure,  too,  that  I  recognize  them  un¬ 
der  the  figure  of  sheep  that  have  been  shorn, 
laying  down  the  burthens  of  the  world  like  fleec¬ 
es,  and  coming  up  from  the  washing,  i.e.,  from 
baptism,  and  all  bearing  twins,  i.e.,  the  twin 
commandments  of  love,  and  none  among  them 
barren  in  that  holy  fruit. 

8.  But  why  I  view  them  with  greater  delight 
under  that  aspect  than  if  no  such  figure  were 
drawn  from  the  sacred  books,  though  the  fact 
would  remain  the  same  and  the  knowledge  the 
same,  is  another  question,  and  one  very  difficult 
to  answer.  Nobody,  however,  has  any  doubt 
about  the  facts,  both  that  it  is  pleasanter  in 
some  cases  to  have  knowledge  communicated 
through  figures,  and  that  what  is  attended  with 
difficulty  in  the  seeking  gives  greater  pleasure 
in  the  finding.  For  those  who  seek  but  do  not 
find  suffer  from  hunger.  Those,  again,  who  do 
not  seek  at  all  because  they  have  what  they  re¬ 
quire  just  beside  them  often  grow  languid  from 
satiety.  Now  weakness  from  either  of  these 
causes  is  to  be  avoided.  Accordingly  the  Holy 
Spirit  has,  with  admirable  wisdom  and  care  for 
our  welfare,  so  arranged  the  Holy  Scriptures  as 
by  the  plainer  passages  to  satisfy  our  hunger, 
and  by  the  more  obscure  to  stimulate  our  appe¬ 
tite.  For  almost  nothing  is  dug  out  of  those  ob¬ 
scure  passages  which  may  not  be  found  set  forth 
in  the  plainest  language  elsewhere. 

Chap.  7.  Steps  to  wisdom:  first,  fear;  second, 

piety;  third,  knowledge;  fourth,  resolution; 

fifth,  counsel;  sixth,  purification  of  heart; 

seventh,  wisdom 

9.  First  of  all,  then,  it  is  necessary  that  we 
should  be  led  by  the  fear  of  God  to  seek  the 
knowledge  of  His  will,  what  He  commands  us 
to  desire  and  what  to  avoid.  Now  this  fear  will 
of  necessity  excite  in  us  the  thought  of  our  mor¬ 
tality  and  of  the  death  that  is  before  us,  and 
crucify  all  the  motions  of  pride  as  if  our  flesh 

2Song  of  Sol.  4.  2. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  5-8  639 


were  nailed  to  the  tree.  Next  it  is  necessary  to 
have  our  hearts  subdued  by  piety,  and  not  to 
run  in  the  face  of  Holy  Scripture,  whether 
when  understood  it  strikes  at  some  of  our  sins, 
or,  when  not  understood,  we  feel  as  if  we  could 
be  wiser  and  give  better  commands  ourselves. 
We  must  rather  think  and  believe  that  what- 
ever  is  there  written,  even  though  it  be  hidden, 
is  better  and  truer  than  anything  we  could  de¬ 
vise  by  our  own  wisdom. 

10.  After  these  two  steps  of  fear  and  piety, 
we  come  to  the  third  step,  knowledge,  of  which 
I  have  now  undertaken  to  treat.  For  in  this  ev¬ 
ery  earnest  student  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  exer¬ 
cises  himself,  to  find  nothing  else  in  them  but 
that  God  is  to  be  loved  for  His  own  sake,  and 
our  neighbour  for  God’s  sake;  and  that  God  is 
to  be  loved  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the 
soul,  and  with  all  the  mind,  and  one’s  neighbour 
as  one’s  self — that  is,  in  such  a  way  that  all  our 
love  for  our  neighbour,  like  all  our  love  for  our¬ 
selves,  should  have  reference  to  God.1  And  on 
these  two  commandments  I  touched  in  the  pre¬ 
vious  book  when  I  was  treating  about  things.2  It 
is  necessary,  then,  that  each  man  should  first  of 
all  find  in  the  Scriptures  that  he,  through  being 
entangled  in  the  love  of  this  world — i.e.,  of  tem¬ 
poral  things — has  been  drawn  far  away  from 
such  a  love  for  God  and  such  a  love  for  his 
neighbour  as  Scripture  enjoins.  Then  that  fear 
which  leads  him  to  think  of  the  judgment  of 
God.  and  that  piety  which  gives  him  no  option 
but  to  believe  in  and  submit  to  the  authority  of 
Scripture,  compel  him  to  bewail  his  condition. 
For  the  knowledge  of  a  good  hope  makes  a  man 
not  boastful,  but  sorrowful.  And  in  this  frame  of 
mind  he  implores  with  unremitting  prayers  the 
comfort  of  the  Divine  help  that  he  may  not  be 
overwhelmed  in  despair,  and  so  he  gradually 
comes  to  the  fourth  step — that  is,  strength  and 
resolution — in  which  he  hungers  and  thirsts  aft¬ 
er  righteousness.  For  in  this  frame  of  mind  he 
extricates  himself  from  every  form  of  fatal  joy 
in  transitory  things,  and  turning  away  from 
these,  fixes  his  affection  on  things  eternal,  to  wit, 
the  unchangeable  Trinity  in  unity. 

11.  And  when,  to  the  extent  of  his  power,  he 
has  gazed  upon  this  object  shining  from  afar, 
and  has  felt  that  owing  to  the  weakness  of  his 
sight  he  cannot  endure  that  matchless  light, 
then  in  the  fifth  step — that  is,  in  the  counsel  of 
compassion — he  cleanses  his  soul,  which  is  vio¬ 
lently  agitated  and  disturbs  him  with  base  de¬ 
sires,  from  the  filth  it  has  contracted.  And  at 
this  stage  he  exercises  himself  diligently  in  the 

xCf.  Matt.  22.  37-40.  2See  bk.  i  chap.  22. 


love  of  his  neighbour;  and  when  he  has  reached 
the  point  of  loving  his  enemy,  full  of  hopes  and 
unbroken  in  strength,  he  mounts  to  the  sixth 
step,  in  which  he  purifies  the  eye  itself  which 
can  see  God*  so  far  as  God  can  be  seen  by  those 
who  as  far  as  possible  die  to  this  world.  For  men 
see  Him  just  so  far  as  they  die  to  this  world; 
and  so  far  as  they  live  to  it  they  see  Him  not. 
But  yet,  although  that  light  may  begin  to  ap¬ 
pear  clearer,  and  not  only  more  tolerable,  but 
even  more  delightful,  still  it  is  only  through  a 
glass  darkly  that  we  are  said  to  see,  because  we 
walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight,  while  we  continue  to 
wander  as  strangers  in  this  world,  even  though 
our  conversation  be  in  heaven.4  And  at  this 
stage,  too,  a  man  so  purges  the  eye  of  his  affec¬ 
tions  as  not  to  place  his  neighbour  before,  or 
even  in  comparison  with,  the  truth,  and  there¬ 
fore  not  himself,  because  not  him  whom  he 
loves  as  himself.  Accordingly,  that  holy  man 
will  be  so  single  and  so  pure  in  heart  that  he  will 
not  step  aside  from  the  truth,  either  for  the  sake 
of  pleasing  men  or  with  a  view  to  avoid  any  of 
the  annoyances  which  beset  this  life.  Such  a  son 
ascends  to  wisdom,  which  is  the  seventh  and  last 
step,  and  which  he  enjoys  in  peace  and  tran¬ 
quillity.  For  the  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom.5  From  that  beginning,  then,  till  we 
reach  wisdom  itself,  our  way  is  by  the  steps 
now  described. 

Chap.  8.  The  canonical  books 

12.  But  let  us  now  go  back  to  consider  the 
third  step  here  mentioned,  for  it  is  about  it  that 
I  have  set  myself  to  speak  and  reason  as  the 
Lord  shall  grant  me  wisdom.  The  most  skillful 
interpreter  of  the  sacred  writings,  then,  will  be 
he  who  in  the  first  place  has  read  them  all  and 
retained  them  in  his  knowledge,  if  not  yet  with 
full  understanding,  still  with  such  knowledge  as 
reading  gives — those  of  them,  at  least,  that  are 
called  canonical.  For  he  will  read  the  others  with 
greater  safety  when  built  up  in  the  belief  of  the 
truth,  so  that  they  will  not  take  first  possession 
of  a  weak  mind,  nor,  cheating  it  with  dangerous 
falsehoods  and  delusions,  fill  it  with  prejudices 
adverse  to  a  sound  understanding.  Now,  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  canonical  Scriptures,  he  must  follow 
the  judgment  of  the  greater  number  of  Catholic 
Churches;  and  among  these,  of  course,  a  high 
place  must  be  given  to  such  as  have  been 
thought  worthy  to  be  the  seat  of  an  apostle  and 
to  receive  epistles.  Accordingly,  among  the  ca¬ 
nonical  Scriptures  he  will  judge  according  to 

3Matt.  5.  8.  4I  Cor.  13.  12;  II  Cor.  5.  7. 

6Ps.  III.  10. 


640  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  following  standard :  to  prefer  those  that  are 
received  by  all  the  Catholic  Churches  to  those 
which  some  do  not  receive.  Among  those,  again, 
which  are  not  received  by  all,  he  will  prefer 
such  as  have  the  sanction  of  the  greater  number 
and  those  of  greater  authority,  to  such  as  are 
held  by  the  smaller  number  and  those  of  less 
authority.  If,  however,  he  shall  find  that  some 
books  are  held  by  the  greater  number  of 
churches,  and  others  by  the  churches  of  greater 
authority  (though  this  is  not  a  very  likely  thing 
to  happen),  I  think  that  in  such  a  case  the  au¬ 
thority  on  the  two  sides  is  to  be  looked  upon  as 
equal. 

13.  Now  the  whole  canon  of  Scripture  on 
which  we  say  this  judgment  is  to  be  exercised, 
is  contained  in  the  following  books :  Five  books 
of  Moses,  that  is,  Genesis,  Exodus,  Leviticus, 
Numbers,  Deuteronomy;  one  book  of  Joshua 
the  son  of  Nun;  one  of  Judges;  one  short  book 
called  Ruth,  which  seems  rather  to  belong  to  the 
beginning  of  Kings;  next,  four  books  of  Kings, 
and  two  of  Chronicles — these  last  not  following 
one  another,  but  running  parallel,  so  to  speak, 
and  going  over  the  same  ground.  The  books  now 
mentioned  are  history,  which  contains  a  con¬ 
nected  narrative  of  the  times,  and  follows  the 
order  of  the  events. There  are  other  books  which 
seem  to  follow  no  regular  order,  and  are  con¬ 
nected  neither  with  the  order  of  the  preceding 
books  nor  with  one  another,  such  as  Job,  and 
Tobias,  and  Esther,  and  Judith,  and  the  two 
books  of  Maccabees,  and  the  two  of  Ezra,1 
which  last  look  more  like  a  sequel  to  the  con¬ 
tinuous  regular  history  which  terminates  with 
the  books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles.  Next  are  the 
Prophets,  in  which  there  is  one  book  of  the 
Psalms  of  David;  and  three  books  of  Solomon, 
viz.,  Proverbs,  Song  of  Songs,  and  Ecclesiastes. 
For  two  books,  one  called  Wisdom  and  the  other 
Ecclesiasticus,  are  ascribed  to  Solomon  from  a 
certain  resemblance  of  style,  but  the  most  likely 
opinion  is  that  they  were  written  by  Jesus  the 
son  of  Sirach.  Still  they  are  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  prophetical  books,  since  they  have 
attained  recognition  as  being  authoritative.  The 
remainder  are  the  books  which  are  strictly 
called  the  Prophets:  twelve  separate  books  of 
the  prophets  which  are  connected  with  one  an¬ 
other,  and  having  never  been  disjoined,  are 
reckoned  as  one  book;  the  names  of  these 
prophets  are  as  follows:  Hosea,  Joel,  Amos, 
Obadiah,  Jonah,  Micah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk, 
Zephaniah,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  Malachi;  then 
1That  is,  Ezra  and  Nehemiah. 


there  are  the  four  greater  prophets  Isaiah,  Jere¬ 
miah,  Daniel,  Ezekiel.  The  authority  of  the  Old 
Testament  is  contained  within  the  limits  of 
these  forty-four  books.  That  of  the  New  Testa¬ 
ment,  again,  is  contained  within  the  following: 
Four  books  of  the  Gospel,  according  to  Mat¬ 
thew,  according  to  Mark,  according  to  Luke, 
according  to  John;  fourteen  epistles  of  the 
Apostle  Paul — one  to  the  Romans,  two  to  the 
Corinthians,  one  to  the  Galatians,  to  the  Ephesi¬ 
ans,  to  the  Philippians,  two  to  the  Thessaloni- 
ans,  one  to  the  Colossians,  two  to  Timothy,  one 
to  Titus,  to  Philemon,  to  the  Hebrews;  two  of 
Peter;  three  of  John;  one  of  Jude;  and  one  of 
James;  one  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles; 
and  one  of  the  Revelation  of  John. 

Chap.  9.  How  we  should  proceed  in  studying 

Scripture 

14.  In  all  these  books  those  who  fear  God  and 
are  of  a  meek  and  pious  disposition  seek  the  will 
of  God.  And  in  pursuing  this  search  the  first 
rule  to  be  observed  is,  as  I  said,  to  know  these 
books,  if  not  yet  with  the  understanding,  still  to 
read  them  so  as  to  commit  them  to  memory,  or 
at  least  so  as  not  to  remain  wholly  ignorant  of 
them.  Next,  those  matters  that  are  plainly  laid 
down  in  them,  whether  rules  of  life  or  rules  of 
faith,  are  to  be  searched  into  more  carefully  and 
more  diligently;  and  the  more  of  these  a  man 
discovers,  the  more  capacious  does  his  under¬ 
standing  become.  For  among  the  things  that  are 
plainly  laid  down  in  Scripture  are  to  be  found 
all  matters  that  concern  faith  and  the  manner 
of  life — to  wit,  hope  and  love,  of  which  I  have 
spoken  in  the  previous  book.  After  this,  when 
we  have  made  ourselves  to  a  certain  extent  fa¬ 
miliar  with  the  language  of  Scripture,  we  may 
proceed  to  open  up  and  investigate  the  obscure 
passages,  and  in  doing  so  draw  examples  from 
the  plainer  expressions  to  throw  light  upon  the 
more  obscure,  and  use  the  evidence  of  passages 
about  which  there  is  no  doubt  to  remove  all 
hesitation  in  regard  to  the  doubtful  passages. 
And  in  this  matter  memory  counts  for  a  great 
deal;  but  if  the  memory  be  defective,  no  rules 
can  supply  the  want. 

Chap.  10.  Unknown  or  ambiguous  signs  pre¬ 
vent  Scripture  from  being  understood 

15.  Now  there  are  two  causes  which  prevent 
what  is  written  from  being  understood :  its  being 
veiled  either  under  unknown,  or  under  ambigu¬ 
ous  signs.  Signs  are  either  proper  or  figurative. 
They  are  called  proper  when  they  are  used  to 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  9-12  641 


point  out  the  objects  they  were  designed  to 
point  out,  as  we  say  bos  when  we  mean  an  ox, 
because  all  men  who  with  us  use  the  Latin 
tongue  call  it  by  this  name.  Signs  are  figurative 
when  the  things  themselves  which  we  indicate 
by  the  proper  names  are  used  to  signify  some¬ 
thing  else,  as  we  say  bos,  and  understand  by  that 
syllable  the  ox,  which  is  ordinarily  called  by  that 
name;  but  then  further  by  that  ox  understand 
a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  as  Scripture  signifies, 
according  to  the  apostle’s  explanation,  when  it 
says:  “Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  that  tread- 
eth  out  the  corn.”  1 

Chap.  ii.  Knowledge  of  languages,  especially  of 

Greek  and  Hebrew ,  necessary  to  remove  ig¬ 
norance  of  signs 

16.  The  great  remedy  for  ignorance  of  prop¬ 
er  signs  is  knowledge  of  languages.  And  men 
who  speak  the  Latin  tongue,  of  whom  are  those 
I  have  undertaken  to  instruct,  need  two  other 
languages  for  the  knowledge  of  Scripture,  He¬ 
brew  and  Greek,  that  they  may  have  recourse  to 
the  original  texts  if  the  endless  diversity  of  the 
Latin  translators  throw  them  into  doubt.  Al¬ 
though,  indeed,  we  often  find  Hebrew  words  un¬ 
translated  in  the  books,  as  for  example,  Amen, 
Halleluia,  Racha,  Hosanna,  and  others  of  the 
same  kind.  Some  of  these,  although  they  could 
have  been  translated,  have  been  preserved  in 
their  original  form  on  account  of  the  more  sa¬ 
cred  authority  that  attaches  to  it,  as  for  exam¬ 
ple,  Amen  and  Halleluia.  Some  of  them,  again, 
are  said  to  be  untranslatable  into  another 
tongue,  of  which  the  other  two  I  have  men¬ 
tioned  are  examples.  For  in  some  languages 
there  are  words  that  cannot  be  translated  into 
the  idiom  of  another  language.  And  this  happens 
chiefly  in  the  case  of  interjections,  which  are 
words  that  express  rather  an  emotion  of  the 
mind  than  any  part  of  a  thought  we  have  in  our 
mind.  And  the  two  given  above  are  said  to  be  of 
this  kind,  Racha  expressing  the  cry  of  an  angry 
man,  Hosanna  that  of  a  joyful  man.  But  the 
knowledge  of  these  languages  is  necessary,  not 
for  the  sake  of  a  few  words  like  these  which  it  is 
very  easy  to  mark  and  to  ask  about,  but,  as  has 
been  said,  on  account  of  the  diversities  among 
translators.  For  the  translations  of  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  from  Hebrew  into  Greek  can  be  counted, 
but  the  Latin  translators  are  out  of  all  number. 
For  in  the  early  days  of  the  faith  every  man 
who  happened  to  get  his  hands  upon  a  Greek 
manuscript,  and  who  thought  he  had  any  knowl- 
LI  Cor.  9.  9. 


edge,  were  it  ever  so  little,  of  the  two  languages, 
ventured  upon  the  work  of  translation. 

Chap.  12.  A  diversity  of  interpretations  is  use¬ 
ful.  Errors  arising  from  ambiguous  words 
17.  And  this  circumstance  would  assist  rather 
than  hinder  the  understanding  of  Scripture,  if 
only  readers  were  not  careless.  For  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  a  number  of  texts  has  often  thrown  light 
upon  some  of  the  more  obscure  passages;  for 
example,  in  that  passage  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,2 
one  translator  reads:  “And  do  not  despise  the 
domestics  of  thy  seed”;  another  reads:  “And 
do  not  despise  thine  own  flesh.”  Each  of  these 
in  turn  confirms  the  other.  For  the  one  is  ex¬ 
plained  by  the  other;  because  “flesh”  may  be 
taken  in  its  literal  sense,  so  that  a  man  may  un¬ 
derstand  that  he  is  admonished  not  to  despise 
his  own  body;  and  “the  domestics  of  thy  seed” 
may  be  understood  figuratively  of  Christians, 
because  they  are  spiritually  born  of  the  same 
seed  as  ourselves,  namely,  the  Word.  When  now 
the  meaning  of  the  two  translators  is  compared, 
a  more  likely  sense  of  the  words  suggests  itself, 
viz.,  that  the  command  is  not  to  despise  our 
kinsmen,  because  when  one  brings  the  expres¬ 
sion  “domestics  of  thy  seed”  into  relation  with 
“flesh,”  kinsmen  most  naturally  occur  to  one’s 
mind.  Whence,  I  think,  that  expression  of  the 
apostle,  when  he  says,  “If  by  any  means  I  may 
provoke  to  emulation  them  which  are  my  flesh, 
and  might  save  some  of  them”;3  that  is,  that 
through  emulation  of  those  who  had  believed, 
some  of  them  might  believe  too.  And  he  calls  the 
Jews  his  “flesh,”  on  account  of  the  relationship 
of  blood.  Again,  that  passage  from  the  same 
prophet  Isaiah:4  “If  ye  will  not  believe,  ye  shall 
not  understand,”  another  has  translated:  “If  ye 
will  not  believe,  ye  shall  not  abide.”  Now  which 
of  these  is  the  literal  translation  cannot  be  as¬ 
certained  without  reference  to  the  text  in  the 
original  tongue.  And  yet  to  those  who  read  with 
knowledge,  a  great  truth  is  to  be  found  in  each. 
For  it  is  difficult  for  interpreters  to  differ  so 
widely  as  not  to  touch  at  some  point.  According¬ 
ly  here,  as  understanding  consists  in  sight,  and 
is  abiding,  but  faith  feeds  us  as  babes,  upon 
milk,  in  the  cradles  of  temporal  things  (for  now 
we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight)  ;5  as,  moreover, 
unless  we  walk  by  faith,  we  shall  not  attain  to 
sight,  which  does  not  pass  away,  but  abides,  our 
understanding  being  purified  by  holding  to  the 
truth;  for  these  reasons  one  says,  “If  ye  will 

2Isa.  58.  7.  3Rom.  11.  14.  4Isa.  7.  9. 

6II  Cor.  5.  7. 


642  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


not  believe,  ye  shall  not  understand”;  but  the 
other,  “If  ye  will  not  believe,  ye  shall  not  abide.” 

1 8.  And  very  often  a  translator,  to  whom  the 
meaning  is  not  well  known,  is  deceived  by  an 
ambiguity  in  the  original  language,  and  puts  up¬ 
on  the  passage  a  construction  that  is  wholly 
alien  to  the  sense  of  the  writer.  As  for  example, 
some  texts  read:  “Their  feet  are  sharp  to  shed 
blood”;1  for  the  word  of  us  among  the  Greeks 
means  both  sharp  and  swift.  And  so  he  saw  the 
true  meaning  who  translated:  “Their  feet  are 
swift  to  shed  blood.”  The  other,  taking  the 
wrong  sense  of  an  ambiguous  word,  fell  into 
error.  Now  translations  such  as  this  are  not  ob¬ 
scure.  but  false;  and  there  is  a  wide  difference 
between  the  two  things.  For  we  must  learn  not 
to  interpret,  but  to  correct  texts  of  this  sort. 
For  the  same  reason  it  is.  that  because  the 
Greek  word  ixoaxos  means  a  calf,  some  have 
not  understood  that  fioax^vixara2  are  shoots 
of  trees,  and  have  translated  the  word  “calves”; 
and  this  error  has  crept  into  so  many  texts,  that 
you  can  hardly  find  it  written  in  any  other  way. 
And  yet  the  meaning  is  very  clear;  for  \t  is 
made  evident  by  the  words  that  follow.  For  “the 
plantings  of  an  adulterer  will  not  take  deep 
root,”  is  a  more  suitable  form  of  expression  than 
the  “calves”;  because  these  walk  upon  the 
ground  with  their  feet,  and  are  not  fixed  in  the 
earth  by  roots.  In  this  passage,  indeed,  the  rest 
of  the  context  also  justifies  this  translation. 

Chap.  13.  How  faulty  interpretations  can  be 

emended 

19.  But  since  we  do  not  clearly  see  what  the 
actual  thought  is  which  the  several  translators 
endeavour  to  express,  each  according  to  his  own 
ability  and  judgment,  unless  we  examine  it  in 
the  language  which  they  translate ;  and  since  the 
translator,  if  he  be  not  a  very  learned  man, 
often  departs  from  the  meaning  of  his  author, 
we  must  either  endeavour  to  get  a  knowledge  of 
those  languages  from  which  the  Scriptures  are 
translated  into  Latin,  or  we  must  get  hold  of 
the  translations  of  those  who  keep  rather  close 
to  the  letter  of  the  original,  not  because  these 
are  sufficient,  but  because  we  may  use  them  to 
correct  the  freedom  or  the  error  of  others,  who 
in  their  translations  have  chosen  to  follow  the 
sense  quite  as  much  as  the  words.  For  not  only 
single  words,  but  often  whole  phrases  are  trans¬ 
lated,  which  could  not  be  translated  at  all  into 
the  Latin  idiom  by  any  one  who  wished  to  hold 
by  the  usage  of  the  ancients  who  spoke  Latin. 
And  though  these  sometimes  do  not  interfere 

^om.  3.  15.  ^Visd.  4.  3. 


with  the  understanding  of  the  passage,  yet  they 
are  offensive  to  those  who  feel  greater  delight  in 
things  when  even  the  signs  of  those  things  are 
kept  in  their  own  purity.  For  what  is  called  a 
solecism  is  nothing  else  than  the  putting  of 
words  together  According  to  a  different  rule 
from  that  which  those  of  our  predecessors  who 
spoke  with  any  authority  followed.  For  whether 
we  say  inter  homines  (among  men)  or  inter 
hominibus ,  is  of  no  consequence  to  a  man  who 
only  wishes  to  know  the  facts.  And  in  the  same 
way,  what  is  a  barbarism  but  the  pronouncing 
of  a  word  in  a  different  way  from  that  in  which 
those  who  spoke  Latin  before  us  pronounced  it? 
For  whether  the  word  ignoscere  (to  pardon) 
should  be  pronounced  with  the  third  syllable 
long  or  short,  is  not  a  matter  of  much  concern 
to  the  man  who  is  beseeching  God,  in  any  way 
at  all  that  he  can  get  the  words  out,  to  pardon 
his  sins.  What  then  is  purity  of  speech,  except 
the  preserving  of  the  custom  of  language  estab¬ 
lished  by  the  authority  of  former  speakers? 

20.  And  men  are  easily  offended  in  a  matter 
of  this  kind,  just  in  proportion  as  they  are 
weak;  and  they  are  weak  just  in  proportion  as 
they  wish  to  seem  learned,  not  in  the  knowledge 
of  things  which  tend  to  edification,  but  in  that 
of  signs,  by  which  it  is  hard  not  to  be  puffed  up,3 
seeing  that  the  knowledge  of  things  even  would 
often  set  up  our  neck,  if  it  were  not  held  down 
by  the  yoke  of  our  Master.  For  how  does  it  pre¬ 
vent  our  understanding  it  to  have  the  following 
passage  thus  expressed:  “Qnce  est  terra  in  qua 
isti  insidunt  super  earn,  si  bona  est  an  nequam; 
et  quce  sunt  civitates,  in  quibus  ipsi  inhabitant 
in  ipsis ”?A  And  I  am  more  disposed  to  think  that 
this  is  simply  the  idiom  of  another  language 
than  that  any  deeper  meaning  is  intended. 
Again,  that  phrase,  which  we  cannot  now  take 
away  from  the  lips  of  the  people  who  sing  it: 
“Super  ipsum  autem  floriet  sanctificatio  mea,,}  5 
surely  takes  away  nothing  from  the  meaning. 
Yet  a  more  learned  man  would  prefer  that  this 
should  be  corrected,  and  that  we  should  say,  not 
floriet ,  but  florebit.  Nor  does  anything  stand  in 
the  way  of  the  correction  being  made,  except 
the  usage  of  the  singers.  Mistakes  of  this  kind, 
then,  if  a  man  do  not  choose  to  avoid  them  alto¬ 
gether,  it  is  easy  to  treat  with  indifference,  as 
not  interfering  with  a  right  understanding.  But 

3Cf.  I  Cor.  8.  1. 

4“And  what  the  land  is  that  they  dwell  in,  whether  it  be 
good  or  bad;  and  what  cities  they  be  that  they  dwell  in.” — 
Num.  13.  19  (Authorized  Version). 

6“But  upon  himself  shall  my  holiness  flourish.” — Ps. 
132. 18  (see  Septuagint).  “But  upon  himself  shall  his  crown 
flourish”  (Authorized  Version). 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  13-15  643 


take,  on  the  other  hand,  the  saying  of  the  apos¬ 
tle  :  “Quod  stultum  est  Dei,  sapientius  est  hom- 
inibus,  et  quod  infirmum  est  Dei ,  fortius  est 
hominibus.”  1  If  any  one  should  retain  in  this 
passage  the  Greek  idiom,  and  say,  “Quod  stul¬ 
tum  est  Dei,  sapientius  est  hominum  et  quod  in¬ 
firmum  est  Dei  fortius  est  hominum, ”2  a  quick 
and  careful  reader  would  indeed  by  an  effort  at¬ 
tain  to  the  true  meaning,  but  still  a  man  of  slow¬ 
er  intelligence  either  would  not  understand  it  at 
all,  or  would  put  an  utterly  false  construction 
upon  it.  For  not  only  is  such  a  form  of  speech 
faulty  in  the  Latin  tongue,  but  it  is  ambiguous 
too,  as  if  the  meaning  might  be,  that  the  folly  of 
men  or  the  weakness  of  men  is  wiser  or  stronger 
than  that  of  God.  But  indeed  even  the  expres¬ 
sion  sapientius  est  hominibus  (stronger  than 
men)  is  not  free  from  ambiguity,  even  though 
it  be  free  from  solecism.  For  whether  hominibus 
is  put  as  the  plural  of  the  dative  or  as  the  plural 
of  the  ablative,  does  not  appear,  unless  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  the  meaning.  It  would  be  better  then 
to  say,  sapientius  est  quam  homines,  and  fortius 
est  quam  homines. 

Chap.  14.  How  the  meaning  of  unknown  words 

and  idioms  is  to  be  discovered 

2 1.  About  ambiguous  signs,  however,  I  shall 
speak  afterwards.  I  am  treating  at  present  of 
unknown  signs,  of  which,  as  far  as  the  words  are 
concerned,  there  are  two  kinds.  For  either  a 
word  or  an  idiom,  of  which  the  reader  is  igno¬ 
rant,  brings  him  to  a  stop.  Now  if  these  belong 
to  foreign  tongues,  we  must  either  make  inquiry 
about  them  from  men  who  speak  those  tongues, 
or  if  we  have  leisure  we  must  learn  the  tongues 
ourselves,  or  we  must  consult  and  compare  sev¬ 
eral  translators.  If,  however,  there  are  words  or 
idioms  in  our  own  tongue  that  we  are  unac¬ 
quainted  with,  we  gradually  come  to  know  them 
through  being  accustomed  to  read  or  to  hear 
them.  There  is  nothing  that  it  is  better  to  com¬ 
mit  to  memory  than  those  kinds  of  words  and 
phrases  whose  meaning  we  do  not  know,  so  that 
where  \ye  happen  to  meet  either  with  a  more 
learned  man  of  whom  we  can  inquire,  or  with  a 
passage  that  shows,  either  by  the  preceding  or 
succeeding  context,  or  by  both,  the  force  and 
significance  of  the  phrase  we  are  ignorant  of, 
we  can  easily  by  the  help  of  our  memory  turn 
our  attention  to  the  matter  and  learn  all  about 
it.  So  great,  however,  is  the  force  of  custom, 

^‘Because  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men,  and 
the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men”  (I  Cor.  i.  25). 

2“What  is  foolish  of  God  is  wiser  of  men,  and  what  is 
weak  of  God  is  stronger  of  men.” 


even  in  regard  to  learning,  that  those  who  have 
been  in  a  sort  of  way  nurtured  and  brought  up 
on  the  study  of  Holy  Scripture  are  surprised  at 
other  forms  of  speech,  and  think  them  less  pure 
Latin  than  those  which  they  have  learnt  from 
Scripture,  but  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  Lat¬ 
in  authors.  In  this  matter,  too.  the  great  num¬ 
ber  of  the  translators  proves  a  very  great  as¬ 
sistance,  if  they  are  examined  and  discussed 
with  a  careful  comparison  of  their  texts.  Only 
all  positive  error  must  be  removed.  For  those 
who  are  anxious  to  know  the  Scriptures  ought 
in  the  first  place  to  use  their  skill  in  the  correc¬ 
tion  of  the  texts,  so  that  the  uncorrected  ones 
should  give  way  to  the  corrected,  at  least  when 
they  are  copies  of  the  same  translation. 

Chap.  15.  Among  versions  a  preference  is  given 

to  the  Septuagint  and  the  I  tala 

22.  Now  among  translations  themselves  the 
Italian  ( Itala )3  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  others, 
for  it  keeps  closer  to  the  words  without  preju¬ 
dice  to  clearness  of  expression.  And  to  correct 
the  Latin  we  must  use  the  Greek  versions, 
among  which  the  authority  of  the  Septuagint  is 
pre-eminent  as  far  as  the  Old  Testament  is  con¬ 
cerned;  for  it  is  reported  through  all  the  more 
learned  churches  that  the  seventy  translators 
enjoyed  so  much  of  the  presence  and  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  their  work  of  translation,  that 
among  that  number  of  men  there  was  but  one 
voice.  And  if,  as  is  reported,  and  as  many  not 
unworthy  of  confidence  assert,4  they  were  sep¬ 
arated  during  the  work  of  translation,  each  man 
being  in  a  cell  by  himself,  and  yet  nothing  was 
found  in  the  manuscript  of  any  one  of  them  that 
was  not  found  in  the  same  words  and  in  the 
same  order  of  words  in  all  the  rest,  who  dares 
put  anything  in  comparison  with  an  authority 
like  this,  not  to  speak  of  preferring  anything  to 
it?  And  even  if  they  conferred  together  with  the 
result  that  a  unanimous  agreement  sprang  out 
of  the  common  labour  and  judgment  of  them 
all;  even  so,  it  would  not  be  right  or  becoming 
for  any  one  man,  whatever  his  experience,  to 
aspire  to  correct  the  unanimous  opinion  of 
many  venerable  and  learned  men.  Wherefore, 
even  if  anything  is  found  in  the  original  Hebrew 
in  a  different  form  from  that  in  which  these 
men  have  expressed  it,  I  think  we  must  give 
way  to  the  dispensation  of  Providence  which 
used  these  men  to  bring  it  about,  that  books 
which  the  Jewish  race  were  unwilling,  either 
from  religious  scruple  or  from  jealousy,  to 

3The  Vetus  Latina,  commonly  called  the  Vulgate. 

4Cf.  Augustine,  City  of  God,  bk.  xviii.  43. 


644  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


make  known  to  other  nations,  were,  with  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  the  power  of  King  Ptolemy,  made 
known  so  long  beforehand  to  the  nations  which 
in  the  future  were  to  believe  in  the  Lord.  And 
thus  it  is  possible  that  they  translated  in  such  a 
way  as  the  Holy  Spirit,  Who  worked  in  them  and 
had  given  them  all  one  voice,  thought  most  suit¬ 
able  for  the  Gentiles.  But  nevertheless,  as  I  said 
above,  a  comparison  of  those  translators  also 
who  have  kept  most  closely  to  the  words,  is 
often  not  without  value  as  a  help  to  the  clearing 
up  of  the  meaning.  The  Latin  texts,  therefore,  of 
the  Old  Testament  are,  as  I  was  about  to  say,  to 
be  corrected  if  necessary  by  the  authority  of  the 
Greek,  and  especially  by  that  of  those  who, 
though  they  were  seventy  in  number,  are  said  to 
have  translated  as  with  one  voice.  As  to  the 
books  of  the  New  Testament,  again,  if  any  per¬ 
plexity  arises  from  the  diversities  of  the  Latin 
texts,  we  must  of  course  yield  to  the  Greek,  es¬ 
pecially  those  that  are  found  in  the  churches  of 
greater  learning  and  research. 

Chap.  16.  The  knowledge  both  of  language  and 
things  is  helpful  for  the  understanding  oj  fig¬ 
urative  expressions 

23.  In  the  case  of  figurative  signs,  again,  if 
ignorance  of  any  of  them  should  chance  to  bring 
the  reader  to  a  stand-still,  their  meaning  is  to  be 
traced  partly  by  the  knowledge  of  languages, 
partly  by  the  knowledge  of  things.  The  pool  of 
Siloam,  for  example,  where  the  man  whose  eyes 
our  Lord  had  anointed  with  clay  made  out  of 
spittle  was  commanded  to  wash,  has  a  figurative 
significance,  and  undoubtedly  conveys  a  secret 
sense;  but  yet  if  the  evangelist  had  not  inter¬ 
preted  that  name,1  a  meaning  so  important 
would  lie  unnoticed.  And  we  cannot  doubt  that, 
in  the  same  way,  many  Hebrew7  names  which 
have  not  been  interpreted  by  the  writers  of  those 
books,  w7ould,  if  any  one  could  interpret  them, 
be  of  great  value  and  service  in  solving  the  enig¬ 
mas  of  Scripture.  And  a  number  of  men  skilled 
in  that  language  have  conferred  no  small  bene¬ 
fit  on  posterity  by  explaining  all  these  words 
without  reference  to  their  place  in  Scripture, 
and  telling  us  what  Adam  means,  what  Eve, 
what  Abraham,  w7hat  Moses,  and  also  the  names 
of  places,  what  Jerusalem  signifies,  or  Sion,  or 
Sinai,  or  Lebanon,  or  Jordan,  and  whatever  oth¬ 
er  names  in  that  language  w7e  are  not  acquainted 
with.  And  wrhen  these  names  have  been  investi¬ 
gated  and  explained,  many  figurative  expres¬ 
sions  in  Scripture  become  clear. 

^ohn,  9.  7. 


24.  Ignorance  of  things,  too.  renders  figura¬ 
tive  expressions  obscure,  as  w’hen  we  do  not 
know  the  nature  of  the  animals,  or  minerals,  or 
plants.  w7hich  are  frequently  referred  to  in  Scrip¬ 
ture  by  way  of  comparison.  The  fact  so  well 
knowm  about  the  serpent,  for  example,  that  to 
protect  its  head  it  will  present  its  w7hole  body  to 
its  assailants — how7  much  light  it  throws  upon 
the  meaning  of  our  Lord’s  command  that  w7e 
should  be  wise  as  serpents;2  that  is  to  say,  that 
for  the  sake  of  our  head,  wdiich  is  Christ,  wre 
should  willingly  offer  our  body  to  the  persecu¬ 
tors,  lest  the  Christian  faith  should,  as  it  were, 
be  destroyed  in  us,  if  to  save  the  body  we  deny 
our  God!  Or  again,  the  statement  that  the  ser¬ 
pent  gets  rid  of  its  old  skin  by  squeezing  itself 
through  a  narrow  hole,  and  thus  acquires  new7 
strength — how  appropriately  it  fits  in  with  the 
direction  to  imitate  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent, 
and  to  put  off  the  old  man,  as  the  apostle  says, 
that  we  may  put  on  the  new;3  and  to  put  it  off, 
too,  by  coming  through  a  narrow  place,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  saying  of  our  Lord,  “Enter  ye  in  at 
the  strait  gate!”  4  As,  then,  knowledge  of  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  serpent  throws  light  upon  many 
metaphors  w7hich  Scripture  is  accustomed  to 
draw  from  that  animal,  so  ignorance  of  other 
animals,  which  are  no  less  frequently  men¬ 
tioned  by  way  of  comparison,  is  a  very  great 
drawback  to  the  reader.  And  so  in  regard  to 
minerals  and  plants:  knowledge  of  the  carbun¬ 
cle,  for  instance,  wiiich  shines  in  the  dark, 
throws  light  upon  many  of  the  dark  places  in 
books  too,  where  it  is  used  metaphorically;  and 
ignorance  of  the  beryl  or  the  adamant  often 
shuts  the  doors  of  knowledge.  And  the  only  rea¬ 
son  why  wre  find  it  easy  to  understand  that  per¬ 
petual  peace  is  indicated  by  the  olive  branch 
which  the  dove  brought  with  it  w7hen  it  returned 
to  the  ark,5  is  that  we  know  both  that  the 
smooth  touch  of  olive  oil  is  not  easily  spoiled 
by  a  fluid  of  another  kind,  and  that  the  tree  it¬ 
self  is  an  evergreen.  Many,  again,  by  reason  of 
their  ignorance  of  hyssop,  not  knowing  the  vir¬ 
tue  it  has  in  cleansing  the  lungs,  nor  the  powrer 
it  is  said  to  have  of  piercing  rocks  with  its  roots, 
although  it  is  a  small  and  insignificant  plant, 
cannot  make  out  why  it  is  said,  “Purge  me  with 
hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean.”6 

25.  Ignorance  of  numbers,  too,  prevents  us 
from  understanding  things  that  are  set  down  in 
Scripture  in  a  figurative  and  mystical  way.  A 
candid  mind,  if  I  may  so  speak,  cannot  but  be 

2Matt.  10.  16.  3Eph.  4.  22.  4Matt.  7.  13. 

6Gen.  8.  11.  6Ps.  51.  7. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  16-17  645 


anxious,  for  example,  to  ascertain  what  is  meant 
by  the  fact  that  Moses  and  Elijah,  and  our  Lord 
Himself,  all  fasted  for  forty  days.1  And  except 
by  knowledge  of  and  reflection  upon  the  num¬ 
ber,  the  difficulty  of  explaining  the  figure  in¬ 
volved  in  this  action  cannot  be  got  over.  For 
the  number  contains  ten  four  times,  indicating 
the  knowledge  of  all  things,  and  that  knowledge 
interwoven  with  time.  For  both  the  diurnal  and 
the  annual  revolutions  are  accomplished  in  pe¬ 
riods  numbering  four  each;  the  diurnal  in  the 
hours  of  the  morning,  the  noontide,  the  evening, 
and  the  night;  the  annual  in  the  spring,  sum¬ 
mer,  autumn,  and  winter  months.  Now  while  we 
live  in  time,  we  must  abstain  and  fast  from  all 
joy  in  time,  for  the  sake  of  that  eternity  in 
which  we  wish  to  live ;  although  by  the  passage 
of  time  we  are  taught  this  very  lesson  of  despis¬ 
ing  time  and  seeking  eternity.  Further,  the 
number  ten  signifies  the  knowledge  of  the 
Creator  and  the  creature,  for  there  is  a  trinity 
in  the  Creator;  and  the  number  seven  indicates 
the  creature,  because  of  the  life  and  the  body. 
For  the  life  consists  of  three  parts,  whence  also 
God  is  to  be  loved  with  the  whole  heart,  the 
whole  soul,  and  the  whole  mind ;  and  it  is  very 
clear  that  in  the  body  there  are  four  elements  of 
which  it  is  made  up.  In  this  number  ten,  there¬ 
fore,  when  it  is  placed  before  us  in  connexion 
with  time,  that  is,  when  it  is  taken  four  times, 
we  are  admonished  to  live  unstained  by,  and  not 
partaking  of,  any  delight  in  time,  that  is,  to  fast 
for  forty  days.  Of  this  we  are  admonished  by 
the  law  personified  in  Moses,  by  prophecy  per¬ 
sonified  in  Elijah,  and  by  our  Lord  Himself, 
Who,  as  if  receiving  the  witness  both  of  the  law 
and  the  prophets,  appeared  on  the  mount  be¬ 
tween  the  other  two,  while  His  three  disciples 
looked  on  in  amazement.  Next,  we  have  to  in¬ 
quire  in  the  same  way.  how  out  of  the  number 
forty  springs  the  number  fifty,  wrhich  in  our  re¬ 
ligion  has  no  ordinary  sacredness  attached  to  it 
on  account  of  the  Pentecost,  and  how  this  num¬ 
ber  taken  thrice  on  account  of  the  three  divi¬ 
sions  of  /time,  before  the  law\  under  the  law,  and 
under  grace,  or  perhaps  on  account  of  the  name 
of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  and  the 
Trinity  itself  being  added  over  and  above,  has 
reference  to  the  mystery  of  the  most  Holy 
Church,  and  reaches  to  the  number  of  the  one 
hundred  and  fifty-three  fishes  which  were  taken 
after  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  when  the 
nets  were  cast  out  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
boat.2  And  in  the  same  way,  many  other  num- 
lEx.  24.  18;  I  Kings,  19.  8;  Matt.  4.  2.  2John,  21.  11. 


bers  and  combinations  of  numbers  are  used  in 
the  sacred  writings,  to  convey  instruction  under 
a  figurative  guise,  and  ignorance  of  numbers 
often  shuts  out  the  reader  from  this  instruction. 

26.  Not  a  few  things,  too,  are  closed  against 
us  and  obscured  by  ignorance  of  music.  One 
man.  for  example,  has  not  unskilfully  explained 
some  metaphors  from  the  difference  between 
the  psaltery  and  the  harp.3  And  it  is  a  question 
which  it  is  not  out  of  place  for  learned  men  to 
discuss,  whether  there  is  any  musical  law  that 
compels  the  psaltery  of  ten  chords  to  have  just 
so  many  strings ;  or  whether,  if  there  be  no  such 
law,  the  number  itself  is  not  on  that  very  ac¬ 
count  the  more  to  be  considered  as  of  sacred 
significance,  either  with  reference  to  the  ten 
commandments  of  the  law  (and  if  again  any 
question  is  raised  about  that  number,  we  can 
only  refer  it  to  the  Creator  and  the  creature), 
or  with  reference  to  the  number  ten  itself  as  in¬ 
terpreted  above.  And  the  number  of  years  the 
temple  was  in  building,  which  is  mentioned  in 
the  Gospel4 — viz.,  forty-six — has  a  certain  un- 
definable  musical  sound,  and  when  referred  to 
the  structure  of  our  Lord’s  body,  in  relation  to 
which  the  temple  was  mentioned,  compels 
many  heretics  to  confess  that  our  Lord  put  on, 
not  a  false,  but  a  true  and  human  body.  And  in 
several  places  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  we  find 
both  numbers  and  music  mentioned  with  hon¬ 
our. 

Chap,  i  7.  Origin  of  the  legend  of  the  nine  Muses 

27.  For  we  must  not  listen  to  the  falsities  of 
heathen  superstition,  which  represent  the  nine 
Muses  as  daughters  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury. 
Varro  refutes  these,  and  I  doubt  whether  any 
one  can  be  found  among  them  more  curious  or 
more  learned  in  such  matters.  He  says  that  a 
certain  state  (I  do  not  recollect  the  name)  or¬ 
dered  from  each  of  three  artists  a  set  of  statues 
of  the  Muses,  to  be  placed  as  an  offering  in  the 
temple  of  Apollo,  intending  that  whichever  of 
the  artists  produced  the  most  beautiful  statues, 
they  should  select  and  purchase  from  him.  It  so 
happened  that  these  artists  executed  their  works 
with  equal  beauty,  that  all  nine  pleased  the 
state,  and  that  all  were  bought  to  be  dedicated 
in  the  temple  of  Apollo;  and  he  says  that  after¬ 
wards  Hesiod  the  poet  gave  names  to  them  all. 
It  was  not  Jupiter,  therefore,  that  begat  the 
nine  Muses,  but  three  artists  created  three  each. 
And  the  state  had  originally  given  the  order  for 
three,  not  because  it  had  seen  them  in  visions, 

3Ps.  33.  2.  4John,  2.  20. 


646  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


nor  because  they  had  presented  themselves  in 
that  number  to  the  eyes  of  any  of  the  citizens, 
but  because  it  was  obvious  to  remark  that  all 
sound,  which  is  the  material  of  song,  is  by  na¬ 
ture  of  three  kinds.  For  it  is  either  produced  by 
the  voice,  as  in  the  case  of  those  who  sing  with 
the  mouth  without  an  instrument ;  or  by  blow¬ 
ing,  as  in  the  case  of  trumpets  and  flutes;  or  by 
striking,  as  in  the  case  of  harps  and  drums,  and 
all  other  instruments  that  give  their  sound  when 
struck. 

Chap.  18.  No  help  is  to  be  despised ,  even 

though  it  come  from  a  profane  source 

28.  But  whether  the  fact  is  as  Varro  has  re¬ 
lated,  or  is  not  so,  still  we  ought  not  to  give  up 
music  because  of  the  superstition  of  the  hea¬ 
then,  if  we  can  derive  anything  from  it  that  is  of 
use  for  the  understanding  of  Holy  Scripture; 
nor  does  it  follow  that  we  must  busy  ourselves 
with  their  theatrical  trumpery  because  we  enter 
upon  an  investigation  about  harps  and  other  in¬ 
struments,  that  may  help  us  to  lay  hold  upon 
spiritual  things.  For  we  ought  not  to  refuse  to 
learn  letters  because  they  say  that  Mercury  dis¬ 
covered  them;  nor  because  they  have  dedicated 
temples  to  Justice  and  Virtue,  and  prefer  to 
worship  in  the  form  of  stones  things  that  ought 
to  have  their  place  in  the  heart,  ought  we  on 
that  account  to  forsake  justice  and  virtue.  Nay, 
but  let  every  good  and  true  Christian  under¬ 
stand  that  wherever  truth  may  be  found,  it  be¬ 
longs  to  his  Master;  and  while  he  recognizes 
and  acknowledges  the  truth,  even  in  their  re¬ 
ligious  literature,  let  him  reject  the  figments  of 
superstition,  and  let  him  grieve  over  and  avoid 
men  who,  “when  they  knew  God,  glorified  him 
not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful;  but  became 
vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish 
heart  was  darkened.  Professing  themselves  to  be 
wise,  they  became  fools,  and  changed  the  glory 
of  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made 
like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four- 
footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things.”  1 

Chap.  19.  Two  kinds  of  heathen  knowledge 

29.  But  to  explain  more  fully  this  whole  topic 
(for  it  is  one  that  cannot  be  omitted),  there  are 
two  kinds  of  knowledge  which  are  in  vogue 
among  the  heathen.  One  is  the  knowledge  of 
things  instituted  by  men,  the  other  of  things 
which  they  have  noted,  either  as  transacted  in 
the  past  or  as  instituted  by  God.  The  former 
kind,  that  which  deals  with  human  institutions, 
is  partly  superstitious,  partly  not. 

^om.  1.  21-23. 


Chap.  20.  The  superstitious  nature  of  human 

institutions 

30.  All  the  arrangements  made  by  men  for  the 
making  and  worshipping  of  idols  are  supersti¬ 
tious,  pertaining  as  they  do  either  to  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  what  is  created  or  of  some  part  of  it  as 
God,  or  to  consultations  and  arrangements 
about  signs  and  leagues  with  devils,  such,  for 
example,  as  are  employed  in  the  magical  arts, 
and  which  the  poets  are  accustomed  not  so 
much  to  teach  as  to  celebrate.  And  to  this  class 
belong,  but  with  a  bolder  reach  of  deception,  the 
books  of  the  haruspices  and  augurs.  In  this  class 
we  must  place  also  all  amulets  and  cures  which 
the  medical  art  condemns,  whether  these  con¬ 
sist  in  incantations,  or  in  marks  which  they  call 
characters,  or  in  hanging  or  tying  on  or  even 
dancing  in  a  fashion  certain  articles,  not  with 
reference  to  the  condition  of  the  body,  but  to 
certain  signs  hidden  or  manifest;  and  these  rem¬ 
edies  they  call  by  the  less  offensive  name  of 
physica,  so  as  to  appear  not  to  be  engaged  in  su¬ 
perstitious  observances,  but  to  be  taking  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  forces  of  nature.  Examples  of  these 
are  the  ear-rings  on  the  top  of  each  ear,  or  the 
rings  of  ostrich  bone  on  the  fingers,  or  telling 
you  when  you  hiccup  to  hold  your  left  thumb  in 
your  right  hand. 

31.  To  these  we  may  add  thousands  of  the 
most  frivolous  practices,  that  are  to  be  observed 
if  any  part  of  the  body  should  jump,  or  if,  when 
friends  are  walking  arm-in-arm,  a  stone,  or  a 
dog,  or  a  boy,  should  come  between  them.  And 
the  kicking  of  a  stone,  as  if  it  were  a  divider  of 
friends,  does  less  harm  than  to  cuff  an  innocent 
boy  if  he  happens  to  run  between  men  who  are 
walking  side  by  side.  But  it  is  delightful  that  the 
boys  are  sometimes  avenged  by  the  dogs;  for 
frequently  men  are  so  superstitious  as  to  ven¬ 
ture  upon  striking  a  dog  who  has  run  between 
them — not  with  impunity  however,  for  instead 
of  a  superstitious  remedy,  the  dog  sometimes 
makes  his  assailant  run  in  hot  haste  for  a  real 
surgeon.  To  this  class,  too,  belong  the  following 
rules:  To  tread  upon  the  threshold  when  you  go 
out  in  front  of  the  house;  to  go  back  to  bed  if 
any  one  should  sneeze  when  you  are  putting  on 
your  slippers;  to  return  home  if  you  stumble 
when  going  to  a  place;  when  your  clothes  are 
eaten  by  mice,  to  be  more  frightened  at  the 
prospect  of  coming  misfortune  than  grieved  by 
your  present  loss.  Whence  that  witty  saying  of 
Cato,  who,  when  consulted  by  a  man  who  told 
him  that  the  mice  had  eaten  his  boots,  replied, 
“That  is  not  strange,  but  it  would  have  been 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  18-22  647 


very  strange  indeed  if  the  boots  had  eaten  the 
mice.” 

Chap.  21.  Superstition  of  astrologers 

32.  Nor  can  we  exclude  from  this  kind  of  su¬ 
perstition  those  who  were  called  genethliaci ,  on 
account  of  their  attention  to  birthdays,  but  are 
now  commonly  called  mathematici.  For  these, 
too,  although  they  may  seek  with  pains  for  the 
true  position  of  the  stars  at  the  time  of  our 
birth,  and  may  sometimes  even  find  it  out,  yet 
in  so  far  as  they  attempt  thence  to  predict  our 
actions,  or  the  consequences  of  our  actions, 
grievously  err,  and  sell  inexperienced  men  into 
a  miserable  bondage.  For  when  any  freeman 
goes  to  an  astrologer  of  this  kind,  he  gives 
money  that  he  may  come  away  the  slave  either 
of  Mars  or  of  Venus,  or  rather,  perhaps,  of  all 
the  stars  to  which  those  who  first  fell  into  this 
error,  and  handed  it  on  to  posterity,  have  given 
the  names  either  of  beasts  on  account  of  their 
likeness  to  beasts,  or  of  men  with  a  view  to  con¬ 
fer  honour  on  those  men.  And  this  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at,  when  we  consider  that  even  in 
times  more  recent  and  nearer  our  own,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  made  an  attempt  to  dedicate  the  star 
which  we  call  Lucifer  to  the  name  and  honour 
of  Caesar.  And  this  would,  perhaps,  have  been 
done,  and  the  name  handed  down  to  distant 
ages,  only  that  his  ancestress  Venus  had  given 
her  name  to  this  star  before  him,  and  could  not 
by  any  law  transfer  to  her  heirs  what  she  had 
never  possessed,  nor  sought  to  possess,  in  life. 
For  where  a  place  was  vacant,  or  not  held  in 
honour  of  any  of  the  dead  of  former  times,  the 
usual  proceeding  in  such  cases  was  carried  out. 
For  example,  we  have  changed  the  names  of  the 
months  Quintilis  and  Sextilis  to  July  and  Au¬ 
gust,  naming  them  in  honour  of  the  men  Julius 
Caesar  and  Augustus  Caesar;  and  from  this  in¬ 
stance  any  one  who  cares  can  easily  see  that  the 
stars  spoken  of  above  formerly  wandered  in  the 
heavens  without  the  names  they  now  bear.  But 
as  the  men  were  dead  whose  memory  people 
were  either  compelled  by  royal  power  or  im¬ 
pelled  by  human  folly  to  honour,  they  seemed 
to  think  that  in  putting  their  names  upon  the 
stars  they  were  raising  the  dead  men  themselves 
to  heaven.  But  whatever  they  may  be  called  by 
men,  still  there  are  stars  which  God  has  made 
and  set  in  order  after  His  own  pleasure,  and 
they  have  a  fixed  movement,  by  which  the  sea¬ 
sons  are  distinguished  and  varied.  And  when 
any  one  is  born,  it  is  easy  to  observe  the  point 
at  which  this  movement  has  arrived,  by  use  of 
the  rules  discovered  and  laid  down  by  those  who 


are  rebuked  by  Holy  Writ  in  these  terms:  “For 
if  they  were  able  to  know  so  much  that  they 
could  weigh  the  world,  how  did  they  not  more 
easily  find  out  the  Lord  thereof?”  1 

Chap.  22.  The  folly  of  observing  the  stars  in  or¬ 
der  to  predict  the  events  of  a  life 

33.  But  to  desire  to  predict  the  characters,  the 
acts,  and  the  fate  of  those  who  are  born  from 
such  an  observation,  is  a  great  delusion  and 
great  madness.  And  among  those  at  least  who 
have  any  sort  of  acquaintance  with  matters  of 
this  kind  (which,  indeed,  are  only  fit  to  be  un¬ 
learnt  again),  this  superstition  is  refuted  beyond 
the  reach  of  doubt.  For  the  observation  is  of  the 
position  of  the  stars,  which  they  call  constella¬ 
tions,  at  the  time  when  the  person  was  born 
about  whom  these  wretched  men  are  consulted 
by  their  still  more  wretched  dupes.  Now  it  may 
happen  that,  in  the  case  of  twins,  one  follows 
the  other  out  of  the  womb  so  closely  that  there 
is  no  interval  of  time  between  them  that  can  be 
apprehended  and  marked  in  the  position  of  the 
constellations.  Whence  it  necessarily  follows 
that  twins  are  in  many  cases  born  under  the 
same  stars,  while  they  do  not  meet  with  equal 
fortune  either  in  what  they  do  or  what  they  suf¬ 
fer,  but  often  meet  with  fates  so  different  that 
one  of  them  has  a  most  fortunate  life,  the  other 
a  most  unfortunate.  As,  for  example,  we  are  told 
that  Esau  and  Jacob  were  born  twins,  and  in 
such  close  succession,  that  Jacob,  who  was  born 
last,  was  found  to  have  laid  hold  with  his  hand 
upon  the  heel  of  his  brother,  who  preceded  him.2 
Now,  assuredly,  the  day  and  hour  of  the  birth 
of  these  two  could  not  be  marked  in  any  way 
that  would  not  give  both  the  same  constellation. 
But  what  a  difference  there  was  between  the 
characters,  the  actions,  the  labours,  and  the 
fortunes  of  these  two,  the  Scriptures  bear  wit¬ 
ness,  which  are  now  so  widely  spread  as  to  be  in 
the  mouth  of  all  nations. 

34.  Nor  is  it  to  the  point  to  say  that  the  very 
smallest  and  briefest  moment  of  time  that  sepa¬ 
rates  the  birth  of  twins  produces  great  effects  in 
nature  and  in  the  extremely  rapid  motion  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.  For,  although  I  may  grant  that 
it  does  produce  the  greatest  effects,  yet  the  as¬ 
trologer  cannot  discover  this  in  the  constella¬ 
tions,  and  it  is  by  looking  into  these  that  he  pro¬ 
fesses  to  read  the  fates.  If,  then,  he  does  not  dis¬ 
cover  the  difference  when  he  examines  the  con¬ 
stellations,  which  must,  of  course,  be  the  same 
whether  he  is  consulted  about  Jacob  or  his 
brother,  what  does  it  profit  him  that  there  is  a 

Wisd.  13.  9.  2Gen.  25.  24. 


648  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


difference  in  the  heavens,  which  he  rashly  and 
carelessly  brings  into  disrepute,  when  there  is  no 
difference  in  his  chart,  which  he  looks  into  anx¬ 
iously  but  in  vain?  And  so  these  notions  also, 
which  have  their  origin  in  certain  signs  of  things 
being  arbitrarily  fixed  upon  by  the  presumption 
of  men,  are  to  be  referred  to  the  same  class  as  if 
they  were  leagues  and  covenants  with  devils. 

Chap.  23.  Why  we  repudiate  arts  of  divination 

35.  For  in  this  way  it  comes  to  pass  that  men 
who  lust  after  evil  things  are,  by  a  secret  judg¬ 
ment  of  God,  delivered  over  to  be  mocked  and 
deceived,  as  the  just  reward  of  their  evil  desires. 
For  they  are  deluded  and  imposed  on  by  the 
false  angels,  to  whom  the  lowest  part  of  the 
world  has  been  put  in  subjection  by  the  law  of 
God’s  providence,  and  in  accordance  with  His 
most  admirable  arrangement  of  things.  And  the 
result  of  these  delusions  and  deceptions  is,  that 
through  these  superstitious  and  baneful  modes 
of  divination,  many  things  in  the  past  and  fu¬ 
ture  are  made  known,  and  turn  out  just  as  they 
are  foretold ;  and  in  the  case  of  those  who  prac¬ 
tise  superstitious  observances,  many  things  turn 
out  agreeably  to  their  observances,  and  ensnared 
by  these  successes,  they  become  more  eagerly 
inquisitive,  and  involve  themselves  further  and 
further  in  a  labyrinth  of  most  pernicious  error. 
And  to  our  advantage,  the  Word  of  God  is  not 
silent  about  this  species  of  fornication  of  the 
soul;  and  it  does  not  warn  the  soul  against  fol¬ 
lowing  such  practices  on  the  ground  that  those 
who  profess  them  speak  lies,  but  it  says,  “Even 
if  what  they  tell  you  should  come  to  pass,  heark¬ 
en  not  unto  them.”  1  For  though  the  ghost  of  the 
dead  Samuel  foretold  the  truth  to  King  Saul,2 
that  does  not  make  such  sacrilegious  observ¬ 
ances  as  those  by  which  his  ghost  was  brought 
up  the  less  detestable ;  and  though  the  ventrilo¬ 
quist  woman3  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  bore 
true  testimony  to  the  apostles  of  the  Lord,  the 
Apostle  Paul  did  not  spare  the  evil  spirit  on  that 
account,  but  rebuked  and  cast  it  out,  and  so 
made  the  woman  clean.4 

36.  All  arts  of  this  sort,  therefore,  are  either 
nullities,  or  are  part  of  a  guilty  superstition, 
springing  out  of  a  baleful  fellowship  between 
men  and  devils,  and  are  to  be  utterly  repudiated 
and  avoided  by  the  Christian  as  the  covenants 
of  a  false  and  treacherous  friendship.  “Not  as  if 
the  idol  were  anything,”  says  the  apostle;  “but 
because  the  things  which  they  sacrifice  they  sac- 

*Cf.  Deut.  13.  1-3. 

2I  Sam,  28;  cf.  Ecclus.  46.  20. 

3See  I  Sam.  28.  7.  4Acts,  16.  16-18. 


rifice  to  devils  and  not  to  God;  and  I  would  not 
that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils.”5 
Now,  what  the  apostle  has  said  about  idols  and 
the  sacrifices  offered  in  their  honour,  that  we 
ought  to  feel  in  regard  to  all  fancied  signs  which 
lead  either  to  the  worship  of  idols,  or  to  wor¬ 
shipping  creation  or  its  parts  instead  of  God,  or 
which  are  connected  with  attention  to  medicinal 
charms  and  other  observances ;  for  these  are  not 
appointed  by  God  as  the  public  means  of  pro¬ 
moting  love  towards  God  and  our  neighbour,  but 
they  waste  the  hearts  of  wretched  men  in  pri¬ 
vate  and  selfish  strivings  after  temporal  things. 
Accordingly,  in  regard  to  all  these  branches  of 
knowledge,  we  must  fear  and  shun  the  fellow¬ 
ship  of  demons,  who,  with  the  Devil  their 
prince,  strive  only  to  shut  and  bar  the  door 
against  our  return.  As,  then,  from  the  stars 
which  God  created  and  ordained,  men  have 
drawn  lying  omens  of  their  own  fancy,  so  also 
from  things  that  are  born,  or  in  any  other  way 
come  into  existence  under  the  government  of 
God’s  providence,  if  there  chance  only  to  be 
something  unusual  in  the  occurrence — as  when 
a  mule  brings  forth  young,  or  an  object  is  struck 
by  lightning — men  have  frequently  drawn 
omens  by  conjectures  of  their  own,  and  have 
committed  them  to  writing,  as  if  they  had  drawn 
them  by  rule. 

Chap.  24.  The  intercourse  and  agreement  with 
demons  which  superstitious  observances 
maintain 

37.  And  all  these  omens  are  of  force  just  so 
far  as  has  been  arranged  with  the  devils  by  that 
previous  understanding  in  the  mind  which  is,  as 
it  were,  the  common  language,  but  they  are  all 
full  of  hurtful  curiosity,  torturing  anxiety,  and 
deadly  slavery.  For  it  was  not  because  they  had 
meaning  that  they  were  attended  to,  but  it  was 
by  attending  to  and  marking  them  that  they 
came  to  have  meaning.  And  so  they  are  made 
different  for  different  people,  according  to  their 
serveral  notions  and  prejudices.  For  those  spir¬ 
its  which  are  bent  upon  deceiving,  take  care  to 
provide  for  each  person  the  same  sort  of  omens 
as  they  see  his  own  conjectures  and  preconcep¬ 
tions  have  already  entangled  him  in.  For,  to 
take  an  illustration,  the  same  figure  of  the  letter 
X,  which  is  made  in  the  shape  of  a  cross,  means 
one  thing  among  the  Greeks  and  another  among 
the  Latins,  not  by  nature,  but  by  agreement  and 
pre-arrangement  as  to  its  signification;  and  so, 
any  one  who  knows  both  languages  uses  this  let¬ 
ter  in  a  different  sense  when  writing  to  a  Greek 
6I  Cor.  10.  19,  20. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  23-26  649 


from  that  in  which  he  uses  it  when  writing  to  a 
Latin.  And  the  same  sound,  beta,  which  is  the 
name  of  a  letter  among  the  Greeks,  is  the  name 
of  a  vegetable  among  the  Latins;  and  when  I 
say,  lege,  these  two  syllables  mean  one  thing  to 
a  Greek  and  another  to  a  Latin.  Now,  just  as  all 
these  signs  affect  the  mind  according  to  the  ar¬ 
rangements  of  the  community  in  which  each 
man  lives,  and  affect  different  men’s  minds  dif¬ 
ferently,  because  these  arrangements  are  dif¬ 
ferent;  and  as,  further,  men  did  not  agree  upon 
them  as  signs  because  they  were  already  signifi¬ 
cant,  but  on  the  contrary  they  are  now  signifi¬ 
cant  because  men  have  agreed  upon  them;  in 
the  same  way  also,  those  signs  by  which  the  ru¬ 
inous  intercourse  with  devils  is  maintained  have 
meaning  just  in  proportion  to  each  man’s  obser¬ 
vations.  And  this  appears  quite  plainly  in  the 
rites  of  the  augurs;  for  they,  both  before  they 
observe  the  omens  and  after  they  have  com¬ 
pleted  their  observations,  take  pains  not  to  see 
the  flight  or  hear  the  cries  of  birds,  because 
these  omens  are  of  no  significance  apart  from 
the  previous  arrangement  in  the  mind  of  the 
observer. 

Chap.  25.  In  human  institutions  which  are  not 
superstitious,  there  are  some  things  superflu¬ 
ous  and  some  convenient  and  necessary 

38.  But  when  all  these  have  been  cut  away 
and  rooted  out  of  the  mind  of  the  Christian,  we 
must  then  look  at  human  institutions  which  are 
not  superstitious,  that  is,  such  as  are  not  set  up 
in  association  with  devils,  but  by  men  in  asso¬ 
ciation  with  one  another.  For  all  arrangements 
that  are  in  force  among  men,  because  they  have 
agreed  among  themselves  that  they  should  be  in 
force,  are  human  institutions;  and  of  these, 
some  are  matters  of  superfluity  and  luxury, 
some  of  convenience  and  necessity.  For  if  those 
signs  which  the  actors  make  in  dancing  were  of 
force  by  nature,  and  not  by  the  arrangement  and 
agreement  of  men,  the  public  crier  would  not  in 
former  times  have  announced  to  the  people  of 
Carthage^,  while  the  pantomime  was  dancing, 
what  it  was  he  meant  to  express — a  thing  still 
remembered  by  many  old  men  from  whom  we 
have  frequently  heard  it.  And  we  may  well  be¬ 
lieve  this,  because  even  now,  if  any  one  who  is 
unaccustomed  to  such  follies  goes  into  the  thea¬ 
tre,  unless  some  one  tells  him  what  these  move¬ 
ments  mean,  he  will  give  his  whole  attention  to 
them  in  vain.  Yet  all  men  aim  at  a  certain  de¬ 
gree  of  likeness  in  their  choice  of  signs,  that  the 
signs  may  as  far  as  possible  be  like  the  things 
they  signify.  But  because  one  thing  may  resem¬ 


ble  another  in  many  ways,  such  signs  are  not  al¬ 
ways  of  the  same  significance  among  men,  ex¬ 
cept  when  they  have  mutually  agreed  upon 
them. 

39.  But  in  regard  to  pictures  and  statues,  and 
other  works  of  this  kind,  which  are  intended  as 
representations  of  things,  nobody  makes  a  mis¬ 
take,  especially  if  they  are  executed  by  skilled 
artists,  but  every  one,  as  soon  as  he  sees  the  like¬ 
nesses,  recognizes  the  things  they  are  likenesses 
of.  And  this  whole  class  are  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  superfluous  devices  of  men,  unless 
when  it  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  inquire  in 
regard  to  any  of  them,  for  what  reason,  where, 
when,  and  by  whose  authority  it  was  made.  Fi¬ 
nally,  the  thousands  of  fables  and  fictions,  in 
whose  lies  men  take  delight,  are  human  devices, 
and  nothing  is  to  be  considered  more  peculiarly 
man’s  own  and  derived  from  himself  than  any¬ 
thing  that  is  false  and  lying.  Among  the  con¬ 
venient  and  necessary  arrangements  of  men 
with  men  are  to  be  reckoned  whatever  differ¬ 
ences  they  choose  to  make  in  bodily  dress  and 
ornament  for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  sex 
or  rank;  and  the  countless  varieties  of  signs 
without  which  human  intercourse  either  could 
not  be  carried  on  at  all,  or  would  be  carried  on 
at  great  inconvenience;  and  the  arrangements 
as  to  weights  and  measures,  and  the  stamping 
and  weighing  of  coins,  which  are  peculiar  to  each 
state  and  people,  and  other  things  of  the  same 
kind.  Now  these,  if  they  were  not  devices  of 
men,  would  not  be  different  in  different  nations, 
and  could  not  be  changed  among  particular  na¬ 
tions  at  the  discretion  of  their  respective  sov¬ 
ereigns. 

40.  This  whole  class  of  human  arrangements, 
which  are  of  convenience  for  the  necessary  in¬ 
tercourse  of  life,  the  Christian  is  not  by  any 
means  to  neglect,  but  on  the  contrary  should 
pay  a  sufficient  degree  of  attention  to  them,  and 
keep  them  in  memory. 

Chap.  26.  What  human  contrivances  we  are  to 

adopt,  and  what  we  are  to  avoid 

For  certain  institutions  of  men  are  in  a  sort 
of  way  representations  and  likenesses  of  natural 
objects.  And  of  these,  such  as  have  relation  to 
fellowship  with  devils  must,  as  has  been  said, 
be  utterly  rejected  and  held  in  detestation; 
those,  on  the  other  hand,  which  relate  to  the 
mutual  intercourse  of  men,  are,  so  far  as  they 
are  not  matters  of  luxury  and  superfluity,  to  be 
adopted,  especially  the  forms  of  the  letters 
which  are  necessary  for  reading,  and  the  various 
languages  as  far  as  is  required — a  matter  I  have 


650  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


spoken  of  above.1  To  this  class  also  belong 
shorthand  characters,  those  who  are  acquainted 
with  which  are  called  shorthand  writers.  All 
these  are  useful,  and  there  is  nothing  unlawful 
in  learning  them,  nor  do  they  involve  us  in  su¬ 
perstition,  or  enervate  us  by  luxury,  if  they  only 
occupy  our  minds  so  far  as  not  to  stand  in  the 
way  of  more  important  objects  to  which  they 
ought  to  be  subservient. 

Chap.  27.  Some  departments  of  knowledge ,  not 

of  mere  human  invention,  aid  us  in  interpret¬ 
ing  Scripture 

41.  But,  coming  to  the  next  point,  we  are  not 
to  reckon  among  human  institutions  those  things 
which  men  have  handed  down  to  us,  not  as  ar¬ 
rangements  of  their  own,  but  as  the  result  of  in¬ 
vestigation  into  the  occurrences  of  the  past,  and 
into  the  arrangements  of  God’s  providence.  And 
of  these,  some  pertain  to  the  bodily  senses,  some 
to  the  intellect.  Those  which  are  reached  by  the 
bodily  senses  we  either  believe  on  testimony,  or 
perceive  when  they  are  pointed  out  to  us,  or  in¬ 
fer  from  experience. 

Chap.  2%.  To  what  extent  history  is  an  aid 

42.  Anything,  then,  that  we  learn  from  his¬ 
tory  about  the  chronology  of  past  times  assists 
us  very  much  in  understanding  the  Scriptures, 
even  if  it  be  learnt  without  the  pale  of  the 
Church  as  a  matter  of  childish  instruction.  For 
we  frequently  seek  information  about  a  variety 
of  matters  by  use  of  the  Olympiads,  and  the 
names  of  the  consuls;  and  ignorance  of  the  con¬ 
sulship  in  which  our  Lord  was  born,  and  that  in 
which  He  suffered,  has  led  some  into  the  error 
of  supposing  that  He  was  forty-six  years  of  age 
when  He  suffered,  that  being  the  number  of 
years  He  was  told  by  the  Jews  the  temple 
(which  He  took  as  a  symbol  of  His  body)  wTas 
in  building.2  Now  we  know  on  the  authority  of 
the  evangelist  that  He  was  about  thirty  years  of 
age  wrhen  He  was  baptized;3  but  the  number  of 
years  He  lived  afterwards,  although  by  putting 
His  actions  together  we  can  make  it  out,  yet  that 
no  shadow  of  doubt  might  arise  from  another 
source,  can  be  ascertained  more  clearly  and 
more  certainly  from  a  comparison  of  profane 
history  with  the  gospel.  It  will  still  be  evident, 
however,  that  it  was  not  without  a  purpose  it 
was  said  that  the  temple  was  forty  and  six  years 
in  building;  so  that,  as  this  cannot  be  referred 
to  our  Lord’s  age.  it  may  be  referred  to  the  more 
secret  formation  of  the  body  which,  for  our 
sakes.  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God.  by  Whom 

1See  above  Chap.  n.  2John,  2.  19.  3Luke,  3.  23. 


all  things  were  made,  condescended  to  put  on.4 

43.  As  to  the  utility  of  history,  moreover, 
passing  over  the  Greeks,  what  a  great  question 
our  own  Ambrose  has  set  at  rest!  For,  when  the 
readers  and  admirers  of  Plato  dared  calumni- 
ously  to  assert  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  learnt 
all  those  sayings  of  His,  which  they  are  com¬ 
pelled  to  admire  and  praise,  from  the  books  of 
Plato — because  (they  urged)  it  cannot  be  de¬ 
nied  that  Plato  lived  long  before  the  coming  of 
our  Lord! — did  not  the  illustrious  bishop,  when 
by  his  investigations  into  profane  history  he  had 
discovered  that  Plato  made  a  journey  into 
Egypt  at  the  time  when  Jeremiah  the  prophet 
was  there,  show  that  it  is  much  more  likely  that 
Plato  was  through  Jeremiah’s  means  initiated 
into  our  literature,  so  as  to  be  able  to  teach  and 
write  those  views  of  his  which  are  so  justly 
praised?  For  not  even  Pythagoras  himself,  from 
whose  successors  these  men  assert  Plato  learnt 
theology,  lived  at  a  date  prior  to  the  books  of 
that  Hebrew  race,  among  whom  the  worship  of 
one  God  sprang  up,  and  of  whom  as  concerning 
the  flesh  our  Lord  came.  And  thus,  when  we  re¬ 
flect  upon  the  dates,  it  becomes  much  more 
probable  that  those  philosophers  learnt  what¬ 
ever  they  said  that  was  good  and  true  from  our 
literature,  than  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  learnt 
from  the  writings  of  Plato — a  thing  which  it  is 
the  height  of  folly  to  believe. 

44.  And  even  when  in  the  course  of  an  histori¬ 
cal  narrative  former  institutions  of  men  are 
described,  the  history  itself  is  not  to  be  reck¬ 
oned  among  human  institutions;  because  things 
that  are  past  and  gone  and  cannot  be  undone 
are  to  be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  course  of 
time,  of  which  God  is  the  author  and  governor. 
For  it  is  one  thing  to  tell  what  has  been  done, 
another  to  show  what  ought  to  be  done.  History 
narrates  what  has  been  done,  faithfully  and  with 
advantage;  but  the  books  of  the  haruspices,  and 
all  writings  of  the  same  kind,  aim  at  teaching 
what  ought  to  be  done  or  observed,  using  the 
boldness  of  an  adviser,  not  the  fidelity  of  a  nar¬ 
rator. 

Chap.  29.  To  what  extent  natural  science  is  an 

exegetical  aid 

45.  There  is  also  a  species  of  narrative  resem¬ 
bling  description,  in  which  not  a  past  but  an  ex¬ 
isting  state  of  things  is  made  known  to  those 
who  are  ignorant  of  it.  To  this  species  belongs 
all  that  has  been  written  about  the  situation  of 
places,  and  the  nature  of  animals,  trees,  herbs, 
stones,  and  other  bodies.  And  of  this  species  I 

4See  above,  Chap.  16. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  27-31  651 


have  treated  above,  and  have  shown  that  this 
kind  of  knowledge  is  serviceable  in  solving  the 
difficulties  of  Scripture,  not  that  these  objects 
are  to  be  used  conformably  to  certain  signs  as 
nostrums  or  the  instruments  of  superstition; 
for  that  kind  of  knowledge  I  have  already  set 
aside  as  distinct  from  the  lawful  and  free  kind 
now  spoken  of.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  say:  “If 
you  bruise  down  this  herb  and  drink  it,  it  will 
remove  the  pain  from  your  stomach”;  and  an¬ 
other  to  say:  “If  you  hang  this  herb  round  your 
neck,  it  will  remove  the  pain  from  your  stom¬ 
ach.”  In  the  former  case  the  wholesome  mix¬ 
ture  is  approved  of,  in  the  latter  the  supersti¬ 
tious  charm  is  condemned;  although  indeed, 
where  incantations  and  invocations  and  marks 
are  not  used,  it  is  frequently  doubtful  whether 
the  thing  that  is  tied  or  fixed  in  any  way  to  the 
body  to  cure  it,  acts  by  a  natural  virtue,  in 
which  case  it  may  be  freely  used;  or  acts  by  a 
sort  of  charm,  in  which  case  it  becomes  the 
Christian  to  avoid  it  the  more  carefully,  the 
more  efficacious  it  may  seem  to  be.  But  when 
the  reason  why  a  thing  is  of  virtue  does  not  ap¬ 
pear,  the  intention  with  which  it  is  used  is  of 
great  importance,  at  least  in  healing  or  in  tem¬ 
pering  bodies,  whether  in  medicine  or  in  agri¬ 
culture. 

46.  The  knowledge  of  the  stars,  again,  is  not 
a  matter  of  narration,  but  of  description.  Very 
few  of  these,  however,  are  mentioned  in  Scrip¬ 
ture.  And  as  the  course  of  the  moon,  which  is 
regularly  employed  in  reference  to  celebrating 
the  anniversary  of  our  Lord’s  passion,  is  known 
to  most  people,  so  the  rising  and  setting  and 
other  movements  of  the  rest  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  are  thoroughly  known  to  very  few.  And 
this  knowledge,  although  in  itself  it  involves  no 
superstition,  renders  very  little,  indeed  almost 
no  assistance,  in  the  interpretation  of  Holy 
Scripture,  and  by  engaging  the  attention  unprof- 
itably  is  a  hindrance  rather;  and  as  it  is  closely 
related  to  the  very  pernicious  error  of  the  di¬ 
viners  of  the  fates,  it  is  more  convenient  and  be¬ 
coming  to  neglect  it.  It  involves,  moreover,  in 
addition  to  a  description  of  the  present  state  of 
things,  something  like  a  narrative  of  the  past 
also;  because  one  may  go  back  from  the  present 
position  and  motion  of  the  stars,  and  trace  by 
rule  their  past  movements.  It  involves  also  regu¬ 
lar  anticipations  of  the  future,  not  in  the  way  of 
forebodings  and  omens,  but  by  way  of  sure  cal¬ 
culation  ;  not  with  the  design  of  drawing  any  in¬ 
formation  from  them  as  to  our  own  acts  and 
fates,  in  the  absurd  fashion  of  the  genethliaci , 
but  only  as  to  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bod¬ 


ies  themselves.  For,  as  the  man  who  computes 
the  moon’s  age  can  tell,  when  he  has  found  out 
her  age  to-day,  what  her  age  was  any  number  of 
years  ago,  or  what  will  be  her  age  any  number  of 
years  hence,  in  just  the  same  way  men  who  are 
skilled  in  such  computations  are  accustomed  to 
answer  like  questions  about  every  one  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.  And  I  have  stated  what  my 
views  are  about  all  this  knowledge,  so  far  as  re¬ 
gards  its  utility. 

Chap.  30.  What  the  mechanical  arts  contribute 

to  exegetics 

47.  Further,  as  to  the  remaining  arts,  whether 
those  by  which  something  is  made  which,  when 
the  effort  of  the  workman  is  over,  remains  as  a 
result  of  his  work,  as,  for  example,  a  house,  a 
bench,  a  dish,  and  other  things  of  that  kind;  or 
those  which,  so  to  speak,  assist  God  in  His  op¬ 
erations,  as  medicine,  and  agriculture,  and  navi¬ 
gation  :  or  those  whose  sole  result  is  an  action, 
as  dancing,  and  racing,  and  wrestling;  in  all 
these  arts  experience  teaches  us  to  infer  the  fu¬ 
ture  from  the  past.  For  no  man  who  is  skilled  in 
any  of  these  arts  moves  his  limbs  in  any  opera¬ 
tion  without  connecting  the  memory  of  the  past 
with  the  expectation  of  the  future.  Now  of  these 
arts  a  very  superficial  and  cursory  knowledge  is 
to  be  acquired,  not  with  a  view  to  practising 
them  (unless  some  duty  compel  us,  a  matter  on 
which  I  do  not  touch  at  present),  but  with  a 
view  to  forming  a  judgment  about  them,  that 
we  may  not  be  wholly  ignorant  of  what  Scrip¬ 
ture  means  to  convey  when  it  employs  figures  of 
speech  derived  from  these  arts. 

Chap.  31  .Use  of  dialectics.  Of  fallacies 

48.  There  remain  those  branches  of  knowl¬ 
edge  which  pertain  not  to  the  bodily  senses,  but 
to  the  intellect,  among  which  the  science  of  rea¬ 
soning  and  that  of  number  are  the  chief.  The 
science  of  reasoning  is  of  very  great  service  in 
searching  into  and  unravelling  all  sorts  of  ques¬ 
tions  that  come  up  in  Scripture,  only  in  the  use 
of  it  we  must  guard  against  the  love  of  wran¬ 
gling  and  the  childish  vanity  of  entrapping  an 
adversary.  For  there  are  many  of  what  are  called 
sophisms,  inferences  in  reasoning  that  are  false, 
and  yet  so  close  an  imitation  of  the  true,  as  to 
deceive  not  only  dull  people,  but  clever  men 
too,  when  they  are  not  on  their  guard.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  one  man  lays  before  another  with  whom 
he  is  talking,  the  proposition,  “What  I  am,  you 
are  not.”  The  other  assents,  for  the  proposition 
is  in  part  true,  the  one  man  being  cunning  and 
the  other  simple.  Then  the  first  speaker  adds:  “I 


652 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


am  a  man”;  and  when  the  other  has  given  his  as¬ 
sent  to  this  also,  the  first  draws  his  conclusion : 
‘‘Then  you  are  not  a  man.”  Now  of  this  sort  of 
ensnaring  arguments,  Scripture,  as  I  judge,  ex¬ 
presses  detestation  in  that  place  where  it  is  said, 
‘‘There  is  one  that  showeth  wisdom  in  words, 
and  is  hated”;1  although,  indeed,  a  style  of 
speech  which  is  not  intended  to  entrap,  but  only 
aims  at  verbal  ornamentation  more  than  is  con¬ 
sistent  with  seriousness  of  purpose,  is  also  called 
sophistical. 

49.  There  are  also  valid  processes  of  reason¬ 
ing  which  lead  to  false  conclusions,  by  following 
out  to  its  logical  consequences  the  error  of  the 
man  with  whom  one  is  arguing ;  and  these  con¬ 
clusions  are  sometimes  drawn  by  a  good  and 
learned  man,  with  the  object  of  making  the  per¬ 
son  from  whose  error  these  consequences  result, 
feel  ashamed  of  them,  and  of  thus  leading  him 
to  give  up  his  error,  when  he  finds  that  if  he 
wishes  to  retain  his  old  opinion,  he  must  of  ne¬ 
cessity  also  hold  other  opinions  which  he  con¬ 
demns.  For  example,  the  apostle  did  not  draw 
true  conclusions  when  he  said,  “Then  is  Christ 
not  risen,”  and  again,  “Then  is  our  preaching 
vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain”;2  and  further 
on  drew  other  inferences  which  are  all  utterly 
false;  for  Christ  has  risen,  the  preaching  of 
those  who  declared  this  fact  was  not  in  vain, 
nor  was  their  faith  in  vain  who  had  believed  it. 
But  all  these  false  inferences  followed  legiti¬ 
mately  from  the  opinion  of  those  who  said  that 
there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead.  These  in¬ 
ferences,  then,  being  repudiated  as  false,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  since  they  would  be  true  if  the  dead 
rise  not,  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
As,  then,  valid  conclusions  may  be  drawn  not 
only  from  true  but  from  false  propositions,  the 
laws  of  valid  reasoning  may  easily  be  learnt  in 
the  schools,  outside  the  pale  of  the  Church.  But 
the  truth  of  propositions  must  be  inquired  into 
in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Church. 

Chap.  32.  Valid  logical  sequence  is  not  devised 

but  only  observed  by  man 

50.  And  yet  the  validity  of  logical  sequences 
is  not  a  thing  devised  by  men,  but  is  observed 
and  noted  by  them  that  they  may  be  able  to 
learn  and  teach  it;  for  it  exists  eternally  in  the 
reason  of  things,  and  has  its  origin  with  God. 
For  as  the  man  who  narrates  the  order  of  events 
does  not  himself  create  that  order;  and  as  he 
who  describes  the  situations  of  places,  or  the 
natures  of  animals,  or  roots,  or  minerals,  does 
not  describe  arrangements  of  man;  and  as  he 

1Ecclus.  37.  20.  2I  Cor.  15.  13,  14. 


who  points  out  the  stars  and  their  movements 
does  not  point  out  anything  that  he  himself  or 
any  other  man  has  ordained;  in  the  same  way. 
he  wrho  says,  “When  the  consequent  is  false,  the 
antecedent  must  also  be  false,”  says  what  is 
most  true;  but  he  does  not  himself  make  it  so, 
he  only  points  out  that  it  is  so.  And  it  is  upon 
this  rule  that  the  reasoning  I  have  quoted  from 
the  Apostle  Paul  proceeds.  For  the  antecedent 
is,  “There  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead” — the 
position  taken  up  by  those  whose  error  the  apos¬ 
tle  wished  to  overthrow.  Next,  from  this  ante¬ 
cedent,  the  assertion,  viz.,  that  there  is  no  resur¬ 
rection  of  the  dead,  the  necessary  consequence 
is.  “Then  Christ  is  not  risen.”  But  this  conse¬ 
quence  is  false,  for  Christ  has  risen;  therefore 
the  antecedent  is  also  false.  But  the  antecedent 
is  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead.  We 
conclude,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  Now  all  this  is  briefly  expressed 
thus:  “If  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
then  is  Christ  not  risen;  but  Christ  is  risen, 
therefore  there  is  a  resurrection  of  the  dead.” 
This  rule,  then,  that  when  the  consequent  is  re¬ 
moved,  the  antecedent  must  also  be  removed, 
is  not  made  by  man,  but  only  pointed  out  by 
him.  And  this  rule  has  reference  to  the  validity 
of  the  reasoning,  not  to  the  truth  of  the  state¬ 
ments. 


Chap.  33.  False  inferences  may  be  drawn  from 
valid  reasonings ,  and  vice  versa 

51.  In  this  passage,  however,  where  the  argu¬ 
ment  is  about  the  resurrection,  both  the  law  of 
the  inference  is  valid,  and  the  conclusion  ar¬ 
rived  at  is  true.  But  in  the  case  of  false  conclu¬ 
sions,  too,  there  is  a  validity  of  inference  in 
some  such  way  as  the  following.  Let  us  suppose 
some  man  to  have  admitted :  “If  a  snail  is  an  an¬ 
imal,  it  has  a  voice.”  This  being  admitted,  then, 
when  it  has  been  proved  that  the  snail  has  no 
voice,  it  follows  (since  wThen  the  consequent  is 
proved  false,  the  antecedent  is  also  false)  that 
the  snail  is  not  an  animal.  Now  this  conclusion 
is  false,  but  it  is  a  true  and  valid  inference  from 
the  false  admission.  Thus,  the  truth  of  a  state¬ 
ment  stands  on  its  own  merits;  the  validity  of 
an  inference  depends  on  the  statement  or  the  ad¬ 
mission  of  the  man  with  whom  one  is  arguing. 
And  thus,  as  I  said  above,  a  false  inference  may 
be  drawn  by  a  valid  process  of  reasoning,  in  or¬ 
der  that  he  whose  error  we  wish  to  correct  may 
be  sorry  that  he  has  admitted  the  antecedent, 
when  he  sees  that  its  logical  consequences  are 
utterly  untenable.  And  hence  it  is  easy  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  as  the  inferences  may  be  valid 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  32-37  653 


where  the  opinions  are  false,  so  the  inferences 
may  be  unsound  where  the  opinions  are  true. 
For  example,  suppose  that  a  man  propounds  the 
statement,  “If  this  man  is  just,  he  is  good,”  and 
we  admit  its  truth.  Then  he  adds,  “But  he  is  not 
just”;  and  when  we  admit  this  too,  he  draws 
the  conclusion,  “Therefore  he  is  not  good.”  Now 
although  every  one  of  these  statements  may  be 
true,  still  the  principle  of  the  inference  is  un¬ 
sound.  For  it  is  not  true  that,  as  when  the  con¬ 
sequent  is  proved  false  the  antecedent  is  also 
false,  so  when  the  antecedent  is  proved  false  the 
consequent  is  false.  For  the  statement  is  true. 
“If  he  is  an  orator,  he  is  a  man.”  But  if  we  add, 
“He  is  not  an  orator,”  the  consequence  does  not 
follow,  “He  is  not  a  man.” 

Chap.  34.  It  is  one  thing  to  know  the  laws  of 

inference ,  another  to  know  the  truth  of  opin¬ 
ions 

52.  Therefore  it  is  one  thing  to  know  the  laws 
of  inference,  and  another  to  know  the  truth  of 
opinions.  In  the  former  case  we  learn  what  is 
consequent,  what  is  inconsequent,  and  what  is 
incompatible.  An  example  of  a  consequent  is, 
“If  he  is  an  orator,  he  is  a  man”;  of  an  incon¬ 
sequent,  “If  he  is  a  man,  he  is  an  orator”;  of  an 
incompatible,  “If  he  is  a  man,  he  is  a  quad¬ 
ruped.”  In  these  instances  we  judge  of  the  con¬ 
nexion.  In  regard  to  the  truth  of  opinions,  how¬ 
ever,  we  must  consider  propositions  as  they 
stand  by  themselves,  and  not  in  their  connex¬ 
ion  with  one  another;  but  when  propositions 
that  we  are  not  sure  about  are  joined  by  a  valid 
inference  to  propositions  that  are  true  and  cer¬ 
tain,  they  themselves,  too,  necessarily  become 
certain.  Now  some,  when  they  have  ascertained 
the  validity  of  the  inference,  plume  themselves 
as  if  this  involved  also  the  truth  of  the  propo¬ 
sitions.  Many,  again,  who  hold  the  true  opinions 
have  an  unfounded  contempt  for  themselves, 
because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  infer¬ 
ence  ;  whereas  the  man  who  knows  that  there  is 
a  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  assuredly  better 
than  the  man  who  only  knows  that  it  follows 
that  if  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,  then 
is  Christ  not  risen. 

Chap.  35.  The  science  of  definition  is  not  false, 

though  it  may  be  applied  to  falsities 

53.  Again,  the  science  of  definition,  of  divi¬ 
sion,  and  of  partition,  although  it  is  frequently 
applied  to  falsities,  is  not  itself  false,  nor  framed 
by  man’s  device,  but  is  evolved  from  the  rea¬ 
son  of  things.  For  although  poets  have  applied 
it  to  their  fictions,  and  false  philosophers,  or 


even  heretics — that  is,  false  Christians — to 
their  erroneous  doctrines,  that  is  no  reason  why 
it  should  be  false,  for  example,  that  neither  in 
definition,  nor  in  division,  nor  in  partition,  is 
anything  to  be  included  that  does  not  pertain  to 
the  matter  in  hand,  nor  anything  to  be  omitted 
that  does.  This  is  true,  even  though  the  things 
to  be  defined  or  divided  are  not  true.  For  even 
falsehood  itself  is  defined  when  we  say  that 
falsehood  is  the  declaration  of  a  state  of  things 
which  is  not  as  we  declare  it  to  be ;  and  this  defi¬ 
nition  is  true,  although  falsehood  itself  cannot 
be  true.  We  can  also  divide  it,  saying  that  there 
are  two  kinds  of  falsehood,  one  in  regard  to 
things  that  cannot  be  true  at  all,  the  other  in  re¬ 
gard  to  things  that  are  not,  though  it  is  possible 
they  might  be,  true.  For  example,  the  man  who 
says  that  seven  and  three  are  eleven,  says  what 
cannot  be  true  under  any  circumstances;  but  he 
who  says  that  it  rained  on  the  kalends  of  Janu¬ 
ary,  although  perhaps  the  fact  is  not  so,  says 
what  possibly  might  have  been.  The  definition 
and  division,  therefore,  of  what  is  false  may  be 
perfectly  true,  although  what  is  false  cannot,  of 
course,  itself  be  true. 

Chap.  36.  The  rides  of  eloquence  are  true, 

though  sometimes  used  to  persuade  men  of 

what  is  false 

54.  There  are  also  certain  rules  for  a  more 
copious  kind  of  argument,  which  is  called  elo¬ 
quence,  and  these  rules  are  not  the  less  true  that 
they  can  be  used  for  persuading  men  of  what  is 
false;  but  as  they  can  be  used  to  enforce  the 
truth  as  well,  it  is  not  the  faculty  itself  that  is 
to  be  blamed,  but  the  perversity  of  those  who 
put  it  to  a  bad  use.  Nor  is  it  owing  to  an  arrange¬ 
ment  among  men  that  the  expression  of  affec¬ 
tion  conciliates  the  hearer,  or  that  a  narrative, 
when  it  is  short  and  clear,  is  effective,  and  that 
variety  arrests  men’s  attention  without  weary¬ 
ing  them.  And  it  is  the  same  with  other  direc¬ 
tions  of  the  same  kind,  which,  whether  the  cause 
in  which  they  are  used  be  true  or  false,  are 
themselves  true  just  in  so  far  as  they  are  effec¬ 
tive  in  producing  knowledge  or  belief,  or  in  mov¬ 
ing  men’s  minds  to  desire  and  aversion.  And 
men  rather  found  out  that  these  things  are  so 
than  arranged  that  they  should  be  so. 

Chap.  37.  Use  of  rhetoric  and  dialectic 

55.  This  art,  however,  when  it  is  learnt,  is  not 
to  be  used  so  much  for  ascertaining  the  meaning 
as  for  setting  forth  the  meaning  when  it  is  as¬ 
certained.  But  the  art  previously  spoken  of, 
which  deals  with  inferences,  and  definitions,  and 


654  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


divisions,  is  of  the  greatest  assistance  in  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  meaning,  provided  only  that  men 
do  not  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  when 
they  have  learnt  these  things  they  have  learnt 
the  true  secret  of  a  happy  life.  Still,  it  some¬ 
times  happens  that  men  find  less  difficulty  in  at¬ 
taining  the  object  for  the  sake  of  which  these 
sciences  are  learnt,  than  in  going  through  the 
very  intricate  and  thorny  discipline  of  such 
rules.  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  wishing  to  give  rules 
for  walking  should  warn  you  not  to  lift  the  hin¬ 
der  foot  before  you  set  down  the  front  one,  and 
then  should  describe  minutely  the  way  you 
ought  to  move  the  hinges  of  the  joints  and 
knees.  For  what  he  says  is  true,  and  one  cannot 
walk  in  any  other  way ;  but  men  find  it  easier  to 
walk  by  executing  these  movements  than  to  at¬ 
tend  to  them  while  they  are  going  through  them, 
or  to  understand  when  they  are  told  about  them. 
Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  cannot  walk, 
care  still  less  about  such  directions,  as  they  can¬ 
not  prove  them  by  making  trial  of  them.  And  in 
the  same  way  a  clever  man  often  sees  that  an  in¬ 
ference  is  unsound  more  quickly  than  he  appre¬ 
hends  the  rules  for  it.  A  dull  man,  on  the  ofher 
hand,  does  not  see  the  unsoundness,  but  much 
less  does  he  grasp  the  rules.  And  in  regard  to  all 
these  laws,  we  derive  more  pleasure  from  them 
as  exhibitions  of  truth,  than  assistance  in  argu¬ 
ing  or  forming  opinions,  except  perhaps  that 
they  put  the  intellect  in  better  training.  We 
must  take  care,  however,  that  they  do  not  at 
the  same  time  make  it  more  inclined  to  mischief 
or  vanity — that  is  to  say,  that  they  do  not  give 
those  who  have  learnt  them  an  inclination  to 
lead  people  astray  by  plausible  speech  and 
catching  questions,  or  make  them  think  that 
they  have  attained  some  great  thing  that  gives 
them  an  advantage  over  the  good  and  innocent. 

Chap.  38.  The  science  of  numbers  not  created, 
but  only  discovered,  by  man 

56.  Coming  now  to  the  science  of  numbers  it 
is  clear  to  the  dullest  apprehension  that  this  was 
not  created  by  man,  but  was  discovered  by  in¬ 
vestigation.  For,  though  Virgil  could  at  his  own 
pleasure  make  the  first  syllable  of  Italia  long, 
while  the  ancients  pronounced  it  short,  it  is  not 
in  any  man’s  power  to  determine  at  his  pleasure 
that  three  times  three  are  not  nine,  or  do  not 
make  a  square,  or  are  not  the  triple  of  three,  nor 
one  and  a  half  times  the  number  six,  or  that  it 
is  not  true  that  they  are  not  the  double  of  any 
number  because  odd  numbers  have  no  half. 
Whether,  then,  numbers  are  considered  in  them¬ 
selves,  or  as  applied  to  the  laws  of  figures,  or  of 


sounds,  or  of  other  motions,  they  have  fixed 
laws  which  were  not  made  by  man,  but  which 
the  acuteness  of  ingenious  men  brought  to  light. 

57.  The  man,  however,  who  puts  so  high  a 
value  on  these  things  as  to  be  inclined  to  boast 
himself  one  of  the  learned,  and  who  does  not 
rather  inquire  after  the  source  from  which  those 
things  which  he  perceives  to  be  true  derive  their 
truth,  and  from  which  those  others  which  he 
perceives  to  be  unchangeable  also  derive  their 
truth  and  unchangeableness,  and  who,  mounting 
up  from  bodily  appearances  to  the  mind  of  man, 
and  finding  that  it  too  is  changeable  (for  it  is 
sometimes  instructed,  at  other  times  uninstruct¬ 
ed),  although  it  holds  a  middle  place  between 
the  unchangeable  truth  above  it  and  the  change¬ 
able  things  beneath  it,  does  not  strive  to  make 
all  things  redound  to  the  praise  and  love  of  the 
one  God  from  Whom  he  knows  that  all  things 
have  their  being;  the  man,  I  say,  who  acts  in 
this  way  may  seem  to  be  learned,  but  wise  he 
cannot  in  any  sense  be  deemed. 

Chap.  39.  To  which  of  the  above-mentioned 

studies  attention  should  be  given,  and  in  what 

spirit 

58.  Accordingly,  I  think  that  it  is  well  to  warn 
studious  and  able  young  men,  who  fear  God  and 
are  seeking  for  happiness  of  life,  not  to  venture 
heedlessly  upon  the  pursuit  of  the  branches  of 
learning  that  are  in  vogue  beyond  the  pale  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  as  if  these  could  secure  for 
them  the  happiness  they  seek;  but  soberly  and 
carefully  to  discriminate  among  them.  And  if 
they  find  any  of  those  which  have  been  institut¬ 
ed  by  men  varying  by  reason  of  the  varying 
pleasure  of  their  founders,  and  unknown  by  rea¬ 
son  of  erroneous  conjectures,  especially  if  they 
involve  entering  into  fellowship  with  devils  by 
means  of  leagues  and  covenants  about  signs,  let 
these  be  utterly  rejected  and  held  in  detesta¬ 
tion.  Let  the  young  men  also  withdraw  their  at¬ 
tention  from  such  institutions  of  men  as  are  un¬ 
necessary  and  luxurious.  But  for  the  sake  of  the 
necessities  of  this  life  we  must  not  neglect  the 
arrangements  of  men  that  enable  us  to  carry  on 
intercourse  with  those  around  us.  I  think,  how¬ 
ever,  there  is  nothing  useful  in  the  other  branch¬ 
es  of  learning  that  are  found  among  the  hea¬ 
then,  except  information  about  objects,  either 
past  or  present,  that  relate  to  the  bodily  senses, 
in  which  are  included  also  the  experiments  and 
conclusions  of  the  useful  mechanical  arts,  ex¬ 
cept  also  the  sciences  of  reasoning  and  of  num¬ 
bers.  And  in  regard  to  all  these  we  must  hold  by 
the  maxim,  “Not  too  much  of  anything”;  espe- 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  38-40  655 


dally  in  the  case  of  those  which,  pertaining  as 
they  do  to  the  senses,  are  subject  to  the  rela¬ 
tions  of  space  and  time. 

59.  What,  then,  some  men  have  done  in  re¬ 
gard  to  all  words  and  names  found  in  Scripture, 
in  the  Hebrew,  and  Syriac,  and  Egyptian,  and 
other  tongues,  taking  up  and  interpreting  sepa¬ 
rately  such  as  were  left  in  Scripture  without  in¬ 
terpretation  ;  and  what  Eusebius  has  done  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  history  of  the  past  with  a  view  to  the 
questions  arising  in  Scripture  that  require  a 
knowledge  of  history  for  their  solution;  what, 
I  say.  these  men  have  done  in  regard  to  matters 
of  this  kind,  making  it  unnecessary  for  the 
Christian  to  spend  his  strength  on  many  sub¬ 
jects  for  the  sake  of  a  few  items  of  knowledge, 
the  same,  I  think,  might  be  done  in  regard  to 
other  matters,  if  any  competent  man  were  will¬ 
ing  in  a  spirit  of  benevolence  to  undertake  the 
labour  for  the  advantage  of  his  brethren.  In  this 
way  he  might  arrange  in  their  several  classes, 
and  give  an  account  of  the  unknown  places,  and 
animals,  and  plants,  and  trees,  and  stones,  and 
metals,  and  other  species  of  things  that  are  men¬ 
tioned  in  Scripture,  taking  up  these  only,  and 
committing  his  account  to  writing.  This  might 
also  be  done  in  relation  to  numbers,  so  that  the 
theory  of  those  numbers,  and  those  only,  which 
are  mentioned  in  Holy  Scripture,  might  be  ex¬ 
plained  and  written  down’  And  it  may  happen 
that  some  or  all  of  these  things  have  been  done 
already  (as  I  have  found  that  many  things  I  had 
no  notion  of  have  been  worked  out  and  commit¬ 
ted  to  writing  by  good  and  learned  Christians), 
but  are  either  lost  amid  the  crowds  of  the  care¬ 
less,  or  are  kept  out  of  sight  by  the  envious. 
And  I  am  not  sure  whether  the  same  thing  can 
be  done  in  regard  to  the  theory  of  reasoning; 
but  it  seems  to  me  it  cannot,  because  this  runs 
like  a  system  of  nerves  through  the  whole  struc¬ 
ture  of  Scripture,  and  on  that  account  is  of  more 
service  to  the  reader  in  disentangling  and  ex¬ 
plaining  ambiguous  passages,  of  which  I  shall 
speak  hereafter,  than  in  ascertaining  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  unknown  signs,  the  topic  I  am  now  dis¬ 
cussing. 

Chap.  40.  Whatever  has  been  rightly  said  by 

the  heathen ,  we  mast  appropriate  to  our  uses 

60.  Moreover,  if  those  who  are  called  philoso¬ 
phers,  and  especially  the  Platonists,  have  said 
aught  that  is  true  and  in  harmony  with  our  faith, 
we  are  not  only  not  to  shrink  from  it,  but  to 
claim  it  for  our  own  use  from  those  who  have 
unlawful  possession  of  it.  For,  as  the  Egyptians 
had  not  only  the  idols  and  heavy  burdens  which 


the  people  of  Israel  hated  and  fled  from,  but 
also  vessels  and  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver, 
and  garments,  which  the  same  people  when  go¬ 
ing  out  of  Egypt  appropriated  to  themselves,  de¬ 
signing  them  for  a  better  use,  not  doing  this  on 
their  own  authority,  but  by  the  command  of 
God,  the  Egyptians  themselves,  in  their  igno¬ 
rance,  providing  them  with  things  which  they 
themselves  were  not  making  a  good  use  of;1  in 
the  same  way  all  branches  of  heathen  learning 
have  not  only  false  and  superstitious  fancies 
and  heavy  burdens  of  unnecessary  toil,  which 
every  one  of  us,  when  going  out  under  the  lead¬ 
ership  of  Christ  from  the  fellowship  of  the 
heathen,  ought  to  abhor  and  avoid;  but  they 
contain  also  liberal  instruction  which  is  better 
adapted  to  the  use  of  the  truth,  and  some  most 
excellent  precepts  of  morality;  and  some  truths 
in  regard  even  to  the  worship  of  the  One  God 
are  found  among  them.  Now  these  are,  so  to 
speak,  their  gold  and  silver,  which  they  did  not 
create  themselves,  but  dug  out  of  the  mines  of 
God’s  providence  which  are  everywhere  scat¬ 
tered  abroad,  and  are  perversely  and  unlawful¬ 
ly  prostituting  to  the  worship  of  devils.  These, 
therefore,  the  Christian,  when  he  separates  him¬ 
self  in  spirit  from  the  miserable  fellowship  of 
these  men,  ought  to  take  away  from  them,  and 
to  devote  to  their  proper  use  in  preaching  the 
gospel.  Their  garments,  also — that  is,  human 
institutions  such  as  are  adapted  to  that  inter¬ 
course  with  men  which  is  indispensable  in  this 
life — we  must  take  and  turn  to  a  Christian  use. 

61.  And  what  else  have  many  good  and  faith¬ 
ful  men  among  our  brethren  done?  Do  we  not 
see  with  what  a  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  and 
garments  Cyprian,  that  most  persuasive  teacher 
and  most  blessed  martyr,  was  loaded  when  he 
came  out  of  Egypt?  How  much  Lactantius 
brought  with  him?  And  Victorinus,  and  Optatus, 
and  Hilary,  not  to  speak  of  living  men!  How 
much  Greeks  out  of  number  have  borrowed! 
And  prior  to  all  these,  that  most  faithful  serv¬ 
ant  of  God,  Moses,  had  done  the  same  thing; 
for  of  him  it  is  written  that  he  was  learned  in 
all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians.2  And  to  none 
of  all  these  would  heathen  superstition  (espe¬ 
cially  in  those  times  when,  kicking  against  the 
yoke  of  Christ,  it  was  persecuting  the  Chris¬ 
tians)  have  ever  furnished  branches  of  knowl¬ 
edge  it  held  useful,  if  it  had  suspected  they  were 
about  to  turn  them  to  the  use  of  worshipping  the 
One  God,  and  thereby  overturning  the  vain  wor¬ 
ship  of  idols.  But  they  gave  their  gold  and  their 
silver  and  their  garments  to  the  people  of  God 
^x.  3.  21,  22;  12.  35,  36.  2Acts,  7.  22. 


656  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


as  they  were  going  out  of  Egypt,  not  knowing 
how  the  things  they  gave  would  be  turned  to  the 
service  of  Christ.  For  what  was  done  at  the  time 
of  the  exodus  was  no  doubt  a  type  prefiguring 
what  happens  now.  And  this  I  say  without  preju¬ 
dice  to  any  other  interpretation  that  may  be  as 
good,  or  better. 

Chap.  41.  What  kind  of  spirit  is  required  for 
the  study  of  Holy  Scripture 
62.  But  when  the  student  of  the  Holy  Scrip¬ 
tures,  prepared  in  the  way  I  have  indicated, 
shall  enter  upon  his  investigations,  let  him  con¬ 
stantly  meditate  upon  that  saying  of  the  apos¬ 
tle’s,  “Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edi- 
fieth.”  1  For  so  he  will  feel  that,  whatever  may 
be  the  riches  he  brings  with  him  out  of  Egypt, 
yet  unless  he  has  kept  the  passover,  he  cannot 
be  safe.  Now  Christ  is  our  passover  sacrificed 
for  us,2  and  there  is  nothing  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  more  clearly  teaches  us  than  the  call 
which  He  himself  addresses  to  those  whom  He 
sees  toiling  in  Egypt  under  Pharaoh:  “Come 
unto  me.  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon 
you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart:  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls. 
For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light.”  3 
To  whom  is  it  light  but  to  the  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart,  whom  knowledge  doth  not  puff  up,  but 
charity  edifieth?  Let  them  remember,  then,  that 
those  who  celebrated  the  passover  at  that  time 
in  type  and  shadow,  when  they  were  ordered  to 
mark  their  door-posts  with  the  blood  of  the 
lamb,  used  hyssop  to  mark  them  with.4  Now  this 
is  a  meek  and  lowly  herb,  and  yet  nothing  is 
stronger  and  more  penetrating  than  its  roots; 
that  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  we  may 
be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  saints  what  is 
the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height5 
— that  is,  to  comprehend  the  cross  of  our  Lord, 
the  breadth  of  which  is  indicated  by  the  trans¬ 
verse  wood  on  which  the  hands  are  stretched,  its 
length  by  the  part  from  the  ground  up  to  the 
cross-bar  on  which  the  whole  body  from  the 
head  downwards  is  fixed,  its  height  by  the  part 
from  the  cross-bar  to  the  top  on  which  the  head 
lies,  and  its  depth  by  the  part  which  is  hidden, 
being  fixed  in  the  earth.  And  by  this  sign  of  the 
cross  all  Christian  action  is  symbolized,  viz.,  to 

*1  Cor.  8.  1.  2I  Cor.  5.  7.  3Matt.  11.  28-30. 

4Ex.  12.  22.  6Eph.  3.  17,  18. 


do  good  works  in  Christ,  to  cling  with  constancy 
to  Him,  to  hope  for  heaven,  and  not  to  dese¬ 
crate  the  sacraments.  And  purified  by  this  Chris¬ 
tian  action,  we  shall  be  able  to  know  even  “the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge,”  Who 
is  equal  to  the  Father,  by  Whom  all  things,  were 
made,  “that  we  may  be  filled  with  all  the  full¬ 
ness  of  God.”  6  There  is  besides  in  hyssop  a  pur¬ 
gative  virtue,  that  the  breast  may  not  be  swol¬ 
len  with  that  knowledge  which  puffeth  up,  nor 
boast  vainly  of  the  riches  brought  out  from 
Egypt.  “Purge  me  with  hyssop,”  the  psalmist 
says,7  “and  I  shall  be  clean;  wash  me,  and  I 
shall  be  whiter  than  snow.  Make  me  to  hear  joy 
and  gladness.”  Then  he  immediately  adds,  to 
show  that  it  is  purifying  from  pride  that  is  indi¬ 
cated  by  hyssop,  “that  the  bones  which  Thou 
hast  broken  may  rejoice.” 

Chap.  42.  Sacred  Scripture  compared  with  pro¬ 
fane  authors 

63.  But  just  as  poor  as  the  store  of  gold  and 
silver  and  garments  which  the  people  of  Israel 
brought  with  them  out  of  Egypt  was  in  compar¬ 
ison  with  the  riches  which  they  afterwards  at¬ 
tained  at  Jerusalem,  and  which  reached  their 
height  in  the  reign  of  King  Solomon,  so  poor  is 
all  the  useful  knowledge  which  is  gathered  from 
the  books  of  the  heathen  when  compared  with 
the  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture.  For  whatever 
man  may  have  learnt  from  other  sources,  if  it  is 
hurtful,  it  is  there  condemned;  if  it  is  useful,  it 
is  therein  contained.  And  while  every  man  may 
find  there  all  that  he  has  learnt  of  useful  else¬ 
where,  he  will  find  there  in  much  greater  abun¬ 
dance  things  that  are  to  be  found  nowhere  else, 
but  can  be  learnt  only  in  the  wonderful  sub¬ 
limity  and  wonderful  simplicity  of  the  Scrip¬ 
tures. 

When,  then,  the  reader  is  possessed  of  the  in¬ 
struction  here  pointed  out,  so  that  unknown 
signs  have  ceased  to  be  a  hindrance  to  him; 
when  he  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  subject  to 
the  easy  yoke  of  Christ,  and  loaded  with  His 
light  burden,  rooted  and  grounded  and  built  up 
in  faith,  so  that  knowledge  cannot  puff  him  up, 
let  him  then  approach  the  consideration  and  dis¬ 
cussion  of  ambiguous  signs  in  Scripture.  And 
about  these  I  shall  now,  in  a  third  book,  en¬ 
deavour  to  say  what  the  Lord  shall  be  pleased 
to  vouchsafe. 

6Eph.  3.  19.  7Ps.  51.  7,  8. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  II.  41-42,  III.  1-2 


657 


BOOK  III 

ARGUMENT.  The  author,  having  discussed  in  the  preceding  book  the 

METHOD  OF  DEALING  WITH  UNKNOWN  SIGNS,  GOES  ON  IN  THIS  THIRD  BOOK  TO  TREAT 
OF  AMBIGUOUS  SIGNS.  SUCH  SIGNS  MAY  BE  EITHER  DIRECT  OR  FIGURATIVE.  In  THE 
CASE  OF  DIRECT  SIGNS  AMBIGUITY  MAY  ARISE  FROM  THE  PUNCTUATION,  THE  PRO¬ 
NUNCIATION,  OR  THE  DOUBTFUL  SIGNIFICATION  OF  THE  WORDS,  AND  IS  TO  BE  RE¬ 
SOLVED  BY  ATTENTION  TO  THE  CONTEXT,  A  COMPARISON  OF  TRANSLATIONS,  OR  A  REF¬ 
ERENCE  TO  THE  ORIGINAL  TONGUE.  In  THE  CASE  OF  FIGURATIVE  SIGNS  WE  NEED  TO 
GUARD  AGAINST  TWO  MISTAKES!  —  I.  THE  INTERPRETING  LITERAL  EXPRESSIONS  FIG¬ 
URATIVELY;  2.  THE  INTERPRETING  FIGURATIVE  EXPRESSIONS  LITERALLY.  THE  AU¬ 
THOR  LAYS  DOWN  RULES  BY  WHICH  WE  MAY  DECIDE  WHETHER  AN  EXPRESSION  IS  LIT¬ 
ERAL  OR  figurative;  the  general  rule  being,  that  whatever  can  be  shown 

TO  BE  IN  ITS  LITERAL  SENSE  INCONSISTENT  EITHER  WITH  PURITY  OF  LIFE  OR  COR¬ 
RECTNESS  OF  DOCTRINE  MUST  BE  TAKEN  FIGURATIVELY.  He  THEN  GOES  ON  TO  LAY 
DOWN  RULES  FOR  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  EXPRESSIONS  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  PROVED 

TO  BE  figurative;  the  general  principle  being,  that  no  interpretation  can 

BE  TRUE  WHICH  DOES  NOT  PROMOTE  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD  AND  THE  LOVE  OF  MAN.  THE 
AUTHOR  THEN  PROCEEDS  TO  EXPOUND  AND  ILLUSTRATE  THE  SEVEN  RULES  OF  TICHO- 
NIUS  THE  DONATIST,  WHICH  HE  COMMENDS  TO  THE  ATTENTION  OF  THE  STUDENT 
OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE. 


Chap.  i.  Summary  of  the  foregoing  books ,  and 
scope  of  that  which  follows 

1.  The  man  who  fears  God  seeks  diligently  in 
Holy  Scripture  for  a  knowledge  of  His  will.  And 
when  he  has  become  meek  through  piety,  so  as 
to  have  no  love  of  strife;  when  furnished  also 
with  a  knowledge  of  languages,  so  as  not  to  be 
stopped  by  unknown  words  and  forms  of  speech, 
and  with  the  knowledge  of  certain  necessary 
objects,  so  as  not  to  be  ignorant  of  the  force 
and  nature  of  those  which  are  used  figuratively; 
and  assisted,  besides,  by  accuracy  in  the  texts, 
which  has  been  secured  by  skill  and  care  in  the 
matter  of  correction;  when  thus  prepared,  let 
him  proceed  to  the  examination  and  solution  of 
the  ambiguities  of  Scripture.  And  that  he  may 
not  be  led  astray  by  ambiguous  signs,  so  far  as  I 
can  give  him  instruction  (it  may  happen,  how¬ 
ever,  that  either  from  the  greatness  of  his  in¬ 
tellect,  or  the  greater  clearness  of  the  light  he 
enjoys,  he  shall  laugh  at  the  methods  I  am  go¬ 
ing  to  point  out  as  childish),  but  yet,  as  I  was 
going  to  say,  so  far  as  I  can  give  instruction,  let 
him  who  is  in  such  a  state  of  mind  that  he  can 
be  instructed  by  me  know,  that  the  ambiguity 
of  Scripture  lies  either  in  proper  words  or  in 
metaphorical,  classes  which  I  have  already  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  second  book.1 
^ee  bk.  11.  Chap.  io. 


Chap.  2.  Rule  for  removing  ambiguity  by  at¬ 
tending  to  punctuation 

2.  But  when  proper  words  make  Scripture 
ambiguous,  we  must  see  in  the  first  place  that 
there  is  nothing  wrong  in  our  punctuation  or 
pronunciation.  Accordingly,  if,  when  attention 
is  given  to  the  passage,  it  shall  appear  to  be  un¬ 
certain  in  what  way  it  ought  to  be  punctuated  or 
pronounced,  let  the  reader  consult  the  rule  of 
faith  which  he  has  gathered  from  the  plainer 
passages  of  Scripture,  and  from  the  authority  of 
the  Church,  and  of  which  I  treated  at  sufficient 
length  when  I  was  speaking  in  the  first  book 
about  things.  But  if  both  readings,  or  all  of 
them  (if  there  are  more  than  two),  give  a  mean¬ 
ing  in  harmony  with  the  faith,  it  remains  to 
consult  the  context,  both  what  goes  before  and 
what  comes  after,  to  see  which  interpretation, 
out  of  many  that  offer  themselves,  it  pronounces 
for  and  permits  to  be  dovetailed  into  itself. 

3.  Now  look  at  some  examples.  The  hereti¬ 
cal  pointing,2  “In  principio  erat  verbum ,  et  ver- 
bum  erat  apud  Deum,  et  Deus  erat” 3  so  as  to 
make  the  next  sentence  run,  “Verbum  hoc  erat 
in  principio  apud  Deum”  4  arises  out  of  unwill- 

2John,  1.  1,  2. 

3In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  God  was. 

4This  Word  was  in  the  beginning  with  God. 


658  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


ingness  to  confess  that  the  Word  was  God.  But 
this  must  be  rejected  by  the  rule  of  faith,  which, 
in  reference  to  the  equality  of  the  Trinity,  di¬ 
rects  us  to  say:  “ et  Deus  erat  verbum,”  1  and 
then  to  add:  “hoc  erat  in  principio  apud  De- 
um.” 2 

4.  But  the  following  ambiguity  of  punctua¬ 
tion  does  not  go  against  the  faith  in  either  way 
you  take  it,  and  therefore  must  be  decided  from 
the  context.  It  is  where  the  apostle  says:  “What 
I  shall  choose  I  wot  not :  for  I  am  in  a  strait  be¬ 
twixt  two.  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be 
with  Christ,  which  is  far  better :  nevertheless  to 
abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you.”  3 
Now  it  is  uncertain  whether  we  should  read, 
“ex  daobns  concnpiscentiam  habens”  [having  a 
desire  for  two  things],  or  “compellor  antem  ex 
duobus”  [I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two]  ;  and  so 
to  add:  “concnpiscentiam  habens  dissolvi,  et 
esse  cum  Christ 0”  [having  a  desire  to  depart, 
and  to  be  with  Christ] .  But  since  there  follows 
“multo  enim  magis  optimum”  [for  it  is  far  bet¬ 
ter] ,  it  is  evident  that  he  says  he  has  a  desire  for 
that  which  is  better;  so  that,  while  he  is  in  a 
strait  betwixt  two,  yet  he  has  a  desire  forgone 
and  sees  a  necessity  for  the  other;  a  desire,  viz., 
to  be  with  Christ,  and  a  necessity  to  remain  in 
the  flesh.  Now  this  ambiguity  is  resolved  by  one 
word  that  follows,  which  is  translated  enim 
[for]  ;  and  the  translators  who  have  omitted 
this  particle  have  preferred  the  interpretation 
which  makes  the  apostle  seem  not  only  in  a 
strait  betwixt  two.  but  also  to  have  a  desire  for 
two.  We  must  therefore  punctuate  the  sentence 
thus:  “et  quid  eligam  ignoro:  compellor  autem 
ex  duobus”  [what  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not:  for 
I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two]  ;  and  after  this 
point  follows:  “concnpiscentiam  habens  dissol¬ 
vi et  esse  cum  Christo”  [having  a  desire  to  de¬ 
part.  and  to  be  with  Christ].  And,  as  if  he  were 
asked  why  he  has  a  desire  for  this  in  preference 
to  the  other,  he  adds:  “multo  enim  magis  opti¬ 
mum”  [for  it  is  far  better].  Why,  then,  is  he  in 
a  strait  betwixt  the  two?  Because  there  is  a  need 
for  his  remaining,  which  he  adds  in  these  terms : 
“manere  in  carne  necessarium  propter  vos” 
[nevertheless  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  need¬ 
ful  for  you]. 

5.  Where,  however,  the  ambiguity  cannot  be 
cleared  up.  either  by  the  rule  of  faith  or  by  the 
context,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  to  point 
the  sentence  according  to  any  method  we  choose 
of  those  that  suggest  themselves.  As  is  the  case 

^nd  the  Word  was  God. 

2The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God. 

3Phil.  1.  22-24. 


in  that  passage  to  the  Corinthians:  “Having 
therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us 
cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh 
and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of 
God.  Receive  us;  we  have  wrronged  no  man.”  4 
It  is  doubtful  whether  we  should  read,  “munde- 
mus  nos  ab  omni  coinquinatione  carnis  et  spir- 
itus”  [let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthi¬ 
ness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit],  in  accordance  with 
the  passage,  “that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body 
and  in  spirit,”5  or,  “mundemus  nos  ab  omni 
coinquinatione  carnis”  [let  us  cleanse  ourselves 
from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh],  so  as  to  make 
the  next  sentence,  “et  spiritus  perficientes  sanc- 
tificationem  in  timore  Dei  capite  nos”  [and 
perfecting  holiness  of  spirit  in  the  fear  of 
God,  receive  us].  Such  ambiguities  of  punctua¬ 
tion,  therefore,  are  left  to  the  reader’s  discre¬ 
tion. 

Chap.  3.  How  pronunciation  serves  to  remove 
ambiguity .  Different  kinds  of  interrogation 

6.  And  all  the  directions  that  I  have  given 
about  ambiguous  punctuations  are  to  be  ob¬ 
served  likewise  in  the  case  of  doubtful  pronun¬ 
ciations.  For  these  too,  unless  the  fault  lies  in 
the  carelessness  of  the  reader,  are  corrected  ei¬ 
ther  by  the  rule  of  faith,  or  by  a  reference  to 
the  preceding  or  succeeding  context;  or  if  nei¬ 
ther  of  these  methods  is  applied  with  success, 
they  will  remain  doubtful,  but  so  that  the  read¬ 
er  will  not  be  in  fault  in  whatever  way  he  may 
pronounce  them.  For  example,  if  our  faith  that 
God  will  not  bring  any  charges  against  His 
elect,  and  that  Christ  will  not  condemn  His 
elect,  did  not  stand  in  the  way,  this  passage, 
“Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God’s 
elect?”  might  be  pronounced  in  such  a  way  as 
to  make  what  follows  an  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion,  “God  who  justifieth,”  and  to  make  a  sec¬ 
ond  question,  “Who  is  he  that  condemneth?” 
with  the  answer,  “Christ  Jesus  who  died.”  6  But 
as  it  would  be  the  height  of  madness  to  believe 
this,  the  passage  will  be  pronounced  in  such  a 
way  as  to  make  the  first  part  a  question  of  in¬ 
quiry7  and  the  second  a  rhetorical  interroga¬ 
tive.8  Now  the  ancients  said  that  the  difference 
between  an  inquiry  and  an  interrogative  was 
this,  that  an  inquiry  admits  of  many  answers, 
but  to  an  interrogative  the  answer  must  be  ei¬ 
ther  “No”  or  “Yes.”  The  passage  will  be  pro¬ 
nounced,  then,  in  such  a  way  that  after  the  in¬ 
quiry,  “Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of 
God’s  elect?”  what  follows  will  be  put  as  an  in- 

4II  Cor.  7.  1,  2.  5I  Cor.  7.  34.  6Rom.  8.  33,  34. 

7 Percontatio.  Hnterrogatio. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  3-5  659 


terrogative:  “Shall  God  who  justifieth?” — the 
answer  “No”  being  understood.  And  in  the  same 
way  we  shall  have  the  inquiry,  “Who  is  he  that 
condemneth?”  and  the  answer  here  again  in  the 
form  of  an  interrogative,  “Is  it  Christ  Who  died? 
yea,  rather,  Who  is  risen  again?  Who  is  even  at 
the  right  hand  of  God?  Who  also  maketh  inter¬ 
cession  for  us?” — the  answer  “No”  being  un¬ 
derstood  to  every  one  of  these  questions.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  that  passage  where  the  apostle 
says,  “What  shall  we  say  then?  That  the  Gen¬ 
tiles  which  followed  not  after  righteousness 
have  attained  to  righteousness”;1  unless  after 
the  inquiry,  “What  shall  we  say  then?”  what 
follows  were  given  as  the  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion:  “That  the  Gentiles,  which  followed  not 
after  righteousness,  have  attained  to  righteous¬ 
ness”;  it  would  not  be  in  harmony  with  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  context.  But  with  whatever  tone  of 
voice  one  may  choose  to  pronounce  that  saying 
of  Nathanael’s,  “Can  any  good  thing  come  out 
of  Nazareth?”2 — whether  with  that  of  a  man 
who  gives  an  affirmative  answer,  so  that  “out  of 
Nazareth”  is  the  only  part  that  belongs  to  the 
interrogation,  or  with  that  of  a  man  who  asks 
the  whole  question  with  doubt  and  hesitation — 
I  do  not  see  how  a  difference  can  be  made.  But 
neither  sense  is  opposed  to  faith. 

7.  There  is,  again,  an  ambiguity  arising  out 
of  the  doubtful  sound  of  syllables;  and  this  of 
course  has  relation  to  pronunciation.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  in  the  passage,  “My  bone  [05  meum]  was 
not  hid  from  Thee,  which  Thou  didst  make  in 
secret.”  3  it  is  not  clear  to  the  reader  whether  he 
should  take  the  word  os  as  short  or  long.  If  he 
make  it  short,  it  is  the  singular  of  ossa  [bones]  ; 
if  he  make  it  long,  it  is  the  singular  of  ora 
[mouths].  Now  difficulties  such  as  this  are 
cleared  up  by  looking  into  the  original  tongue, 
for  in  the  Greek  we  find  not  oro/za  [mouth], 
but  ocrreov  [bone].  And  for  this  reason  the 
vulgar  idiom  is  frequently  more  useful  in  con¬ 
veying  the  sense  than  the  pure  speech  of  the 
educated.  For  I  would  rather  have  the  barba¬ 
rism,  non  est  absconditum  a  te  ossum  meum* 
than  hlive  the  passage  in  better  Latin,  but  the 
sense  less  clear.  But  sometimes  when  the  sound 
of  a  syllable  is  doubtful,  it  is  decided  by  a  word 
near  it  belonging  to  the  same  sentence.  As,  for 
example,  that  saying  of  the  apostle,  “Of  the 
which  I  tell  you  before  [ prcedico ] ,  as  I  have  also 
told  you  in  time  past  [ prcedixi ] ,  that  they  which 
do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God.” 5  Now  if  he  had  only  said,  “Of  the  which 

‘Rom.  9.  30.  2John,  i.  47.  3Ps.  139.  16. 

4My  bone  was  not  hid  from  Thee.  5Gal.  5.21. 


I  tell  you  before  [qua  prcedico  vobis ],”  and 
had  not  added,  “as  I  have  also  told  you  in  time 
past  [sicut  prcedixi]”  we  could  not  know  with¬ 
out  going  back  to  the  original  whether  in  the 
word  prcedico  the  middle  syllable  should  be  pro¬ 
nounced  long  or  short.  But  as  it  is,  it  is  clear 
that  it  should  be  pronounced  long;  for  he  does 
not  say,  sicut  prcedicavi,  but  sicut  prcedixi. 

Chap.  4.  How  ambiguities  may  be  solved 

8.  And  not  only  these,  but  also  those  ambi¬ 
guities  that  do  not  relate  either  to  punctuation 
or  pronunciation,  are  to  be  examined  in  the 
same  way.  For  example,  that  one  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians :  Propterea  consolati  su- 
mus  fratres  in  vobis.6  Now  it  is  doubtful  wheth¬ 
er  fratres  [brethren]  is  in  the  vocative  or  accu¬ 
sative  case,  and  it  is  not  contrary  to  faith  to 
take  it  either  way.  But  in  the  Greek  language 
the  two  cases  are  not  the  same  in  form ;  and  ac¬ 
cordingly,  when  we  look  into  the  original,  the 
case  is  shown  to  be  vocative.  Now  if  the  trans¬ 
lator  had  chosen  to  say,  propterea  consolation - 
em  habuimus  fratres  in  vobis,  he  would  have 
followed  the  words  less  literally,  but  there 
would  have  been  less  doubt  about  the  meaning; 
or,  indeed,  if  he  had  added  nostri,  hardly  any 
one  would  have  doubted  that  the  vocative  case 
was  meant  when  he  heard  propterea  consolati 
sumus  fratres  nostri  in  vobis.  But  this  is  a  rath¬ 
er  dangerous  liberty  to  take.  It  has  been  taken, 
however,  in  that  passage  to  the  Corinthians, 
where  the  apostle  says,  “I  protest  by  your  re¬ 
joicing  [per  vestram  gloriam]  which  I  have  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  I  die  daily.”  7  For  one 
translator  has  it,  per  vestram  juro  gloriam ,  the 
form  of  adjuration  appearing  in  the  Greek  with¬ 
out  any  ambiguity.  It  is  therefore  very  rare  and 
very  difficult  to  find  any  ambiguity  in  the  case 
of  proper  words,  as  far  at  least  as  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture  is  concerned,  which  neither  the  context, 
showing  the  design  of  the  writer,  nor  a  compari¬ 
son  of  translations,  nor  a  reference  to  the  orig¬ 
inal  tongue,  will  suffice  to  explain. 

Chap.  5.  It  is  a  wretched  slavery  which  takes 

the  figurative  expressions  of  Scripture  in  a 

literal  sense 

9.  But  the  ambiguities  of  metaphorical  words, 
about  which  I  am  next  to  speak,  demand  no  or¬ 
dinary  care  and  diligence.  In  the  first  place,  we 
must  beware  of  taking  a  figurative  expression 
literally.  For  the  saying  of  the  apostle  applies  in 
this  case  too:  “The  letter  killeth,  but  the  spirit 

6I  Thess.  3.  7.  “Therefore,  brethren,  we  were  comforted 
over  you.”  7I  Cor.  15.  31. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


660 

giveth  life.”  1  For  when  what  is  said  figuratively 
is  taken  as  if  it  were  said  literally,  it  is  under¬ 
stood  in  a  carnal  manner.  And  nothing  is  more 
fittingly  called  the  death  of  the  soul  than  when 
that  in  it  which  raises  it  above  the  brutes,  the 
intelligence  namely,  is  put  in  subjection  to  the 
flesh  by  a  blind  adherence  to  the  letter.  For  he 
who  follows  the  letter  takes  figurative  words  as 
if  they  were  proper,  and  does  not  carry  out 
what  is  indicated  by  a  proper  word  into  its  sec¬ 
ondary  signification;  but,  if  he  hears  of  the  Sab¬ 
bath,  for  example,  thinks  of  nothing  but  the  one 
day  out  of  seven  which  recurs  in  constant  suc¬ 
cession;  and  when  he  hears  of  a  sacrifice,  does 
not  carry  his  thoughts  beyond  the  customary  of¬ 
ferings  of  victims  from  the  flock,  and  of  the 
fruits  of  the  earth.  Now  it  is  surely  a  miserable 
slavery  of  the  soul  to  take  signs  for  things,  and 
to  be  unable  to  lift  the  eye  of  the  mind  above 
what  is  corporeal  and  created,  that  it  may  drink 
in  eternal  light. 

Chap.  6.  Utility  of  the  bondage  of  the  Jews 
10.  This  bondage,  however,  in  the  case  of  the 
Jewish  people,  differed  widely  from  what  it  was 
in  the  case  of  the  other  nations ;  because,  though 
the  former  were  in  bondage  to  temporal  things, 
it  was  in  such  a  way  that  in  all  these  the  One 
God  was  put  before  their  minds.  And  although 
they  paid  attention  to  the  signs  of  spiritual  re¬ 
alities  in  place  of  the  realities  themselves,  not 
knowing  to  what  the  signs  referred,  still  they 
had  this  conviction  rooted  in  their  minds,  that  in 
subjecting  themselves  to  such  a  bondage  they 
were  doing  the  pleasure  of  the  one  invisible  God 
of  all.  And  the  apostle  describes  this  bondage  as 
being  like  to  that  of  boys  under  the  guidance  of 
a  schoolmaster.2  And  those  who  clung  obsti¬ 
nately  to  such  signs  could  not  endure  our  Lord’s 
neglect  of  them  when  the  time  for  their  revela¬ 
tion  had  come ;  and  hence  their  leaders  brought 
it  as  a  charge  against  Him  that  He  healed  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  the  people,  clinging  to  these  signs 
as  if  they  were  realities,  could  not  believe  that 
one  who  refused  to  observe  them  in  the  way  the 
Jews  did  was  God,  or  came  from  God.  But  those 
who  did  believe,  from  among  whom  the  first 
Church  at  Jerusalem  was  formed,  showed  clear¬ 
ly  how  great  an  advantage  it  had  been  to  be  so 
guided  by  the  schoolmaster  that  signs,  which 
had  been  for  a  season  imposed  on  the  obedient, 
fixed  the  thoughts  of  those  who  observed  them 
on  the  worship  of  the  One  God  Who  made  heav¬ 
en  and  earth.  These  men,  because  they  had  been 
very  near  to  spiritual  things  (for  even  in  the 
lll  Cor.  3.  6.  2Gal.  3.  24. 


temporal  and  carnal  offerings  and  types,  though 
they  did  not  clearly  apprehend  their  spiritual 
meaning,  they  had  learnt  to  adore  the  One  Eter¬ 
nal  God),  were  filled  with  such  a  measure  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  they  sold  all  their  goods,  and 
laid  their  price  at  the  apostles’  feet  to  be  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  needy,3  and  consecrated 
themselves  wholly  to  God  as  a  new  temple,  of 
which  the  old  temple  they  were  serving  was  but 
the  earthly  type. 

11.  Now  it  is  not  recorded  that  any  of  the 
Gentile  churches  did  this,  because  men  who  had 
for  their  gods  idols  made  with  hands  had  not 
been  so  near  to  spiritual  things. 

Chap.  7.  The  useless  bondage  of  the  Gentiles 

And  if  ever  any  of  them  endeavoured  to  make 
it  out  that  their  idols  were  only  signs,  yet  still 
they  used  them  in  reference  to  the  worship  and 
adoration  of  the  creature.  What  difference  does 
it  make  to  me,  for  instance,  that  the  image  of 
Neptune  is  not  itself  to  be  considered  a  god,  but 
only  as  representing  the  wide  ocean,  and  all  the 
other  waters  besides  that  spring  out  of  foun¬ 
tains?  As  it  is  described  by  a  poet  of  theirs,4 who 
says,  if  I  recollect  aright,  “Thou,  Father  Nep¬ 
tune,  whose  hoary  temples  are  wreathed  with 
the  resounding  sea,  whose  beard  is  the  mighty 
ocean  flowing  forth  unceasingly,  and  whose  hair 
is  the  winding  rivers.”  This  husk  shakes  its  rat¬ 
tling  stones  within  a  sweet  covering,  and  yet  it 
is  not  food  for  men,  but  for  swine.  He  who 
knows  the  gospel  knows  what  I  mean.5  What 
profit  is  it  to  me,  then,  that  the  image  of  Nep¬ 
tune  is  used  with  a  reference  to  this  explanation 
of  it,  unless  indeed  the  result  be  that  I  worship 
neither?  For  any  statue  you  like  to  take  is  as 
much  god  to  me  as  the  wide  ocean.  I  grant,  how¬ 
ever,  that  they  who  make  gods  of  the  works  of 
man  have  sunk  lower  than  they  who  make  gods 
of  the  works  of  God.  But  the  command  is  that 
we  should  love  and  serve  the  One  God,  who  is 
the  Maker  of  all  those  things,  the  images  of 
which  are  worshipped  by  the  heathen  either  as 
gods,  or  as  signs  and  representations  of  gods. 
If,  then,  to  take  a  sign  which  has  been  estab¬ 
lished  for  a  useful  end  instead  of  the  thing  itself 
which  it  was  designed  to  signify,  is  bondage  to 
the  flesh,  how  much  more  so  is  it  to  take  signs 
intended  to  represent  useless  things  for  the 
things  themselves!  For  even  if  you  go  back  to 
the  very  things  signified  by  such  signs,  and  en¬ 
gage  your  mind  in  the  worship  of  these,  you  will 
not  be  anything  the  more  free  from  the  burden 
and  the  livery  of  bondage  to  the  flesh. 

3Acts,  4.  34,  35.  4Claudian.  6Luke,  15.  16. 


66i 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  6-10 


Chap.  8.  The  Jews  liberated  from  their  bond¬ 
age  in  one  way,  the  Gentiles  in  another 

12.  Accordingly  the  liberty  that  comes  by 
Christ  took  those  whom  it  found  under  bondage 
to  useful  signs,  and  who  were  (so  to  speak)  near 
to  it,  and,  interpreting  the  signs  to  which  they 
were  in  bondage,  set  them  free  by  raising  them 
to  the  realities  of  which  these  were  signs.  And 
out  of  such  were  formed  the  churches  of  the 
saints  of  Israel.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  whom 
it  found  in  bondage  to  useless  signs,  it  not  only 
freed  from  their  slavery  to  such  signs,  but 
brought  to  nothing  and  cleared  out  of  the  way 
all  these  signs  themselves,  so  that  the  Gentiles 
were  turned  from  the  corruption  of  a  multitude 
of  false  gods,  which  Scripture  frequently  and 
justly  speaks  of  as  fornication,  to  the  worship  of 
the  One  God:  not  that  they  might  now  fall  into 
bondage  to  signs  of  a  useful  kind,  but  rather 
that  they  might  exercise  their  minds  in  the  spir¬ 
itual  understanding  of  such. 

Chap.  9.  Who  is  in  bondage  to  signs,  and  who 

not 

13.  Now  he  is  in  bondage  to  a  sign  who  uses, 
or  pays  homage  to,  any  significant  object  with¬ 
out  knowing  what  it  signifies :  he,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  either  uses  or  honours  a  useful  sign 
divinely  appointed,  whose  force  and  significance 
he  understands,  does  not  honour  the  sign  which 
is  seen  and  temporal,  but  that  to  which  all  such 
signs  refer.  Now  such  a  man  is  spiritual  and  free 
even  at  the  time  of  his  bondage,  when  it  is  not 
yet  expedient  to  reveal  to  carnal  minds  those 
signs  by  subjection  to  which  their  carnality  is  to 
be  overcome.  To  this  class  of  spiritual  persons 
belonged  the  patriarchs  and  the  prophets,  and 
all  those  among  the  people  of  Israel  through 
whose  instrumentality  the  Holy  Spirit  minis¬ 
tered  unto  us  the  aids  and  consolations  of  the 
Scriptures.  But  at  the  present  time,  after  that 
the  proof  of  our  liberty  has  shone  forth  so  clear¬ 
ly  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  we  are  not 
oppressed  with  the  heavy  burden  of  attending 
even  to  those  signs  which  we  now  understand, 
but  our  Lord  Himself  and  apostolic  practice 
have  handed  down  to  us  a  few  rites  in  place  of 
many,  and  these  at  once  very  easy  to  perform, 
most  majestic  in  their  significance,  and  most 
sacred  in  the  observance;  such,  for  example,  as 
the  sacrament  of  baptism,  and  the  celebration  of 
the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  And  as  soon  as 
any  one  looks  upon  these  observances  he  knows 
to  what  they  refer,  and  so  reveres  them  not  in 
carnal  bondage,  but  in  spiritual  freedom.  Now, 


as  to  follow  the  letter,  and  to  take  signs  for  the 
things  that  are  signified  by  them,  is  a  mark  of 
weakness  and  bondage;  so  to  interpret  signs 
wrongly  is  the  result  of  being  misled  by  error. 
He,  however,  who  does  not  understand  what  a 
sign  signifies,  but  yet  knows  that  it  is  a  sign,  is 
not  in  bondage.  And  it  is  better  even  to  be  in 
bondage  to  unknown  but  useful  signs  than,  by 
interpreting  them  wrongly,  to  draw  the  neck 
from  under  the  yoke  of  bondage  only  to  insert  it 
in  the  coils  of  error. 

Chap.  10.  How  we  are  to  discern  whether  a 

phrase  is  figurative 

14.  But  in  addition  to  the  foregoing  rule, 
which  guards  us  against  taking  a  metaphorical 
form  of  speech  as  if  it  were  literal,  we  must  also 
pay  heed  to  that  \yhich  tells  us  not  to  take  a  lit¬ 
eral  form  of  speech  as  if  it  were  figurative.  In 
the  first  place,  then,  we  must  show  the  way  to 
find  out  whether  a  phrase  is  literal  or  figurative. 
And  the  way  is  certainly  as  follows :  Whatever 
there  is  in  the  word  of  God  that  cannot,  when 
taken  literally,  be  referred  either  to  purity  of 
life  or  soundness  of  doctrine,  you  may  set  down 
as  figurative.  Purity  of  life  has  reference  to  the 
love  of  God  and  one’s  neighbour;  soundness  of 
doctrine  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  one’s 
neighbour.  Every  man,  moreover,  has  hope  in 
his  own  conscience,  so  far  as  he  perceives  that 
he  has  attained  to  the  love  and  knowledge  of 
God  and  his  neighbour.  Now  all  these  matters 
have  been  spoken  of  in  the  first  book. 

1 5.  But  as  men  are  prone  to  estimate  sins,  not 
by  reference  to  their  inherent  sinfulness,  but 
rather  by  reference  to  their  own  customs,  it  fre¬ 
quently  happens  that  a  man  will  think  nothing 
blameable  except  what  the  men  of  his  own  coun¬ 
try  and  time  are  accustomed  to  condemn,  and 
nothing  worthy  of  praise  or  approval  except 
what  is  sanctioned  by  the  custom  of  his  compan¬ 
ions;  and  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  if  Scripture 
either  enjoins  what  is  opposed  to  the  customs  of 
the  hearers,  or  condemns  what  is  not  so  opposed, 
and  if  at  the  same  time  the  authority  of  the 
word  has  a  hold  upon  their  minds,  they  think 
that  the  expression  is  figurative.  Now  Scripture 
enjoins  nothing  except  charity,  and  condemns 
nothing  except  lust,  and  in  that  way  fashions  the 
lives  of  men.  In  the  same  way,  if  an  erroneous 
opinion  has  taken  possession  of  the  mind,  men 
think  that  whatever  Scripture  asserts  contrary 
to  this  must  be  figurative.  Now  Scripture  as¬ 
serts  nothing  but  the  Catholic  faith,  in  regard  to 
things  past,  future,  and  present.  It  is  a  narra¬ 
tive  of  the  past,  a  prophecy  of  the  future,  and  a 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


662 

description  of  the  present.  But  all  these  tend  to 
nourish  and  strengthen  charity,  and  to  over¬ 
come  and  root  out  lust. 

16.  I  mean  by  charity  that  affection  of  the 
mind  which  aims  at  the  enjoyment  of  God  for 
His  own  sake,  and  the  enjoyment  of  one’s  self 
and  one’s  neighbour  in  subordination  to  God; 
by  lust  I  mean  that  affection  of  the  mind  which 
aims  at  enjoying  one’s  self  and  one’s  neighbour, 
and  other  corporeal  things,  without  reference  to 
God.  Again,  w7hat  lust,  wiien  unsubdued,  does 
towards  corrupting  one’s  own  soul  and  body,  is 
called  vice;  but  what  it  does  to  injure  another 
is  called  crime.  And  these  are  the  two  classes 
into  which  all  sins  may  be  divided.  But  the  vices 
come  first;  for  wiien  these  have  exhausted  the 
soul,  and  reduced  it  to  a  kind  of  poverty,  it  eas¬ 
ily  slides  into  crimes,  in  order  to  remove  hin¬ 
drances  to,  or  to  find  assistance  in.  its  vices.  In 
the  same  wTay,  wThat  charity  does  with  a  view7  to 
one’s  owrn  advantage  is  prudence;  but  w7hat  it 
does  with  a  view  to  a  neighbour’s  advantage  is 
called  benevolence.  And  here  prudence  comes 
first;  because  no  one  can  confer  an  advantage 
on  another  w7hich  he  does  not  himself  possess. 
Now7  in  proportion  as  the  dominion  of  lust  is 
pulled  dow7n,  in  the  same  proportion  is  that  of 
charity  built  up. 

Chap.  ii.  Ride  for  interpreting  phrases  which 

seem  to  ascribe  severity  to  God  and  the  saints 

17.  Every  severity,  therefore,  and  apparent 
cruelty,  either  in  word  or  deed,  that  is  ascribed 
in  Holy  Scripture  to  God  or  His  saints,  avails 
to  the  pulling  down  of  the  dominion  of  lust.  And 
if  its  meaning  be  clear,  we  are  not  to  give  it 
some  secondary  reference,  as  if  it  were  spoken 
figuratively.  Take,  for  example,  that  saying  of 
the  apostle:  “But,  after  thy  hardness  and  im¬ 
penitent  heart,  treasurest  up  unto  thyself  wrrath 
against  the  day  of  wrrath  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God;  Who  will  render  to 
every  man  according  to  his  deeds :  to  them  wrho. 
by  patient  continuance  in  wrell-doing,  seek  for 
glory,  and  honour,  and  immortality,  eternal  life ; 
but  unto  them  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not 
obey  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness,  indig¬ 
nation  and  w7rath.  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon 
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  of  the  Jew 
first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile.”  1  But  this  is  ad¬ 
dressed  to  those  w7ho,  being  unwilling  to  subdue 
their  lust,  are  themselves  involved  in  the  de¬ 
struction  of  their  lust.  When,  however,  the  do¬ 
minion  of  lust  is  overturned  in  a  man  over  whom 

1Rom.  2.  5-9. 


it  had  held  swray,  this  plain  expression  is  used: 
“They  that  are  Christ’s  have  crucified  the  flesh, 
with  the  affections  and  lusts.”  2  Only  that,  even 
in  these  instances,  some  words  are  used  figura¬ 
tively,  as  for  example,  “the  w7rath  of  God”  and 
“crucified.”  But  these  are  not  so  numerous,  nor 
placed  in  such  a  wray  as  to  obscure  the  sense, 
and  make  it  allegorical  or  enigmatical,  w7hich  is 
the  kind  of  expresssion  properly  called  figura¬ 
tive.  But  in  the  saying  addressed  to  Jeremiah, 
“See,  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations, 
and  over  the  kingdoms,  to  root  out,  and  to  pull 
down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  throw  dowrn,”  3 
there  is  no  doubt  the  whole  of  the  language  is 
figurative,  and  to  be  referred  to  the  end  I  have 
spoken  of. 

Chap.  12.  Ride  for  interpreting  those  sayings 
and  actions  which  are  ascribed  to  God  and 
the  saints,  and  which  yet  seem  to  the  unskil¬ 
ful  to  be  wicked 

18.  Those  things,  again,  whether  only  sayings 
or  whether  actual  deeds,  w7hich  appear  to  the  in¬ 
experienced  to  be  sinful,  and  which  are  as¬ 
cribed  to  God,  or  to  men  w7hose  holiness  is  put 
before  us  as  an  example,  are  wholly  figurative, 
and  the  hidden  kernel  of  meaning  they  contain 
is  to  be  picked  out  as  food  for  the  nourishment 
of  charity.  Now,  whoever  uses  transitory  ob¬ 
jects  less  freely  than  is  the  custom  of  those 
among  w7hom  he  lives,  is  either  temperate  or  su¬ 
perstitious;  whoever,  on  the  other  hand,  uses 
them  so  as  to  transgress  the  bounds  of  the  cus¬ 
tom  of  the  good  men  about  him,  either  has  a 
further  meaning  in  wrhat  he  does,  or  is  sinful.  In 
all  such  matters  it  is  not  the  use  of  the  objects, 
but  the  lust  of  the  user,  that  is  to  blame.  No¬ 
body  in  his  sober  senses  wrould  believe,  for  ex¬ 
ample.  that  when  our  Lord’s  feet  w7ere  anointed 
by  the  woman  with  precious  ointment,4  it  was 
for  the  same  purpose  for  w7hich  luxurious  and 
profligate  men  are  accustomed  to  have  theirs 
anointed  in  those  banquets  w7hich  we  abhor.  For 
the  sweet  odour  means  the  good  report  wrhich  is 
earned  by  a  life  of  good  works ;  and  the  man  w7ho 
wrins  this,  while  following  in  the  footsteps  of 
Christ,  anoints  His  feet  (so  to  speak)  with  the 
most  precious  ointment.  And  so  that  wThich  in 
the  case  of  other  persons  is  often  a  sin,  becomes, 
wiien  ascribed  to  God  or  a  prophet,  the  sign  of 
some  great  truth.  Keeping  company  with  a  har¬ 
lot,  for  example,  is  one  thing  wThen  it  is  the  re¬ 
sult  of  abandoned  manners,  another  thing  w7hen 
done  in  the  course  of  his  prophecy  by  the  proph- 
2Gal.  5.  24.  3Jer.  1.  10.  4John,  12.  3. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  11-15  663 


et  Hosea.1  Because  it  is  a  shamefully  wick¬ 
ed  thing  to  strip  the  body  naked  at  a  ban¬ 
quet  among  the  drunken  and  licentious,  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  is  a  sin  to  be  naked  in  the 
baths. 

19.  We  must,  therefore,  consider  carefully 
what  is  suitable  to  times  and  places  and  persons, 
and  not  rashly  charge  men  with  sins.  For  it  is 
possible  that  a  wise  man  may  use  the  daintiest 
food  without  any  sin  of  epicurism  or  gluttony, 
while  a  fool  will  crave  for  the  vilest  food  with  a 
most  disgusting  eagerness  of  appetite.  And  any 
sane  man  would  prefer  eating  fish  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  our  Lord,  to  eating  lentils  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Esau,  or  barley  after  the  manner  of  oxen. 
For  there  are  several  beasts  that  feed  on  com¬ 
moner  kinds  of  food,  but  it  does  not  follow  that 
they  are  more  temperate  than  we  are.  For  in 
all  matters  of  this  kind  it  is  not  the  nature  of 
the  things  we  use,  but  our  reason  for  using 
them,  and  our  manner  of  seeking  them,  that 
make  what  we  do  either  praiseworthy  or  blame- 
able. 

20.  Now  the  saints  of  ancient  times  were,  un¬ 
der  the  form  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  foreshad¬ 
owing  and  foretelling  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
And  on  account  of  the  necessity  for  a  numerous 
offspring,  the  custom  of  one  man  having  several 
wives  was  at  that  time  blameless:  and  for  the 
same  reason  it  was  not  proper  for  one  woman  to 
have  several  husbands,  because  a  woman  does 
not  in  that  way  become  more  fruitful,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  base  harlotry  to  seek  either 
gain  or  offspring  by  promiscuous  intercourse.  In 
regard  to  matters  of  this  sort,  whatever  the  holy 
men  of  those  times  did  without  lust,  Scripture 
passes  over  without  blame,  although  they  did 
things  which  could  not  be  done  at  the  present 
time,  except  through  lust.  And  everything  of 
this  nature  that  is  there  narrated  we  are  to  take 
not  only  in  its  historical  and  literal,  but  also  in 
its  figurative  and  prophetical  sense,  and  to  in¬ 
terpret  as  bearing  ultimately  upon  the  end  of 
love  towards  God  or  our  neighbour,  or  both.  For 
as  it  was  disgraceful  among  the  ancient  Romans 
to  wear  tunics  reaching  to  the  heels,  and  fur¬ 
nished  with  sleeves,  but  now  it  is  disgraceful  for 
men  honourably  born  not  to  wear  tunics  of  that 
description:  so  we  must  take  heed  in  regard  to 
other  things  also,  that  lust  do  not  mix  with  our 
use  of  them ;  for  lust  not  only  abuses  to  wicked 
ends  the  customs  of  those  among  whom  we  live, 
but  frequently  also  transgressing  the  bounds  of 
custom,  betrays,  in  a  disgraceful  outbreak,  its 

^OS.  I.  2. 


own  hideousness,  which  was  concealed  under  the 
cover  of  prevailing  fashions. 

Chap.  13.  Same  subject,  continued 

21.  Whatever,  then,  is  in  accordance  with  the 
habits  of  those  with  whom  we  are  either  com¬ 
pelled  by  necessity,  or  undertake  as  a  matter  of 
duty,  to  spend  this  life,  is  to  be  turned  by  good 
and  great  men  to  some  prudent  or  benevolent 
end,  either  directly,  as  is  our  duty,  or  figurative¬ 
ly,  as  is  allowable  to  prophets. 

Chap,  14.  Error  of  those  who  think  that  there 

is  no  absolute  right  and  wrong 

22.  But  when  men  unacquainted  with  other 
modes  of  life  than  their  own  meet  with  the  rec¬ 
ord  of  such  actions,  unless  they  are  restrained 
by  authority,  they  look  upon  them  as  sins,  and 
do  not  consider  that  their  own  customs  either 
in  regard  to  marriage,  or  feasts,  or  dress,  or  the 
other  necessities  and  adornments  of  human  life, 
appear  sinful  to  the  people  of  other  nations  and 
other  times.  And,  distracted  by  this  endless  va¬ 
riety  of  customs,  some  who  were  half  asleep  (as 
I  may  say) — that  is,  who  were  neither  sunk  in 
the  deep  sleep  of  folly,  nor  were  able  to  awake 
into  the  light  of  wisdom — have  thought  that 
there  was  no  such  thing  as  absolute  right,  but 
that  every  nation  took  its  own  custom  for  right; 
and  that,  since  every  nation  has  a  different  cus¬ 
tom.  and  right  must  remain  unchangeable,  it  be¬ 
comes  manifest  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
right  at  all.  Such  men  did  not  perceive,  to  take 
only  one  example,  that  the  precept,  “Whatso¬ 
ever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye 
even  so  to  them,”  2  cannot  be  altered  by  any  di¬ 
versity  of  national  customs.  And  this  precept, 
when  it  is  referred  to  the  love  of  God,  destroys 
all  vices;  when  to  the  love  of  one’s  neighbour, 
puts  an  end  to  all  crimes.  For  no  one  is  willing  to 
defile  his  own  dwelling;  he  ought  not,  therefore, 
to  defile  the  dwelling  of  God,  that  is,  himself. 
And  no  one  wishes  an  injury  to  be  done  him  by 
another;  he  himself,  therefore,  ought  not  to  do 
injury  to  another. 

Chap.  15.  Rule  for  interpreting  figurative  ex¬ 
pressions 

23.  The  tyranny  of  lust  being  thus  over¬ 
thrown,  charity  reigns  through  its  supremely 
just  laws  of  love  to  God  for  His  own  sake,  and 
love  to  one’s  self  and  one’s  neighbour  for  God’s 
sake.  Accordingly,  in  regard  to  figurative  expres¬ 
sions,  a  rule  such  as  the  following  will  be 

2Matt.  7.  12.  Cf.  Tobit,  4.  15. 


664  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


observed,  to  carefully  turn  over  in  our  minds 
and  meditate  upon  what  we  read  till  an  interpre¬ 
tation  be  found  that  tends  to  establish  the  reign 
of  love.  Now,  if  when  taken  literally  it  at  once 
gives  a  meaning  of  this  kind,  the  expression  is 
not  to  be  considered  figurative. 

Chap.  16.  Rule  for  interpreting  commands  arid 

prohibitions 

24.  If  the  sentence  is  one  of  command,  either 
forbidding  a  crime  or  vice,  or  enjoining  an  act 
of  prudence  or  benevolence,  it  is  not  figurative. 
If,  however,  it  seems  to  enjoin  a  crime  or  vice, 
or  to  forbid  an  act  of  prudence  or  benevolence, 
it  is  figurative.  “Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the 
Son  of  man,”  says  Christ,  “and  drink  His  blood, 
ye  have  no  life  in  you.”  1  This  seems  to  enjoin  a 
crime  or  a  vice;  it  is  therefore  a  figure,  enjoin¬ 
ing  that  we  should  have  a  share  in  the  sufferings 
of  our  Lord,  and  that  we  should  retain  a  sweet 
and  profitable  memory  of  the  fact  that  His  flesh 
was  wounded  and  crucified  for  us.  Scripture 
says:  “If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him;  if  he 
thirst,  give  him  drink” ;  and  this  is  beyond  doubt 
a  command  to  do  a  kindness.  But  in  what  fol¬ 
lows,  “for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of 
fire  on  his  head,”  2  one  would  think  a  deed  of 
malevolence  was  enjoined.  Do  not  doubt,  then, 
that  the  expression  is  figurative;  and,  while  it  is 
possible  to  interpret  it  in  two  ways,  one  pointing 
to  the  doing  of  an  injury,  the  other  to  a  display 
of  superiority,  let  charity  on  the  contrary  call 
you  back  to  benevolence,  and  interpret  the  coals 
of  fire  as  the  burning  groans  of  penitence  by 
which  a  man’s  pride  is  cured  who  bewails  that 
he  has  been  the  enemy  of  one  who  came  to  his 
assistance  in  distress.  In  the  same  way,  when 
our  Lord  says,  “He  who  loveth  his  life  shall  lose 
it,”3we  are  not  to  think  that  He  forbids  the  pru¬ 
dence  with  which  it  is  a  man’s  duty  to  care  for 
his  life,  but  that  He  says  in  a  figurative  sense, 
“Let  him  lose  his  life” — that  is,  let  him  destroy 
and  lose  that  perverted  and  unnatural  use  which 
he  now  makes  of  his  life,  and  through  which  his 
desires  are  fixed  on  temporal  things  so  that  he 
gives  no  heed  to  eternal.  It  is  written :  “Give  to 
the  godly  man,  and  help  not  a  sinner.” 4  The  lat¬ 
ter  clause  of  this  sentence  seems  to  forbid  be¬ 
nevolence;  for  it  says,  “help  not  a  sinner.”  Un¬ 
derstand,  therefore,  that  “sinner”  is  put  figura¬ 
tively  for  sin,  so  that  it  is  his  sin  you  are  not  to 
help. 

^ohn,  6.  53. 

2Rom.  12.  20;  Prov.  25.  21,  22. 

3John,  12.  25.  Cf.  Matt.  10.  39. 

4Ecclus.  12.  4.  Cf.  Tobit,  4.  17. 


Chap.  17.  Some  commands  are  given  to  all  in 

common,  others  to  particular  classes 

25.  Again,  it  often  happens  that  a  man  who 
has  attained,  or  thinks  he  has  attained,  to  a  high¬ 
er  grade  of  spiritual  life,  thinks  that  the  com¬ 
mands  given  to  those  who  are  still  in  the  lower 
grades  are  figurative;  for  example,  if  he  has  em¬ 
braced  a  life  of  celibacy  and  made  himself  a  eu¬ 
nuch  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven’s  sake,  he  con¬ 
tends  that  the  commands  given  in  Scripture 
about  loving  and  ruling  a  wife  are  not  to  be  tak¬ 
en  literally,  but  figuratively;  and  if  he  has  de¬ 
termined  to  keep  his  virgin  unmarried,  he  tries 
to  put  a  figurative  interpretation  on  the  passage 
where  it  is  said,  “Marry  thy  daughter,  and  so 
shalt  thou  have  performed  a  weighty  matter.” 5 
Accordingly,  another  of  our  rules  for  under¬ 
standing  the  Scriptures  will  be  as  follows — to 
recognize  that  some  commands  are  given  to  all 
in  common,  others  to  particular  classes  of  per¬ 
sons,  that  the  medicine  may  act  not  only  upon 
the  state  of  health  as  a  whole,  but  also  upon  the 
special  weakness  of  each  member.  For  that 
which  cannot  be  raised  to  a  higher  state  must 
be  cared  for  in  its  own  state. 

Chap.  18.  We  must  take  into  consideration  the 

time  at  which  anything  was  enjoyed  or  al¬ 
lowed 

26.  We  must  also  be  on  our  guard  against 
supposing  that  what  in  the  Old  Testament,  mak¬ 
ing  allowance  for  the  condition  of  those  times, 
is  not  a  crime  or  a  vice  even  if  we  take  it  liter¬ 
ally  and  not  figuratively,  can  be  transferred  to 
the  present  time  as  a  habit  of  life.  For  no  one 
will  do  this  except  lust  has  dominion  over  him, 
and  endeavours  to  find  support  for  itself  in  the 
very  Scriptures  which  were  intended  to  over¬ 
throw  it.  And  the  wretched  man  does  not  per¬ 
ceive  that  such  matters  are  recorded  with  this 
useful  design,  that  men  of  good  hope  may  learn 
the  salutary  lesson,  both  that  the  custom  they 
spurn  can  be  turned  to  a  good  use,  and  that 
which  they  embrace  can  be  used  to  condemna¬ 
tion,  if  the  use  of  the  former  be  accompanied 
with  charity,  and  the  use  of  the  latter  with  lust. 

27.  For,  if  it  was  possible  for  one  man  to  use 
many  wives  with  chastity,  it  is  possible  for  an¬ 
other  to  use  one  wife  with  lust.  And  I  look  with 
greater  approval  on  the  man  who  uses  the  fruit¬ 
fulness  of  many  wives  for  the  sake  of  an  ulterior 
object,  than  on  the  man  who  enjoys  the  body  of 
one  wife  for  its  own  sake.  For  in  the  former  case 
the  man  aims  at  a  useful  object  suited  to  the 

6Ecclus.  7.  27. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  16-21  665 


circumstances  of  the  times;  in  the  latter  case 
he  gratifies  a  lust  which  is  engrossed  in  tempo¬ 
ral  enjoyments.  And  those  men  to  whom  the 
apostle  permitted  as  a  matter  of  indulgence  to 
have  one  wife,  because  of  their  incontinence,1 
were  less  near  to  God  than  those  who,  though 
they  had  each  of  them  numerous  wives,  yet  just 
as  a  wise  man  uses  food  and  drink  only  for  the 
sake  of  bodily  health,  used  marriage  only  for 
the  sake  of  offspring.  And,  accordingly,  if  these 
last  had  been  still  alive  at  the  advent  of  our 
Lord,  when  the  time  not  of  casting  stones  away 
but  of  gathering  them  together  had  come,2  they 
would  have  immediately  made  themselves  eu¬ 
nuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven’s  sake.  For 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  abstaining  unless  when 
there  is  lust  in  enjoying.  And  assuredly  those 
men  of  whom  I  speak  knew  that  wantonness 
even  in  regard  to  wives  is  abuse  and  intemper¬ 
ance,  as  is  proved  by  Tobit’s  prayer  when  he 
was  married  to  his  wife.  For  he  says:  “Blessed 
art  Thou,  0  God  of  our  fathers,  and  blessed  is 
Thy  holy  and  glorious  name  for  ever;  let  the 
heavens  bless  Thee,  and  all  Thy  creatures.  Thou 
madest  Adam,  and  gavest  him  Eve  his  wife  for 
an  helper  and  stay.  .  .  .  And  now,  0  Lord,  Thou 
knowest  that  I  take  not  this  my  sister  for  lust, 
but  uprightly:  therefore  have  pity  on  us,  0 
Lord.”3 

Chap.  19.  Wicked  men  judge  others  by  them¬ 
selves 

28.  But  those  who,  giving  the  rein  to  lust,  ei¬ 
ther  wander  about  steeping  themselves  in  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  debaucheries,  or  even  in  regard  to  one 
wife  not  only  exceed  the  measure  necessary  for 
the  procreation  of  children,  but  with  the  shame¬ 
less  licence  of  a  sort  of  slavish  freedom  heap  up 
the  filth  of  a  still  more  beastly  excess,  such  men 
do  not  believe  it  possible  that  the  men  of  an¬ 
cient  times  used  a  number  of  wives  with  tem¬ 
perance,  looking  to  nothing  but  the  duty,  neces¬ 
sary  in  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  of  propa¬ 
gating  the  race;  and  what  they  themselves,  who 
are  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  lust,  do  not  ac¬ 
complish  in  the  case  of  a  single  wife,  they  think 
utterly  impossible  in  the  case  of  a  number  of 
wives. 

29.  But  these  same  men  might  say  that  it  is 
not  right  even  to  honour  and  praise  good  and 
holy  men.  because  they  themselves  when  they 
are  honoured  and  praised,  swell  with  pride,  be¬ 
coming  the  more  eager  for  the  emptiest  sort  of 
distinction  the  more  frequently  and  the  more 
widely  they  are  blown  about  on  the  tongue  of 

*1  Cor.  7.  1,  2,  9.  2Eccles.  3.  5.  3Tobit,  8.  5-7. 


flattery,  and  so  become  so  light  that  a  breath  of 
rumour,  whether  it  appear  prosperous  or  ad¬ 
verse,  will  carry  them  into  the  whirlpool  of  vice 
or  dash  them  on  the  rocks  of  crime.  Let  them, 
then,  learn  how  trying  and  difficult  it  is  for 
themselves  to  escape  either  being  caught  by  the 
bait  of  praise,  or  pierced  by  the  stings  of  in¬ 
sult;  but  let  them  not  measure  others  by  their 
own  standard. 

Chap.  20.  Consistency  of  good  men  in  all  out¬ 
ward  circumstances 

Let  them  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 
apostles  of  our  faith  were  neither  puffed  up 
when  they  were  honoured  by  men,  nor  cast  down 
when  they  were  despised.  And  certainly  neither 
sort  of  temptation  was  wanting  to  those  great 
men.  For  they  were  both  cried  up  by  the  loud 
praises  of  believers,  and  cried  down  by  the  slan¬ 
derous  reports  of  their  persecutors.  But  the 
apostles  used  all  these  things,  as  occasion 
served,  and  were  not  corrupted;  and  in  the  same 
way  the  saints  of  old  used  their  wives  with  ref¬ 
erence  to  the  necessities  of  their  own  times,  and 
were  not  in  bondage  to  lust  as  they  are  who  re¬ 
fuse  to  believe  these  things. 

30.  For  if  they  had  been  under  the  influence 
of  any  such  passion,  they  could  never  have  re¬ 
strained  themselves  from  implacable  hatred  to¬ 
wards  their  sons,  by  whom  they  knew  that  their 
wives  and  concubines  were  solicited  and  de¬ 
bauched. 

Chap.  21.  David  not  lustful ,  though  he  fell  into 

adultery 

But  when  King  David  had  suffered  this  injury 
at  the  hands  of  his  impious  and  unnatural  son. 
he  not  only  bore  with  him  in  his  mad  passion, 
but  mourned  over  him  in  his  death.  He  certain¬ 
ly  was  not  caught  in  the  meshes  of  carnal  jeal¬ 
ousy,  seeing  that  it  was  not  his  own  injuries  but 
the  sins  of  his  son  that  moved  him.  For  it  was 
on  this  account  he  had  given  orders  that  his  son 
should  not  be  slain  if  he  were  conquered  in  bat¬ 
tle,  that  he  might  have  a  place  of  repentance  aft¬ 
er  he  was  subdued ;  and  when  he  was  baffled  in 
this  design,  he  mourned  over  his  son’s  death,  not 
because  of  his  own  loss,  but  because  he  knew  to 
what  punishment  so  impious  an  adulterer  and 
parricide  had  been  hurried.4  For  prior  to  this,  in 
the  case  of  another  son  who  had  been  guilty  of 
no  crime,  though  he  was  dreadfully  afflicted  for 
him  while  he  was  sick,  yet  he  comforted  himself 
after  his  death.5 

31.  And  with  what  moderation  and  self- 

4Cf.  II  Sam.  16.  22;  18.  5;  19.  1.  6II  Sam.  12.  19-23. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


666 

restraint  those  men  used  their  wives  appears 
chiefly  in  this,  that  when  this  same  king,  carried 
away  by  the  heat  of  passion  and  by  temporal 
prosperity,  had  taken  unlawful  possession  of 
one  woman,  whose  husband  also  he  ordered  to 
be  put  to  death,  he  was  accused  of  his  crime  by 
a  prophet,  who,  when  he  had  come  to  show  him 
his  sin,  set  before  him  the  parable  of  the  poor 
man  who  had  but  one  ewe-lamb,  and  whose 
neighbour,  though  he  had  many,  yet  when  a 
guest  came  to  him  spared  to  take  of  his  own 
flock,  but  set  his  poor  neighbour’s  one  lamb  be¬ 
fore  his  guest  to  eat.  And  David’s  anger  being 
kindled  against  the  man,  he  commanded  that  he 
should  be  put  to  death,  and  the  lamb  restored 
fourfold  to  the  poor  man ;  thus  unwittingly  con¬ 
demning  the  sin  he  had  wittingly  committed.1 
And  when  he  had  been  shown  this,  and  God’s 
punishment  had  been  denounced  against  him,  he 
wiped  out  his  sin  in  deep  penitence.  But  yet  in 
this  parable  it  was  the  adultery  only  that  was  in¬ 
dicated  by  the  poor  man’s  ewe-lamb;  about  the 
killing  of  the  woman’s  husband — that  is,  about 
the  murder  of  the  poor  man  himself  who  had  the 
one  ewe-lamb — nothing  is  said  in  the  parable,  so 
that  the  sentence  of  condemnation  is  pro¬ 
nounced  against  the  adultery  alone.  And  hence 
we  may  understand  with  what  temperance  he 
possessed  a  number  of  wives  when  he  was  forced 
to  punish  himself  for  transgressing  in  regard  to 
one  woman.  But  in  his  case  the  immoderate  de¬ 
sire  did  not  take  up  its  abode  with  him,  but  was 
only  a  passing  guest.  On  this  account  the  unlaw¬ 
ful  appetite  is  called  even  by  the  accusing 
prophet,  a  guest.  For  he  did  not  say  that  he  took 
the  poor  man’s  ewe-lamb  to  make  a  feast  for  his 
king,  but  for  his  guest.  In  the  case  of  his  son 
Solomon,  however,  this  lust  did  not  come  and 
pass  away  like  a  guest,  but  reigned  as  a  king. 
And  about  him  Scripture  is  not  silent,  but  ac¬ 
cuses  him  of  being  a  lover  of  strange  women; 
for  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he  was  inflamed 
with  a  desire  for  wisdom,  but  after  he  had  at¬ 
tained  it  through  spiritual  love,  he  lost  it 
through  carnal  lust.2 

Chap.  22.  Rule  regarding  passages  of  Scripture 

in  which  approval  is  expressed  of  actions 

which  are  now  condemned  by  good  men 

32.  Therefore,  although  all,  or  nearly  all,  the 
transactions  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  are 
to  be  taken  not  literally  only,  but  figuratively 
as  well,  nevertheless  even  in  the  case  of  those 
which  the  reader  has  taken  literally,  and  which, 

1II  Sam.  12.  1-6. 

2II  Chron.  1.  10-12;  I  Kings  11.  1-3. 


though  the  authors  of  them  are  praised,  are  re¬ 
pugnant  to  the  habits  of  the  good  men  who  since 
our  Lord’s  advent  are  the  custodians  of  the  di¬ 
vine  commands,  let  him  refer  the  figure  to  its 
interpretation,  but  let  him  not  transfer  the  act 
to  his  habits  of  life.  For  many  things  which 
were  done  as  duties  at  that  time  cannot  now  be 
done  except  through  lust. 

Chap.  23.  Rule  regarding  the  narrative  of  sins 
of  great  men 

33.  And  when  he  reads  of  the  sins  of  great 
men,  although  he  may  be  able  to  see  and  to  trace 
out  in  them  a  figure  of  things  to  come,  let  him 
yet  put  the  literal  fact  to  this  use  also,  to  teach 
him  not  to  dare  to  vaunt  himself  in  his  own  good 
deeds,  and  in  comparison  with  his  own  right¬ 
eousness,  to  despise  others  as  sinners,  when  he 
sees  in  the  case  of  men  so  eminent  both  the 
storms  that  are  to  be  avoided  and  the  ship¬ 
wrecks  that  are  to  be  wept  over.  For  the  sins  of 
these  men  were  recorded  to  this  end,  that  men 
might  everywhere  and  always  tremble  at  that 
saying  of  the  apostle:  “Wherefore  let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall.”  3 
For  there  is  hardly  a  page  of  Scripture  on  which 
it  is  not  clearly  written  that  God  resisteth  the 
proud  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble.4 

Chap.  24.  The  character  of  the  expressions  used 
is  above  all  to  have  weight 

34.  The  chief  thing  to  be  inquired  into,  there¬ 
fore,  in  regard  to  any  expression  that  we  are 
trying  to  understand  is,  whether  it  is  literal  or 
figurative.  For  when  it  is  ascertained  to  be  fig¬ 
urative,  it  is  easy,  by  an  application  of  the  laws 
of  things  which  we  discussed  in  the  first  book, 
to  turn  it  in  every  way  until  we  arrive  at  a  true 
interpretation,  especially  when  we  bring  to  our 
aid  experience  strengthened  by  the  exercise  of 
piety.  Now  we  find  out  whether  an  expression 
is  literal  or  figurative  by  attending  to  the  con¬ 
siderations  indicated  above. 

Chap.  25.  The  same  word  does  not  always  signi¬ 
fy  the  same  thing 

And  when  it  is  shown  to  be  figurative,  the 
words  in  which  it  is  expressed  will  be  found  to 
be  drawn  either  from  like  objects  or  from  ob¬ 
jects  having  some  affinity. 

35.  But  as  there  are  many  ways  in  which 
things  show  a  likeness  to  each  other,  we  are  not 
to  suppose  there  is  any  rule  that  what  a  thing 
signifies  by  similitude  in  one  place  it  is  to  be 
taken  to  signify  in  all  other  places.  For  our  Lord 

3I  Cor.  10.  12.  4Cf.  Jas.  4.  6  and  I  Pet.  5.  6. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  22-27  667 


used  leaven  both  in  a  bad  sense,  as  when  He 
said,  “Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,”  1 
and  in  a  good  sense,  as  when  He  said,  “The  king¬ 
dom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a  wom¬ 
an  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  till 
the  whole  was  leavened.” 2 

36.  Now  the  rule  in  regard  to  this  variation 
has  two  forms.  For  things  that  signify  now  one 
thing  and  now  another,  signify  either  things  that 
are  contrary,  or  things  that  are  only  different. 
They  signify  contraries,  for  example,  when  they 
are  used  metaphorically  at  one  time  in  a  good 
sense,  at  another  in  a  bad,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
leaven  mentioned  above.  Another  example  of 
the  same  is  that  a  lion  stands  for  Christ  in  the 
place  where  it  is  said,  “The  lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  hath  prevailed”;3  and  again,  stands  for 
the  devil  where  it  is  written,  “Your  adversary 
the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about  seek¬ 
ing  whom  he  may  devour.” 4  In  the  same  way 
the  serpent  is  used  in  a  good  sense,  “Be  wise  as 
serpents”;5  and  again,  in  a  bad  sense,  “The  ser¬ 
pent  beguiled  Eve  through  his  subtlety.” 6  Bread 
is  used  in  a  good  sense,  “I  am  the  living  bread 
which  came  down  from  heaven”;7  in  a  bad, 
“Bread  eaten  in  secret  is  pleasant.” 8  And  so  in 
a  great  many  other  cases.  The  examples  I  have 
adduced  are  indeed  by  no  means  doubtful  in 
their  signification,  because  only  plain  instances 
ought  to  be  used  as  examples.  There  are  pas¬ 
sages,  however,  in  regard  to  which  it  is  uncer¬ 
tain  in  what  sense  they  ought  to  be  taken,  as  for 
example,  “In  the  hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a 
cup,  and  the  wine  is  red:  it  is  full  of  mixture.” 9 
Now  it  is  uncertain  whether  this  denotes  the 
wrath  of  God,  but  not  to  the  last  extremity  of 
punishment,  that  is,  “to  the  very  dregs”;  or 
whether  it  denotes  the  grace  of  the  Scriptures 
passing  away  from  the  Jews  and  coming  to  the 
Gentiles,  because  “He  has  put  down  one  and  set 
up  another” — certain  observances,  however, 
which  they  understand  in  a  carnal  manner,  still 
remaining  among  the  Jews,  for  “the  dregs  here¬ 
of  is  not  yet  wrung  out.”  The  following  is  an  ex- 
ample'of  the  same  object  being  taken,  not  in  op¬ 
posite,  but  only  in  different  significations:  wa¬ 
ter  denotes  people,  as  we  read  in  the  Apoca¬ 
lypse,10  and  also  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  for  example, 
“Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  wa¬ 
ter”;11  and  many  other  things  besides  water 
must  be  interpreted  according  to  the  place  in 
which  they  are  found. 

1Matt.  16.  6;  Luke,  12.  1.  2Luke,  13.  21. 

3Rev.  5.  5.  4I  Pet.  5.  8.  6Matt.  10.  16. 

6II  Cor.  11.  3.  7 John,  6.  51.  8Prov.  9.  17. 

9Ps.  75-  8.  10Rev.  17.  1 5.  “John,  7.  38. 


37.  And  in  the  same  way  other  objects  are  not 
single  in  their  signification,  but  each  one  of  them 
denotes  not  two  only  but  sometimes  even  sever¬ 
al  different  things,  according  to  the  connexion 
in  which  it  is  found. 

Chap.  26.  Obscure  passages  are  to  be  inter - 

preted  by  those  which  are  clearer 

Now  from  the  places  where  the  sense  in  which 
they  are  used  is  more  manifest  we  must  gather 
the  sense  in  which  they  are  to  be  understood  in 
obscure  passages.  For  example,  there  is  no  bet¬ 
ter  way  of  understanding  the  words  addressed 
to  God,  “Take  hold  of  shield  and  buckler  and 
stand  up  for  mine  help,”  12  than  by  referring  to 
the  passage  where  we  read,  “Thou,  Lord,  hast 
crowned  us  with  Thy  favour  as  with  a  shield.”13 
And  yet  we  are  not  so  to  understand  it  as  that 
wherever  we  meet  with  a  shield  put  to  indicate 
a  protection  of  any  kind,  we  must  take  it  as  sig¬ 
nifying  nothing  but  the  favour  of  God.  For  we 
hear  also  of  the  shield  of  faith,  “wherewith,” 
says  the  apostle,  “ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.”  14  Nor  ought  we, 
on  the  other  hand,  in  regard  to  spiritual  armour 
of  this  kind  to  assign  faith  to  the  shield  only; 
for  we  read  in  another  place  of  the  breastplate 
of  faith:  “putting  on,”  says  the  apostle,  “the 
breastplate  of  faith  and  love.15 

Chap.  27.  One  passage  susceptible  of  various 

interpretations 

38.  When,  again,  not  some  one  interpretation, 
but  two  or  more  interpretations  are  put  upon 
the  same  words  of  Scripture,  even  though  the 
meaning  the  writer  intended  remain  undiscov¬ 
ered,  there  is  no  danger  if  it  can  be  shown  from 
other  passages  of  Scripture  that  any  of  the  in¬ 
terpretations  put  on  the  words  is  in  harmony 
with  the  truth.  And  if  a  man  in  searching  the 
Scriptures  endeavours  to  get  at  the  intention  of 
the  author  through  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  spake, 
whether  he  succeeds  in  this  endeavour,  or 
whether  he  draws  a  different  meaning  from  the 
words,  but  one  that  is  not  opposed  to  sound  doc¬ 
trine,  he  is  free  from  blame  so  long  as  he  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  testimony  of  some  other  passage 
of  Scripture.  For  the  author  perhaps  saw  that 
this  very  meaning  lay  in  the  words  which  we  are 
trying  to  interpret ;  and  assuredly  the  Holy  Spir¬ 
it,  who  through  him  spake  these  words,  fore¬ 
saw  that  this  interpretation  would  occur  to  the 
reader,  nay,  made  provision  that  it  should  occur 
to  him,  seeing  that  it  too  is  founded  on  truth. 
For  what  more  liberal  and  more  fruitful  provi- 

“Ps.  35.  2.  13Ps.  5. 12.  14Eph.  6. 16.  16I  Thess.  5.  8. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


668 

sion  could  God  have  made  in  regard  to  the  Sa¬ 
cred  Scriptures  than  that  the  same  words  might 
be  understood  in  several  senses,  all  of  which  are 
sanctioned  by  the  concurring  testimony  of  other 
passages  equally  divine? 

Chap.  28.  It  is  safer  to  explain  a  doubtful  pas¬ 
sage  by  other  passages  of  Scripture  than  by 

reason 

39.  When,  however,  a  meaning  is  evolved  of 
such  a  kind  that  what  is  doubtful  in  it  cannot 
be  cleared  up  by  indubitable  evidence  from 
Scripture,  it  remains  for  us  to  make  it  clear  by 
the  evidence  of  reason.  But  this  is  a  dangerous 
practice.  For  it  is  far  safer  to  walk  by  the  light 
of  Holy  Scripture ;  so  that  when  we  wish  to  ex¬ 
amine  the  passages  that  are  obscured  by  meta¬ 
phorical  expressions,  we  may  either  obtain  a 
meaning  about  which  there  is  no  controversy, 
or  if  a  controversy  arises,  may  settle  it  by  the 
application  of  testimonies  sought  out  in  every 
portion  of  the  same  Scripture. 

Chap.  29.  The  knowledge  of  tropes  is  necessary 

40.  Moreover,  I  would  have  learned  men  to 
know  that  the  authors  of  our  Scriptures  use  all 
those  forms  of  expression  which  grammarians 
call  by  the  Greek  name  tropes ,  and  use  them 
more  freely  and  in  greater  variety  than  people 
who  are  unacquainted  with  the  Scriptures,  and 
have  learnt  these  figures  of  speech  from  other 
writings,  can  imagine  or  believe.  Nevertheless 
those  who  know  these  tropes  recognize  them  in 
Scripture,  and  are  very  much  assisted  by  their 
knowledge  of  them  in  understanding  Scripture. 
But  this  is  not  the  place  to  teach  them  to  the  il¬ 
literate,  lest  it  might  seem  that  I  was  teaching 
grammar.  I  certainly  advise,  however,  that  they 
be  learnt  elsewhere,  although  indeed  I  have  al¬ 
ready  given  that  advice  above,  in  the  second 
book — namely,  where  I  treated  of  the  necessary 
knowledge  of  languages.  For  the  written  charac¬ 
ters  from  which  grammar  itself  gets  its  name 
(the  Greek  name  for  letters  being  ypa/jL/dara  ) 
are  the  signs  of  sounds  made  by  the  articulate 
voice  with  which  we  speak.  Now  of  some  of 
these  figures  of  speech  we  find  in  Scripture  not 
only  examples  (which  we  have  of  them  all),  but 
the  very  names  as  well:  for  instance,  allegory , 
enigma}  and  parable .  However,  nearly  all  these 
tropes  which  are  said  to  be  learnt  as  a  matter  of 
liberal  education  are  found  even  in  the  ordinary 
speech  of  men  who  have  learnt  no  grammar,  but 
are  content  to  use  the  vulgar  idiom.  For  who 
does  not  say,  “So  may  you  flourish”?  And  this 
is  the  figure  of  speech  called  metaphor .  Who 


does  not  speak  of  a  fish-pond  in  which  there  is 
no  fish,  which  was  not  made  for  fish,  and  yet 
gets  its  name  from  fish?  And  this  is  the  figure 
called  catachresis. 

41.  It  would  be  tedious  to  go  over  all  the  rest 
in  this  way;  for  the  speech  of  the  vulgar  makes 
use  of  them  all,  even  of  those  more  curious  fig¬ 
ures  which  mean  the  very  opposite  of  what  they 
say,  as  for  example,  those  called  irony  and  anti- 
phrasis.  Now  in  irony  we  indicate  by  the  tone 
of  voice  the  meaning  we  desire  to  convey;  as 
when  we  say  to  a  man  who  is  behaving  badly, 
“You  are  doing  well.”  But  it  is  not  by  the  tone 
of  voice  that  we  make  an  antiphrasis  to  indicate 
the  opposite  of  what  the  words  convey;  but  ei¬ 
ther  the  words  in  which  it  is  expressed  are  used 
in  the  opposite  of  their  etymological  sense,  as  a 
grove  is  called  lucus  from  its  want  of  light;  or 
it  is  customary  to  use  a  certain  form  of  expres¬ 
sion,  although  it  puts  yes  for  no  by  a  law  of  con¬ 
traries,  as  when  we  ask  in  a  place  for  what  is 
not  there,  and  get  the  answer,  “There  is  plen¬ 
ty”;  or  we  add  words  that  make  it  plain  we 
mean  the  opposite  of  what  we  say,  as  in  the  ex¬ 
pression,  “Beware  of  him,  for  he  is  a  good  man.” 
And  what  illiterate  man  is  there  that  does  not 
use  such  expressions,  although  he  knows  nothing 
at  all  about  either  the  nature  or  the  names  of 
these  figures  of  speech?  And  yet  the  knowledge 
of  these  is  necessary  for  clearing  up  the  difficul¬ 
ties  of  Scripture ;  because  when  the  words  taken 
literally  give  an  absurd  meaning,  we  ought  forth¬ 
with  to  inquire  whether  they  may  not  be  used  in 
this  or  that  figurative  sense  which  we  are  unac¬ 
quainted  with;  and  in  this  way  many  obscure 
passages  have  had  light  thrown  upon  them. 

Chap.  30.  The  rides  of  Tichonius  the  Donatist 

examined 

42.  One  Tichonius,  who,  although  a  Dona¬ 
tist  himself,  has  written  most  triumphantly 
against  the  Donatists  (and  herein  showed  him¬ 
self  of  a  most  inconsistent  disposition,  that  he 
was  unwilling  to  give  them  up  altogether), 
wrote  a  book  which  he  called  the  Book  of  Rides , 
because  in  it  he  laid  down  seven  rules,  which 
are,  as  it  were,  keys  to  open  the  secrets  of  Scrip¬ 
ture.  And  of  these  rules,  the  first  relates  to  the 
Lord  and  His  body,  the  second  to  the  twofold 
division  of  the  Lord’s  body,  the  third  to  the 
promises  and  the  law,  the  fourth  to  species  and 
geniiSy  the  fifth  to  times,  the  sixth  to  recapitula¬ 
tion,  the  seventh  to  the  devil  and  his  body.  Now 
these  rules,  as  expounded  by  their  author,  do  in¬ 
deed,  when  carefully  considered,  afford  consid¬ 
erable  assistance  in  penetrating  the  secrets  of 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  28-32  669 


the  sacred  writings ;  but  still  they  do  not  explain 
all  the  difficult  passages,  for  there  are  several 
other  methods  required,  which  are  so  far  from 
being  embraced  in  this  number  of  seven,  that 
the  author  himself  explains  many  obscure  pas¬ 
sages  without  using  any  of  his  rules ;  finding,  in¬ 
deed,  that  there  was  no  need  for  them,  as  there 
was  no  difficulty  in  the  passage  of  the  kind  to 
which  his  rules  apply.  As,  for  example,  he  in¬ 
quires  what  we  are  to  understand  in  the  Apoc¬ 
alypse  by  the  seven  angels  of  the  churches  to 
whom  John  is  commanded  to  write;  and  after 
much  and  various  reasoning,  arrives  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  the  angels  are  the  churches  them¬ 
selves.  And  throughout  this  long  and  full  dis¬ 
cussion,  although  the  matter  inquired  into  is 
certainly  very  obscure,  no  use  whatever  is  made 
of  the  rules.  This  is  enough  for  an  example,  for 
it  would  be  too  tedious  and  troublesome  to  col¬ 
lect  all  the  passages  in  the  canonical  Scriptures 
which  present  obscurities  of  such  a  kind  as  re¬ 
quire  none  of  these  seven  rules  for  their  elucida¬ 
tion. 

43.  The  author  himself,  however,  when  com¬ 
mending  these  rules,  attributes  so  much  value  to 
them  that  it  would  appear  as  if,  when  they  were 
thoroughly  known  and  duly  applied,  we  should 
be  able  to  interpret  all  the  obscure  passages  in 
the  law — that  is,  in  the. sacred  books.  For  he 
thus  commences  this  very  book:  “Of  all  the 
things  that  occur  to  me,  I  consider  none  so  nec¬ 
essary  as  to  write  a  little  book  of  rules,  and,  as 
it  were,  to  make  keys  for,  and  put  windows  in, 
the  secret  places  of  the  law.  For  there  are  cer¬ 
tain  mystical  rules  which  hold  the  key  to  the  se¬ 
cret  recesses  of  the  whole  law,  and  render  visible 
the  treasures  of  truth  that  are  to  many  invisi¬ 
ble.  And  if  this  system  of  rules  be  received  as  I 
communicate  it,  without  jealousy,  what  is  shut 
shall  be  laid  open,  and  what  is  obscure  shall  be 
elucidated,  so  that  a  man  travelling  through  the 
vast  forest  of  prophecy  shall,  if  he  follow  these 
rules  as  pathways  of  light,  be  preserved  from 
going  astray.”  Now,  if  he  had  said,  “There  are 
certaih  mystical  rules  which  hold  the  key  to 
some  of  the  secrets  of  the  law,”  or  even  “which 
hold  the  key  to  the  great  secrets  of  the  law,” 
and  not  what  he  does  say,  “the  secret  recesses  of 
the  whole  law”;  and  if  he  had  not  said  “What 
is  shut  shall  be  laid  open,”  but,  “Many  things 
that  are  shut  shall  be  laid  open,”  he  would  have 
said  what  was  true,  and  he  would  not,  by  attrib¬ 
uting  more  than  is  warranted  by  the  facts  to  his 
very  elaborate  and  useful  work,  have  led  the 
reader  into  false  expectations.  And  I  have 
thought  it  right  to  say  thus  much,  in  order  both 


that  the  book  may  be  read  by  the  studious  (for 
it  is  of  very  great  assistance  in  understanding 
Scripture),  and  that  no  more  may  be  expected 
from  it  than  it  really  contains.  Certainly  it  must 
be  read  with  caution,  not  only  on  account  of  the 
errors  into  which  the  author  falls  as  a  man,  but 
chiefly  on  account  of  the  heresies  which  he  ad¬ 
vances  as  a  Donatist.  And  now  I  shall  briefly 
indicate  what  these  seven  rules  teach  or  advise. 

Chap.  31.  The  first  rule  of  Tichonius 

44.  The  first  is  about  the  Lord  and  His  body , 
and  it  is  this,  that,  knowing  as  we  do  that  the 
head  and  the  body — that  is,  Christ  and  His 
Church — are  sometimes  indicated  to  us  under 
one  person  (for  it  is  not  in  vain  that  it  is  said 
to  believers,  “Ye  then  are  Abraham’s  seed,”  1 
when  there  is  but  one  seed  of  Abraham,  and  that 
is  Christ),  we  need  not  be  in  a  difficulty  when  a 
transition  is  made  from  the  head  to  the  body  or 
from  the  body  to  the  head,  and  yet  no  change 
made  in  the  person  spoken  of.  For  a  single  per¬ 
son  is  represented  as  saying,  “He  hath  decked 
me  as  a  bridegroom  with  ornaments,  and 
adorned  me  as  a  bride  with  jewels”;2  and  yet  it 
is,  of  course,  a  matter  for  interpretation  which 
of  these  two  refers  to  the  head  and  which  to  the 
body,  that  is,  which  to  Christ  and  which  to  the 
Church. 

Chap.  32.  The  second  rule  of  Tichonius 

45.  The  second  rule  is  about  the  twofold  di¬ 
vision  of  the  body  of  the  Lord;  but  this  indeed 
is  not  a  suitable  name,  for  that  is  really  no  part 
of  the  body  of  Christ  which  will  not  be  with 
Him  in  eternity.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  say 
that  the  rule  is  about  the  true  and  the  mixed 
body  of  the  Lord,  or  the  true  and  the  counter¬ 
feit,  or  some  such  name;  because,  not  to  speak 
of  eternity,  hypocrites  cannot  even  now  be  said 
to  be  in  Him,  although  they  seem  to  be  in  His 
Church.  And  hence  this  rule  might  be  designat¬ 
ed  thus:  Concerning  the  mixed  Church.  Now 
this  rule  requires  the  reader  to  be  on  his  guard 
when  Scripture,  although  it  has  now  come  to  ad¬ 
dress  or  speak  of  a  different  set  of  persons, 
seems  to  be  addressing  or  speaking  of  the  same 
persons  as  before,  just  as  if  both  sets  constitut¬ 
ed  one  body  in  consequence  of  their  being  for 
the  time  united  in  a  common  participation  of 
the  sacraments.  An  example  of  this  is  that  pas¬ 
sage  in  the  Song  of  Solomon,  “I  am  black,  but 
comely,  as  the  tents  of  Kedar.  as  the  curtains  of 
Solomon.” 3  For  it  is  not  said,  I  was  black  as  the 

xGal.  3.  29.  2Isa.  61.  10  (Septuagint). 

8Song  of  Sol.  1.  5. 


670  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


tents  of  Kedar,  but  am  now  comely  as  the  cur¬ 
tains  of  Solomon.  The  Church  declares  itself  to 
be  at  present  both;  and  this  because  the  good 
fish  and  the  bad  are  for  the  time  mixed  up  in 
the  one  net.1  For  the  tents  of  Kedar  pertain  to 
Ishmael,  who  “shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of 
the  free  woman.” 2  And  in  the  same  way,  when 
God  says  of  the  good  part  of  the  Church,  “I  will 
bring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  knew  not ;  I 
will  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not 
known;  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them, 
and  crooked  things  straight:  these  things  will  I 
do  unto  them,  and  not  forsake  them”;3  He  im¬ 
mediately  adds  in  regard  to  the  other  part,  the 
bad  that  is  mixed  with  the  good,  “They  shall  be 
turned  back.”  Now  these  words  refer  to  a  set  of 
persons  altogether  different  from  the  former; 
but  as  the  two  sets  are  for  the  present  united  in 
one  body,  He  speaks  as  if  there  were  no  change 
in  the  subject  of  the  sentence.  They  will  not, 
however,  always  be  in  one  body;  for  one  of 
them  is  that  wicked  servant  of  whom  we  are 
told  in  the  Gospel,  whose  lord,  when  he  comes, 
“shall  cut  him  asunder  and  appoint  him  his  por¬ 
tion  with  the  hypocrites.” 4 

Chap.  33.  The  third  rule  of  Tichonius 

46.  The  third  rule  relates  to  the  promises  and 
the  law ,  and  may  be  designated  in  other  terms 
as  relating  to  the  spirit  and  the  letter,  which  is 
the  name  I  made  use  of  when  writing  a  book  on 
this  subject.  It  may  be  also  named,  of  grace  and 
the  law.  This,  however,  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
great  question  in  itself,  rather  than  a  rule  to  be 
applied  to  the  solution  of  other  questions.  It 
was  the  want  of  clear  views  on  this  question  that 
originated,  or  at  least  greatly  aggravated,  the 
Pelagian  heresy.  And  the  efforts  of  Tichonius  to 
clear  up  this  point  were  good,  but  not  complete. 
For,  in  discussing  the  question  about  faith  and 
works,  he  said  that  works  were  given  us  by  God 
as  the  reward  of  faith,  but  that  faith  itself  was 
so  far  our  own  that  it  did  not  come  to  us  from 
God;  not  keeping  in  mind  the  saying  of  the  apos¬ 
tle:  “Peace  be  to  the  brethren,  and  love  with 
faith,  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.” 5  But  he  had  not  come  into  contact  with 
this  heresy,  which  has  arisen  in  our  time,  and 
has  given  us  much  labour  and  trouble  in  defend¬ 
ing  against  it  the  grace  of  God  which  is  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  (according  to 
the  saying  of  the  apostle,  “There  must  be  also 
heresies  among  you,  that  they  which  are  ap¬ 
proved  may  be  made  manifest  among  you” 6) 

lMatt.  13.  47,  48.  2Gal.  4.  30.  3Isa.  42.  16. 

4Matt.  24.  50,  51.  5Eph.  6.  23.  6I  Cor.  n.  19. 


has  made  us  much  more  watchful  and  diligent 
to  discover  in  Scripture  what  escaped  Tichonius, 
who,  having  no  enemy  to  guard  against,  was  less 
attentive  and  anxious  on  this  point,  namely, 
that  even  faith  itself  is  the  gift  of  Him  Who 
“hath  dealth  to  every  man  the  measure  of 
faith.”7  Whence  it  is  said  to  certain  believers: 
“Unto  you  it  is  given,  in  the  behalf  of  Christ, 
not  only  to  believe  on  Him,  but  also  to  suffer  for 
His  sake.”  8  Who,  then,  can  doubt  that  each  of 
these  is  the  gift  of  God,  when  he  learns  from 
this  passage,  and  believes,  that  each  of  them  is 
given?  There  are  many  other  testimonies  be¬ 
sides  which  prove  this.  But  I  am  not  now  treat¬ 
ing  of  this  doctrine.  I  have,  however,  dealt  with 
it,  one  place  or  another,  very  frequently. 

Chap.  34.  The  fourth  rule  of  Tichonius 

47.  The  fourth  rule  of  Tichonius  is  about 
species  and  genus.  For  so  he  calls  it,  intending 
that  by  species  should  be  understood  a  part,  by 
genus  the  whole  of  which  that  which  he  calls 
species  is  a  part:  as,  for  example,  every  single 
city  is  a  part  of  the  great  society  of  nations:  the 
city  he  calls  a  species,  all  nations  constitute  the 
genus.  There  is  no  necessity  for  here  applying 
that  subtlety  of  distinction  which  is  in  use 
among  logicians,  who  discuss  with  great  acute¬ 
ness  the  difference  between  a  part  and  a  species. 
The  rule  is  of  course  the  same,  if  anything  of 
the  kind  referred  to  is  found  in  Scripture,  not 
in  regard  to  a  single  city,  but  in  regard  to  a  sin¬ 
gle  province,  or  tribe,  or  kingdom.  Not  only,  for 
example,  about  Jerusalem,  or  some  of  the  cities 
of  the  Gentiles,  such  as  Tyre  or  Babylon,  are 
things  said  in  Scripture  whose  significance  over¬ 
steps  the  limits  of  the  city,  and  which  are  more 
suitable  when  applied  to  all  nations ;  but  in  re¬ 
gard  to  Judea  also,  and  Egypt,  and  Assyria,  or 
any  other  nation  you  choose  to  take  which  con¬ 
tains  numerous  cities,  but  still  is  not  the  whole 
world,  but  only  a  part  of  it,  things  are  said 
which  pass  over  the  limits  of  that  particular 
country,  and  apply  more  fitly  to  the  whole  of 
which  this  is  a  part;  or,  as  our  author  terms  it, 
to  the  genus  of  which  this  is  a  species.  And 
hence  these  words  have  come  to  be  commonly 
known,  so  that  even  uneducated  people  under¬ 
stand  what  is  laid  down  specially,  and  what  gen¬ 
erally,  in  any  given  Imperial  command.  The 
same  thing  occurs  in  the  case  of  men :  things  are 
said  of  Solomon,  for  example,  the  scope  of 
which  reaches  far  beyond  him,  and  which  are 
only  properly  understood  when  applied  to  Christ 
and  His  Church,  of  which  Solomon  is  a  part.9 

7Rom.  12.  3.  8Phil.  1.  29.  9II  Sam.  7.  14-16. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  33-34  671 


48.  Now  the  species  is  not  always  over¬ 
stepped,  for  things  are  often  said  of  such  a  kind 
as  evidently  apply  to  it  also,  or  perhaps  even  to 
it  exclusively.  But  when  Scripture,  having  up  to 
a  certain  point  been  speaking  about  the  species, 
makes  a  transition  at  that  point  from  the  species 
to  the  genus,  the  reader  must  then  be  carefully 
on  his  guard  against  seeking  in  the  species  what 
he  can  find  much  better  and  more  surely  in  the 
genus.  Take,  for  example,  what  the  prophet 
Ezekiel  says:  “When  the  house  of  Israel  dwelt 
in  their  own  land,  they  defiled  it  by  their  own 
way,  and  by  their  doings:  their  way  was  before 
me  as  the  uncleanness  of  a  removed  woman. 
Wherefore  I  poured  my  fury  upon  them  for  the 
blood  that  they  had  shed  upon  the  land,  and  for 
their  idols  wherewith  they  had  polluted  it :  and 
I  scattered  them  among  the  heathen,  and  they 
were  dispersed  through  the  countries:  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  way.  and  according  to  their  doings,  I 
judged  them.”  1  Now  it  is  easy  to  understand 
that  this  applies  to  that  house  of  Israel  of  which 
the  apostle  says,  “Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh”;2 
because  the  people  of  Israel  after  the  flesh  did 
both  perform  and  endure  all  that  is  here  re¬ 
ferred  to.  What  immediately  follows,  too,  may 
be  understood  as  applying  to  the  same  people. 
But  when  the  prophet  begins  to  say,  “And  I  will 
sanctify  my  great  name,,  which  was  profaned 
among  the  heathen,  which  ye  have  profaned  in 
the  midst  of  them;  and  the  heathen  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord,”3  the  reader  ought  now 
carefully  to  observe  the  way  in  which  the  spe¬ 
cies  is  overstepped  and  the  genus  taken  in.  For 
he  goes  on  to  say:  “And  I  shall  be  sanctified  in 
you  before  their  eyes.  For  I  will  take  you  from 
among  the  heathen,  and  gather  you  out  of  all 
countries,  and  will  bring  you  into  your  own 
land.  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you, 
and  ye  shall  be  clean:  from  all  your  filthiness, 
and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleanse  you.  A 
new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit 
will  I  put  within  you ;  and  I  will  take  away  the 
stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh  and  I  will  give  you 
a  heart  of  flesh.  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within 
you,  and  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and 
ye  shall  keep  my  commandments,  and  do  them. 
And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to 
your  fathers;  and  ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I 
will  be  your  God.  I  will  also  save  you  from  all 
your  uncleannesses.”  4  Now  that  this  is  a  proph¬ 
ecy  of  the  New  Testament,  to  which  pertain  not 
only  the  remnant  of  that  one  nation  of  which  it 
is  elsewhere  said,  “For  though  the  number  of  the 

1Ezek.  36.  17-19.  2I  Cor.  io.  18.  3Ezek.  36.  23. 

4Ezek.  36.  23-29. 


children  of  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  yet 
a  remnant  of  them  shall  be  saved,”  5  but  also 
the  other  nations  which  were  promised  to  their 
fathers  and  our  fathers;  and  that  there  is  here  a 
promise  of  that  washing  of  regeneration  which, 
as  we  see,  is  now  imparted  to  all  nations,  no  one 
who  looks  into  the  matter  can  doubt.  And  that 
saying  of  the  apostle,  when  he  is  commending 
the  grace  of  the  New  Testament  and  its  excel¬ 
lence  in  comparison  with  the  Old,  “Ye  are  our 
epistle  .  .  .  written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  God;  not  in  tables  of  stone, 
but  in  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart,”  6  has  an  evi¬ 
dent  reference  to  this  place  where  the  prophet 
says,  “A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a 
new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you ;  and  I  will  take 
away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will 
give  you  an  heart  of  flesh.”7  Now  the  heart  of 
flesh  from  which  the  apostle’s  expression,  “the 
fleshy  tables  of  the  heart,”  is  drawn,  the  proph¬ 
et  intended  to  point  out  as  distinguished  from 
the  stony  heart  by  the  possession  of  sentient 
life;  and  by  sentient  he  understood  intelligent 
life.  And  thus  the  spiritual  Israel  is  made  up. 
not  of  one  nation,  but  of  all  the  nations  which 
were  promised  to  the  fathers  in  their  seed,  that 
is,  in  Christ. 

49.  This  spiritual  Israel,  therefore,  is  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  carnal  Israel  which  is  of  one 
nation,  by  newness  of  grace,  not  by  nobility  of 
descent,  in  feeling,  not  in  race;  but  the  prophet, 
in  his  depth  of  meaning,  while  speaking  of  the 
carnal  Israel,  passes  on,  without  indicating  the 
transition,  to  speak  of  the  spiritual,  and  al¬ 
though  now  speaking  of  the  latter,  seems  to  be 
still  speaking  of  the  former;  not  that  he  grudges 
us  the  clear  apprehension  of  Scripture,  as  if  we 
were  enemies,  but  that  he  deals  with  us  as  a 
physician,  giving  us  a  wholesome  exercise  for 
our  spirit.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  take  this 
saying,  “And  I  will  bring  you  into  your  own 
land,”  and  what  he  says  shortly  afterwards,  as 
if  repeating  himself,  “And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the 
land  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers,”  not  literally, 
as  if  they  referred  to  Israel  after  the  flesh,  but 
spiritually,  as  referring  to  the  spiritual  Israel. 
For  the  Church,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  gath¬ 
ered  out  of  all  nations,  and  destined  to  reign 
for  ever  with  Christ,  is  itself  the  land  of  the 
blessed,  the  land  of  the  living;  and  we  are  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  this  was  given  to  the  fathers  when 
it  was  promised  to  them  in  the  sure  and  immu¬ 
table  purpose  of  God;  for  what  the  fathers  be¬ 
lieved  would  be  given  in  its  own  time  was  to 
them,  on  account  of  the  unchangeableness  of 

6Isa.  10.  22.  6II  Cor.  3.  2,  3.  7Ezek.  38.  26. 


672  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


the  promise  and  purpose,  the  same  as  if  it  were 
already  given;  just  as  the  apostle,  writing  to 
Timothy,  speaks  of  the  grace  which  is  given  to 
the  saints:  “Not  according  to  our  works,  but 
according  to  His  own  purpose  and  grace,  which 
was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world 
began;  but  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  ap¬ 
pearing  of  our  Saviour.”  1  He  speaks  of  the 
grace  as  given  at  a  time  when  those  to  whom 
it  was  to  be  given  were  not  yet  in  existence ;  be¬ 
cause  he  looks  upon  that  as  having  been  already 
done  in  the  arrangement  and  purpose  of  God, 
which  was  to  take  place  in  its  own  time,  and  he 
himself  speaks  of  it  as  now  made  manifest.  It 
is  possible,  however,  that  these  words  may  re¬ 
fer  to  the  land  of  the  age  to  come,  when  there 
will  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein 
the  unrighteous  shall  be  unable  to  dwell.  And 
so  it  is  truly  said  to  the  righteous,  that  the  land 
itself  is  theirs,  no  part  of  which  will  belong  to 
the  unrighteous;  because  it  is  the  same  as  if  it 
were  itself  given,  when  it  is  firmly  settled  that 
it  shall  be  given. 

Chap.  35.  The  fifth  rule  of  Tichonius 

50.  The  fifth  rule  Tichonius  lays  down  is  one 
he  designates  of  times — a  rule  by  which  we  can 
frequently  discover  or  conjecture  quantities  of 
time  which  are  not  expressly  mentioned  in 
Scripture.  And  he  says  that  this  rule  applies  in 
two  ways :  either  to  the  figure  of  speech  called 
synecdoche,  or  to  legitimate  numbers.  The  fig¬ 
ure  synecdoche  either  puts  the  part  for  the 
whole,  or  the  whole  for  the  part.  As,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  in  reference  to  the  time  when,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  only  three  of  His  disciples,  our  Lord  was 
transfigured  on  the  mount,  so  that  His  face 
shone  as  the  sun,  and  His  raiment  was  white  as 
snow,  one  evangelist  says  that  this  event  oc¬ 
curred  “after  eight  days,”  2  while  another  says 
that  it  occurred  “after  six  days.”  3  Now  both  of 
these  statements  about  the  number  of  days  can¬ 
not  be  true,  unless  we  suppose  that  the  writer 
who  says  “after  eight  days,”  counted  the  latter 
part  of  the  day  on  which  Christ  uttered  the  pre¬ 
diction  and  the  first  part  of  the  day  on  which  he 
showed  its  fulfilment  as  two  whole  days;  while 
the  writer  who  says  “after  six  days,”  counted 
only  the  whole  unbroken  days  between  these 
two.  This  figure  of  speech,  which  puts  the  part 
for  the  whole,  explains  also  the  great  question 
about  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  For  unless  to 
the  latter  part  of  the  day  on  which  He  suffered 
we  join  the  previous  night,  and  count  it  as  a 

1II  Tim.  1.  9,  10.  ^uke,  9.  28. 

3Matt.  17.  1 ;  Mark,  9.  2. 


whole  day,  and  to  the  latter  part  of  the  night  in 
which  He  arose  we  join  the  Lord’s  day  which 
was  just  dawning,  and  count  it  also  a  whole  day, 
we  cannot  make  out  the  three  days  and  three 
nights  during  which  He  foretold  that  He  would 
be  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.4 

51.  In  the  next  place,  our  author  calls  those 
numbers  legitimate  which  Holy  Scripture  more 
highly  favours,  such  as  seven,  or  ten,  or  twelve, 
or  any  of  the  other  numbers  which  the  diligent 
reader  of  Scripture  soon  comes  to  know.  Now 
numbers  of  this  sort  are  often  put  for  time  uni¬ 
versal;  as,  for  example,  “Seven  times  in  the  day 
do  I  praise  Thee,”  means  just  the  same  as  “His 
praise  shall  continually  be  in  my  mouth.” 5  And 
their  force  is  exactly  the  same,  either  when 
multiplied  by  ten,  as  seventy  and  seven  hun¬ 
dred  (whence  the  seventy  years  mentioned  in 
Jeremiah  may  be  taken  in  a  spiritual  sense  for 
the  whole  time  during  which  the  Church  is  a 
sojourner  among  aliens)  ;6  or  when  multiplied 
into  themselves,  as  ten  into  ten  gives  one  hun¬ 
dred,  and  twelve  into  twelve  gives  one  hundred 
and  forty-four,  which  last  number  is  used  in  the 
Apocalypse  to  signify  the  whole  body  of  the 
saints.7  Hence  it  appears  that  it  is  not  merely 
questions  about  times  that  are  to  be  settled  by 
these  numbers,  but  that  their  significance  is  of 
much  wider  application,  and  extends  to  many 
subjects.  That  number  in  the  Apocalypse,  for 
example,  mentioned  above,  has  not  reference  to 
times,  but  to  men. 

Chap.  36.  The  sixth  rule  of  Tichonius 

52.  The  sixth  rule  Tichonius  calls  the  reca¬ 
pitulation,  which,  with  sufficient  watchfulness, 
is  discovered  in  difficult  parts  of  Scripture.  For 
certain  occurrences  are  so  related,  that  the  nar¬ 
rative  appears  to  be  following  the  order  of  time, 
or  the  continuity  of  events,  when  it  really  goes 
back  without  mentioning  it  to  previous  occur¬ 
rences,  which  had  been  passed  over  in  their 
proper  place.  And  we  make  mistakes  if  we  do 
not  understand  this,  from  applying  the  rule  here 
spoken  of.  For  example,  in  the  book  of  Genesis 
we  read,  “And  the  Lord  God  planted  a  garden 
eastward  in  Eden;  and  there  He  put  the  man 
whom  He  had  formed.  And  out  of  the  ground 
made  the  Lord  God  to  grow  every  tree  that  is 
pleasant  to  the  sight,  and  good  for  food.”  8  Now 
here  it  seems  to  be  indicated  that  the  events  last 
mentioned  took  place  after  God  had  formed 
man  and  put  him  in  the  garden;  whereas  the 
fact  is,  that  the  two  events  having  been  briefly 

4Matt.  12.  40.  6Cf.  Ps.  1 19.  164.  with  34.  2. 

6Jer.  25.  11.  7Rev.  7.  4.  8Gen.  2.  8,  9. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  III.  35~37  673 


mentioned,  viz.,  that  God  planted  a  garden,  and 
there  put  the  man  whom  He  had  formed,  the 
narrative  goes  back,  by  way  of  recapitulation, 
to  tell  what  had  before  been  omitted,  the  way 
in  which  the  garden  was  planted:  that  out  of 
the  ground  God  made  to  grow  every  tree  that  is 
pleasant  to  the  sight,  and  good  for  food.  Here 
there  follows  “The  tree  of  life  also  was  in  the 
midst  of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.”  Next  the  river  is  mentioned 
which  watered  the  garden,  and  which  was  part¬ 
ed  into  four  heads,  the  sources  of  four  streams; 
and  all  this  has  reference  to  the  arrangements 
of  the  garden.  And  when  this  is  finished,  there 
is  a  repetition  of  the  fact  which  had  been  al¬ 
ready  told,  but  which  in  the  strict  order  of 
events  came  after  all  this:  “And  the  Lord  God 
took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the  garden  of 
Eden.”  1  For  it  was  after  all  these  other  things 
were  done  that  man  was  put  in  the  garden,  as 
now  appears  from  the  order  of  the  narrative  it¬ 
self  :  it  was  not  after  man  was  put  there  that  the 
other  things  were  done,  as  the  previous  state¬ 
ment  might  be  thought  to  imply,  did  we  not  ac¬ 
curately  mark  and  understand  the  recapitula¬ 
tion  by  which  the  narrative  reverts  to  what  had 
previously  been  passed  over. 

53.  In  the  same  book,  again,  when  the  gener¬ 
ations  of  the  sons  of  Noah  are  recounted,  it  is 
said:  “These  are  the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their 
families,  after  their  tongues,  in  their  countries, 
and  in  their  nations.”2  And,  again,  when  the 
sons  of  Shem  are  enumerated:  “These  are  the 
sons  of  Shem,  after  their  families,  after  their 
tongues,  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations.”3 
And  it  is  added  in  reference  to  them  all:  “These 
are  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their 
generations,  in  their  nations;  and  by  these  were 
the  nations  divided  in  the  earth  after  the  flood. 
And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language  and  of 
one  speech.”  4  Now  the  addition  of  this  sen¬ 
tence,  “And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  lan¬ 
guage  and  of  one  speech,”  seems  to  indicate  that 
at  the  time  when  the  nations  were  scattered 
over  the  earth  they  had  all  one  language  in 
common;  but  this  is  evidently  inconsistent  with 
the  previous  words,  “after  their  families,  after 
their  tongues.”  For  each  family  or  nation  could 
not  be  said  to  have  its  own  language  if  all  had 
one  language  in  common.  And  so  it  is  by  way 
of  recapitulation  it  is  added,  “And  the  whole 
earth  was  of  one  language  and  of  one  speech,” 
the  narrative  here  going  back,  without  indicat¬ 
ing  the  change,  to  tell  how  it  was,  that  from 

^en.  2.  15.  2Gen.  10.  20.  3Gen.  10.  31. 

4Gen.  10.  32;  11.  1. 


having  one  language  in  common,  the  nations 
were  divided  into  a  multiude  of  tongues.  And, 
accordingly,  we  are  forthwith  told  of  the  build¬ 
ing  of  the  tower,  and  of  this  punishment  being 
there  laid  upon  them  as  the  judgment  of  God 
upon  their  arrogance;  and  it  was  after  this  that 
they  were  scattered  over  the  earth  according  to 
their  tongues. 

54.  This  recapitulation  is  found  in  a  still 
more  obscure  form;  as,  for  example,  our  Lord 
says  in  the  gospel:  “The  same  day  that  Lot 
went  out  of  Sodom  it  rained  fire  from  heaven, 
and  destroyed  them  all.  Even  thus  shall  it  be  in 
the  day  when  the  Son  of  man  is  revealed.  In 
that  day,  he  which  shall  be  upon  the  house-top, 
and  his  stuff  in  the  house,  let  him  not  come 
down  to  take  it  away;  and  he  that  is  in  the  field, 
let  him  likewise  not  return  back.  Remember 
Lot’s  wife.” 5  Is  it  when  our  Lord  shall  have 
been  revealed  that  men  are  to  give  heed  to  these 
sayings,  and  not  to  look  behind  them,  that  is, 
not  to  long  after  the  past  life  which  they  have 
renounced?  Is  not  the  present  rather  the  time 
to  give  heed  to  them,  that  when  the  Lord  shall 
have  been  revealed  every  man  may  receive  his 
reward  according  to  the  things  he  has  given 
heed  to  or  despised?  And  yet  because  Scripture 
says,  “In  that  day,”  the  time  of  the  revelation 
of  the  Lord  will  be  thought  the  time  for  giving 
heed  to  these  sayings,  unless  the  reader  be 
watchful  and  intelligent  so  as  to  understand 
the  recapitulation,  in  which  he  will  be  assisted 
by  that  other  passage  of  Scripture  which 
even  in  the  time  of  the  apostles  proclaimed: 
“Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time.”  6  The  very 
time  then  when  the  gospel  is  preached,  up  to 
the  time  that  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  is 
the  day  in  which  men  ought  to  give  heed  to 
these  sayings:  for  to  the  same  day,  which  shall 
be  brought  to  a  close  by  a  day  of  judgment, 
belongs  that  very  revelation  of  the  Lord  here 
spoken  of.7 

Chap.  37.  The  seventh  rule  of  Tichonius 

55.  The  seventh  rule  of  Tichonius  and  the 
last,  is  about  the  devil  and  his  body.  For  he  is 
the  head  of  the  wicked,  who  are  in  a  sense  his 
body,  and  destined  to  go  with  him  into  the  pun¬ 
ishment  of  everlasting  fire,  just  as  Christ  is  the 
head  of  the  Church,  which  is  His  body,  destined 
to  be  with  Him  in  His  eternal  kingdom  and 
glory.  Accordingly,  as  the  first  rule,  which  is 
called  of  the  Lord  and  His  body}  directs  us, 
when  Scripture  speaks  of  one  and  the  same  per¬ 
son,  to  take  pains  to  understand  which  part  of 

6Luke,  17.  29-32.  6IJohn,  2.  18.  7Cf.  Rom.  2.  5. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


674 

the  statement  applies  to  the  head  and  which  to 
the  body;  so  this  last  rule  shows  us  that  state¬ 
ments  are  sometimes  made  about  the  devil, 
whose  truth  is  not  so  evident  in  regard  to  him¬ 
self  as  in  regard  to  his  body;  and  his  body  is 
made  up  not  only  of  those  who  are  manifestly 
out  of  the  way,  but  of  those  also  who,  though 
they  really  belong  to  him,  are  for  a  time  mixed 
up  with  the  Church,  until  they  depart  from  this 
life,  or  until  the  chaff  is  separated  from  the 
wheat  at  the  last  great  winnowing.  For  example, 
what  is  said  in  Isaiah,  ‘'How  he  is  fallen  from 
heaven,  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning!”  1  and  the 
other  statements  of  the  context  which,  under 
the  figure  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  are  made 
about  the  same  person,  are  of  course  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  of  the  devil;  and  yet  the  statement 
which  is  made  in  the  same  place,  “He  is  ground 
down  on  the  earth,  who  sendeth  to  all  nations,”2 
does  not  altogether  fitly  apply  to  the  head  him¬ 
self.  For,  although  the  devil  sends  his  angels  to 
all  nations,  yet  it  is  his  body,  not  himself,  that 
is  ground  down  on  the  earth,  except  that  he 
himself  is  in  his  body,  which  is  beaten  small  like 
the  dust  which  the  wind  blows  from  the  face  of 
the  earth, 

56.  Now  all  these  rules,  except  the  one  about 
the  promises  and  the  law,  make  one  meaning  to 
be  understood  where  another  is  expressed, 
which  is  the  peculiarity  of  figurative  diction; 
and  this  kind  of  diction,  it  seems  to  me,  is  too 
widely  spread  to  be  comprehended  in  its  full  ex¬ 
tent  by  any  one.  For,  wherever  one  thing  is  said 
with  the  intention  that  another  should  be  un- 
^sa.  14.  12  (Septuagint).  Hbid. 


derstood  we  have  a  figurative  expression,  even 
though  the  name  of  the  trope  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  art  of  rhetoric.  And  when  an  expression 
of  this  sort  occurs  where  it  is  customary  to  find 
it,  there  is  no  trouble  in  understanding  it;  when 
it  occurs,  however,  where  it  is  not  customary,  it 
costs  labour  to  understand  it,  from  some  more, 
from  some  less,  just  as  men  have  got  more  or 
less  from  God  of  the  gifts  of  intellect,  or  as  they 
have  access  to  more  or  fewer  external  helps. 
And,  as  in  the  case  of  proper  words  which  I  dis¬ 
cussed  above,  and  in  which  things  are  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  just  as  they  are  expressed,  so  in  the 
case  of  figurative  words,  in  which  one  thing  is 
expressed  and  another  is  to  be  understood,  and 
which  I  have  just  finished  speaking  of  as  much 
as  I  thought  enough,  students  of  these  venerable 
documents  ought  to  be  counselled  not  only  to 
make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  forms  of 
expression  ordinarily  used  in  Scripture,  to  ob¬ 
serve  them  carefully,  and  to  remember  them  ac¬ 
curately,  but  also,  what  is  especially  and  before 
all  things  necessary,  to  pray  that  they  may  un¬ 
derstand  them.  For  in  these  very  books  on  the 
study  of  which  they  are  intent,  they  read,  “The 
Lord  giveth  wisdom :  out  of  His  mouth  cometh 
knowledge  and  understanding”;3  and  it  is  from 
Him  they  have  received  their  very  desire  for 
knowledge,  if  it  is  wedded  to  piety.  But  about 
signs,  so  far  as  relates  to  words,  I  have  now 
said  enough.  It  remains  to  discuss,  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  book,  so  far  as  God  has  given  me  light, 
the  means  of  communicating  our  thoughts  to 
others. 

3Prov.  2.  6. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  1-2 


675 


BOOK  IV 

ARGUMENT.  Passing  to  the  second  part  of  his  work,  that  which  treats 

OF  EXPRESSION,  THE  AUTHOR  PREMISES  THAT  IT  IS  NO  PART  OF  HIS  INTENTION  TO 
WRITE  A  TREATISE  ON  THE  LAWS  OF  RHETORIC.  THESE  CAN  BE  LEARNED  ELSEWHERE, 
AND  OUGHT  NOT  TO  BE  NEGLECTED,  BEING  INDEED  SPECIALLY  NECESSARY  FOR  THE 
CHRISTIAN  TEACHER,  WHOM  IT  BEHOVES  TO  EXCEL  IN  ELOQUENCE  AND  POWER  OF 

speech.  After  detailing  with  much  care  and  minuteness  the  various  qual¬ 
ities  OF  AN  ORATOR,  HE  RECOMMENDS  THE  AUTHORS  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES  AS 
THE  BEST  MODELS  OF  ELOQUENCE,  FAR  EXCELLING  ALL  OTHERS  IN  THE  COMBINATION 
OF  ELOQUENCE  WITH  WISDOM.  He  POINTS  OUT  THAT  PERSPICUITY  IS  THE  MOST  ES¬ 
SENTIAL  QUALITY  OF  STYLE,  AND  OUGHT  TO  BE  CULTIVATED  WITH  ESPECIAL  CARE  BY 
THE  TEACHER,  AS  IT  IS  THE  MAIN  REQUISITE  FOR  INSTRUCTION,  ALTHOUGH  OTHER 
QUALITIES  ARE  REQUIRED  FOR  DELIGHTING  AND  PERSUADING  THE  HEARER.  ALL 
THESE  GIFTS  ARE  TO  BE  SOUGHT  IN  EARNEST  PRAYER  FROM  GOD,  THOUGH  WE  ARE 
NOT  TO  FORGET  TO  BE  ZEALOUS  AND  DILIGENT  IN  STUDY.  He  SHOWS  THAT  THERE 
ARE  THREE  SPECIES  OF  STYLE,  THE  SUBDUED,  THE  ELEGANT,  AND  THE  MAJESTIC; 
THE  FIRST  SERVING  FOR  INSTRUCTION,  THE  SECOND  FOR  PRAISE,  AND  THE  THIRD  FOR 
EXHORTATION  :  AND  OF  EACH  OF  THESE  HE  GIVES  EXAMPLES,  SELECTED  BOTH  FROM 
SCRIPTURE  AND  FROM  EARLY  TEACHERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  CYPRIAN  AND  AMBROSE.  He 
SHOWS  THAT  THESE  VARIOUS  STYLES  MAY  BE  MINGLED,  AND  WHEN  AND  FOR  WHAT 
PURPOSES  THEY  ARE  MINGLED;  AND  THAT  THEY  ALL  HAVE  THE  SAME  END  IN  VIEW, 
TO  BRING  HOME  THE  TRUTH  TO  THE  HEARER,  SO  THAT  HE  MAY  UNDERSTAND  IT, 
HEAR  IT  WITH  GLADNESS,  AND  PRACTISE  IT  IN  HIS  LIFE.  FINALLY,  HE  EXHORTS  THE 
CHRISTIAN  TEACHER  HIMSELF,  POINTING  OUT  THE  DIGNITY  AND  RESPONSIBILITY 
OF  THE  OFFICE  HE  HOLDS,  TO  LEAD  A  LIFE  IN  HARMONY  WITH  HIS  OWN  TEACHING, 
AND  TO  SHOW  A  GOOD  EXAMPLE  TO  ALL. 

Chap.  i.  This  work  not  intended  as  a  treatise 
on  rhetoric 

1.  This  work  of  mine,  which  is  entitled  On 
Christian  Doctrine ,  was  at  the  commencement 
divided  into  two  parts.  For,  after  a  preface,  in 
which  I  answered  by  anticipation  those  who 
were  likely  to  take  exception  to  the  work,  I 
said,  “There  are  two  things  on  which  all  inter¬ 
pretation  of  Scripture  depends:  the  mode  of  as¬ 
certaining  the  proper  meaning,  and  the  mode  of 
making  known  the  meaning  when  it  is  ascer¬ 
tained.  I  shall  treat  first  of  the  mode  of  ascer¬ 
taining,  next  of  the  mode  of  making  known,  the 
meaning.”  1  As,  then,  I  have  already  said  a  great 
deal  about  the  mode  of  ascertaining  the  mean¬ 
ing,  and  have  given  three  books  to  this  one  part 
of  the  subject,  I  shall  only  say  a  few  things 
about  the  mode  of  making  known  the  meaning, 
in  order  if  possible  to  bring  them  all  within  the 
compass  of  one  book,  and  so  finish  the  whole 
work  in  four  books. 

2.  In  the  first  place,  then,  I  wish  by  this  pre¬ 
amble  to  put  a  stop  to  the  expectations  of  read¬ 
ers  who  may  think  that  I  am  about  to  lay  down 
rules  of  rhetoric  such  as  I  have  learnt,  and 

hiK.  i,  Chap.  i. 


taught  too,  in  the  secular  schools,  and  to  warn 
them  that  they  need  not  look  for  any  such  from 
me.  Not  that  I  think  such  rules  of  no  use,  but 
that  whatever  use  they  have  is  to  be  learnt  else¬ 
where;  and  if  any  good  man  should  happen  to 
have  leisure  for  learning  them,  he  is  not  to  ask 
me  to  teach  them  either  in  this  work  or  any  oth¬ 
er. 

Chap.  2.  It  is  lawful  for  a  Christian  teacher  to 

use  the  art  of  rhetoric 

3.  Now,  the  art  of  rhetoric  being  available 
for  the  enforcing  either  of  truth  or  falsehood, 
who  will  dare  to  say  that  truth  in  the  person  of 
its  defenders  is  to  take  its  stand  unarmed  against 
falsehood?  For  example,  that  those  who  are  try¬ 
ing  to  persuade  men  of  what  is  false  are  to  know 
how  to  introduce  their  subject,  so  as  to  put  the 
hearer  into  a  friendly,  or  attentive,  or  teachable 
frame  of  mind,  while  the  defenders  of  the  truth 
shall  be  ignorant  of  that  art?  That  the  former 
are  to  tell  their  falsehoods  briefly,  clearly,  and 
plausibly,  while  the  latter  shall  tell  the  truth  in 
such  a  way  that  it  is  tedious  to  listen  to,  hard  to 
understand,  and,  in  fine,  not  easy  to  believe  it? 
That  the  former  are  to  oppose  the  truth  and  de¬ 
fend  falsehood  with  sophistical  arguments,  while 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


676 

the  latter  shall  be  unable  either  to  defend  what 
is  true,  or  to  refute  what  is  false?  That  the  for¬ 
mer,  while  imbuing  the  minds  of  their  hearers 
with  erroneous  opinions,  are  by  their  power  of 
speech  to  awe,  to  melt,  to  enliven,  and  to  rouse 
them,  while  the  latter  shall  in  defence  of  the 
truth  be  sluggish,  and  frigid,  and  somnolent? 
Who  is  such  a  fool  as  to  think  this  wisdom? 
Since,  then,  the  faculty  of  eloquence  is  available 
for  both  sides,  and  is  of  very  great  service  in  the 
enforcing  either  of  wrong  or  right,  why  do  not 
good  men  study  to  engage  it  on  the  side  of  truth, 
when  bad  men  use  it  to  obtain  the  triumph  of 
wicked  and  worthless  causes,  and  to  further  in¬ 
justice  and  error? 

Chap.  3.  The  proper  age  and  the  proper  means 
for  acquiring  rhetorical  skill 

4.  But  the  theories  and  rules  on  this  subject 
(to  which,  when  you  add  a  tongue  thoroughly 
skilled  by  exercise  and  habit  in  the  use  of  many 
words  and  many  ornaments  of  speech,  you  have 
what  is  called  eloquence  or  oratory)  may  be 
learnt  apart  from  these  writings  of  mine,  if-a 
suitable  space  of  time  be  set  aside  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  at  a  fit  and  proper  age.  But  only  by  those 
who  can  learn  them  quickly;  for  the  masters  of 
Roman  eloquence  themselves  did  not  shrink 
from  saying  that  any  one  who  cannot  learn  this 
art  quickly  can  never  thoroughly  learn  it  at  all. 
Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  why  need  we  in¬ 
quire?  For  even  if  this  art  can  occasionally  be 
in  the  end  mastered  by  men  of  slower  intellect, 
I  do  not  think  it  of  so  much  importance  as  to 
wish  men  who  have  arrived  at  mature  age  to 
spend  time  in  learning  it.  It  is  enough  that  boys 
should  give  attention  to  it;  and  even  of  these, 
not  all  who  are  to  be  fitted  for  usefulness  in  the 
Church,  but  only  those  who  are  not  yet  engaged 
in  any  occupation  of  more  urgent  necessity,  or 
which  ought  evidently  to  take  precedence  of  it. 
For  men  of  quick  intellect  and  glowing  tempera¬ 
ment  find  it  easier  to  become  eloquent  by  read¬ 
ing  and  listening  to  eloquent  speakers  than  by 
following  rules  for  eloquence.  And  even  outside 
the  canon,  which  to  our  great  advantage  is  fixed 
in  a  place  of  secure  authority,  there  is  no  want 
of  ecclesiastical  writings,  in  reading  which  a 
man  of  ability  will  acquire  a  tinge  of  the  elo¬ 
quence  with  which  they  are  written,  even 
though  he  does  not  aim  at  this,  but  is  solely  in¬ 
tent  on  the  matters  treated  of;  especially,  of 
course,  if  in  addition  he  practise  himself  in  writ¬ 
ing,  or  dictating,  and  at  last  also  in  speaking, 
the  opinions  he  has  formed  on  grounds  of  piety 
and  faith.  If,  however,  such  ability  be  wanting, 


the  rules  of  rhetoric  are  either  not  understood, 
or  if,  after  great  labour  has  been  spent  in  en¬ 
forcing  them,  they  come  to  be  in  some  small 
measure  understood,  they  prove  of  no  service. 
For  even  those  who  have  learnt  them,  and  who 
speak  with  fluency  and  elegance,  cannot  always 
think  of  them  when  they  are  speaking  so  as  to 
speak  in  accordance  with  them,  unless  they  are 
discussing  the  rules  themselves.  Indeed.  I  think 
there  are  scarcely  any  who  can  do  both  things — 
that  is,  speak  well,  and,  in  order  to  do  this,  think 
of  the  rules  of  speaking  while  they  are  speaking. 
For  we  must  be  careful  that  what  we  have  got 
to  say  does  not  escape  us  whilst  we  are  thinking 
about  saying  it  according  to  the  rules  of  art. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  speeches  of  eloquent  men, 
we  find  rules  of  eloquence  carried  out  which  the 
speakers  did  not  think  of  as  aids  to  eloquence 
at  the  time  when  they  were  speaking,  whether 
they  had  ever  learnt  them,  or  whether  they  had 
never  even  met  with  them.  For  it  is  because  they 
are  eloquent  that  they  exemplify  these  rules;  it 
is  not  that  they  use  them  in  order  to  be  elo¬ 
quent. 

5.  And.  therefore,  as  infants  cannot  learn  to 
speak  except  by  learning  words  and  phrases 
from  those  who  do  speak,  why  should  not  men 
become  eloquent  without  being  taught  any  art 
of  speech,  simply  by  reading  and  learning  the 
speeches  of  eloquent  men,  and  by  imitating 
them  as  far  as  they  can?  And  what  do  we  find 
from  the  examples  themselves  to  be  the  case  in 
this  respect?  We  know  numbers  who,  without 
acquaintance  with  rhetorical  rules,  are  more  el¬ 
oquent  than  many  who  have  learnt  these;  but 
we  know  no  one  who  is  eloquent  without  having 
read  and  listened  to  the  speeches  and  debates  of 
eloquent  men.  For  even  the  art  of  grammar, 
which  teaches  correctness  of  speech,  need  not 
be  learnt  by  boys,  if  they  have  the  advantage  of 
growing  up  and  living  among  men  who  speak 
correctly.  For  without  knowing  the  names  of 
any  of  the  faults,  they  will,  from  being  accus¬ 
tomed  to  correct  speech,  lay  hold  upon  what¬ 
ever  is  faulty  in  the  speech  of  any  one  they  lis¬ 
ten  to,  and  avoid  it;  just  as  citybred  men,  even 
when  illiterate,  seize  upon  the  faults  of  rustics. 

Chap.  4.  The  duty  of  the  Christian  teacher 

6.  It  is  the  duty,  then,  of  the  interpreter  and 
teacher  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  defender  of  the 
true  faith  and  the  opponent  of  error,  both  to 
teach  what  is  right  and  to  refute  what  is  wrong, 
and  in  the  performance  of  this  task  to  conciliate 
the  hostile,  to  rouse  the  careless,  and  to  tell  the 
ignorant  both  what  is  occurring  at  present  and 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  3-6  677 


what  is  probable  in  the  future.  But  once  that 
his  hearers  are  friendly,  attentive,  and  ready  to 
learn,  whether  he  has  found  them  so,  or  has  him¬ 
self  made  them  so,  the  remaining  objects  are  to 
be  carried  out  in  whatever  way  the  case  re¬ 
quires.  If  the  hearers  need  teaching,  the  matter 
treated  of  must  be  made  fully  known  by  means 
of  narrative.  On  the  other  hand,  to  clear  up 
points  that  are  doubtful  requires  reasoning  and 
the  exhibition  of  proofs.  If,  however,  the  hear¬ 
ers  require  to  be  roused  rather  than  instructed, 
in  order  that  they  may  be  diligent  to  do  what 
they  already  know,  and  to  bring  their  feelings 
into  harmony  with  the  truths  they  admit,  great¬ 
er  vigour  of  speech  is  needed.  Here  entreaties 
and  reproaches,  exhortations  and  upbraidings, 
and  all  the  other  means  of  rousing  the  emotions, 
are  necessary. 

7.  And  all  the  methods  I  have  mentioned  are 
constantly  used  by  nearly  every  one  in  cases 
where  speech  is  the  agency  employed. 

Chap.  5.  Wisdom  of  more  importance  than  elo¬ 
quence  to  the  Christian  teacher 

But  as  some  men  employ  these  coarsely,  in¬ 
elegantly,  and  frigidly,  while  others  use  them 
with  acuteness,  elegance,  and  spirit,  the  work 
that  I  am  speaking  of  ought  to  be  undertaken 
by  one  who  can  argue  and  speak  with  wisdom, 
if  not  with  eloquence,  and  with  profit  to  his 
hearers,  even  though  he  profit  them  less  than  he 
would  if  he  could  speak  with  eloquence  too.  But 
we  must  beware  of  the  man  who  abounds  in 
eloquent  nonsense,  and  so  much  the  more  if  the 
hearer  is  pleased  with  what  is  not  worth  listen¬ 
ing  to,  and  thinks  that  because  the  speaker  is 
eloquent  what  he  says  must  be  true.  And  this 
opinion  is  held  even  by  those  who  think  that  the 
art  of  rhetoric  should  be  taught :  for  they  con¬ 
fess  that  “though  wisdom  without  eloquence  is 
of  little  service  to  states,  yet  eloquence  without 
wisdom  is  frequently  a  positive  injury,  and  is  of 
service  never.”  If,  then,  the  men  who  teach  the 
principles  of  eloquence  have  been  forced  by 
truth  t/o  confess  this  in  the  very  books  which 
treat  of  eloquence,  though  they  were  ignorant 
of  the  true,  that  is.  the  heavenly  wisdom  which 
comes  down  from  the  Father  of  Lights,  how 
much  more  ought  we  to  feel  it  who  are  the  sons 
and  the  ministers  of  this  higher  wisdom!  Now  a 
man  speaks  with  more  or  less  wisdom  just  as  he 
has  made  more  or  less  progress  in  the  knowledge 
of  Scripture;  I  do  not  mean  by  reading  them 
much  and  committing  them  to  memory,  but  by 
understanding  them  aright  and  carefully  search¬ 
ing  into  their  meaning.  For  there  are  those  who 


read  and  yet  neglect  them ;  they  read  to  remem¬ 
ber  the  words,  but  are  careless  about  knowing 
the  meaning.  It  is  plain  we  must  set  far  above 
these  the  men  who  are  not  so  retentive  of  the 
words,  but  see  with  the  eyes  of  the  heart  into  the 
heart  of  Scripture.  Better  than  either  of  these, 
however,  is  the  man  who,  when  he  wishes,  can 
repeat  the  words,  and  at  the  same  time  correct¬ 
ly  apprehends  their  meaning. 

8.  Now  it  is  especially  necessary  for  the  man 
who  is  bound  to  speak  wisely,  even  though  he 
cannot  speak  eloquently,  to  retain  in  memory 
the  words  of  Scripture.  For  the  more  he  discerns 
the  poverty  of  his  own  speech,  the  more  he 
ought  to  draw  on  the  riches  of  Scripture,  so  that 
what  he  says  in  his  own  words  he  may  prove  by 
the  words  of  Scripture;  and  he  himself,  though 
small  and  weak  in  his  own  words,  may  gain 
strength  and  power  from  the  confirming  testi¬ 
mony  of  great  men.  For  his  proof  gives  pleasure 
when  he  cannot  please  by  his  mode  of  speech. 
But  if  a  man  desire  to  speak  not  only  with  wis¬ 
dom,  but  with  eloquence  also  (and  assuredly  he 
will  prove  of  greater  service  if  he  can  do  both), 
I  would  rather  send  him  to  read,  and  listen  to, 
and  exercise  himself  in  imitating,  eloquent  men, 
than  advise  him  to  spend  time  with  the  teach¬ 
ers  of  rhetoric ;  especially  if  the  men  he  reads 
and  listens  to  are  justly  praised  as  having  spok¬ 
en,  or  as  being  accustomed  to  speak,  not  only 
with  eloquence,  but  with  wisdom  also.  For  elo¬ 
quent  speakers  are  heard  with  pleasure;  wise 
speakers  with  profit.  And,  therefore.  Scripture 
does  not  say  that  the  multitude  of  the  eloquent, 
but  “the  multitude  of  the  wise  is  the  welfare  of 
the  world.”  1  And  as  we  must  often  swallow 
wholesome  bitters,  so  we  must  always  avoid  un¬ 
wholesome  sweets.  But  what  is  better  than 
wholesome  sweetness  or  sweet  wholesomeness? 
For  the  sweeter  we  try  to  make  such  things,  the 
easier  it  is  to  make  their  wholesomeness  service¬ 
able.  And  so  there  are  writers  of  the  Church  who 
have  expounded  the  Holy  Scriptures,  not  only 
with  wisdom,  but  with  eloquence  as  well;  and 
there  is  not  more  time  for  the  reading  of  these 
than  is  sufficient  for  those  who  are  studious  and 
at  leisure  to  exhaust  them. 

Chap.  6.  The  sacred  writers  unite  eloquence 

with  wisdom 

9.  Here,  perhaps,  some  one  inquires  whether 
the  authors  whose  divinely  inspired  writings 
constitute  the  canon,  which  carries  with  it  a 
most  wholesome  authority,  are  to  be  considered 
wise  only,  or  eloquent  as  well.  A  question  which 

^isd.  6.  24. 


678  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


to  me,  and  to  those  who  think  with  me.  is  very 
easily  settled.  For  where  I  understand  these 
writers,  it  seems  to  me  not  only  that  nothing 
can  be  wiser,  but  also  that  nothing  can  be  more 
eloquent.  And  I  venture  to  affirm  that  all  who 
truly  understand  what  these  writers  say,  per¬ 
ceive  at  the  same  time  that  it  could  not  have 
been  properly  said  in  any  other  way.  For  as 
there  is  a  kind  of  eloquence  that  is  more  becom¬ 
ing  in  youth,  and  a  kind  that  is  more  becoming 
in  old  age,  and  nothing  can  be  called  eloquence 
if  it  be  not  suitable  to  the  person  of  the  speaker, 
so  there  is  a  kind  of  eloquence  that  is  becoming 
in  men  who  justly  claim  the  highest  authority, 
and  who  are  evidently  inspired  of  God.  With 
this  eloquence  they  spoke ;  no  other  would  have 
been  suitable  for  them;  and  this  itself  would  be 
unsuitable  in  any  other,  for  it  is  in  keeping  with 
their  character,  while  it  mounts  as  far  above 
that  of  others  (not  from  empty  inflation,  but 
from  solid  merit)  as  it  seems  to  fall  below  them. 
Where,  however,  I  do  not  understand  these 
writers,  though  their  eloquence  is  then  less  ap¬ 
parent,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  it  is  of  ^he 
same  kind  as  that  I  do  understand.  The  very  ob¬ 
scurity.  too,  of  these  divine  and  wholesome 
words  was  a  necessary  element  in  eloquence  of 
a  kind  that  was  designed  to  profit  our  under¬ 
standings,  not  only  by  the  discovery  of  truth, 
but  also  by  the  exercise  of  their  powers. 

io.  I  could,  however,  if  I  had  time,  show 
those  men  who  cry  up  their  own  form  of  lan¬ 
guage  as  superior  to  that  of  our  authors  (not 
because  of  its  majesty,  but  because  of  its  in¬ 
flation),  that  all  those  powers  and  beauties  of 
eloquence  which  they  make  their  boast,  are  to 
be  found  in  the  sacred  writings  which  God  in 
His  goodness  has  provided  to  mould  our  char¬ 
acters  and  to  guide  us  from  this  world  of  wick¬ 
edness  to  the  blessed  world  above.  But  it  is  not 
the  qualities  which  these  writers  have  in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  heathen  orators  and  poets  that 
give  me  such  unspeakable  delight  in  their  elo¬ 
quence;  I  am  more  struck  with  admiration  at 
the  way  in  which,  by  an  eloquence  peculiarly 
their  own,  they  so  use  this  eloquence  of  ours 
that  it  is  not  conspicuous  either  by  its  presence 
or  its  absence:  for  it  did  not  become  them  ei¬ 
ther  to  condemn  it  or  to  make  an  ostentatious 
display  of  it;  and  if  they  had  shunned  it,  they 
would  have  done  the  former;  if  they  had  made 
it  prominent,  they  might  have  appeared  to  be 
doing  the  latter.  And  in  those  passages  where 
the  learned  do  note  its  presence,  the  matters 
spoken  of  are  such  that  the  wTords  in  wffiich 
they  are  put  seem  not  so  much  to  be  sought  out 


by  the  speaker  as  spontaneously  to  suggest 
themselves;  as  if  wisdom  were  walking  out  of 
its  house,  that  is,  the  breast  of  the  wise  man, 
and  eloquence,  like  an  inseparable  attendant, 
followed  it  without  being  called  for. 

Chap.  7.  Examples  of  true  eloquence  drawn 

from  the  epistles  of  Paul  and  the  prophecies 

of  Amos 

11.  For  wffio  would  not  see  what  the  apostle 
meant  to  say,  and  how7  wisely  he  has  said  it,  in 
the  following  passage:  “We  glory  in  tribula¬ 
tions  also :  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  pa¬ 
tience;  and  patience,  experience;  and  experi¬ 
ence,  hope:  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed;  be¬ 
cause  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto 
us”?  1  Now  were  any  man  unlearnedly  learned 
(if  I  may  use  the  expression)  to  contend  that 
the  apostle  had  here  followed  the  rules  of  rhet¬ 
oric,  wrould  not  every  Christian,  learned  or  un¬ 
learned,  laugh  at  him?  And  yet  here  w7e  find  the 
figure  which  is  called  in  Greek  /cXquaf  (climax), 
and  by  some  in  Latin  gradatio ,  for  they  do  not 
care  to  call  it  scala  (a  ladder),  w7hen  the  words 
and  ideas  have  a  connection  of  dependency  the 
one  upon  the  other,  as  w7e  see  here  that  patience 
arises  out  of  tribulation,  experience  out  of  pa¬ 
tience,  and  hope  out  of  experience.  Another  or¬ 
nament,  too,  is  found  here;  for  after  certain 
statements  finished  in  a  single  tone  of  voice, 
which  w7e  call  clauses  and  sections  ( membra  et 
ccBsa ),  but  the  Greeks  /cwXa  and  /cojujuara, 
there  follows  a  rounded  sentence  ( ambitus  sive 
circuitus )  wffiich  the  Greeks  call  irepiodos,  the 
clauses  of  wffiich  are  suspended  on  the  voice  of 
the  speaker  till  the  whole  is  completed  by  the 
last  clause.  For  of  the  statements  wffiich  precede 
the  period,  this  is  the  first  clause,  “knowing  that 
tribulation  worketh  patience”;  the  second,  “and 
patience,  experience”;  the  third,  “and  experi¬ 
ence,  hope.”  Then  the  period  which  is  subjoined 
is  completed  in  three  clauses,  of  wffiich  the  first 
is,  “and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed”;  the  second, 
“because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts”;  the  third,  “by  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
is  given  unto  us.”  But  these  and  other  matters 
of  the  same  kind  are  taught  in  the  art  of  elocu¬ 
tion.  As  then  I  do  not  affirm  that  the  apostle 
was  guided  by  the  rules  of  eloquence,  so  I  do 
not  deny  that  his  wisdom  naturally  produced, 
and  wras  accompanied  by,  eloquence. 

12.  In  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
again,  he  refutes  certain  false  apostles  who  had 
gone  out  from  the  Jew7s,  and  had  been  trying  to 

^om.  5.  3-5. 


ON  CHRISTIAN 

injure  his  character;  and  being  compelled  to 
speak  of  himself,  though  he  ascribes  this  as  fol¬ 
ly  to  himself,  how  wisely  and  how  eloquently 
he  speaks!  But  wisdom  is  his  guide,  eloquence 
his  attendant;  he  follows  the  first,  the  second 
follows  him,  and  yet  he  does  not  spurn  it  when 
it  comes  after  him.  “I  say  again,”  he  says,  “Let 
no  man  think  me  a  fool:  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a 
fool  receive  me,  that  I  may  boast  myself  a  lit¬ 
tle.  That  which  I  speak.  I  speak  it  not  after  the 
Lord,  but  as  it  were  foolishly,  in  this  confidence 
of  boasting.  Seeing  that  many  glory  after  the 
flesh,  I  will  glory  also.  For  ye  suffer  fools  gladly, 
seeing  ye  yourselves  are  wise.  For  ye  suffer,  if  a 
man  bring  you  into  bondage,  if  a  man  devour 
you,  if  a  man  take  of  you,  if  a  man  exalt  him¬ 
self,  if  a  man  smite  you  on  the  face.  I  speak  as 
concerning  reproach,  as  though  we  had  been 
weak.  Howbeit,  whereinsoever  any  is  bold  (I 
speak  foolishly),  I  am  bold  also.  Are  they  He¬ 
brews?  so  am  I.  Are  they  Israelites?  so  am  I. 
Are  they  the  seed  of  Abraham?  so  am  I.  Are 
they  ministers  of  Christ?  (I  speak  as  a  fool), 
I  am  more :  in  labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes 
above  measure,  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in 
deaths  oft.  Of  the  Jews  five  times  received  I 
forty  stripes  save  one,  thrice  was  I  beaten  with 
rods,  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered  ship¬ 
wreck,  a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the 
deep;  in  journeyings  often,  in  perils  of  waters, 
in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by  mine  own  coun¬ 
trymen,  in  perils  by  the  heathen,  in  perils  in  the 
city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the 
sea,  in  perils  among  false  brethren;  in  weariness 
and  painfulness,  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger 
and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  naked¬ 
ness.  Besides  those  things  which  are  without, 
that  which  cometh  upon  me  daily,  the  care  of  all 
the  churches.  Who  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak? 
who  is  offended,  and  I  burn  not?  If  I  must 
needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of  the  things  which  con¬ 
cern  my  infirmities.”  1  The  thoughtful  and  at¬ 
tentive  perceive  how  much  wisdom  there  is  in 
these  words.  And  even  a  man  sound  asleep  must 
notice  what  a  stream  of  eloquence  flows  through 
them. 

13.  Further  still,  the  educated  man  observes 
that  those  sections  which  the  Greeks  call  ko/jl- 
fiara ,  and  the  clauses  and  periods  of  which  I 
spoke  a  short  time  ago,  being  intermingled  in 
the  most  beautiful  variety,  make  up  the  whole 
form  and  features  (so  to  speak)  of  that  diction 
by  which  even  the  unlearned  are  delighted  and 
affected.  For,  from  the  place  where  I  com¬ 
menced  to  quote,  the  passage  consists  of  peri- 

1II  Cor.  11. 16-30. 


DOCTRINE  IV.  7  679 

ods:  the  first  the  smallest  possible,  consisting  of 
two  members;  for  a  period  cannot  have  less 
than  two  members,  though  it  may  have  more : 
“I  say  again,  let  no  man  think  me  a  fool.”  The 
next  has  three  members :  “if  otherwise,  yet  as  a 
fool  receive  me,  that  I  may  boast  myself  a  lit¬ 
tle.”  The  third  has  four  members:  “That  which 
I  speak,  I  speak  it  not  after  the  Lord,  but  as  it 
were  foolishly,  in  this  confidence  of  boasting.” 
The  fourth  has  two:  “Seeing  that  many  glory 
after  the  flesh,  I  will  glory  also.”  And  the  fifth 
has  two:  “For  ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye 
yourselves  are  wise.”  The  sixth  again  has  two 
members:  “for  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  bring  you  into 
bondage.”  Then  follow  three  sections  ( ccBsa ) : 
“if  a  man  devour  you,  if  a  man  take  of  you,  if  a 
man  exalt  himself.”  Next  three  clauses  ( mem¬ 
bra ) :  “if  a  man  smite  you  on  the  face.  I  speak 
as  concerning  reproach,  as  though  we  had  been 
weak.”  Then  is  subjoined  a  period  of  three 
members :  “Howbeit,  whereinsoever  any  is  bold 
(I  speak  foolishly),  I  am  bold  also.”  After  this, 
certain  separate  sections  being  put  in  the  inter¬ 
rogatory  form,  separate  sections  are  also  given 
as  answers,  three  to  three:  “Are  they  Hebrews? 
so  am  I.  Are  they  Israelites?  so  am  I.  Are  they 
the  seed  of  Abraham?  so  am  I.”  But  a  fourth 
section  being  put  likewise  in  the  interrogatory 
form,  the  answer  is  given  not  in  another  section 
(ccBsnm)  but  in  a  clause  (membrum) :  “Are 
they  the  ministers  of  Christ?  (I  speak  as  a 
fool.)  I  am  more.”  Then  the  next  four  sections 
are  given  continuously,  the  interrogatory  form 
being  most  elegantly  suppressed:  “in  labours 
more  abundant,  in  stripes  above  measure,  in 
prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft.”  Next  is 
interposed  a  short  period;  for,  by  a  suspension 
of  the  voice,  “of  the  Jews  five  times”  is  to  be 
marked  off  as  constituting  one  member,  to 
which  is  joined  the  second,  “received  I  forty 
stripes  save  one.”  Then  he  returns  to  sections, 
and  three  are  set  down:  “Thrice  was  I  beaten 
with  rods,  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered 
shipwreck.”  Next  comes  a  clause:  “a  night  and 
a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep.”  Next  fourteen 
sections  burst  forth  with  a  vehemence  which  is 
most  appropriate:  “In  journeyings  often,  in 
perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by 
mine  own  countrymen,  in  perils  by  the  heathen, 
in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness, 
in  perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  among  false  breth¬ 
ren,  in  weariness  and  painfulness,  in  watchings 
often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in 
cold  and  nakedness.”  After  this  comes  in  a  peri¬ 
od  of  three  members:  “Besides  those  things 
which  are  without,  that  which  cometh  upon  me 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


680 

daily,  the  care  of  all  the  churches.”  And  to  this 
he  adds  two  clauses  in  a  tone  of  inquiry :  “Who 
is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak?  who  is  offended, 
and  I  burn  not?”  In  fine,  this  whole  passage,  as 
if  panting  for  breath,  winds  up  with  a  period  of 
two  members:  “If  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will 
glory  of  the  things  which  concern  mine  infirmi¬ 
ties.”  And  I  cannot  sufficiently  express  how 
beautiful  and  delightful  it  is  when  after  this  out¬ 
burst  he  rests  himself,  and  gives  the  hearer  rest, 
by  interposing  a  slight  narrative.  For  he  goes  on 
to  say:  “The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  is  blessed  for  evermore,  knoweth 
that  I  lie  not.”  And  then  he  tells,  very  briefly 
the  danger  he  had  been  in,  and  the  way  he  es¬ 
caped  it. 

14.  It  would  be  tedious  to  pursue  the  matter 
further,  or  to  point  out  the  same  facts  in  regard 
to  other  passages  of  Holy  Scripture.  Suppose  I 
had  taken  the  further  trouble,  at  least  in  regard 
to  the  passages  I  have  quoted  from  the  apostle’s 
writings,  to  point  out  figures  of  speech  which 
are  taught  in  the  art  of  rhetoric?  Is  it  not  more 
likely  that  serious  men  would  think  I  had  gone 
too  far,  than  that  any  of  the  studious  would 
think  I  had  done  enough?  All  these  things  when 
taught  by  masters  are  reckoned  of  great  value; 
great  prices  are  paid  for  them,  and  the  vendors 
puff  them  magniloquently.  And  I  fear  lest  I  too 
should  smack  of  that  puffery  while  thus  descant¬ 
ing  on  matters  of  this  kind.  It  was  necessary, 
however,  to  reply  to  the  ill-taught  men  who 
think  our  authors  contemptible;  not  because 
they  do  not  possess,  but  because  they  do  not  dis¬ 
play,  the  eloquence  which  these  men  value  so 
highly. 

15.  But  perhaps  some  one  is  thinking  that  I 
have  selected  the  Apostle  Paul  because  he  is 
our  great  orator.  For  when  he  says,  “Though  I 
be  rude  in  speech,  yet  not  in  knowledge,”1  he 
seems  to  speak  as  if  granting  so  much  to  his  de¬ 
tractors,  not  as  confessing  that  he  recognized  its 
truth.  If  he  had  said,  “I  am  indeed  rude  in 
speech,  but  not  in  knowledge,”  we  could  not  in 
any  way  have  put  another  meaning  upon  it.  He 
did  not  hesitate  plainly  to  assert  his  knowledge, 
because  without  it  he  could  not  have  been  the 
teacher  of  the  Gentiles.  And  certainly  if  we 
bring  forward  anything  of  his  as  a  model  of  elo¬ 
quence,  we  take  it  from  those  epistles  which 
even  his  very  detractors,  who  thought  his  bodily 
presence  weak  and  his  speech  contemptible,  con¬ 
fessed  to  be  weighty  and  powerful.2 

I  see,  then,  that  I  must  say  something  about 
the  eloquence  of  the  prophets  also,  where  many 
!II  Cor.  11.  6.  2II  Cor.  10.  10. 


things  are  concealed  under  a  metaphorical  style, 
which  the  more  completely  they  seem  buried 
under  figures  of  speech  give  the  greater  pleasure 
when  brought  to  light.  In  this  place,  however,  it 
is  my  duty  to  select  a  passage  of  such  a  kind 
that  I  shall  not  be  compelled  to  explain  the  mat¬ 
ter,  but  only  to  commend  the  style.  And  I  shall 
do  so,  quoting  principally  from  the  book  of  that 
prophet  who  says  that  he  was  a  shepherd  or 
herdsman,  and  was  called  by  God  from  that  oc¬ 
cupation,  and  sent  to  prophesy  to  the  people  of 
God.3  I  shall  not,  however,  follow  the  Septua- 
gint  translators,  who,  being  themselves  under 
the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  their  transla¬ 
tion,  seem  to  have  altered  some  passages  with 
the  view  of  directing  the  reader’s  attention 
more  particularly  to  the  investigation  of  the 
spiritual  sense  (and  hence  some  passages  are 
more  obscure,  because  more  figurative,  in  their 
translation) ;  but  I  shall  follow  the  translation 
made  from  the  Hebrew  into  Latin  by  the  pres¬ 
byter  Jerome,  a  man  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  both  tongues. 

16.  When,  then,  this  rustic,  or  quondam  rus¬ 
tic  prophet,  was  denouncing  the  godless,  the 
proud,  the  luxurious,  and  therefore  the  most 
neglectful  of  brotherly  love,  he  called  aloud, 
saying:  “Woe  to  you  who  are  at  ease  in  Zion, 
and  trust  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria,  who  are 
heads  and  chiefs  of  the  people,  entering  with 
pomp  into  the  house  of  Israel !  Pass  ye  unto  Cal- 
neh,  and  see;  and  from  thence  go  ye  to  Hamath 
the  great ;  then  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  Philis¬ 
tines,  and  to  all  the  best  kingdoms  of  these:  is 
their  border  greater  than  your  border?  Ye  that 
are  set  apart  for  the  day  of  evil,  and  that  come 
near  to  the  seat  of  oppression;  that  lie  upon 
beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch  yourselves  upon 
couches;  that  eat  the  lamb  of  the  flock,  and  the 
calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the  herd;  that  chant 
to  the  sound  of  the  viol.  They  thought  that  they 
had  instruments  of  music  like  David;  drinking 
wine  in  bowls,  and  anointing  themselves  with 
the  costliest  ointment :  and  they  were  not 
grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph.”  4  Suppose 
those  men  who,  assuming  to  be  themselves 
learned  and  eloquent,  despise  our  prophets  as 
untaught  and  unskilful  of  speech,  had  been 
obliged  to  deliver  a  message  like  this,  and  to 
men  such  as  these,  would  they  have  chosen  to 
express  themselves  in  any  respect  differently — 
those  of  them,  at  least,  who  would  have  shrunk 
from  raving  like  madmen? 

17.  For  what  is  there  that  sober  ears  could 
wish  changed  in  this  speech?  In  the  first  place, 

3Amos,  1.  1;  7.  14.  4 Amos,  6.  1-6. 


ON  CHRISTIAN 

the  invective  itself;  with  what  vehemence  it 
throws  itself  upon  the  drowsy  senses  to  startle 
them  into  wakefulness:  “Woe  to  you  who  are 
at  ease  in  Zion,  and  trust  in  the  mountains  of 
Samaria,  who  are  heads  and  chiefs  of  the  people, 
entering  with  pomp  into  the  house  of  Israel!” 
Next,  that  he  may  use  the  favours  of  God,  Who 
has  bestowed  upon  them  ample  territory,  to 
show  their  ingratitude  in  trusting  to  the  moun¬ 
tain  of  Samaria,  where  idols  were  worshipped: 
“Pass  ye  unto  Calneh,”  he  says,  “and  see;  and 
from  thence  go  ye  to  Hamath  the  great;  then 
go  down  to  Gath  of  the  Philistines,  and  to  all 
the  best  kingdoms  of  these:  is  their  border 
greater  than  your  border?”  At  the  same  time 
also  that  these  things  are  spoken  of,  the  style 
is  adorned  with  names  of  places  as  with  lamps, 
such  as  “Zion,”  “Samaria,”  “Calneh,”  “Hamath 
the  great,”  and  “Gath  of  the  Philistines.”  Then 
the  words  joined  to  these  places  are  most  ap¬ 
propriately  varied:  “ye  are  at  ease,”  “ye  trust,” 
“pass  on,”  “go,”  “descend.” 

1 8.  And  then  the  future  captivity  under  an 
oppressive  king  is  announced  as  approaching, 
when  it  is  added:  “Ye  that  are  set  apart  for  the 
day  of  evil,  and  come  near  to  the  seat  of  oppres¬ 
sion.”  Then  are  subjoined  the  evils  of  luxury: 
“ye  that  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch 
yourselves  upon  couches-;  that  eat  the  lamb 
from  the  flock,  and  the  calves  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  herd.”  These  six  clauses  form  three  peri¬ 
ods  of  two  members  each.  For  he  does  not  say: 
“Ye  who  are  set  apart  for  the  day  of  evil,  who 
come  near  to  the  seat  of  oppression,  who  sleep 
upon  beds  of  ivory,  who  stretch  yourselves  upon 
couches,  who  eat  the  lamb  from  the  flock,  and 
calves  out  of  the  herd.”  If  he  had  so  expressed 
it,  this  would  have  had  its  beauty:  six  separate 
clauses  running  on,  the  same  pronoun  being  re¬ 
peated  each  time,  and  each  clause  finished  by  a 
single  effort  of  the  speaker’s  voice.  But  it  is 
more  beautiful  as  it  is,  the  clauses  being  joined 
in  pairs  under  the  same  pronoun,  and  forming 
three  sentences,  one  referring  to  the  prophecy 
of  the 'captivity:  “Ye  that  are  set  apart  for  the 
day  of  evil,  and  come  near  the  seat  of  oppres¬ 
sion”;  the  second  to  lasciviousness:  “ye  that  lie 
upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch  yourselves  upon 
couches”;  the  third  to  gluttony:  “who  eat  the 
lamb  from  the  flock,  and  the  calves  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  herd.”  So  that  it  is  at  the  discretion 
of  the  speaker  whether  he  finish  each  clause  sep¬ 
arately  and  make  six  altogether,  or  whether  he 
suspend  his  voice  at  the  first,  the  third,  and  the 
fifth,  and  by  joining  the  second  to  the  first,  the 
fourth  to  the  third,  and  the  sixth  to  the  fifth, 


DOCTRINE  IV.  7  681 

make  three  most  elegant  periods  of  two  mem¬ 
bers  each:  one  describing  the  imminent  catas¬ 
trophe;  another,  the  lascivious  couch;  and  the 
third,  the  luxurious  table. 

19.  Next  he  reproaches  them  with  their  lux¬ 
ury  in  seeking  pleasure  for  the  sense  of  hearing. 
And  here,  when  he  had  said,  “Ye  who  chant  to 
the  sound  of  the  viol,”  seeing  that  wise  men 
may  practise  music  wisely,  he,  with  wonderful 
skill  of  speech,  checks  the  flow  of  his  invective, 
and  not  now  speaking  to,  but  of,  these  men,  and 
to  show  us  that  we  must  distinguish  the  music 
of  the  wise  from  the  music  of  the  voluptuary, 
he  does  not  say,  “Ye  who  chant  to  the  sound  of 
the  viol,  and  think  that  ye  have  instruments  of 
music  like  David”;  but  he  first  addresses  to 
themselves  what  it  is  right  the  voluptuaries 
should  hear,  “Ye  who  chant  to  the  sound  of  the 
viol”;  and  then,  turning  to  others,  he  intimates 
that  these  men  have  not  even  skill  in  their  art : 
“they  thought  that  they  had  instruments  of  mu¬ 
sic  like  David;  drinking  wine  in  bowls,  and 
anointing  themselves  with  the  costliest  oint¬ 
ment.”  These  three  clauses  are  best  pronounced 
when  the  voice  is  suspended  on  the  first  two 
members  of  the  period,  and  comes  to  a  pause  on 
the  third. 

20.  But  now  as  to  the  sentence  which  follows 
all  these:  “and  they  were  not  grieved  for  the 
affliction  of  Joseph.”  Whether  this  be  pro¬ 
nounced  continuously  as  one  clause,  or  whether 
with  more  elegance  we  hold  the  words,  “and 
they  were  not  grieved,”  suspended  on  the  voice, 
and  then  add,  “for  the  affliction  of  Joseph,”  so 
as  to  make  a  period  of  two  members;  in  any 
case,  it  is  a  touch  of  marvellous  beauty  not  to 
say,  “and  they  were  not  grieved  for  the  afflic¬ 
tion  of  their  brother”;  but  to  put  Joseph  for 
brother,  so  as  to  indicate  brothers  in  general  by 
the  proper  name  of  him  who  stands  out  illustri¬ 
ous  from  among  his  brethren,  both  in  regard  to 
the  injuries  he  suffered  and  the  good  return  he 
made.  And,  indeed,  I  do  not  know  whether  this 
figure  of  speech,  by  which  Joseph  is  put  for 
brothers  in  general,  is  one  of  those  laid  down  in 
that  art  which  I  learnt  and  used  to  teach.  But 
how  beautiful  it  is,  and  how  it  comes  home  to 
the  intelligent  reader,  it  is  useless  to  tell  any  one 
who  does  not  himself  feel  it. 

21.  And  a  number  of  other  points  bearing  on 
the  laws  of  eloquence  could  be  found  in  this  pas¬ 
sage  which  I  have  chosen  as  an  example.  But 
an  intelligent  reader  will  not  be  so  much  in¬ 
structed  by  carefully  analysing  it  as  kindled  by 
reciting  it  with  spirit.  Nor  was  it  composed  by 
man’s  art  and  care,  but  it  flowed  forth  in  wis- 


682 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


dom  and  eloquence  from  the  Divine  mind;  wis¬ 
dom  not  aiming  at  eloquence,  yet  eloquence  not 
shrinking  from  wisdom.  For  if,  as  certain  very 
eloquent  and  acute  men  have  perceived  and 
said,  the  rules  which  are  laid  down  in  the  art  of 
oratory  could  not  have  been  observed,  and  not¬ 
ed,  and  reduced  to  system,  if  they  had  not  first 
had  their  birth  in  the  genius  of  orators,  is  it 
wonderful  that  they  should  be  found  in  the 
messengers  of  Him  Who  is  the  author  of  all 
genius?  Therefore  let  us  acknowledge  that  the 
canonical  writers  are  not  only  wise  but  eloquent 
also,  with  an  eloquence  suited  to  a  character 
and  position  like  theirs. 

Chap.  8.  The  obscurity  of  the  sacred  writers y 

though  compatible  with  eloquence,  not  to  be 

imitated  by  Christian  teachers 

22.  But  although  I  take  some  examples  of  elo¬ 
quence  from  those  writings  of  theirs  which 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding,  we  are 
not  by  any  means  to  suppose  that  it  is  our  duty 
to  imitate  them  in  those  passages  where,  with  a 
view  to  exercise  and  train  the  minds  of  their 
readers,  and  to  break  in  upon  the  satiety  and 
stimulate  the  zeal  of  those  who  are  willing  to 
learn,  and  with  a  view  also  to  throw  a  veil  over 
the  minds  of  the  godless  either  that  they  may  be 
converted  to  piety  or  shut  out  from  a  knowledge 
of  the  mysteries,  from  one  or  other  of  these  rea¬ 
sons  they  have  expressed  themselves  with  a  use¬ 
ful  and  wholesome  obscurity.  They  have  in¬ 
deed  expressed  themselves  in  such  a  way  that 
those  who  in  after  ages  understood  and  ex¬ 
plained  them  aright  have  in  the  Church  of  God 
obtained  an  esteem,  not  indeed  equal  to  that 
with  which  they  are  themselves  regarded,  but 
coming  next  to  it.  The  expositors  of  these  writ¬ 
ers,  then,  ought  not  to  express  themselves  in  the 
same  way,  as  if  putting  forward  their  exposi¬ 
tions  as  of  the  same  authority ;  but  they  ought 
in  all  their  deliverances  to  make  it  their  first 
and  chief  aim  to  be  understood,  using  as  far  as 
possible  such  clearness  of  speech  that  either  he 
will  be  very  dull  who  does  not  understand  them, 
or  that  if  what  they  say  should  not  be  very  eas¬ 
ily  or  quickly  understood,  the  reason  will  lie  not 
in  their  manner  of  expression,  but  in  the  diffi¬ 
culty  and  subtlety  of  the  matter  they  are  trying 
to  explain. 

Chap.  9.  How ,  and  with  whom,  difficult  pas¬ 
sages  are  to  be  discussed 

23.  For  there  are  some  passages  which  are 
not  understood  in  their  proper  force,  or  are 
understood  with  great  difficulty,  at  whatever 


length,  however  clearly,  or  with  whatever  elo¬ 
quence  the  speaker  may  expound  them;  and 
these  should  never  be  brought  before  the  peo¬ 
ple  at  all,  or  only  on  rare  occasions  when  there 
is  some  urgent  reason.  In  books,  however,  which 
are  written  in  such  a  style  that,  if  understood, 
they,  so  to  speak,  draw  their  own  readers,  and 
if  not  understood,  give  no  trouble  to  those  who 
do  not  care  to  read  them,  and  in  private  con¬ 
versations  we  must  not  shrink  from  the  duty  of 
bringing  the  truth  which  we  ourselves  have 
reached  within  the  comprehension  of  others, 
however  difficult  it  may  be  to  understand  it  and 
whatever  labour  in  the  way  of  argument  it  may 
cost  us.  Only  two  conditions  are  to  be  insisted 
upon,  that  our  hearer  or  companion  should  have 
an  earnest  desire  to  learn  the  truth,  and  should 
have  capacity  of  mind  to  receive  it  in  whatever 
form  it  may  be  communicated,  the  teacher  not 
being  so  anxious  about  the  eloquence  as  about 
the  clearness  of  his  teaching. 

Chap.  10.  The  necessity  for  perspicuity  of  style 

24.  Now  a  strong  desire  for  clearness  some¬ 
times  leads  to  neglect  of  the  more  polished 
forms  of  speech,  and  indifference  about  what 
sounds  wrell,  compared  with  what  clearly  ex¬ 
presses  and  conveys  the  meaning  intended. 
Whence  a  certain  author,  when  dealing  with 
speech  of  this  kind,  says  that  there  is  in  it  “a 
kind  of  careful  negligence.”  Yet  while  taking 
away  ornament,  it  does  not  bring  in  vulgarity  of 
speech ;  though  good  teachers  have,  or  ought  to 
have,  so  great  an  anxiety  about  teaching  that 
they  will  employ  a  word  which  cannot  be  made 
pure  Latin  without  becoming  obscure  or  am¬ 
biguous,  but  which  when  used  according  to  the 
vulgar  idiom  is  neither  ambiguous  nor  obscure 
not  in  the  way  the  learned,  but  rather  in  the  way 
the  unlearned  employ  it.  For  if  our  translators 
did  not  shrink  from  saying,  uNon  congregabo 
conventicida  eorum  de  sanguinibus,)n  because 
they  felt  that  it  was  important  for  the  sense  to 
put  a  word  here  in  the  plural  which  in  Latin  is 
only  used  in  the  singular ;  why  should  a  teacher 
of  godliness  who  is  addressing  an  unlearned  au¬ 
dience  shrink  from  using  ossum  instead  of  os, 
if  he  fear  that  the  latter  might  be  taken  not  as 
the  singular  of  ossa,  but  as  the  singular  of  ora, 
seeing  that  African  ears  have  no  quick  percep¬ 
tion  of  the  shortness  or  length  of  vowels?  And 
what  advantage  is  there  in  purity  of  speech 
which  does  not  lead  to  understanding  in  the 
hearer,  seeing  that  there  is  no  use  at  all  in  speak- 

1“I  shall  not  assemble  their  assemblies  of  blood,”  Ps.  16. 
4.  (Vulgate) 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  8-12  683 


ing,  if  they  do  not  understand  us  for  whose  sake 
we  speak?  He,  therefore,  who  teaches  will  avoid 
all  words  that  do  not  teach;  and  if  instead  of 
them  he  can  find  words  which  are  at  once  pure 
and  intelligible,  he  will  take  these  by  preference ; 
if,  however,  he  cannot,  either  because  there  are 
no  such  words,  or  because  they  do  not  at  the 
time  occur  to  him,  he  will  use  words  that  are 
not  quite  pure,  if  only  the  substance  of  his 
thought  be  conveyed  and  apprehended  in  its 
integrity. 

25.  And  this  must  be  insisted  on  as  necessary 
to  our  being  understood,  not  only  in  conversa¬ 
tions,  whether  with  one  person  or  with  several, 
but  much  more  in  the  case  of  a  speech  delivered 
in  public :  for  in  conversation  any  one  has  the 
power  of  asking  a  question ;  but  when  all  are  si¬ 
lent  that  one  may  be  heard,  and  all  faces  are 
turned  attentively  upon  him,  it  is  neither  cus¬ 
tomary  nor  decorous  for  a  person  to  ask  a  ques¬ 
tion  about  what  he  does  not  understand ;  and  on 
this  account  the  speaker  ought  to  be  especially 
careful  to  give  assistance  to  those  who  cannot 
ask  it.  Now  a  crowd  anxious  for  instruction 
generally  shows  by  its  movements  if  it  under¬ 
stands  what  is  said;  and  until  some  indication 
of  this  sort  be  given,  the  subject  discussed  ought 
to  be  turned  over  and  over,  and  put  in  every 
shape  and  form  and  variety  of  expression,  a 
thing  which  cannot  be  done  by  men  who  are  re¬ 
peating  words  prepared  beforehand  and  com¬ 
mitted  to  memory.  As  soon,  however,  as  the 
speaker  has  ascertained  that  what  he  says  is  un¬ 
derstood,  he  ought  either  to  bring  his  address  to 
a  close,  or  pass  on  to  another  point.  For  if  a  man 
gives  pleasure  when  he  throws  light  upon  points 
on  which  people  wish  for  instruction,  he  be¬ 
comes  wearisome  when  he  dwells  at  length  up¬ 
on  things  that  are  already  well  known,  especial¬ 
ly  when  men’s  expectation  was  fixed  on  having 
the  difficulties  of  the  passage  removed.  For  even 
things  that  are  very  well  known  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  the  pleasure  they  give,  if  the  attention 
be  directed  not  to  the  things  themselves,  but  to 
the  way'in  which  they  are  told.  Nay,  even  when 
the  style  itself  is  already  well  known,  if  it  be 
pleasing  to  the  hearers,  it  is  almost  a  matter  of 
indifference  whether  he  who  speaks  be  a  speak¬ 
er  or  a  reader.  For  things  that  are  gracefully 
written  are  often  not  only  read  with  delight  by 
those  who  are  making  their  first  acquaintance 
with  them,  but  re-read  with  delight  by  those 
who  have  already  made  acquaintance  with  them, 
and  have  not  yet  forgotten  them;  nay,  both 
these  classes  will  derive  pleasure  even  from 
hearing  another  man  repeat  them.  And  if  a  man 


has  forgotten  anything,  when  he  is  reminded  of 
it  he  is  taught.  But  I  am  not  now  treating  of  the 
mode  of  giving  pleasure.  I  am  speaking  of  the 
mode  in  which  men  who  desire  to  learn  ought  to 
be  taught.  And  the  best  mode  is  that  which  se¬ 
cures  that  he  who  hears  shall  hear  the  truth,  and 
that  what  he  hears  he  shall  understand.  And 
when  this  point  has  been  reached,  no  further 
labour  need  be  spent  on  the  truth  itself,  as  if  it 
required  further  explanation ;  but  perhaps  some 
trouble  may  be  taken  to  enforce  it  so  as  to  bring 
it  home  to  the  heart.  If  it  appear  right  to  do 
this,  it  ought  to  be  done  so  moderately  as  not  to 
lead  to  weariness  and  impatience. 

Chap.  ii.  The  Christian  teacher  must  speak 
clearly,  but  not  inelegantly 

26.  For  teaching,  of  course,  true  eloquence 
consists,  not  in  making  people  like  what  they 
disliked,  nor  in  making  them  do  what  they 
shrank  from,  but  in  making  clear  what  was  ob¬ 
scure;  yet  if  this  be  done  without  grace  of  style, 
the  benefit  does  not  extend  beyond  the  few 
eager  students  who  are  anxious  to  know  what¬ 
ever  is  to  be  learnt,  however  rude  and  unpol¬ 
ished  the  form  in  which  it  is  put ;  and  who,  when 
they  have  succeeded  in  their  object,  find  the 
plain  truth  pleasant  food  enough.  And  it  is  one 
of  the  distinctive  features  of  good  intellects  not 
to  love  words,  but  the  truth  in  words.  For  of 
what  service  is  a  golden  key,  if  it  cannot  open 
what  we  want  it  to  open?  Or  what  objection  is 
there  to  a  wooden  one  if  it  can,  seeing  that  to 
open  what  is  shut  is  all  we  want?  But  as  there  is 
a  certain  analogy  between  learning  and  eating, 
the  very  food  without  which  it  is  impossible  to 
live  must  be  flavoured  to  meet  the  tastes  of  the 
majority. 

Chap.  12.  The  aim  of  the  orator,  according  to 
Cicero,  is  to  teach,  to  delight,  and  to  move. 
Of  these,  teaching  is  the  most  essential 

27.  Accordingly  a  great  orator  has  truly  said 
that  “an  eloquent  man  must  speak  so  as  to 
teach,  to  delight,  and  to  persuade.”1  Then  he 
adds:  “To  teach  is  a  necessity,  to  delight  is  a 
beauty,  to  persuade  is  a  triumph.”  Now  of  these 
three,  the  one  first  mentioned,  the  teaching, 
which  is  a  matter  of  necessity,  depends  on  what 
we  say;  the  other  two  on  the  way  we  say  it.  He, 
then,  who  speaks  with  the  purpose  of  teaching 
should  not  suppose  that  he  has  said  what  he  has 
to  say  as  long  as  he  is  not  understood;  for  al¬ 
though  what  he  has  said  be  intelligible  to  him¬ 
self,  it  is  not  said  at  all  to  the  man  who  does  not 
Cicero,  Orator ,  21. 


684  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


understand  it.  If,  however,  he  is  understood,  he 
has  said  his  say,  whatever  may  have  been  his 
manner  of  saying  it.  But  if  he  wishes  to  delight 
or  persuade  his  hearer  as  well,  he  will  not  ac¬ 
complish  that  end  by  putting  his  thought  in  any 
shape  no  matter  what,  but  for  that  purpose  the 
style  of  speaking  is  a  matter  of  importance.  And 
as  the  hearer  must  be  pleased  in  order  to  secure 
his  attention,  so  he  must  be  persuaded  in  order 
to  move  him  to  action.  And  as  he  is  pleased  if 
you  speak  with  sweetness  and  elegance,  so  he  is 
persuaded  if  he  be  drawn  by  your  promises,  and 
awed  by  your  threats;  if  he  reject  what  you 
condemn,  and  embrace  what  you  commend ;  if 
he  grieve  when  you  heap  up  objects  for  grief, 
and  rejoice  when  you  point  out  an  object  for 
joy;  if  he  pity  those  whom  you  present  to  him 
as  objects  of  pity,  and  shrink  from  those  whom 
you  set  before  him  as  men  to  be  feared  and 
shunned.  I  need  not  go  over  all  the  other  things 
that  can  be  done  by  powerful  eloquence  to 
move  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  not  telling  them 
what  they  ought  to  do,  but  urging  them  to  do 
what  they  already  know  ought  to  be  done.  - 

28.  If,  however,  they  do  not  yet  know  this, 
they  must  of  course  be  instructed  before  they 
can  be  moved.  And  perhaps  the  mere  knowl¬ 
edge  of  their  duty  will  have  such  an  effect  that 
there  will  be  no  need  to  move  them  with  greater 
strength  of  eloquence.  Yet  when  this  is  needful, 
it  ought  to  be  done.  And  it  is  needful  when  peo¬ 
ple,  knowing  what  they  ought  to  do,  do  it  not. 
Therefore,  to  teach  is  a  necessity.  For  what 
men  know,  it  is  in  their  own  hands  either  to  do 
or  not  to  do.  But  who  would  say  that  it  is  their 
duty  to  do  what  they  do  not  know?  On  the  same 
principle,  to  persuade  is  not  a  necessity:  for  it 
is  not  always  called  for;  as,  for  example,  when 
the  hearer  yields  his  assent  to  one  who  simply 
teaches  or  give  pleasure.  For  this  reason  also  to 
persuade  is  a  triumph,  because  it  is  possible 
that  a  man  may  be  taught  and  delighted,  and 
yet  not  give  his  consent.  And  what  will  be  the 
use  of  gaining  the  first  two  ends  if  we  fail  in  the 
third?  Neither  is  it  a  necessity  to  give  pleasure; 
for  when,  in  the  course  of  an  address,  the  truth 
is  clearly  pointed  out  (and  this  is  the  true  func¬ 
tion  of  teaching),  it  is  not  the  fact,  nor  is  it  the 
intention,  that  the  style  of  speech  should  make 
the  truth  pleasing,  or  that  the  style  should  of  it¬ 
self  give  pleasure;  but  the  truth  itself,  when  ex¬ 
hibited  in  its  naked  simplicity,  gives  pleasure, 
because  it  is  the  truth.  And  hence  even  falsities 
are  frequently  a  source  of  pleasure  when  they 
are  brought  to  light  and  exposed.  It  is  not,  of 
course,  their  falsity  that  gives  pleasure;  but  as 


it  is  true  that  they  are  false,  the  speech  which 
shows  this  to  be  true  gives  pleasure. 

Chap.  13.  The  hearer  must  be  moved  as  well  as 

instructed. 

29.  But  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are  so  fas¬ 
tidious  that  they  do  not  care  for  truth  unless  it 
is  put  in  the  form  of  a  pleasing  discourse,  no 
small  place  has  been  assigned  in  eloquence  to 
the  art  of  pleasing.  And  yet  even  this  is  not 
enough  for  those  stubborn-minded  men  who 
both  understand  and  are  pleased  with  the  teach¬ 
er’s  discourse,  without  deriving  any  profit  from 
it.  For  what  does  it  profit  a  man  that  he  both 
confesses  the  truth  and  praises  the  eloquence, 
if  he  does  not  yield  his  consent,  when  it  is  only 
for  the  sake  of  securing  his  consent  that  the 
speaker  in  urging  the  truth  gives  careful  atten¬ 
tion  to  what  he  says?  If  the  truths  taught  are 
such  that  to  believe  or  to  know  them  is  enough, 
to  give  one’s  assent  implies  nothing  more  than 
to  confess  that  they  are  true.  When,  however, 
the  truth  taught  is  one  that  must  be  carried  into 
practice,  and  that  is  taught  for  the  very  purpose 
of  being  practised,  it  is  useless  to  be  persuaded 
of  the  truth  of  what  is  said,  it  is  useless  to  be 
pleased  with  the  manner  in  which  it  is  said,  if  it 
be  not  so  learnt  as  to  be  practised.  The  eloquent 
divine,  then,  when  he  is  urging  a  practical  truth, 
must  not  only  teach  so  as  to  give  instruction, 
and  please  so  as  to  keep  up  the  attention,  but 
he  must  also  sway  the  mind  so  as  to  subdue  the 
will.  For  if  a  man  be  not  moved  by  the  force  of 
truth,  though  it  is  demonstrated  to  his  own  con¬ 
fession,  and  clothed  in  beauty  of  style,  nothing 
remains  but  to  subdue  him  by  the  power  of  elo¬ 
quence. 

Chap.  14.  Beauty  of  diction  to  be  in  keeping 

with  the  matter 

30.  And  so  much  labour  has  been  spent  by 
men  on  the  beauty  of  expression  here  spoken  of 
that  not  only  is  it  not  our  duty  to  do.  but  it  is 
our  duty  to  shun  and  abhor,  many  and  heinous 
deeds  of  wickedness  and  baseness  which  wicked 
and  base  men  have  with  great  eloquence  recom¬ 
mended.  not  with  a  view  to  gaining  assent  but 
merely  for  the  sake  of  being  read  with  pleasure. 
But  may  God  avert  from  His  Church  what  the 
prophet  Jeremiah  says  of  the  synagogue  of  the 
Jews:  “A  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  com¬ 
mitted  in  the  land:  the  prophets  prophesy  false¬ 
ly,  and  the  priests  applaud  them  with  their 
hands ; 1  and  my  people  love  to  have  it  so :  and 

1“And  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means.”  (Author¬ 
ized  Version) 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  13-16  685 


what  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof?”  1  0  elo¬ 
quence,  which  is  the  more  terrible  from  its  pur¬ 
ity,  and  the  more  crushing  from  its  solidity!  As¬ 
suredly  it  is  “a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock 
in  pieces.”  For  to  this  God  Himself  has  by  the 
same  prophet  compared  His  own  word  spoken 
through  His  holy  prophets.2  God  forbid,  then, 
God  forbid  that  with  us  the  priest  should  ap¬ 
plaud  the  false  prophet,  and  that  God’s  people 
should  love  to  have  it  so.  God  forbid,  I  say,  that 
with  us  there  should  be  such  terrible  madness ! 
For  what  shall  we  do  in  the  end  thereof?  And 
assuredly  it  is  preferable,  even  though  what  is 
said  should  be  less  intelligible,  less  pleasing,  and 
less  persuasive,  that  truth  be  spoken,  and  that 
what  is  just,  not  what  is  iniquitous,  be  listened 
to  with  pleasure.  But  this,  of  course,  cannot  be, 
unless  what  is  true  and  just  be  expressed  with 
elegance. 

31.  In  a  serious  assembly,  moreover,  such  as 
is  spoken  of  when  it  is  said,  “I  will  praise  Thee 
among  much  people,” 3  no  pleasure  is  derived 
from  that  species  of  eloquence  which  indeed 
says  nothing  that  is  false,  but  which  buries  small 
and  unimportant  truths  under  a  frothy  mass  of 
ornamental  words,  such  as  would  not  be  grace¬ 
ful  or  dignified  even  if  used  to  adorn  great  and 
fundamental  truths.  And  something  of  this  sort 
occurs  in  a  letter  of  the  blessed  Cyprian,  which, 
I  think,  came  there  by  accident,  or  else  was  in¬ 
serted  designedly  with  this  view,  that  posterity 
might  see  how  the  wholesome  discipline  of 
Christian  teaching  had  cured  him  of  that  re¬ 
dundancy  of  language,  and  confined  him  to  a 
more  dignified  and  modest  form  of  eloquence, 
such  as  we  find  in  his  subsequent  letters,  a  style 
which  is  admired  without  effort,  is  sought  after 
with  eagerness,  but  is  not  attained  without  great 
difficulty.  He  says,  then,  in  one  place,  “Let  us 
seek  this  abode:  the  neighbouring  solitudes  af¬ 
ford  a  retreat  where,  whilst  the  spreading  shoots 
of  the  vine  trees,  pendulous  and  intertwined, 
creep  amongst  the  supporting  reeds,  the  leafy 
covering  has  made  a  portico  of  vine.”  There  is 
wonderful  fluency  and  exuberance  of  language 
here ;  but  it  is  too  florid  to  be  pleasing  to  serious 
minds.  But  people  who  are  fond  of  this  style  are 
apt  to  think  that  men  who  do  not  use  it,  but 
employ  a  more  chastened  style,  do  so  because 
they  cannot  attain  the  former,  not  because  their 
judgment  teaches  them  to  avoid  it.  Wherefore 
this  holy  man  shows  both  that  he  can  speak  in 
that  style,  for  he  has  done  so  once,  and  that  he 
does  not  choose,  for  he  never  uses  it  again. 

^er.  5.  30,  31  (Septuagint). 

2Jer.  23.  29.  3Ps.  35.  18. 


Chap.  15.  The  Christian  teacher  should  pray 

be j ore  preaching 

32.  And  so  our  Christian  orator,  while  he  says 
what  is  just,  and  holy,  and  good  (and  he  ought 
never  to  say  anything  else),  does  all  he  can  to 
be  heard  with  intelligence,  with  pleasure,  and 
with  obedience;  and  he  need  not  doubt  that  if 
he  succeed  in  this  object,  and  so  far  as  he  suc¬ 
ceeds,  he  will  succeed  more  by  piety  in  prayer 
than  by  gifts  of  oratory;  and  so  he  ought  to  pray 
for  himself  and  for  those  he  is  about  to  address, 
before  he  attempts  to  speak.  And  when  the  hour 
is  come  that  he  must  speak,  he  ought,  before  he 
opens  his  mouth,  to  lift  up  his  thirsty  soul  to 
God,  to  drink  in  what  he  is  about  to  pour  forth, 
and  to  be  himself  filled  with  what  he  is  about  to 
distribute.  For,  as  in  regard  to  every  matter  of 
faith  and  love  there  are  many  things  that  may 
be  said  and  many  ways  of  saying  them,  who 
knows  what  it  is  expedient  at  a  given  momen 
for  us  to  say,  or  to  be  heard  saying,  except  Gcd 
Who  knows  the  hearts  of  all?  And  who  can  make 
us  say  what  we  ought,  and  in  the  way  we  ought, 
except  Him  in  Whose  hand  both  we  and  our 
speeches  are?  Accordingly,  he  who  is  anxious 
both  to  know  and  to  teach  should  learn  all  that 
is  to  be  taught,  and  acquire  such  a  faculty  of 
speech  as  is  suitable  for  a  divine.  But  when  the 
hour  for  speech  arrives,  let  him  reflect  upon  that 
saying  of  our  Lord’s,  as  better  suited  to  the 
wants  of  a  pious  mind:  “Take  no  thought  how 
or  what  ye  shall  speak ;  for  it  shall  be  given  you 
in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall  speak.  For  it  is 
not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father 
which  speaketh  in  you.”  4  The  Holy  Spirit,  then, 
speaks  thus  in  those  who  for  Christ’s  sake  are 
delivered  to  the  persecutors;  why  not  also  in 
those  who  deliver  Christ’s  message  to  those  who 
are  willing  to  learn? 

Chap.  16.  Human  directions  not  to  be  despised , 

though  God  makes  the  true  teacher 

33.  Now  if  any  one  says  that  we  need  not  di¬ 
rect  men  how  or  what  they  should  teach,  since 
the  Holy  Spirit  makes  them  teachers,  he  may  as 
well  say  that  we  need  not  pray,  since  our  Lord 
says,  “Your  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye 
have  need  of  before  ye  ask  Him”:5  or  that  the 
Apostle  Paul  should  not  have  given  directions 
to  Timothy  and  Titus  as  to  how  or  what  they 
should  teach  others.  And  these  three  apostolic 
epistles  ought  to  be  constantly  before  the  eyes 
of  every  one  who  has  obtained  the  position  of  a 
teacher  in  the  Church.  In  the  First  Epistle  to 

4Matt.  10.  19,  20.  6Matt.  6.  8. 


686 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Timothy  do  we  not  read:  “These  things  com¬ 
mand  and  teach”?  1  What  these  things  are,  has 
been  told  previously.  Do  we  not  read  there: 
“Rebuke  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  him  as  a  fa¬ 
ther”?  2  Is  it  not  said  in  the  Second  Epistle: 
“Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou 
hast  heard  of  me”?  3  And  is  he  not  there  told: 
“Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a 
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  right¬ 
ly  dividing  the  word  of  truth”?  4  And  in  the 
same  place:  “Preach  the  word;  be  instant  in 
season,  out  of  season;  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort, 
with  all  long-suffering  and  doctrine.”5  And  so 
in  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  does  he  not  say  that  a 
bishop  ought  to  “hold  fast  the  faithful  word  as 
le  hath  been  taught,  that  he  may  be  able  by 
sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  to  convince 
the  gainsayers”? 6  There,  too,  he  says:  “But 
speak  thou  the  things  which  become  sound  doc¬ 
trine:  that  the  aged  men  be  sober,”7  and  so  on. 
And  there,  too:  “These  things  speak,  and  ex¬ 
hort,  and  rebuke  with  all  authority.  Let  no  man 
despise  thee.  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to 
principalities  and  powers,”8  and  so  on.  What 
then  are  we  to  think?  Does  the  apostle  in  any 
way  contradict  himself,  when,  though  he  says 
that  men  are  made  teachers  by  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  he  yet  himself  gives  them  di¬ 
rections  how  and  what  they  should  teach?  Or 
are  we  to  understand,  that  though  the  duty  of 
men  to  teach  even  the  teachers  does  not  cease 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  yet  that  neither  is 
he  who  planteth  anything,  nor  he  who  watereth, 
but  God  Who  giveth  the  increase?9  Wherefore 
though  holy  men  be  our  helpers,  or  even  holy 
angels  assist  us,  no  one  learns  aright  the  things 
that  pertain  to  life  with  God,  until  God  makes 
him  ready  to  learn  from  Himself,  that  God  Who 
is  thus  addressed  in  the  psalm :  “Teach  me  to  do 
Thy  will;  for  Thou  art  my  God.”  10  And  so  the 
same  apostle  says  to  Timothy  himself,  speaking, 
of  course,  as  teacher  to  disciple :  “But  continue 
thou  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned,  and 
hast  been  assured  of,  knowing  of  Whom  thou 
hast  learned  them.” 11  For  as  the  medicines 
which  men  apply  to  the  bodies  of  their  fellow- 
men  are  of  no  avail  except  God  gives  them  vir¬ 
tue  (Who  can  heal  without  their  aid,  though 
they  cannot  without  His) ,  and  yet  they  are  ap¬ 
plied;  and  if  it  be  done  from  a  sense  of  duty,  it 
is  esteemed  a  work  of  mercy  or  benevolence;  so 
the  aids  of  teaching,  applied  through  the  instru- 


*1  Tim.  4. 11. 
4II  Tim.  2.  15. 
7Tit.  2.  1,  2. 
10Ps.  143. 10. 


2I  Tim.  5.  1. 
5II  Tim.  4.  2. 
8Tit.  2.  15;  3.  1. 

“II  Tim.  3. 14. 


3II  Tim.  1.  13. 
6Tit.  1.9. 

9I  Cor.  3.  7- 


mentality  of  man,  are  of  advantage  to  the  soul 
only  when  God  works  to  make  them  of  advan¬ 
tage,  Who  could  give  the  Gospel  to  man  even 
without  the  help  or  agency  of  men. 

Chap.  17.  Threefold  division  of  the  various 

styles  of  speech 

34.  He  then  who,  in  speaking,  aims  at  enforc¬ 
ing  what  is  good,  should  not  despise  any  of  those 
three  objects,  either  to  teach,  or  to  give  pleas¬ 
ure,  or  to  move,  and  should  pray  and  strive,  as 
we  have  said  above,  to  be  heard  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  with  pleasure,  and  with  ready  compli¬ 
ance.  And  when  he  does  this  with  elegance  and 
propriety,  he  may  justly  be  called  eloquent, 
even  though  he  do  not  carry  with  him  the  assent 
of  his  hearer.  For  it  is  these  three  ends,  viz., 
teaching,  giving  pleasure,  and  moving,  that  the 
great  master  of  Roman  eloquence  himself  seems 
to  have  intended  that  the  following  three  direc¬ 
tions  should  subserve:  “He,  then,  shall  be  elo¬ 
quent,  who  can  say  little  things  in  a  subdued 
style,  moderate  things  in  a  temperate  style, 
and  great  things  in  a  majestic  style”:  as  if  he 
had  taken  in  also  the  three  ends  mentioned 
above,  and  had  embraced  the  whole  in  one  sen¬ 
tence  thus:  “He,  then,  shall  be  eloquent,  who 
can  say  little  things  in  a  subdued  style,  in  order 
to  give  instruction,  moderate  things  in  a  tem¬ 
perate  style,  in  order  to  give  pleasure,  and  great 
things  in  a  majestic  style,  in  order  to  sway  the 
mind.” 

Chap.  18.  The  Christian  orator  is  constantly 

dealing  with  great  matters 

35.  Now  the  author  I  have  quoted  could  have 
exemplified  these  three  directions,  as  laid  down 
by  himself,  in  regard  to  legal  questions:  he 
could  not,  however,  have  done  so  in  regard  to 
ecclesiastical  questions — the  only  ones  that  an 
address  such  as  I  wish  to  give  shape  to  is  con¬ 
cerned  with.  For  of  legal  questions  those  are 
called  small  which  have  reference  to  pecuniary 
transactions;  those  great  where  a  matter  relat¬ 
ing  to  man’s  life  or  liberty  comes  up.  Cases, 
again,  which  have  to  do  with  neither  of  these, 
and  where  the  intention  is  not  to  get  the  hearer 
to  do,  or  to  pronounce  judgment  upon  any¬ 
thing,  but  only  to  give  him  pleasure,  occupy  as 
it  were  a  middle  place  between  the  former  two, 
and  are  on  that  account  called  middling,  or 
moderate.  For  moderate  things  get  their  name 
from  modus  (a  measure) ;  and  it  is  an  abuse, 
not  a  proper  use  of  the  word  moderatey  to  put  it 
for  little.  In  questions  like  ours,  however,  where 
all  things,  and  especially  those  addressed  to  the 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  17-19  687 


people  from  the  place  of  authority,  ought  to 
have  reference  to  men’s  salvation,  and  that  not 
their  temporal  but  their  eternal  salvation,  and 
where  also  the  thing  to  be  guarded  against  is 
eternal  ruin,  everything  that  we  say  is  impor¬ 
tant;  so  much  so,  that  even  what  the  preacher 
says  about  pecuniary  matters,  whether  it  have 
reference  to  loss  or  gain,  whether  the  amount  be 
great  or  small,  should  not  seem  unimportant. 
For  justice  is  never  unimportant,  and  justice 
ought  assuredly  to  be  observed,  even  in  small 
affairs  of  money,  as  our  Lord  says :  “He  that  is 
faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful  also  in 
much.”  1  That  which  is  least,  then,  is  very  lit¬ 
tle;  but  to  be  faithful  in  that  which  is  least  is 
great.  For  as  the  nature  of  the  circle,  viz.,  that 
all  lines  drawn  from  the  centre  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  are  equal,  is  the  same  in  a  great  disk  that 
it  is  in  the  smallest  coin;  so  the  greatness  of 
justice  is  in  no  degree  lessened,  though  the  mat¬ 
ters  to  which  justice  is  applied  be  small. 

36.  And  when  the  apostle  spoke  about  trials 
in  regard  to  secular  affairs  (and  what  were  these 
but  matters  of  money?),  he  says:  “Dare  any  of 
you,  having  a  matter  against  another,  go  to  law 
before  the  unjust,  and  not  before  the  saints? 
Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the 
world?  and  if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by  you, 
are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters? 
Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels?  how 
much  more  things  that  pertain  to  this  life?  If, 
then,  ye  have  judgments  of  things  pertaining 
to  this  life,  set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  es¬ 
teemed  in  the  Church.  I  speak  to  your  shame. 
Is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  among  you? 
no,  not  one  that  shall  be  able  to  judge  between 
his  brethren?  But  brother  goeth  to  law  with 
brother,  and  that  before  the  unbelievers.  Now 
therefore  there  is  utterly  a  fault  among  you,  be¬ 
cause  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another :  why  do  ye 
not  rather  take  wrong?  why  do  ye  not  rather 
suffer  yourselves  to  be  defrauded?  Nay,  ye  do 
wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that  your  brethren. 
Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  in¬ 
herit  the  kingdom  of  God?” 2  Why  is  it  that  the 
apostle  is  so  indignant,  and  that  he  thus  accuses, 
and  upbraids,  and  chides,  and  threatens?  Why  is 
it  that  the  changes  in  his  tone,  so  frequent  and 
so  abrupt,  testify  to  the  depth  of  his  emotion? 
Why  is  it,  in  fine,  that  he  speaks  in  a  tone  so 
exalted  about  matters  so  very  trifling?  Did  secu¬ 
lar  matters  deserve  so  much  at  his  hands?  God 
forbid.  No ;  but  all  this  is  done  for  the  sake  of 
justice,  charity,  and  piety,  which  in  the  judg- 

^uke,  16. 10. 

2I  Cor.  6.  1-9. 


ment  of  every  sober  mind  are  great,  even  when 
applied  to  matters  the  very  least. 

37.  Of  course,  if  we  were  giving  men  advice 
as  to  how  they  ought  to  conduct  secular  cases, 
either  for  themselves  or  for  their  connexions, 
before  the  Church  courts,  we  would  rightly  ad¬ 
vise  them  to  conduct  them  quietly  as  matters 
of  little  moment.  But  we  are  treating  of  the 
manner  of  speech  of  the  man  who  is  to  be  a 
teacher  of  the  truths  which  deliver  us  from  eter¬ 
nal  misery  and  bring  us  to  eternal  happiness; 
and  wherever  these  truths  are  spoken  of,  wheth¬ 
er  in  public  or  private,  whether  to  one  or  many, 
whether  to  friends  or  enemies,  whether  in  a 
continuous  discourse  or  in  conversation,  wheth¬ 
er  in  tracts,  or  in  books,  or  in  letters  long  or 
short,  they  are  of  great  importance.  Unless  in¬ 
deed  we  are  prepared  to  say  that,  because  a  cup 
of  cold  water  is  a  very  trifling  and  common 
thing,  the  saying  of  our  Lord,  that  he  who  gives 
a  cup  of  cold  water  to  one  of  His  disciples  shall 
in  no  wise  lose  his  reward,3  is  very  trivial  and 
unimportant.  Or  that  when  a  preacher  takes  this 
saying  as  his  text,  he  should  think  his  subject 
very  unimportant,  and  therefore  speak  without 
either  eloquence  or  power,  but  in  a  subdued  and 
humble  style.  Is  it  not  the  case  that  when  we 
happen  to  speak  on  this  subject  to  the  people, 
and  the  presence  of  God  is  with  us,  so  that  what 
we  say  is  not  altogether  unworthy  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  a  tongue  of  fire  springs  up  out  of  that 
cold  water  which  inflames  even  the  cold  hearts 
of  men  with  a  zeal  for  doing  works  of  mercy  in 
hope  of  an  eternal  reward? 

Chap.  19.  The  Christian  teacher  must  use  dif¬ 
ferent  styles  on  different  occasions 

38.  And  yet,  while  our  teacher  ought  to  speak 
of  great  matters,  he  ought  not  always  to  be 
speaking  of  them  in  a  majestic  tone,  but  in  a 
subdued  tone  when  he  is  teaching,  temperately 
when  he  is  giving  praise  or  blame.  When,  how¬ 
ever,  something  is  to  be  done,  and  we  are  speak¬ 
ing  to  those  who  ought,  but  are  not  willing,  to 
do  it,  then  great  matters  must  be  spoken  of  with 
power,  and  in  a  manner  calculated  to  sway  the 
mind.  And  sometimes  the  same  important  mat¬ 
ter  is  treated  in  all  these  ways  at  different  times, 
quietly  when  it  is  being  taught,  temperately 
when  its  importance  is  being  urged,  and  power¬ 
fully  when  we  are  forcing  a  mind  that  is  averse 
to  the  truth  to  turn  and  embrace  it.  For  is  there 
anything  greater  than  God  Himself?  Is  nothing, 
then,  to  be  learnt  about  Him?  Or  ought  he  who 
is  teaching  the  Trinity  in  unity  to  speak  of  it 

3Matt.  10.  42. 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


688 

otherwise  than  in  the  method  of  calm  discus¬ 
sion,  so  that  in  regard  to  a  subject  which  it  is 
not  easy  to  comprehend,  we  may  understand  as 
much  as  it  is  given  us  to  understand?  Are  we  in 
this  case  to  seek  out  ornaments  instead  of 
proofs?  Or  is  the  hearer  to  be  moved  to  do 
something  instead  of  being  instructed  so  that  he 
may  learn  something?  But  when  we  come  to 
praise  God,  either  in  Himself,  or  in  His  works, 
what  a  field  for  beauty  and  splendour  of  lan¬ 
guage  opens  up  before  man.  who  can  task  his 
powers  to  the  utmost  in  praising  Him  Whom  no 
one  can  adequately  praise,  though  there  is  no 
one  who  does  not  praise  Him  in  some  measure ! 
But  if  He  be  not  worshipped,  or  if  idols,  wheth¬ 
er  they  be  demons  or  any  created  being  what¬ 
ever,  be  worshipped  with  Him  or  in  preference 
to  Him,  then  we  ought  to  speak  out  with  power 
and  impressiveness,  show  how  great  a  wicked¬ 
ness  this  is,  and  urge  men  to  flee  from  it. 

Chap.  20.  Examples  of  the  various  styles  drawn 

from  Scripture 

39.  But  now  to  come  to  something  more-defi¬ 
nite.  We  have  an  example  of  the  calm,  subdued 
style  in  the  Apostle  Paul,  where  he  says:  “Tell 
me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye 
not  hear  the  law?  For  it  is  written,  that  Abra¬ 
ham  had  two  sons;  the  one  by  a  bond  maid,  the 
other  by  a  free  woman.  But  he  who  was  of  the 
bond  woman  was  born  after  the  flesh;  but  he  of 
the  free  woman  was  by  promise.  Which  things 
are  an  allegory:  for  these  are  the  two  covenants ; 
the  one  from  the  Mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth 
to  bondage,  which  is  Hagar.  For  this  Hagar  is 
Mount  Sinai  in  Arabia,  and  answereth  to  Jeru¬ 
salem  which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her 
children.  But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free, 
which  is  the  mother  of  us  all”;1  and  so  on.  And 
in  the  same  way  where  he  reasons  thus :  “Breth¬ 
ren,  I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men:  Though 
it  be  but  a  man’s  covenant,  yet  if  it  be  con¬ 
firmed,  no  man  disannulled,  or  addeth  thereto. 
Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises 
made.  He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of  many; 
but  as  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ. 
And  this  I  say,  that  the  covenant,  that  was  con¬ 
firmed  before  of  God  in  Christ,  the  law,  which 
was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  can¬ 
not  disannul,  that  it  should  make  the  promise  of 
none  effect.  For  if  the  inheritance  be  of  the  law, 
it  is  no  more  of  promise:  but  God  gave  it  to 
Abraham  by  promise.”  2  And  because  it  might 
possibly  occur  to  the  hearer  to  ask,  “If  there  is 
no  inheritance  by  the  law,  why  then  was  the  law 
1Gal.  4.  21-26.  2Gal.  3.  15-18. 


given?”  he  himself  anticipates  this  objection 
and  asks,  “Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?” 
And  the  answer  is  given:  “It  was  added  because 
of  transgressions,  till  the  seed  should  come  to 
whom  the  promise  was  made;  and  it  was  or¬ 
dained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator. 
Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one;  but 
God  is  one.”  And  here  an  objection  occurs  which 
he  himself  has  stated:  “Is  the  law  then  against 
the  promises  of  God?”  He  answers:  “God  for¬ 
bid.”  And  he  also  states  the  reason  in  these 
words :  “For  if  there  had  been  a  law  given  which 
could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness 
should  have  been  by  the  law.  But  the  Scripture 
hath  concluded  all  under  sin,  that  the  promise 
by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given  to  them 
that  believe.”3  It  is  part,  then,  of  the  duty  of 
the  teacher  not  only  to  interpret  what  is  obscure 
and  to  unravel  the  difficulties  of  questions,  but 
also,  while  doing  this,  to  meet  other  questions 
which  may  chance  to  suggest  themselves,  lest 
these  should  cast  doubt  or  discredit  on  what  we 
say.  If,  however,  the  solution  of  these  questions 
suggest  itself  as  soon  as  the  questions  them¬ 
selves  arise,  it  is  useless  to  disturb  what  we  can¬ 
not  remove.  And  besides,  when  out  of  one  ques¬ 
tion  other  questions  arise,  and  out  of  these  again 
still  others;  if  these  be  all  discussed  and  solved, 
the  reasoning  is  extended  to  such  a  length,  that 
unless  the  memory  be  exceedingly  powerful  and 
active,  the  reasoner  finds  it  impossible  to  return 
to  the  original  question  from  which  he  set  out. 
It  is,  however,  exceedingly  desirable  that  what¬ 
ever  occurs  to  the  mind  as  an  objection  that 
might  be  urged  should  be  stated  and  refuted, 
lest  it  turn  up  at  a  time  when  no  one  will  be 
present  to  answer  it,  or  lest,  if  it  should  occur 
to  a  man  who  is  present  but  says  nothing  about 
it,  it  might  never  be  thoroughly  removed. 

40.  In  the  following  words  of  the  apostle  we 
have  the  temperate  style:  “Rebuke  not  an  elder, 
but  entreat  him  as  a  father;  and  the  younger 
men  as  brethren;  the  elder  women  as  mothers, 
the  younger  as  sisters.”  4  And  also  in  these:  “I 
beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is 
your  reasonable  service.”5  And  almost  the  whole 
of  this  hortatory  passage  is  in  the  temperate 
style  of  eloquence;  and  those  parts  of  it  are  the 
most  beautiful  in  which,  as  if  paying  what  was 
due,  things  that  belong  to  each  other  are  grace¬ 
fully  brought  together.  For  example:  “Having 
then  gifts,  differing  according  to  the  grace  that 
is  given  to  us,  whether  prophecy,  let  us  proph- 

3Gal.  3.  19-22.  4I  Tim.  5.1,2.  6Rom.  12.  1. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  20 


esy  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith;  or  min¬ 
istry,  let  us  wait  on  our  ministering ;  or  he  that 
teacheth,  on  teaching;  or  he  that  exhorteth,  on 
exhortation;  he  that  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with 
simplicity;  he  that  ruleth, with  diligence;  he  that 
showeth  mercy,  with  cheerfulness.  Let  love  be 
without  dissimulation.  Abhor  that  which  is  evil, 
cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  Be  kindly  affec- 
tioned  one  to  another  with  brotherly  love;  in 
honour  preferring  one  another;  not  slothful  in 
business;  fervent  in  spirit;  serving  the  Lord; 
rejoicing  in  hope;  patient  in  tribulation;  con¬ 
tinuing  instant  in  prayer;  distributing  to  the 
necessity  of  saints;  given  to  hospitality.  Bless 
them  which  persecute  you :  bless,  and  curse  not. 
Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep 
with  them  that  weep.  Be  of  the  same  mind  one 
toward  another.”  1  And  how  gracefully  all  this 
is  brought  to  a  close  in  a  period  of  two  mem¬ 
bers:  “Mind  not  high  things,  but  condescend  to 
men  of  low'  estate!”  And  a  little  afterwards: 
“Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues:  tribute  to 
whom  tribute  is  due;  custom  to  whom  custom; 
fear  to  whom  fear;  honour  to  whom  honour.” 2 
And  these  also,  though  expressed  in  single 
clauses,  are  terminated  by  a  period  of  two  mem¬ 
bers:  “Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one 
another.”  And  a  little  farther  on:  “The  night  is 
far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand:  let  us  therefore 
cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  let  us  put  on 
the  armour  of  light.  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in 
the  day;  not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in 
chambering  and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and 
envying:  but  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfill 
the  lusts  thereof.”  3  Now  if  the  passage  were 
translated  thus,  “et  carnis  providentiam  ne  in 
concupiscentiis  feceritis,”  the  ear  would  no 
doubt  be  gratified  with  a  more  harmonious  end¬ 
ing;  but  our  translator,  with  more  strictness, 
preferred  to  retain  even  the  order  of  the  words. 
And  how  this  sounds  in  the  Greek  language,  in 
which  the  apostle  spoke,  those  wTho  are  better 
skilled  in  that  tongue  may  determine.  My  opin¬ 
ion,  however,  is  that  what  has  been  translated  to 
us  in  the  same  order  of  words  does  not  run  very 
harmoniously  even  in  the  original  tongue. 

41.  And,  indeed,  I  must  confess  that  our  au¬ 
thors  are  very  defective  in  that  grace  of  speech 
which  consists  in  harmonious  endings.  Whether 
this  be  the  fault  of  the  translators,  or  whether, 
as  I  am  more  inclined  to  believe,  the  authors 
designedly  avoided  such  ornaments,  I  dare  not 
affirm;  for  I  confess  I  do  not  know.  This  I 
know,  however,  that  if  any  one  wrho  is  skilled  in 
lRom.  12.  6-16.  2Rom.  13.  7.  3Rom.  13.  12-14. 


689 

this  species  of  harmony  would  take  the  closing 
sentences  of  these  writers  and  arrange  them  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  law  of  harmony  (which  he  could 
very  easily  do  by  changing  some  words  for 
words  of  equivalent  meaning,  or  by  retaining 
the  words  he  finds  and  altering  their  arrange¬ 
ment),  he  will  learn  that  these  divinely  inspired 
men  are  not  defective  in  any  of  those  points 
which  he  has  been  taught  in  the  schools  of  the 
grammarians  and  rhetoricians  to  consider  of  im¬ 
portance;  and  he  will  find  in  them  many  kinds 
of  speech  of  great  beauty — beautiful  even  in 
our  language,  but  especially  beautiful  in  the 
original — none  of  which  can  be  found  in  those 
writings  of  which  they  boast  so  much.  But  care 
must  be  taken  that,  while  adding  harmony,  we 
take  away  none  of  the  weight  from  these  divine 
and  authoritative  utterances.  Now  our  prophets 
were  so  far  from  being  deficient  in  the  musical 
training  from  which  this  harmony  we  speak  of  is 
most  fully  learnt  that  Jerome,  a  very  learned 
man,  describes  even  the  metres  employed  by 
some  of  them,  in  the  Hebrew  language  at  least ; 
though,  in  order  to  give  an  accurate  rendering  of 
the  words,  he  has  not  preserved  these  in  his 
translation.  I,  however  (to  speak  of  my  own 
feeling,  which  is  better  known  to  me  than  it  is 
to  others,  and  than  that  of  others  is  to  me), 
while  I  do  not  in  my  own  speech,  however  mod¬ 
estly  I  think  it  done,  neglect  these  harmonious 
endings,  am  just  as  well  pleased  to  find  them  in 
the  sacred  authors  very  rarely. 

42.  The  majestic  style  of  speech  differs  from 
the  temperate  style  just  spoken  of,  chiefly  in 
that  it  is  not  so  much  decked  out  with  verbal 
ornaments  as  exalted  into  vehemence  by  mental 
emotion.  It  uses,  indeed,  nearly  all  the  orna¬ 
ments  that  the  other  does;  but  if  they  do  not 
happen  to  be  at  hand,  it  does  not  seek  for  them. 
For  it  is  borne  on  by  its  own  vehemence;  and 
the  force  of  the  thought,  not  the  desire  for  orna¬ 
ment,  makes  it  seize  upon  any  beauty  of  expres¬ 
sion  that  comes  in  its  way.  It  is  enough  for  its 
object  that  warmth  of  feeling  should  suggest  the 
fitting  words ;  they  need  not  be  selected  by  care¬ 
ful  elaboration  of  speech.  If  a  brave  man  be 
armed  with  weapons  adorned  with  gold  and 
jewels,  he  works  feats  of  valour  with  those  arms 
in  the  heat  of  battle,  not  because  they  are  cost¬ 
ly,  but  because  they  are  arms;  and  yet  the  same 
man  does  great  execution,  even  when  anger  fur¬ 
nishes  him  with  a  weapon  that  he  digs  out  of 
the  ground.4  The  apostle  in  the  following  pas¬ 
sage  is  urging  that,  for  the  sake  of  the  ministry 
of  the  gospel,  and  sustained  by  the  consolations 
4Virgil,  JEneid,  bk.  vii.  508. 


690  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


of  God's  grace,  we  should  bear  with  patience  all 
the  evils  of  this  life.  It  is  a  great  subject,  and  is 
treated  with  power,  and  the  ornaments  of 
speech  are  not  wanting:  “Behold,”  he  says, 
“now  is  the  accepted  time;  behold,  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation.  Giving  no  offence  in  anything, 
that  the  ministry  be  not  blamed :  but  in  all  things 
approving  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  God,  in 
much  patience,  in  afflictions,  in  necessities,  in 
distresses,  in  strifes,  in  imprisonments,  in  tu¬ 
mults,  in  labours,  in  watchings,  in  fastings ;  by 
pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long-suffering,  by 
kindness,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  love  unfeigned, 
by  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  power  of  God,  by 
the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand 
and  on  the  left,  by  honour  and  dishonour,  by 
evil  report  and  good  report:  as  deceivers,  and 
yet  true;  as  unknown,  and  yet  well  known;  as 
dying,  and,  behold,  we  live;  as  chastened,  and 
not  killed;  as  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing;  as 
poor,  yet  making  many  rich;  as  having  nothing, 
and  yet  possessing  all  things.”  1  See  him  still 
burning:  “0  ye  Corinthians,  our  mouth  is 
opened  unto  you.  our  heart  is  enlarged,”  and  so 
on ;  it  would  be  tedious  to  go  through  it  all 

43.  And  in  the  same  way,  writing  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  he  urges  that  the  persecutions  of  this 
world  should  be  overcome  by  charity,  in  assured 
reliance  on  the  help  of  God.  And  he  treats  this 
subject  with  both  power  and  beauty:  “We 
know,”  he  says,  “that  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who 
are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose.  For 
whom  He  did  foreknow.  He  also  did  predestin¬ 
ate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son, 
that  He  might  be  the  first-born  among  many 
brethren.  Moreover,  whom  He  did  predestinate, 
them  He  also  called ;  and  whom  He  called,  them 
He  also  justified;  and  whom  He  justified,  them 
He  also  glorified.  What  shall  we  then  say  to 
these  things?  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us?  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all.  how  shall  He  not 
with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?  Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God’s  elect? 
It  is  God  that  justifieth ;  who  is  he  that  condem¬ 
ned?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather,  that  is 
risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  Who 
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?  shall 
tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  fam¬ 
ine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword?  (As  it  is 
written,  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day 
long;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaugh¬ 
ter.)  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than 
JII  Cor.  6.  2-10. 


conquerors,  through  Him  that  loved  us.  For  I 
am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 
present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.”  2 

44.  Again,  in  writing  to  the  Galatians,  al¬ 
though  the  whole  epistle  is  written  in  the  sub¬ 
dued  style,  except  at  the  end,  where  it  rises  into 
a  temperate  eloquence,  yet  he  interposes  one 
passage  of  so  much  feeling  that,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  the  absence  of  any  ornaments  such  as  ap¬ 
pear  in  the  passages  just  quoted,  it  cannot  be 
called  anything  but  powerful:  “Ye  observe 
days,  and  months,  and  times,  and  years.  I  am 
afraid  of  you.  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you 
labour  in  vain.  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  be  as  I 
am;  for  I  am  as  ye  are:  ye  have  not  injured  me 
at  all.  Ye  know  how,  through  infirmity  of  the 
flesh,  I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  at  the  first. 
And  my  temptation  wdiich  was  in  my  flesh  ye 
despised  not,  nor  rejected;  but  received  me  as 
an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus.  Where  is 
then  the  blessedness  ye  spake  of?  for  I  bear  you 
record,  that,  if  it  had  been  possible,  ye  would 
have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes,  and  have  given 
them  to  me.  Am  I  therefore  become  your  en¬ 
emy.  because  I  tell  you  the  truth?  They  zeal¬ 
ously  affect  you,  but  not  well;  yea,  they  would 
exclude  you,  that  ye  might  affect  them.  But  it  is 
good  to  be  zealously  affected  always  in  a  good 
thing,  and  not  only  wThen  I  am  present  with  you. 
My  little  children,  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth 
again  until  Christ  be  formed  in  you,  I  desire  to 
be  present  with  you  now,  and  to  change  my 
voice;  for  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you.”  3  Is  there 
anything  here  of  contrasted  wrords  arranged  an¬ 
tithetically,  or  of  words  rising  gradually  to  a 
climax,  or  of  sonorous  clauses,  and  sections,  and 
periods?  Yet,  notwithstanding,  there  is  a  glow 
of  strong  emotion  that  makes  us  feel  the  fervour 
of  eloquence. 

Chap.  21.  Examples  of  the  various  styles , 

drawn  from  the  teachers  of  the  Churchy  es¬ 
pecially  Ambrose  and  Cyprian 

45.  But  these  writings  of  the  apostles,  though 
clear,  are  yet  profound,  and  are  so  wTritten  that 
one  who  is  not  content  with  a  superficial  ac¬ 
quaintance,  but  desires  to  know  them  thorough¬ 
ly,  must  not  only  read  and  hear  them,  but  must 
have  an  expositor.  Let  us,  then,  study  these  var¬ 
ious  modes  of  speech  as  they  are  exemplified  in 
the  writings  of  men  who,  by  reading  the  Scrip- 

2Rom.  8.  28-39.  3Gal.  4.  10-20. 


ON  CHRISTIAN 

tures,  have  attained  to  the  knowledge  of  divine 
and  saving  truth,  and  have  ministered  it  to  the 
Church.  Cyprian  of  blessed  memory  writes  in 
the  subdued  style  in  his  treatise  on  the  sacra¬ 
ment  of  the  cup.  In  this  book  he  resolves  the 
question,  whether  the  cup  of  the  Lord  ought  to 
contain  water  only,  or  water  mingled  with  wine. 
But  we  must  quote  a  passage  by  way  of  illus¬ 
tration.  After  the  customary  introduction,  he 
proceeds  to  the  discussion  of  the  point  in  ques¬ 
tion.  “Observe,”  he  says,  “that  we  are  instruct¬ 
ed,  in  presenting  the  cup,  to  maintain  the  cus¬ 
tom  handed  down  to  us  from  the  Lord,  and  to 
do  nothing  that  our  Lord  has  not  first  done  for 
us :  so  that  the  cup  which  is  offered  in  remem¬ 
brance  of  Him  should  be  mixed  with  wine.  For, 
as  Christ  says,  T  am  the  true  vine,’ 1  it  follows 
that  the  blood  of  Christ  is  wine,  not  water ;  and 
the  cup  cannot  appear  to  contain  His  blood  by 
which  we  are  redeemed  and  quickened,  if  the 
wine  be  absent ;  for  by  the  wine  is  the  blood  of 
Christ  typified,  that  blood  which  is  foreshad¬ 
owed  and  proclaimed  in  all  the  types  and  decla¬ 
rations  of  Scripture.  For  we  find  that  in  the 
book  of  Genesis  this  very  circumstance  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  sacrament  is  foreshadowed,  and  our 
Lord’s  sufferings  typically  set  forth,  in  the  case 
of  Noah,  when  he  drank  wine,  and  was  drunken, 
and  was  uncovered  within  his  tent,  and  his  nak¬ 
edness  was  exposed  by  his  second  son,  and  was 
carefully  hidden  by  his  elder  and  his  younger 
sons.2  It  is  not  necessary  to  mention  the  other 
circumstances  in  detail,  as  it  is  only  necessary 
to  observe  this  point,  that  Noah,  foreshadow¬ 
ing  the  future  reality,  drank,  not  water,  but 
wine,  and  thus  showed  forth  our  Lord’s  passion. 
In  the  same  way  we  see  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord’s  supper  prefigured  in  the  case  of  Mel- 
chizedek  the  priest,  according  to  the  testimony 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  where  it  says :  ‘And  Mel- 
chizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  bread  and 
wine:  and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  most  h;gh 
God.  And  he  blessed  Abraham.’3  Now,  that 
Melchizedek  was  a  type  of  Christ,  the  Holy 
Spirit  declares  in  the  Psalms,  where  the  Father 
addressing  the  Son  says.  “Thou  art  a  priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.’ 4  ”  In  this 
passage,  and  in  all  of  the  letter  that  follows,  the 
subdued  style  is  maintained,  as  the  reader  may 
easily  satisfy  himself. 

46.  St.  Ambrose  also,  though  dealing  with  a 
question  of  very  great  importance,  the  equality 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
employs  the  subdued  style,  because  the  object 

Mohn,  15. 1.  2Gen.  9.  20-24.  3Gen.  14. 18, 19. 

4Ps.  no.  4. 


DOCTRINE  IV.  21  691 

he  has  in  view  demands,  not  beauty  of  diction, 
nor  the  swaying  of  the  mind  by  the  stir  of  emo¬ 
tion,  but  facts  and  proofs.  Accordingly,  in  the 
introduction  to  his  work,  we  find  the  following 
passage  among  others :  “When  Gideon  was  star¬ 
tled  by  the  message  he  had  heard  from  God. 
that,  though  thousands  of  the  people  failed,  yet 
through  one  man  God  would  deliver  His  peo¬ 
ple  from  their  enemies,  he  brought  forth  a  kid 
of  the  goats,  and  by  direction  of  the  angel  laid 
it  with  unleavened  cakes  upon  a  rock,  and 
poured  the  broth  over  it;  and  as  soon  as  the  an¬ 
gel  of  God  touched  it  with  the  end  of  the  staff 
that  was  in  his  hand,  there  rose  up  fire  out  of 
the  rock  and  consumed  the  offering.5  Now  this 
sign  seems  to  indicate  that  the  rock  was  a  type 
of  the  body  of  Christ,  for  it  is  written,  ‘They 
drank  of  that  spiritual  rock  that  followed  them, 
and  that  rock  was  Christ’;6  this,  of  course,  re¬ 
ferring  not  to  Christ’s  divine  nature,  but  to  His 
flesh,  whose  ever-flowing  fountain  of  blood  has 
ever  satisfied  the  hearts  of  His  thirsting  people. 
And  so  it  was  at  that  time  declared  in  a  mystery 
that  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  crucified,  should 
abolish  in  His  flesh  the  sins  of  the  whole  world, 
and  not  their  guilty  acts  merely,  but  the  evil 
lusts  of  their  hearts.  For  the  kid’s  flesh  refers 
to  the  guilt  of  the  outward  act,  the  broth  to  the 
allurement  of  lust  within,  as  it  is  written,  ‘And 
the  mixed  multitude  that  was  among  them  fell 
a  lusting;  and  the  children  of  Israel  also  wept 
again  and  said.  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat?’7 
When  the  angel,  then,  stretched  out  his  staff  and 
touched  the  rock,  and  fire  rose  out  of  it.  this 
was  a  sign  that  our  Lord’s  flesh,  filled  with  the 
Spirit  of  God,  should  burn  up  all  the  sins  of  the 
human  race.  Whence  also  the  Lord  says,  ‘I  am 
come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth.’8”  And  in  the 
same  style  he  pursues  the  subject,  devoting 
himself  chiefly  to  proving  and  enforcing  his 
point. 

47.  An  example  of  the  temperate  style  is  the 
celebrated  encomium  on  virginity  from  Cypri¬ 
an:  “Now  our  discourse  addresses  itself  to  the 
virgins,  who,  as  they  are  the  objects  of  higher 
honour,  are  also  the  objects  of  greater  care. 
These  are  the  flowers  on  the  tree  of  the  Church, 
the  glory  and  ornament  of  spiritual  grace,  the 
joy  of  honour  and  praise,  a  work  unbroken  and 
unblemished,  the  image  of  God  answering  to  the 
holiness  of  the  Lord,  the  brighter  portion  of 
the  flock  of  Christ.  The  glorious  fruitfulness 
of  their  mother  the  Church  rejoices  in  them, 
and  in  them  flourishes  more  abundantly;  and  in 

5Judges,  6. 14-21.  6I  Cor.  10. 4.  7Num.  11.  4. 

8Luke,  12.  49. 


692  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


proportion  as  bright  virginity  adds  to  her  num¬ 
bers,  in  the  same  proportion  does  the  mother’s 
joy  increase.  And  at  another  place  in  the  end  of 
the  epistle,  ‘As  we  have  borne,’  he  says,  ‘the  im¬ 
age  of  the  earthly,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image 
of  the  heavenly.’ 1  Virginity  bears  this  image,  in¬ 
tegrity  bears  it.  holiness  and  truth  bear  it;  they 
bear  it  who  are  mindful  of  the  chastening  of  the 
Lord,  who  observe  justice  and  piety,  who  are 
strong  in  faith,  humble  in  fear,  steadfast  in  the 
endurance  of  suffering,  meek  in  the  endurance 
of  injury,  ready  to  pity,  of  one  mind  and  of  one 
heart  in  brotherly  peace.  And  every  one  of  these 
things  ought  ye,  holy  virgins,  to  observe,  to 
cherish,  and  fulfil,  who  having  hearts  at  leisure 
for  God  and  for  Christ,  and  having  chosen  the 
greater  and  better  part,  lead  and  point  the  way 
to  the  Lord,  to  whom  you  have  pledged  your 
vows.  Ye  who  are  advanced  in  age,  exercise  con¬ 
trol  over  the  younger.  Ye  who  are  younger,  wait 
upon  the  elders,  and  encourage  your  equals ;  stir 
up  one  another  by  mutual  exhortations;  pro¬ 
voke  one  another  to  glory  by  emulous  examples 
of  virtue;  endure  bravely,  advance  in  spirituali¬ 
ty,  finish  your  course  with  joy;  only  be  mindful 
of  us  when  your  virginity  shall  begin  to  reap  its 
reward  of  honour.” 

48.  Ambrose  also  uses  the  temperate  and  or¬ 
namented  style  when  he  is  holding  up  before 
virgins  who  have  made  their  profession  a  model 
for  their  imitation,  and  says:  “She  was  a  virgin 
not  in  body  only,  but  also  in  mind;  not  min¬ 
gling  the  purity  of  her  affection  with  any  dross 
of  hypocrisy;  serious  in  speech;  prudent  in  dis¬ 
position;  sparing  of  words;  delighting  in  study; 
not  placing  her  confidence  in  uncertain  riches, 
but  in  the  prayer  of  the  poor;  diligent  in  la¬ 
bour;  reverent  in  word;  accustomed  to  look  to 
God.  not  man,  as  the  guide  of  her  conscience; 
injuring  no  one,  wishing  well  to  all;  dutiful  to 
her  elders,  not  envious  of  her  equals;  avoiding 
boastfulness,  following  reason,  loving  virtue. 
When  did  she  wound  her  parents  even  by  a 
look?  When  did  she  quarrel  with  her  neigh¬ 
bours?  When  did  she  spurn  the  humble,  laugh 
at  the  weak,  or  shun  the  indigent?  She  is  accus¬ 
tomed  to  visit  only  those  haunts  of  men  that 
pity  would  not  blush  for,  nor  modesty  pass  by. 
There  is  nothing  haughty  in  her  eyes,  nothing 
bold  in  her  words,  nothing  wanton  in  her  ges¬ 
tures:  her  bearing  is  not  voluptuous,  nor  her 
gait  too  free,  nor  her  voice  petulant;  so  that 
her  outward  appearance  is  an  image  of  her  mind, 
and  a  picture  of  purity.  For  a  good  house  ought 
to  be  known  for  such  at  the  very  threshold,  and 

XI  Cor.  15.49. 


show  at  the  very  entrance  that  there  is  no  dark 
recess  within,  as  the  light  of  a  lamp  set  inside 
sheds  its  radiance  on  the  outside.  Why  need  I 
detail  her  sparingness  in  food,  her  superabun¬ 
dance  in  duty — the  one  falling  beneath  the  de¬ 
mands  of  nature,  the  other  rising  above  its  pow¬ 
ers?  The  latter  has  no  intervals  of  intermission, 
the  former  doubles  the  days  by  fasting;  and 
when  the  desire  for  refreshment  does  arise,  it 
is  satisfied  with  food  such  as  will  support  life, 
but  not  minister  to  appetite.”  Now  I  have  cited 
these  latter  passages  as  examples  of  the  temper¬ 
ate  style,  because  their  purpose  is  not  to  induce 
those  who  have  not  yet  devoted  themselves  to 
take  the  vows  of  virginity,  but  to  show  of  what 
character  those  who  have  taken  vows  ought  to 
be.  To  prevail  on  any  one  to  take  a  step  of  such 
a  nature  and  of  so  great  importance,  requires 
that  the  mind  should  be  excited  and  set  on  fire 
by  the  majestic  style.  Cyprian  the  martyr,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  write  about  the  duty  of  taking  up 
the  profession  of  virginity,  but  about  the  dress 
and  deportment  of  virgins.  Yet  that  great  bish¬ 
op  urges  them  to  their  duty  even  in  these  re¬ 
spects  by  the  power  of  a  majestic  eloquence. 

49.  But  I  shall  select  examples  of  the  majes¬ 
tic  style  from  their  treatment  of  a  subject 
which  both  of  them  have  touched.  Both  have 
denounced  the  women  who  colour,  or  rather  dis¬ 
colour,  their  faces  with  paint.  And  the  first,  in 
dealing  with  this  topic,  says:  “Suppose  a  paint¬ 
er  should  depict  in  colours  that  rival  nature’s 
the  features  and  form  and  complexion  of  some 
man,  and  that,  when  the  portrait  had  been  fin¬ 
ished  with  consummate  art,  another  painter 
should  put  his  hand  over  it,  as  if  to  improve  by 
his  superior  skill  the  painting  already  complet¬ 
ed;  surely  the  first  artist  would  feel  deeply  in¬ 
sulted.  and  his  indignation  would  be  justly 
roused.  Dost  thou,  then,  think  that  thou  wilt 
carry  off  with  impunity  so  audacious  an  act  of 
wickedness,  such  an  insult  to  God  the  great  ar¬ 
tificer?  For,  granting  that  thou  art  not  immod¬ 
est  in  thy  behaviour  towards  men.  and  that  thou 
art  not  polluted  in  mind  by  these  meretricious 
deceits,  yet.  in  corrupting  and  violating  what  is 
God’s,  thou  provest  thyself  worse  than  an  adul¬ 
teress.  The  fact  that  thou  considerest  thyself 
adorned  and  beautified  by  such  arts  is  an  im¬ 
peachment  of  God’s  handiwork,  and  a  violation 
of  truth.  Listen  to  the  warning  voice  of  the 
apostle:  ‘Purge  out  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may 
be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened.  For  even 
Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us:  there¬ 
fore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven, 
neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked- 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  22-23  693 


ness;  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity 
and  truth.’1  Now  can  sincerity  and  truth  con¬ 
tinue  to  exist  when  what  is  sincere  is  polluted, 
and  what  is  true  is  changed  by  meretricious  col¬ 
ouring  and  the  deceptions  of  quackery  into  a 
lie?  Thy  Lord  says,  kThou  canst  not  make  one 
hair  white  or  black’  ;2  and  dost  thou  wish  to  have 
greater  power  so  as  to  bring  to  nought  the  words 
of  thy  Lord?  With  rash  and  sacrilegious  hand 
thou  wouldst  fain  change  the  colour  of  thy  hair: 
I  would  that,  with  a  prophetic  look  to  the  fu¬ 
ture.  thou  shouldst  dye  it  the  colour  of  flame.” 
It  would  be  too  long  to  quote  all  that  follows. 

50.  Ambrose  again,  inveighing  against  such 
practices,  says:  “Hence  arise  these  incentives 
to  vice,  that  women,  in  their  fear  that  they  may 
not  prove  attractive  to  men,  paint  their  faces 
with  carefully  chosen  colours,  and  then  from 
stains  on  their  features  go  on  to  stains  on  their 
chastity.  What  folly  it  is  to  change  the  features 
of  nature  into  those  of  a  painting,  and  from  fear 
of  incurring  their  husband’s  disapproval,  to  pro¬ 
claim  openly  that  they  have  incurred  their  own ! 
For  the  woman  who  desires  to  alter  her  natural 
appearance  pronounces  condemnation  on  her¬ 
self;  and  her  eager  endeavours  to  please  another 
prove  that  she  has  first  been  displeasing  to  her¬ 
self.  And  what  testimony  to  thine  ugliness  can 
we  find.  0  woman,  that  is  more  unquestionable 
than  thine  own,  when  thou  art  afraid  to  show 
thyself?  If  thou  art  comely  why  dost  thou  hide 
thy  comeliness?  If  thou  art  plain,  why  dost  thou 
lyingly  pretend  to  be  beautiful,  when  thou  canst 
not  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  the  lie  either  in  thine 
own  consciousness  or  in  that  of  another?  For  he 
loves  another  woman,  thou  desirest  to  please  an¬ 
other  man ;  and  thou  art  angry  if  he  love  anoth¬ 
er,  though  he  is  taught  adultery  in  thee.  Thou 
art  the  evil  promptress  of  thine  own  injury.  For 
even  the  woman  who  has  been  the  victim  of  a 
pander  shrinks  from  acting  the  pander’s  part, 
and  though  she  be  vile,  it  is  herself  she  sins 
against  and  not  another.  The  crime  of  adultery 
is  almost  more  tolerable  than  thine;  for  adul¬ 
tery  tampers  with  modesty,  but  thou  with  na¬ 
ture.”  It  is  sufficiently  clear,  I  think,  that  this 
eloquence  calls  passionately  upon  women  to 
avoid  tampering  with  their  appearance  by  de¬ 
ceitful  arts,  and  to  cultivate  modesty  and  fear. 
Accordingly,  we  notice  that  the  style  is  neither 
subdued  nor  temperate,  but  majestic  through¬ 
out.  Now  in  these  two  authors  whom  I  have  se¬ 
lected  as  specimens  of  the  rest,  and  in  other 
ecclesiastical  writers  who  both  speak  the  truth 
and  speak  it  well — speak  it,  that  is,  judiciously, 

H  Cor.  5.  7,  8.  2Matt.  5.  36. 


pointedly,  and  with  beauty  and  power  of  ex¬ 
pression — many  examples  may  be  found  of  the 
three  styles  of  speech,  scattered  through  their 
various  writings  and  discourses ;  and  the  diligent 
student  may  by  assiduous  reading,  intermingled 
with  practice  on  his  own  part,  become  thor¬ 
oughly  imbued  with  them  all. 

Chap.  22.  The  necessity  of  variety  in  style 

51.  But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  it  is 
against  rule  to  mingle  these  various  styles:  on 
the  contrary,  every  variety  of  style  should  be 
introduced  so  far  as  is  consistent  with  good 
taste.  For  when  we  keep  monotonously  to  one 
style,  we  fail  to  retain  the  hearer’s  attention; 
but  when  we  pass  from  one  style  to  another,  the 
discourse  goes  off  more  gracefully,  even  though 
it  extend  to  greater  length.  Each  separate  style, 
again,  has  varieties  of  its  own  which  prevent 
the  hearer’s  attention  from  cooling  or  becoming 
languid.  We  can  bear  the  subdued  style,  how¬ 
ever,  longer  without  variety  than  the  majestic 
style.  For  the  mental  emotion  which  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  stir  up  in  order  to  carry  the  hearer’s  feel¬ 
ings  with  us,  when  once  it  has  been  sufficiently 
excited,  the  higher  the  pitch  to  which  it  is  raised, 
can  be  maintained  the  shorter  time.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  must  be  on  our  guard,  lest,  in  striving 
to  carry  to  a  higher  point  the  emotion  we  have 
excited,  we  rather  lose  what  we  have  already 
gained.  But  after  the  interposition  of  matter 
that  we  have  to  treat  in  a  quieter  style,  we  can 
return  with  good  effect  to  that  which  must  be 
treated  forcibly,  thus  making  the  tide  of  elo¬ 
quence  to  ebb  and  flow  like  the  sea.  It  follows 
from  this,  that  the  majestic  style,  if  it  is  to  be 
long  continued,  ought  not  to  be  unvaried,  but 
should  alternate  at  intervals  with  the  other 
styles;  the  speech  or  writing  as  a  whole,  how¬ 
ever,  being  referred  to  that  style  which  is  the 
prevailing  one. 

Chap.  23.  How  the  various  styles  should  he 

mingled 

5 2.  Now  it  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  de¬ 
termine  what  style  should  be  alternated  with 
what  other,  and  the  places  where  it  is  necessary 
that  any  particular  style  should  be  used.  In  the 
majestic  style,  for  instance,  it  is  always,  or  al¬ 
most  always,  desirable  that  the  introduction 
should  be  temperate.  And  the  speaker  has  it  in 
his  discretion  to  use  the  subdued  style  even 
where  the  majestic  would  be  allowable,  in  order 
that  the  majestic  when  it  is  used  may  be  the 
more  majestic  by  comparison,  and  may  as  it 
were  shine  out  with  greater  brilliance  from  the 


694  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


dark  background.  Again,  whatever  may  be  the 
style  of  the  speech  or  writing,  when  knotty 
questions  turn  up  for  solution,  accuracy  of  dis¬ 
tinction  is  required,  and  this  naturally  demands 
the  subdued  style.  And  accordingly  this  style 
must  be  used  in  alternation  with  the  other  two 
styles  whenever  questions  of  that  sort  turn  up; 
just  as  we  must  use  the  temperate  style,  no  mat¬ 
ter  what  may  be  the  general  tone  of  the  dis¬ 
course,  whenever  praise  or  blame  is  to  be  given 
without  any  ulterior  reference  to  the  condemna¬ 
tion  or  acquittal  of  any  one,  or  to  obtaining  the 
concurrence  of  any  one  in  a  course  of  action.  In 
the  majestic  style,  then,  and  in  the  quiet  like¬ 
wise,  both  the  other  two  styles  occasionally  find 
place.  The  temperate  style,  on  the  other  hand, 
not  indeed  always,  but  occasionally,  needs  the 
quiet  style;  for  example,  when,  as  I  have  said,  a 
knotty  question  comes  up  to  be  settled,  or  when 
some  points  that  are  susceptible  of  ornament 
are  left  unadorned  and  expressed  in  the  quiet 
style,  in  order  to  give  greater  effect  to  certain 
exuberances  (as  they  may  be  called)  of  orna¬ 
ment.  But  the  temperate  style  never  needs  the 
aid  of  the  majestic;  for  its  object  is  to  gratify, 
never  to  excite,  the  mind. 

Chap.  24.  The  effects  produced  by  the  majestic 

style 

53.  If  frequent  and  vehement  applause  fol¬ 
lows  a  speaker,  we  are  not  to  suppose  on  that 
account  that  he  is  speaking  in  the  majestic 
style;  for  this  effect  is  often  produced  both  by 
the  accurate  distinctions  of  the  quiet  style,  and 
by  the  beauties  of  the  temperate.  The  majestic 
style,  on  the  other  hand,  frequently  silences  the 
audience  by  its  impressiveness,  but  calls  forth 
their  tears.  For  example,  when  at  Caesarea  in 
Mauritania  I  was  dissuading  the  people  from 
that  civil,  or  worse  than  civil,  war  which  they 
called  Caterva  (for  it  was  not  fellow-citizens 
merely,  but  neighbours,  brothers,  fathers  and 
sons  even,  who,  divided  into  two  factions  and 
armed  with  stones,  fought  annually  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  season  of  the  year  for  several  days  contin¬ 
uously,  every  one  killing  whomsoever  he  could), 
I  strove  with  all  the  vehemence  of  speech  that 
I  could  command  to  root  out  and  drive  from 
their  hearts  and  lives  an  evil  so  cruel  and  invet¬ 
erate;  it  was  not,  however,  when  I  heard  their 
applause,  but  when  I  saw  their  tears,  that  I 
thought  I  had  produced  an  effect.  For  the  ap¬ 
plause  showed  that  they  were  instructed  and  de¬ 
lighted,  but  the  tears  that  they  were  subdued. 
And  when  I  saw  their  tears  I  was  confident, 
even  before  the  event  proved  it,  that  this  horri¬ 


ble  and  barbarous  custom  (which  had  been 
handed  down  to  them  from  their  fathers  and 
their  ancestors  of  generations  long  gone  by  and 
which  like  an  enemy  was  besieging  their  hearts, 
or  rather  had  complete  possession  of  them)  was 
overthrown ;  and  immediately  that  my  sermon 
was  finished  I  called  upon  them  with  heart  and 
voice  to  give  praise  and  thanks  to  God.  And,  lo, 
with  the  blessing  of  Christ,  it  is  now  eight  years 
or  more  since  anything  of  the  sort  was  attempt¬ 
ed  there.  In  many  other  cases  besides  I  have  ob¬ 
served  that  men  show  the  effect  made  on  them 
by  the  powerful  eloquence  of  a  wise  man,  not 
by  clamorous  applause  so  much  as  by  groans, 
sometimes  even  by  tears,  finally  by  change  of 
life. 

54.  The  quiet  style,  too,  has  made  a  change 
in  many;  but  it  was  to  teach  them  what  they 
were  ignorant  of,  or  to  persuade  them  of  what 
they  thought  incredible,  not  to  make  them  do 
what  they  knew  they  ought  to  do  but  were  un¬ 
willing  to  do.  To  break  down  hardness  of  this 
sort,  speech  needs  to  be  vehement.  Praise  and 
censure,  too,  when  they  are  eloquently  ex¬ 
pressed,  even  in  the  temperate  style,  produce 
such  an  effect  on  some,  that  they  are  not  only 
pleased  with  the  eloquence  of  the  encomiums 
and  censures,  but  are  led  to  live  so  as  themselves 
to  deserve  praise,  and  to  avoid  living  so  as  to  in¬ 
cur  blame.  But  no  one  would  say  that  all  who 
are  thus  delighted  change  their  habits  in  conse¬ 
quence,  whereas  all  who  are  moved  by  the  ma¬ 
jestic  style  act  accordingly,  and  all  who  are 
taught  by  the  quiet  style  know  or  believe  a 
truth  which  they  were  previously  ignorant  of. 

Chap.  25.  How  the  temperate  style  is  to  be  used 

55.  From  all  this  we  may  conclude,  that  the 
end  arrived  at  by  the  two  styles  last  mentioned 
is  the  one  which  it  is  most  essential  for  those 
who  aspire  to  speak  with  wisdom  and  eloquence 
to  secure.  On  the  other  hand,  what  the  temper¬ 
ate  style  properly  aims  at,  viz.,  to  please  by 
beauty  of  expression,  is  not  in  itself  an  adequate 
end;  but  when  what  we  have  to  say  is  good  and 
useful,  and  when  the  hearers  are  both  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  it  and  favourably  disposed  towards  it,  so 
that  it  is  not  necessary  either  to  instruct  or  per¬ 
suade  them,  beauty  of  style  may  have  its  influ¬ 
ence  in  securing  their  prompter  compliance,  or 
in  making  them  adhere  to  it  more  tenaciously. 
For  as  the  function  of  all  eloquence,  whichever 
of  these  three  forms  it  may  assume,  is  to  speak 
persuasively,  and  its  object  is  to  persuade,  an 
eloquent  man  will  speak  persuasively,  whatever 
style  he  may  adopt;  but  unless  he  succeeds  in 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  24-26  695 


persuading,  his  eloquence  has  not  secured  its 
object.  Now  in  the  subdued  style,  he  persuades 
his  hearers  that  what  he  says  is  true;  in  the  ma¬ 
jestic  style,  he  persuades  them  to  do  what  they 
are  aware  they  ought  to  do,  but  do  not;  in  the 
temperate  style,  he  persuades  them  that  his 
speech  is  elegant  and  ornate.  But  what  use  is 
there  in  attaining  such  an  object  as  this  last? 
They  may  desire  it  who  are  vain  of  their  elo¬ 
quence  and  make  a  boast  of  panegyrics,  and 
such-like  performances,  where  the  object  is 
not  to  instruct  the  hearer,  or  to  persuade  him 
to  any  course  of  action,  but  merely  to  give  him 
pleasure.  We,  however,  ought  to  make  that  end 
subordinate  to  another,  viz.,  the  effecting  by  this 
style  of  eloquence  what  we  aim  at  effecting  when 
we  use  the  majestic  style.  For  we  may  by  the 
use  of  this  style  persuade  men  to  cultivate  good 
habits  and  give  up  evil  ones,  if  they  are  not  so 
hardened  as  to  need  the  vehement  style;  or  if 
they  have  already  begun  a  good  course,  we  may 
induce  them  to  pursue  it  more  zealously,  and  to 
persevere  in  it  with  constancy.  Accordingly, 
even  in  the  temperate  style  we  must  use  beauty 
of  expression  not  for  ostentation,  but  for  wise 
ends;  not  contenting  ourselves  merely  with 
pleasing  the  hearer,  but  rather  seeking  to  aid 
him  in  the  pursuit  of  the  good  end  which  we 
hold  out  before  him. 

Chap.  26.  In  every  style  the  orator  should  aim 
at  perspicuity ,  beauty ,  and  persuasiveness 

56.  Now  in  regard  to  the  three  conditions  I 
laid  down  a  little  while  ago1  as  necessary  to  be 
fulfilled  by  any  one  who  wishes  to  speak  with 
wisdom  and  eloquence,  viz.  perspicuity,  beauty 
of  style,  and  persuasive  power,  we  are  not  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  these  three  qualities  attach  them¬ 
selves  respectively  to  the  three  several  styles  of 
speech,  one  to  each,  so  that  perspicuity  is  a  mer¬ 
it  peculiar  to  the  subdued  style,  beauty  to  the 
temperate,  and  persuasive  power  to  the  majes¬ 
tic.  On  the  contrary,  all  speech,  whatever  its 
style,  ought  constantly  to  aim  at,  and  as  far  as 
possible  to  display,  all  these  three  merits.  For 
we  do  ndt  like  even  what  we  say  in  the  subdued 
style  to  pall  upon  the  hearer ;  and  therefore  we 
would  be  listened  to,  not  with  intelligence  mere¬ 
ly,  but  with  pleasure  as  well.  Again,  why  do  we 
enforce  what  we  teach  by  divine  testimony,  ex¬ 
cept  that  we  wish  to  carry  the  hearer  with  us, 
that  is,  to  compel  his  assent  by  calling  in  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  Him  of  Whom  it  is  said,  “Thy  testi¬ 
monies  are  very  sure”?  2  And  when  any  one  nar¬ 
rates  a  story,  even  in  the  subdued  style,  what 
^haps.  15  and  17.  2Ps.  93.  5. 


does  he  wish  but  to  be  believed?  But  who  will 
listen  to  him  if  he  do  not  arrest  attention  by 
some  beauty  of  style?  And  if  he  be  not  intelligi¬ 
ble,  is  it  not  plain  that  he  can  neither  give  pleas¬ 
ure  nor  enforce  conviction?  The  subdued  style, 
again,  in  its  own  naked  simplicity,  when  it  un¬ 
ravels  questions  of  very  great  difficulty  and 
throws  an  unexpected  light  upon  them ;  when  it 
worms  out  and  brings  to  light  some  very  acute 
observations  from  a  quarter  whence  nothing 
was  expected;  when  it  seizes  upon  and  exposes 
the  falsity  of  an  opposing  opinion,  which 
seemed  at  its  first  statement  to  be  unassailable; 
especially  when  all  this  is  accompanied  by  a 
natural,  unsought  grace  of  expression,  and  by  a 
rhythm  and  balance  of  style  which  is  not  osten¬ 
tatiously  obtruded,  but  seems  rather  to  be  called 
forth  by  the  nature  of  the  subject:  this  style, 
so  used,  frequently  calls  forth  applause  so  great 
that  one  can  hardly  believe  it  to  be  the  subdued 
style.  For  the  fact  that  it  comes  forth  without 
either  ornament  or  defence,  and  offers  battle  in 
its  own  naked  simplicity,  does  not  hinder  it 
from  crushing  its  adversary  by  weight  of  nerve 
and  muscle,  and  overwhelming  and  destroying 
the  falsehood  that  opposes  it  by  the  mere 
strength  of  its  own  right  arm.  How  explain  the 
frequent  and  vehement  applause  that  waits 
upon  men  who  speak  thus,  except  by  the  pleas¬ 
ure  that  truth  so  irresistibly  established,  and  so 
victoriously  defended,  naturally  affords?  Where¬ 
fore  the  Christian  teacher  and  speaker  ought, 
when  he  uses  the  subdued  style,  to  endeavour 
not  only  to  be  clear  and  intelligible,  but  to  give 
pleasure  and  to  bring  home  conviction  to  the 
hearer. 

57.  Eloquence  of  the  temperate  style,  also, 
must,  in  the  case  of  the  Christian  orator,  be  nei¬ 
ther  altogether  without  ornament,  nor  unsuit¬ 
ably  adorned,  nor  is  it  to  make  the  giving  of 
pleasure  its  sole  aim,  which  is  all  it  professes  to 
accomplish  in  the  hands  of  others;  but  in  its 
encomiums  and  censures  it  should  aim  at  in¬ 
ducing  the  hearer  to  strive  after  or  hold  more 
firmly  by  what  it  praises,  and  to  avoid  or  re¬ 
nounce  what  it  condemns.  On  the  other  hand, 
without  perspicuity  this  style  cannot  give  pleas¬ 
ure.  And  so  the  three  qualities,  perspicuity, 
beauty,  and  persuasiveness,  are  to  be  sought  in 
this  style  also ;  beauty,  of  course,  being  its  pri¬ 
mary  object. 

58.  Again,  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  stir 
and  sway  the  hearer’s  mind  by  the  majestic 
style  (and  this  is  always  necessary  when  he  ad¬ 
mits  that  what  you  say  is  both  true  and  agree¬ 
able,  and  yet  is  unwilling  to  act  accordingly), 


696  ST.  AUGUSTINE 


you  must,  of  course,  speak  in  the  majestic  style. 
But  who  can  be  moved  if  he  does  not  under¬ 
stand  what  is  said?  and  who  will  stay  to  listen  if 
he  receives  no  pleasure?  Wherefore,  in  this 
style,  too,  when  an  obdurate  heart  is  to  be  per¬ 
suaded  to  obedience,  you  must  speak  so  as  to  be 
both  intelligible  and  pleasing,  if  you  would  be 
heard  with  a  submissive  mind. 

Chap.  27.  The  man  whose  life  is  in  harmony 

with  his  teaching  will  teach  with  greater  ef¬ 
fect 

59.  But  whatever  may  be  the  majesty  of  the 
style,  the  life  of  the  speaker  will  count  for  more 
in  securing  the  hearer’s  compliance.  The  man 
who  speaks  wisely  and  eloquently,  but  lives 
wickedly,  may,  it  is  true,  instruct  many  who  are 
anxious  to  learn ;  though,  as  it  is  written,  he  “is 
unprofitable  to  himself.”  1  Wherefore,  also,  the 
apostle  says:  “Whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth 
Christ  is  preached.”  2  Now  Christ  is  the  truth; 
yet  we  see  that  the  truth  can  be  preached, 
though  not  in  truth — that  is,  what  is  right  and 
true  in  itself  may  be  preached  by  a  man  of  per¬ 
verse  and  deceitful  mind.  And  thus  it  irthat 
Jesus  Christ  is  preached  by  those  that  seek  their 
own,  and  not  the  things  that  are  Jesus  Christ’s. 
But  since  true  believers  obey  the  voice,  not  of 
any  man,  but  of  the  Lord  Himself,  Who  says, 
“All  therefore  whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe, 
that  observe  and  do:  but  do  not  ye  after  their 
works ;  for  they  say  and  do  not”  ;3  therefore  it 
is  that  men  who  themselves  lead  unprofitable 
lives  are  heard  with  profit  by  others.  For  though 
they  seek  their  own  objects,  they  do  not  dare  to 
teach  their  own  doctrines,  sitting  as  they  do  in 
the  high  places  of  ecclesiastical  authority,  which 
is  established  on  sound  doctrine.  Wherefore  our 
Lord  Himself,  before  saying  what  I  have  just 
quoted  about  men  of  this  stamp,  made  this  ob¬ 
servation  :  “The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in 
Moses’  seat.”  4  The  seat  they  occupied,  then, 
which  was  not  theirs  but  Moses’,  compelled 
them  to  say  what  was  good,  though  they  did 
what  was  evil.  And  so  they  followed  their  own 
course  in  their  lives,  but  were  prevented  by  the 
seat  they  occupied,  which  belonged  to  another, 
from  preaching  their  own  doctrines. 

60.  Now  these  men  do  good  to  many  by 
preaching  what  they  themselves  do  not  per¬ 
form;  but  they  would  do  good  to  very  many 
more  if  they  lived  as  they  preach.  For  there  are 
numbers  who  seek  an  excuse  for  their  own  evil 
lives  in  comparing  the  teaching  with  the  con- 

Tcclus.  37. 19.  2Phil.  1. 18.  3Matt.  23. 3. 

4Matt.  23.  2. 


duct  of  their  instructors,  and  who  say  in  their 
hearts,  or  even  go  a  little  further,  and  say  with 
their  lips:  “Why  do  you  not  do  yourself  what 
you  bid  me  do?”  And  thus  they  cease  to  listen 
with  submission  to  a  man  who  does  not  listen  to 
himself,  and  in  despising  the  preacher  they  learn 
to  despise  the  word  that  is  preached.  Wherefore 
the  apostle,  writing  to  Timothy,  after  telling 
him,  “Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth,”  adds  im¬ 
mediately  the  course  by  which  he  would  avoid 
contempt:  “but  be  thou  an  example  of  the  be¬ 
lievers,  in  word,  in  conversation,  in  charity,  in 
spirit,  in  faith,  in  purity.” 5 

Chap.  28.  Truth  is  more  important  than  expres¬ 
sion.  What  is  meant  by  strife  about  words 

61.  Such  a  teacher  as  is  here  described  may, 
to  secure  compliance,  speak  not  only  quietly 
and  temperately,  but  even  vehemently,  without 
any  breach  of  modesty,  because  his  life  protects 
him  against  contempt.  For  while  he  pursues  an 
upright  life,  he  takes  care  to  maintain  a  good 
reputation  as  well,  providing  things  honest  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  men,6  fearing  God,  and 
caring  for  men.  In  his  very  speech  even  he  pre¬ 
fers  to  please  by  matter  rather  than  by  words; 
thinks  that  a  thing  is  well  said  in  proportion  as 
it  is  true  in  fact,  and  that  a  teacher  should  gov¬ 
ern  his  words,  not  let  the  words  govern  him. 
This  is  what  the  apostle  says:  “Not  with  wis¬ 
dom  of  words,  lest  the  cross  of  Christ  should 
be  made  of  none  effect.”  7  To  the  same  effect 
also  is  what  he  says  to  Timothy:  “Charging 
them  before  the  Lord  that  they  strive  not  about 
words  to  no  profit,  but  to  the  subverting  of  the 
hearers.”8  Now  this  does  not  mean  that,  when 
adversaries  oppose  the  truth,  we  are  to  say 
nothing  in  defence  of  the  truth.  For  where,  then, 
would  be  what  he  says  when  he  is  describing  the 
sort  of  man  a  bishop  ought  to  be:  “that  he  may 
be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  and 
convince  the  gainsayers”? 9  To  strive  about 
words  is  not  to  be  careful  about  the  way  to  over¬ 
come  error  by  truth,  but  to  be  anxious  that 
your  mode  of  expression  should  be  preferred  to 
that  of  another.  The  man  who  does  not  strive 
about  words,  whether  he  speak  quietly,  temper¬ 
ately,  or  vehemently,  uses  words  with  no  other 
purpose  than  to  make  the  truth  plain,  pleasing, 
and  effective;  for  not  even  love  itself,  which  is 
the  end  of  the  commandment  and  the  fulfilling 
of  the  law,10  can  be  rightly  exercised  unless  the 
objects  of  love  are  true  and  not  false.  For  as  a 

6ITim.  4. 12.  6IICor.  8.  21.  7I  Cor.  2. 17. 

8II  Tim.  2. 14.  9Tit.  1.  9. 

10I  Tim.  1.  5;  Rom.  13.  10. 


ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  IV.  27-30  697 


man  with  a  comely  body  but  an  ill-conditioned 
mind  is  a  more  painful  object  than  if  his  body 
too  were  deformed,  so  men  who  teach  lies  are 
the  more  pitiable  if  they  happen  to  be  eloquent 
in  speech.  To  speak  eloquently,  then,  and  wise¬ 
ly  as  well,  is  just  to  express  truths  which  it  is 
expedient  to  teach  in  fit  and  proper  words — 
words  which  in  the  subdued  style  are  adequate, 
in  the  temperate,  elegant,  and  in  the  majestic, 
forcible.  But  the  man  who  cannot  speak  both 
eloquently  and  wisely  should  speak  wisely  with¬ 
out  eloquence,  rather  than  eloquently  without 
wisdom. 

Chap.  29  .It  is  permissible  for  a  preacher  to  de¬ 
liver  to  the  people  what  has  been  written  by 
a  more  eloquent  man  than  himself 
If,  however,  he  cannot  do  even  this,  let  his 
life  be  such  as  shall  not  only  secure  a  reward 
for  himself,  but  afford  an  example  to  others; 
and  let  his  manner  of  living  be  an  eloquent  ser¬ 
mon  in  itself. 

62.  There  are,  indeed,  some  men  who  have 
a  good  delivery,  but  cannot  compose  anything 
to  deliver.  Now,  if  such  men  take  what  has  been 
written  with  wisdom  and  eloquence  by  others, 
and  commit  it  to  memory,  and  deliver  it  to  the 
people,  they  cannot  be  blamed,  supposing  them 
to  do  it  without  deception.  For  in  this  way 
many  become  preachers  of  the  truth  (which  is 
certainly  desirable),  and  yet  not  many  teachers; 
for  all  deliver  the  discourse  which  one  real 
teacher  has  composed,  and  there  are  no  divi¬ 
sions  among  them.  Nor  are  such  men  to  be 
alarmed  by  the  words  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet, 
through  whom  God  denounces  those  who  steal 
His  words  every  one  from  his  neighbour.1  For 
those  who  steal  take  what  does  not  belong  to 
them,  but  the  word  of  God  belongs  to  all  who 
obey  it ;  and  it  is  the  man  who  speaks  well,  but 
lives  badly,  who  really  takes  the  words  that  be¬ 
long  to  another.  For  the  good  things  he  says 
seem  to  be  the  result  of  his  own  thought,  and 
yet  they  have  nothing  in  common  with  his  man¬ 
ner  of  life.  And  so  God  has  said  that  they  steal 
His  wordfc  who  would  appear  good  by  speaking 
God’s  words,  but  are  in  fact  bad,  as  they  follow 
their  own  ways.  And  if  you  look  closely  into  the 
matter,  it  is  not  really  themselves  who  say  the 
good  things  they  say.  For  how  can  they  say  in 
words  what  they  deny  in  deeds?  It  is  not  for 
nothing  that  the  apostle  says  of  such  men: 
“They  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works 
they  deny  Him.”  2  In  one  sense,  then,  they  do 
say  the  things,  and  in  another  sense  they  do  not 
xJer.  23. 30.  2Tit.  1. 16. 


say  them;  for  both  these  statements  must  be 
true,  both  being  made  by  Him  Who  is  the  Truth. 
Speaking  of  such  men,  in  one  place  He  says, 
“Whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe,  that  ob¬ 
serve  and  do;  but  do  not  ye  after  their  works”; 
that  is  to  say,  what  ye  hear  from  their  lips,  that 
do;  what  ye  see  in  their  lives,  that  do  ye  not; 
“for  they  say  and  do  not.”  3  And  so,  though 
they  do  not,  yet  they  say.  But  in  another  place, 
upbraiding  such  men,  He  says,  “0  generation  of 
vipers,  how  can  ye,  being  evil,  speak  good 
things?”4  And  from  this  it  would  appear  that 
even  what  they  say,  when  they  say  what  is  good, 
it  is  not  themselves  who  say,  for  in  will  and  in 
deed  they  deny  what  they  say.  Hence  it  hap¬ 
pens  that  a  wicked  man  who  is  eloquent  may 
compose  a  discourse  in  which  the  truth  is  set 
forth  to  be  delivered  by  a  good  man  who  is  not 
eloquent;  and  when  this  takes  place,  the  former 
draws  from  himself  what  does  not  belong  to 
him,  and  the  latter  receives  from  another  what 
really  belongs  to  himself.  But  when  true  believ¬ 
ers  render  this  service  to  true  believers,  both 
parties  speak  what  is  their  own,  for  God  is 
theirs,  to  Whom  belongs  all  that  they  say;  and 
even  those  who  could  not  compose  what  they 
say  make  it  their  own  by  composing  their  lives 
in  harmony  with  it. 

Chap.  30.  The  preacher  should  commence  his 

discourse  with  prayer  to  God 

63.  But  whether  a  man  is  going  to  address  the 
people  or  to  dictate  what  others  will  deliver  or 
read  to  the  people,  he  ought  to  pray  God  to 
put  into  his  mouth  a  suitable  discourse.  For  if 
Queen  Esther  prayed,  when  she  was  about  to 
speak  to  the  king  touching  the  temporal  welfare 
of  her  race,  that  God  would  put  fit  words  into 
her  mouth,5  how  much  more  ought  he  to  pray 
for  the  same  blessing  who  labours  in  word  and 
doctrine  for  the  eternal  welfare  of  men?  Those, 
again,  who  are  to  deliver  what  others  compose 
for  them  ought,  before  they  receive  their  dis¬ 
course,  to  pray  for  those  who  are  preparing  it; 
and  when  they  have  received  it,  they  ought  to 
pray  both  that  they  themselves  may  deliver  it 
well,  and  that  those  to  whom  they  address  it 
may  give  ear;  and  when  the  discourse  has  a 
happy  issue,  they  ought  to  render  thanks  to  Him 
from  Whom  they  know  such  blessings  come,  so 
that  all  the  praise  may  be  His  “in  whose  hand 
are  both  we  and  our  words.”  6 

3Matt.  23. 3. 

4Matt.  12. 34. 

6Esth.  4. 16  (Septuagint). 

6Wisd.  7. 16. 


6g8 


ST.  AUGUSTINE 


Chap.  31.  Apology  for  the  length  of  the  work 

64.  This  book  has  extended  to  a  greater  length 
than  I  expected  or  desired.  But  the  reader  or 
hearer  who  finds  pleasure  in  it  will  not  think  it 
long.  He  who  thinks  it  long,  but  is  anxious  to 
know  its  contents,  may  read  it  in  parts.  He  who 
does  not  care  to  be  acquainted  with  it  need  not 


complain  of  its  length.  I,  however,  give  thanks 
to  God  that  with  what  little  ability  I  possess  I 
have  in  these  four  books  striven  to  depict,  not 
the  sort  of  man  I  am  myself  (for  my  defects 
are  very  many),  but  the  sort  of  man  he  ought  to 
be  who  desires  to  labour  in  sound,  that  is,  in 
Christian  doctrine,  not  for  his  own  instruction 
only,  but  for  that  of  others  also. 


ARCHBiSHIP  MITT/  HIGH  SCHOOC  1 
Library 

5000  Mitty  Avenue 
San  Jose,  CA  95123-1897 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


..  • 


I 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


F^PVF 

FF^FFFF 

MATTER 

&P&P& 

MECHANICS 

&P&P& 

FF^FF^F 

MEDICINE 

Ff^ff^f 

MEMORY  AND 

FF^FFSF 

*  ^ 

IMAGINATION 

FFfFFfF 

METAPHYSICS 

FFF?F 

FF^FFFSF 

MIND 

FF^FF^F 

MONARCHY 

FFfFFfSF 

NATURE 

FF=FFfF 

NECESSITY  AND 

CONTINGENCY 

>p^p& 


pp^p^1 


-•. «, 

F=SFF^ 


~P~P 


H5NSS- 


OLIGARCHY 

ONE  AND  MANY 

OPINION 

OPPOSITION 

PHILOSOPHY 

PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


^F 

^F 

^FF> 

^F 

H^F 

H^F 

K^F 

^F> 

^F 

^F 

k;F^F 

^V^F 

^F 

^FfF 


ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  LIBRARY 


